HAftOLO  a.  Let  wiBRARV 

B«IGNAM  rOoNG  UNtVlHtiTV 


.-3''4Slb 
vol.  I 


LATTER-DAY  SAINT 


BIOGRiPHICAL  EICYCLflPEDIA. 


A  Compilation  of  Biographical  Sketches  of   Prominent 

Men  and  Women  in  the  Church  of  Jesus 

Christ  of  Latter-day  Saints 


ANDREW   JENSON, 

Assistant  Church   Historian. 

19B412 


VOLUME    I. 


Published  by  the  Andrew  J^nson  History  Company, 

AND  PRINTED  BY  THE  DESERET  NEWS, 

Salt  Lake  City',  Utah. 
1901. 


PREFACE. 


Ou  the  rolls  of  the  Church  of  Jesns  Christ  of  Latter-day- 
Saints  are  found  the  names  of  a  host  of  men  and  women  of 
worth — heroes  and  heroines  of  a  higher  type — who  have  been  and 
are  willing  to  sacrifice  fortune  and  life  for  the  sake  of  their  re- 
ligion. It  is  for  the  purpose  of  perpetud,ting  the  memory  of 
these,  and  to  place  on  record  deeds  worthy  of  imitation,  that  the 

LA.TTEK-DAY     SaIXT    BIOGRAPHICAL    ENCYCLOPEDIA     makes    its 

appearance. 

The  necessity  and  importance  of  such  a  work  has  been  more 
and  more  realized  by  the  author  during  the  many  years  he  has 
spent  in  gathering  material  for  a  detailed  history  of  the  Church, 
and  this  has  prompted  him  to  devote  much  time  in  the  prepara- 
tion of  this  work.  It  has  been  to  him  a  labor  of  love  and  one  of 
absorbing  interest.  He  now  offers  to  the  public  the  first  volume 
of  this  work  of  reference  which  may  assume  great  magnitude 
before  it  is  completed.  It  has  been  compiled  with  great  care, 
and  yet  it  is  not  free  from  errors. 

The  author  kindly  solicits  the  aid  of  friendly  critics  in  dis- 
covering any  inaccuracy  and  mistake  that  may  have  crept  into 
the  book,  so  that  they  may  not  be  perpetuated  in  future  editions. 

AXDREVV    JeXSON. 


LATTER-DAY  SAINT 


BIOGRAPHICAL  ENCYCLOPEDIA. 


SMITH,  Joseph,  junior,  the  great 
Prophet  of  the  nineteenth  century,  and 
the  founder  of  the  Church  of  Jesus 
Christ  of  Latter-day  Saints,  was  born 
Dec.  23,  1S05,  in  Sharon, Windsor  county. 
Vermont.  He  was  the  fourth  child  of 
Joseph  Smith  and  Lucy  Mack.  When 
about  seven  years  old,  he  came  near 
losing    his    leg'    through    a    fever    sore, 


but  by  opening  the  leg,  and  extracting 
several  pieces  of  affected  bone,  ampu- 
tation was  avoided.  In  this  excruciat- 
ing operation  he  exhibited  that  courage 
which,  united  with  tender  feeling,  al- 
ways marks  the  character  of  the  great 
and  good.  When  ten  years  of  age  he 
removed  with  his  parents  to  Palmyra, 
New  York,  where  he  lived  about  eleven 
years,  the  latter  part  of  the  time  in 
Manchester  township.  At  the  age  of 
fourteen,  when  passing  one  evening 
through   the   door-yard   of   his   father's 


dwelling,  he  was  shot  at;  but  the  balls 
missed  him  and  lodged  in  the  head  and 
neck  o'  a  cow.  No  trace  of  the  per- 
son who  attempted  the  murder  was  ever 
found,  and  no  reason  could  be  assigned 
for  the  attempt.  His  father  was  a 
farmer.  Owing  to  the  adversities  of 
his  parents,  and  the  difficulty  in  giv- 
ing children  an  education  in  newly-set- 
tled districts,  Joseph's  advantages  for 
learning  were  few  indeed,  but  his  mind 
was  active  in  observing  and  reflecting. 
On  the  subject  of  religion  his  ideas  ear- 
ly began  to  develop  themselves.  The 
aspect  of  the  religious  societies  around 
him,  however,  did  not  commend  either 
of  them  to  his  judgment  sufficiently  to 
induce  him  to  become  a  member.  He 
was  somewhat  partial  to  the  Method- 
ists, and  sometimes  attended  their 
meetings.  In  the  midst  of  this  indeci- 
sion, he  had  recourse  to  his  Bible,  and 
there  read  in  St.  James,  "If  any  of  you 
lack  wisdom,  let  him  ask  of  God,  that 
giveth  to  all  men  liberally,  and  up- 
braideth  not,  and  it  shall  be  given 
him."  He  felt  the  force  of  the  pass- 
age; it  gave  heavenly  confidence,  and 
he  resolved  to  test  the  promise.  Ac- 
cordingly, on  the  morning  of  a  beauti- 
ful clear  day,  early  in  the  spring  of 
1820,  he  retired  to  the  shade  of  a  wood 
near  by,  and  after  kneeling  began  to 
offer  up  the  desires  of  his  heart  to  God. 
While  thus  engaged  two  personages 
stood  before  him,  clothed  with  ineffable 
brightness, and  one, pointing  to  the  other, 
said,  "This  is  my  beloved  Son,  hear 
him."  Joseph  then  made  known  the 
object  of  his  prayer,  and  he  was  in- 
formed that  he  must  join  neither  of 
the  sects,  for  they  were  all  wrong,  and 
their  creeds  an  abomination  in  the 
sight  of  God.  Many  other  things  were 
communicated  by  the  heavenly  person- 


No.  1,  Vol.  1. 


Jan.    5.    1901. 


LATTER-DAY  SAINT 


ages,  and  on  leaving  Joseph  they  again 
forb;ide  him  to  join  any  of  the  sects. 
After  receiving  this  vision,  he  informed 
one  of  the  Methodist  preachers  of  it, 
but  met  only  with  ridicule  and  opposi- 
tion. He  experienced  the  same  in  all 
quarters,  and  he  was  led  to  ask,  "Why 
persecute  for  telling  the  truth?";  again, 
"I  had  actually  seen  a  vision,  and  who 
was  I  that  I  could  withstand  God?" 
Thus  things  went  on  until  the  evening 
of  Sept  21.  1823,  when  he  received  a 
visitation  from  the  angel  Moroni,  who 
Informed  him  that  God  had  a  work 
for  him  to  do,  and  revealed  to  him 
who  were  the  aborigines  of  America, 
and  where  was  deposited  their  sacred 
record  (the  Book  of  Mormon).  The 
angel  informed  him  that  this  record 
contained  the  fullness  of  the  everlast- 
ing gospel,  and  that  he  should  be  the 
Instrument  in  bringing  it  forth,  and 
have  power  given  him  to  translate  it. 
The  vision  was  twice  repeated  during 
the  same  night.  The  next  day  the  an- 
gel again  stood  by  his  side  and  gave 
him  further  instructions.  After  he 
had  communicated  to  his  father  what 
he  had  seen,  he  repaired  to  the  place 
where  the  plates  which  contained  the 
record  were  deposited,  and  was  per- 
mitted to  view  them,  but  it  was  not 
till  Sept.  22.  1827,  that  the  angel  de- 
livered them  into  his  hands.  In  the 
meantime,  in  1825.  Joseph  had  engaged 
himself  with  a  Mr.  Josiah  Stoal,  who 
set  him  to  work  digging  for  a  silver 
mine,  which  it  was  reported  the  Span- 
iards had  opened  in  Harmony,  Susque- 
hannah  county.  Pa.,  and  from  this  cir- 
cumstance arose  the  opprobrious  epi- 
thet of  a  "money  digger."  Wliile  thus 
engaged,  Joseph  boarded  with  a  Mr. 
Isaac  Hale,  whose  daughter  Emma  he 
married  Jan.  18,  1827.  After  the  plates 
were  entrusted  to  Joseph,  he  met  with 
the  utmost  difficulty  in  preserving  them 
from  his  excited  persecutors,  and  was 
finally  under  the  necessity  of  leaving 
Manchester,  and  going  with  his  wife  to 
Susquehannah  county.  Pa.,  which  place 
he  reached  in  December,  and  immedi- 
ately commenced  copying  some  of  the 
characters  from  the  plates.  In  April, 
1828.  he  commenced  to  translate,  and 
Mr.  Martin  Harris  to  write  for  him. 
Subsequently  and  chiefly,  Oliver  Cow- 
dery  was  his  scribe.  May  15,  1829,  Jo- 
senh  Smith  and  Oliver  Cowdery  were 
baptized,  and,  by  John  the  Baptist,  or- 
dained to  the  Aaronic  Priesthood.  They 


were  shortly  afterward  ordained  to  the 
Melchisedec  Priesthood  by  Peter, James 
and  John.  At  length,  after  having 
passed  through  many  vicissitudes,  the 
translation  of  the  record  was  complet- 
ed, and.  early  in  1830,  an  edition,  under 
the  title  of  the  Book  of  Mormon,  was 
published.  The  next  great  event  in 
Joseph  Smith's  life  was  the  organiza- 
tion of  the  Church  of  Jesus  Christ  of 
Latter-day  Saints,  April  6.  1830.  in  the 
house  of  Mr.  Peter  Whitmer.  at  Fay- 
ette, Seneca  county.  New  York  The 
mission  which  he  had  been  called  to 
perform  soon  began  to  make  great  pro- 
gress, and  excite  corresponding  hatred 
In  the  hearts  of  its  opposers.  In  Janu- 
ary, 1831,  he  removed  to  Kirtland,Ohio, 
where  a  branch  of  the  Church,  number- 
ing about  one  hundred  members,  had 
previously  been  raised  up.  There, 
among  other  things,  he  was  engaged 
in  translating  the  Holy  Scriptures. 
June  19th,  in  company  with  his  wife, 
Sidney  Rigdon  and  others,  he  set  out, 
in  compliance  with  a  commandment  of 
the  Lord,  for  Missouri.  After  his  ar- 
rival there,  in  July,  it  was  revealed  to 
him  that  Independence,  Jackson  coun- 
ty. Mo.,  was  the  place  for  the  New 
Jerusalem  to  be  built,  and  that  the 
spot  for  the  Temple  was  a  lot  lying  a 
little  west  of  the  court  house.  On  tha 
3rd  of  August,  the  Temple  site  was 
dedicated.  After  spending  several  days 
in  receiving  revelations  for  the  Church, 
and  giving  instructions  for  its  guid- 
ance, he  returned  to  Kirtland,  where  he 
arrived  on  the  27th.  His  time  was  now 
occupied  in  traveling  and  preaching  in 
various  places  by  which  numbers  of 
converts  were  made.  He  also  continued 
the  translation  of  the  Scriptures.  In 
March,  1832.  while  living  in  Hiram,  a 
mob  gathered  about  his  house,  and, 
having  dragged  him  from  it  in  the  dead 
hour  of  the  night,  tarred  and  feathered 
him  and  left  him  half  dead  on  the 
bare  ground.  He  left  again  for  Missouri 
early  in  April,  1832.  Arriving  in  Jackson 
county,  on  the  24th,  he  met  with  a  wel- 
come "only  known  to  brethren  and 
sisters  united  as  one  in  the  same  faith, 
and  by  the  same  baptism,  and  sup- 
ported by  the  same  Lord."  May  6th. 
he  set  out  to  return  to  Kirtland,  and 
on  the  way  the  horses  of  the  stage,  in 
which  he  and  the  other  brethren  were 
traveling,  took  fright.  Bishop  Newel 
K.  Whitney  jumped  out,  and  in  doing 
so   caught    his    foot    in    the    wheel,    by 


BIOGRAPHICAL,       ENCYCLOPEDIA. 


3 


which  his  foot  and  leg  were  broken  in 
several  places.  Joseph  jumped  out,  but 
cleared  himself.  This  accident  de- 
tained Joseph  with  Bishop  Whitney  at 
Greenville  four  weeks,  and  while  there 
Joseph  nearly  lost  his  life  by  poison 
mixed  with  his  dinner,  either  inten- 
tionally or  otherwise  but  it  is  sup- 
posed intentionally.  They  recommenced 
their  journey  the  following  morning, 
and  arrived  in  Kirtland  some  time  in 
June.  There,  during  the  following 
year,  he  was  very  active,  and,  accord- 
ing to  revelations,  commenced  the 
building  of  a  Temple,  the  corner  stones 
of  which  were  laid  July  23,  1833.  Feb. 
17,  1834,  he  organized  the  first  Hign 
Council  in  the  Church  at  Kirtland.  A 
few  days  later  (Feb.  24th)  he  received 
a  revelation  concerning  the  troubles 
that  the  Saints  in  Missouri  were  ex- 
periencing, by  which  he  was  command- 
ed to  select  the  young  men  in  the 
Eastern  branches  of  the  Church  to  go 
up  to  their  relief.  Accordingly,  on  the 
26th,  he  started  from  home  to  obtain 
volunteers  for  this  purpose,  and  on  the 
5th  of  May  he  set  out  witn  about  one 
hundred  men,  with  clothing  and  other 
necessaries  for  the  Saints,  who  were 
suffering  in  Missouri.  After  a  long 
and  difficult  journey  as  leader  of  the 
historical  Zion's  Camp,  he  arrived  in 
Missouri.  He  organized  a  High  Coun- 
cil in  Clay  county,  and  otherwise  ar- 
ranged the  affairs  of  the  Church  in 
Missouri.  While  he  was  there,  the 
High  Council,  by  his  direction,  ad- 
dressed an  appeal,  on  behalf  of  the 
Church,  to  the  authorities  of  the  State 
and  of  the  nation,  and  to  all  people,  for 
peace,  and  praying  for  protection  while 
they  sought  to  obtain,  without  force, 
their  rights,  privileges  and  immunities. 
In  July,  Joseph  again  returned  to  Kirt- 
land. Feb.  14,  1835,  assisted  by  the 
Three  Witnesses  to  the  Book  of  Mor- 
mon, he  called  and  ordained  Twelve 
Apostles,  and  soon  afterwards  com- 
menced the  organization  of  the  Seven- 
ties. Later  in  that  year  he  obtained 
some  rolls  of  papyrus,  covered  with 
hieroglyphic  figures  and  devices.  One 
of  these  rolls  were  found  to  contain 
the  writings  of  Abraham,  which  were 
translated  by  Joseph.  March  27,  1836, 
he  dedicated  the  Lord's  house  in  Kirt- 
land. With  Oliver  Cowdery  he  was 
favored  to  benoid  a  vision  of  the  Lord 
Jesus  Christ;  one  of  Moses,  who  com- 
mitted  unto   them   the   keys   of   a   dis- 


pensation for  gathering  Israel  from  all 
parts  of  the  earth;  one  of  Elias,  who 
committed  unto  them  the  gospel  of 
Abraham;  and  another  of  Elijah,  who 
committed  unto  them  the  keys  of  a  dis- 
pensation to  turn  the  hearts  of  the 
fathers  to  the  children,  and  the  chil- 
dren to  the  fathers.  Many  other  per- 
sons saw  glorious  visions  on  the  same 
occasion.  In  June,  1837,  assisted  by 
his  counselors  in  the  First  Presidency, 
Joseph  set  apart  Heber  C.  Kimball  and 
Orson  Hyde,  two  of  the  Twelve,  as 
missionaries  to  England.  This  was  the 
first  foreign  mission  appointed  by  the 
Church.  In  the  following  September, 
he  left  Kirtland  for  Missouri,  in  com- 
pany with  Sidney  Rigdon,  to  fulfil  a 
mission  appointed  them  by  a  confer- 
ence of  Elders.  Th«  object  of  the  mis- 
sion was  to  lay  off  new  Stakes  of  Zion 
for  the  rapidly  increasing  members  of 
the  Church  to  gather  to.  On  his  re- 
turn, in  the  following  December,  he 
found  "apostasy,  persecution  and  con- 
fusion" prevailing  to  an  alarming  ex- 
tent. He  states  that  the  new  year 
dawned  upon  the  Church  in  Kirtland. 
in  all  the  bitterness  of  apostate  mob- 
ocracy,  which  continued  to  rage,  so 
that  it  was  necessary  for  Elder  Rig- 
don and  himself  "to  flee  from  its  dead- 
ly influence,  as  did  the  Apostles  and 
Prophets  of  old.  They  started  from 
Kirtland  about  10  o'clock  in  the  even- 
ing of  January  12,  1838,  on  horseback, 
and  reached  Norton,  Medina  county, 
Ohio,  sixty  miles  distant,  by  the  ng^xt 
morning.  Here  they  tarried  until  the  ar- 
rival of  their  families,  and  on  the  16th 
continued  their  journey  in  wagons  to 
Far  West,  Mo.  Joseph  had  only  resid- 
ed there  about  six  months  before  the 
troubles  the  Saints  had  been  wading 
through  for  several  years  reached  their 
highest  pitch,  and  he,  together  with 
others,  was  betrayed  into  the  hands  of 
the  mob-militia  on  Wednesday,  Oct 
31st.  The  next  day,  his  brother  Hyrum 
was  arrested  and  brought  into  camp. 
A  court  martial  was  then  held  and 
they  were  condemned  to  be  shot  on 
Friday  morning  on  the  public  square  in 
Far  West,  as  an  example  to  the  "Mor- 
mons," but,  owing  to  the  dissension  of 
Gen.  Doniphan,  the  sentence  was  not 
put  into  execution.  They  and  five 
other  brethren  were  carried  off  to  In- 
dependence under  a  strong  guard,  from 
whom  they  suffered  many  indignities 
by   the  way.       From  thence  they  were 


LATTER-DAY  SAINT 


taken  to  Richmond,  where  they  arrived 
Nov.  9th.      Gen.  Clark,  the  head  of  the 
mob  militia,   who  had   the  brethren  in 
custody,    determined      to      shoot    them 
three   days  after  their  arrival,  but  by 
the  influence  of  certain  parties  he  was 
intimidated.       and       after       searching 
throjigh  a  military  code    of     laws  and 
finding  that     preachers     of  the  gospel, 
who   had   never     done     military   duty, 
could  not  be  subject  to  court  martial, 
he  delivered  them  over  to  the  civil  au- 
thorities,to  be  tried  as  persons  guilty  of 
"treason,    murder,    arson,    larceny   and 
theft."      They  underwent  a  mock  trial, 
and  were  then  sent  to  Liberty  in  Clay 
county,  where  they  were  put  into  jail 
and   confined   about   five   months.   Poi- 
son  was   given   to   them  several   times 
and  even  human  flesh,  during  this  im- 
prisonment.      In  the     following  April, 
they  were  removed  to  Daviess  county 
to  have  a  trial,  as  it  was  said,  but  it 
was  a  mere  farce— the  grand  jury  who 
sat  upon  their  case  during  the  day  act- 
ed at  night  as  their  guard,  and  boasted 
of  the  bloody     deeds     they     had  com- 
mitted at  Haun's  Mill  and  other  places 
of  sad  memory,      They  were,  however, 
indicted    for    "treason,    murder,    arson, 
larceny,  theft  and  stealing,"    on  which 
they  asked   for  a  change  of  venue  to 
Marion  county,  but  it  was  refused  and 
one  given  for  Boone,   in  removing     to 
which  place  the  sheriff,  who  had  them 
in  charge,  told  them  that  he  had  been 
requested   by  Judge  Birch,   of  Daviess 
county,  never  to  carry  them  to  Boone 
county,  and  give  them  permission  to  es- 
cape, which  they  availed  themselves  of. 
and   Joseph   and     Hyrum     arrived     in 
Quincy,   111.,     a     few   days  afterwards. 
There  they  were  welcomed  by  the  em- 
braces  of  their  families,  and   received 
the  congratulations  of  the   Saints  and 
sympathizing  friends.       May  9th,     Jo- 
seph  and   his   family   left   Quincy     for 
Commerce,    and    on    the    9th    took    up 
their  residence  in  a  small  log  house  on 
the  bank  of  the  Mississippi  river.  About 
this  time  the  Saints  were  making  out 
statements  of   their  losses  and  suffer- 
ings  in   Missouri,     to     present     to   the 
President  of  the  United  States,  with  a 
petition   to   Congress   for   redress,   and 
on  the  29th  of  October  Joseph  left  Nau- 
voo  for  Washington,  with  Sidney  Rig- 
don  and  Ellas  Higbee.  the  three  hav- 
ing  been   appointed     a   committee     to 
present  the   petition.       After     arriving 
in  Washington  they  had  an  interview 


with  President  Martin  Van  Buren.  and 
subsequently  with  John  C.  Calhoun.    It 
was   at  this     interview     that  Mr.   Van 
Buren  uttered  the  well  known  words— 
"Gentlemen,   your  cause   is  just,   but  I 
can  do  nothing  for  you."    Early  in  Feb- 
ruary,1840, seeing  that  all  his  efforts  were 
ineffectual   to  obtain  redress     for     the 
wrongs  the  Saints  had  endured,  Joseph 
left  the  capital  for  Nauvoo.      The  re- 
maining four  years  of  his  life  may  be 
said   to  have  been  chiefly   occupied   in 
the  building  up  of  that  city  as  a  gath- 
ering place  for  the  Saints.      After  re- 
maining  silent  for  nearly     two   years. 
Missouri  made    a    demand  on  Governor 
Carlin,    ot   Illinois,    for     Joseph    Smith 
and   others.       A  writ  for  their  appre- 
hension was     issued,     but  the     sherift 
could   not   find   them.       The   writ  was 
returned  to  the  sheriff,  and  the  matter 
dropped   at   that     time.       Among     the 
numerous  revelations  which  Joseph  re- 
ceived from  the  Lord,  for  the  guidance 
of   the   Church   at   large,   one   received 
Jan.  19,  1841,  deserves  special  mention. 
In  that  he  was  commanded  to  immedi- 
ately make  a  proclamation  of  the  gos- 
pel  to   all   kings   of   the   world,   to   the 
president    and   governors   elect   of   the 
United   States,   and   to  all   the   nations 
of  the  earth.      In  that  revelation  also 
were  pointed  out  the  duties  of  various 
members   of   the   Priesthood.       It     re- 
quired a  boarding  house  to  be  built  for 
the  accommodation  of  strangers     who 
should  go  up  to  Nauvoo  to  contemplate 
the  work  of  the  Lord,  called  upon  the 
Saints  to   come  from  afar     with  their 
wealth  and  means,  to  help  to    build  a 
Temple  to  the  Lord,  in  which,  among 
other  ordinances  of  salvation,  might  be 
administered     baptism    for     the    dead, 
etc.      In  June,  1841,  in  returning  from 
Quincy  to  Nauvoo,  Joseph  was  arrested 
on  the  writ  before  referred  to,  for  the 
purpose,  of  being  delivered  up  to  Mis- 
souri.      A  writ  of  habeas  corpus     was 
obtained,   and   the   case   was   heard   at 
Monmouth. Warren  county, before  Judge 
Stephen  A.   Douglas,     of     the     United 
States   Supreme  Court,   which   resulted 
in  his  immediate  discharge.      The  Hon. 
O.  H,  Browning,  in  addressing  the  court 
for  the  defense,  eloquently  referred  to 
the   cruelties   of   Missouri.       He     con- 
cluded  with     the     following  language: 
"And  shall  this  unfortunate  man,  whom 
their  fury  has  seen  proper  to  select  for 
sacrifice,  be  driven  into  such  a  savage 
land,   and   none   dare   to  enlist     in   the 


BIOGRAPHICAL,    ENCYCLOPEDIA. 


cause  of  justice.      If  there  was  no  other 
voice  under  heaven  ever  to  be  heard  in 
this  cause,  gladly  would  I  stand  alone, 
and    proudly   spend   my   last   breath   in 
defence  of  an  oppressed  American  citi- 
zen."      In  the  summer  of  1842,   Joseph 
Smith    succeeded    John    C.    Bennett    in 
the  mayoralty  of  Nauvoo.  which  office 
he  retained  until  his  death.      May  6th, 
of  this   year,   Lilburn     W.   Boggs,     ex- 
governor  of  Missouri,  was  shot  at  and 
wounded   at   his   residence   in   Indepen- 
dence,  Mo.     Still   as  relentless  as  ever 
in   his    purpose    to    destroy   Joseph,    he 
charged  him  with  being  accessory  be- 
fore   the    fact,    and   applied     to     Thos. 
Reynolds,  governor  of  Missouri, to  make 
a  demand  upon  the  governor  of  Illinois 
for  him.       Accordingly,     a     writ     was 
served  upon  him  Aug.  8,  1842.      An  in- 
vestigation into  the  matter  was  had  on 
a   writ   of   habeas   corpus,    in   January, 
1843,   at   Springfield,     before     the   Hon. 
Nathaniel   Pope,   judge   of     the    circuit 
court   of   the  U.    S.   for   the   district   of 
Illinois,    which  ended   in  an   honorable 
acquittal,    the   judge   requesting,    "that 
the    decision    of    the    court    be    entered 
upon  the  records  in  such  a  way,   that 
Mr.   Smith   be  no  more  troubled  about 
the  matter."       Missouri,   however,   still 
true  to  her  purpose,  continued  to  excite 
the   public   mind   against   Joseph,     and 
made  another  demand  upon  Illinois  to 
deliver   him    up   to   her     for     trial     on 
charge  of  treason,  and  in  June,  while  he 
was    visiting   at    Inlet     Grove,     twelve 
miles  from  Dixon,  111.,  Joseph  H.  Rey- 
nolds,  sheriff  of   Jackson   county.    Mo., 
and  Harman  T.  Wilson,     cf  Carthage, 
111.,    appeared   with   a   writ     from     the 
governor  of  Illinois,  and  arrested  him. 
They  drove  him  to  Dixon   in  a  wagon 
and   frequently   struck  him   with   their 
pistols    on    the    way,    and    would    have 
immediately  carried  him  into  Missouri 
to   be   murdered,    but   for   the   interfer- 
ence of  the  people.       With  much  diffi- 
culty   a    writ    of    habeas      corpus    was 
procured   at   Dixon,   and   made   return- 
able before  the  nearest  tribunal,  in  the 
5th  Judicial  District,  authorized  to  hear 
and  determine  upon  such  writs,  which 
was  at  Nauvoo.      On  returning  there  a 
writ  was  sued  out  and  made  returnable 
before   the  municipal  court,   and,   upon 
examination,    Joseph    was      discharged 
from  arrest  upon  the  merits  of  the  case, 
and   upon   the   further   ground   of   sub- 
stantial  defects   in   the   writ  issued   by 
the  governor  of  Illinois.      Missouri  was 


not  yet  satisfied,   but  made  a   requisi- 
tion upon  Governor  Ford,  of  Illinois,  to 
call  out  the  militia  to  re-take  Joseph. 
To   this   the   governor  objected,   as   the 
laws   of   the   State   had   been   fully   ex- 
ercised  in  this  matter,  and  everything 
had  been  done  which  the  law  wairant- 
ed.      The  affair  cost  Joseph  upwards  of 
$3,500.       At  Dixon  he   sued  out  a   writ 
against  Reynolds  and  Wilson,  for  false 
imprisonment,    and    using   unnecessary 
violence  in  arresting  him.      May  9,  1844. 
the  case  was  called  up  for  trial,  and  a 
verdict  for  the  plaintiff  was  recorded, 
with  $40  damages  and  the  cost  of  the 
suit.       July   12,   1843,     the   Prophet   Jo- 
seph received  from  the  Lord  the  great 
revelation  on  marriage,  but  it  was  not 
published  to  the  world  until  1852.      The 
growing  importance  of  Nauvoo,  the  in- 
crease of  members  of  the  Church  in  all 
parts  of  the  Union,  and  in  Great  Brit- 
ain, together  with  the  perplexity  caused 
by  false  friends  and  apostates  in  Nau- 
voo, made  Joseph's  duties  truly  multi- 
farious;   but,    in    the   midst    of   all,    his 
love  for  the   Saints  was  constant,   and 
his  regard  for  their  interest  ever  wake- 
ful.      The     presidential      chair    of    the 
United  States  at  this  time  was  about  to 
be  vacated.  Among  the  new  candidates 
were  John  C.  Calhoun  and  Henry  Clay, 
and  to  ascertain   what  would  be  their 
rule  of  action  to  the  Saints  as  a  people, 
Joseph  wrote  to  each,  setting  forth  how 
they  had  been  persecuted  by  Missouri, 
and  had  failed  to  obtain  redress, though 
they    had    petitioned    from    the      State 
courts  to  Congress  itself.      Very  excep- 
tional   replies    were    returned,    and    Jo- 
seph rejoined  at  some  length,  severely 
commenting  upon  them.      The  number 
of   votes   which    the    Saints   could   give 
was  not  unknown  to  the  rival  parties- 
Whig   and    Democrat,    and    they     were 
courted  by  both;    but  the   Saints,   who 
could  not  feel  justified  in  giving  them 
to  either,  put  Joseph  Smith  forward  as 
a  candidate.      Feb.  7,  1844,  he  issued  an 
address    to    the    American    people,    de- 
claring his  views  on  all  the  great  lead- 
ing political  topics  of  the  times.      This, 
and   the   correspondence   between     him 
and  Calhoun  and  Clay,  were  published 
in  the  "Times  and  Seasons."       Though 
Joseph   was     not     elected,   this   course 
prevented    political    demagogues     from 
making  a  target  of  the  Saints,   as  had 
been  the  case  at  previous  elections,  and 
also  enabled  them  to  vote  for  one  whom 
they   considered     "honorable,     fearless. 


6 


LATTER-DAY    SAINT 


and  energetic,"   and   "that  would     ad- 
minister justice  with  an  impartial  hand, 
and  magnify  and  dignify  t.'-.c;  office  of 
chief   magistrate."       Francis   M.    Hig- 
bee,  a  member  of  the  Church,  had  been 
accused  by  Joseph  Smith,  some  time  in 
1842,    of   seducing   several   women,    and 
of  other  evil  conduct,  and  was  brought 
before  Presidents  Brigham  Young  and 
Hyrum  Smith,  and  others,  which  much 
enraged   him.       Similar   charges     were 
preferred    against   the   notorious     John 
C.  Bennett.      They  both  confessed  and 
aslced  forgiveness.      But  their  repent- 
ance was  not  sincere,  and  they  secretly 
determined  to  ruin  Joseph.      The  thing 
festered  in   Higbee's   mind     until   May, 
1844,  when  he  sued  out  a  writ,  from  the 
circuit  court  of  Hancock  county,  for  the 
arrest  of  Joseph,  on  the  plea  of  defa- 
mation   of    character.       The      damages 
were  laid   at  $5,000.       Joseph   was     ac- 
cordingly arrested,  but  petitioned     the 
municipal  court  of  Nauvoo,  for  a  writ 
of  habeas  corpus,  that  the  whole  mat- 
ter  might   be   thoroughly   investigated. 
An  examination  took  place  before  that 
court,   and  resulted   in     his  discharge: 
first,    from    the   illegality   of   the   writ, 
upon  which  he  was  arrested,  and  sec- 
ondly, from  its  being  fully  proven  that 
the  suit  was  instituted  through  malice, 
private    pique,      and     corruption,      and 
ought  not   to   be   countenanced.       This 
led,   in  quick  succession,  to  the  estab- 
lishment  in    Nauvoo     of   a   newspaper 
called  the  "Nauvoo  Expositor,"    which 
had    for    its    object    the    defamation    of 
the  citizens  who  were  not  of  their  par- 
ty.      The   foulest   libels   upon     Joseph 
Smith's  private  character,  and  that  of 
other  persons,  appeared  in  its  columns, 
and  its   prospectus     actually   proposed 
the   repeal   of   the    city   charter.       The 
city    council,    falling    back    upon    their 
prerogatives,   contained   in  the  charter 
and    in    the    legislative    powers   of    the 
city  council,  declared  the  "Expositor," 
on  account  of  its  filthy  contents,  a  nuis- 
ance, and  ordered  its  abatement,  which 
was  carried  out  by   the     city  marshal 
and   the   police.       Its   proprietors   then 
went  to  Carthage,  the  county  seat,  and 
sued    out    a    writ    against    the    mayor, 
marshal,  and  police,   for  a  riot!       The 
constable  from  Carthage  executing  the 
writ  was  requested  by  Joseph  and  his 
companions  to  return  them    anywhere 
else   but   Carthage,    as   that   place   had 
become  the  rendezvous  of  the  most  hos- 
tile opponents  of  the  Saints,  and  fatal 


consequences    were    apprehended    if   he 
and   the   other   defendants   were   taken 
thither.     The  constable,     however,     re- 
fused, upon  which  the  municipal  court 
.sued   out     a     writ     of   habeas   corpus, 
which  the  charter  empowered  them  to 
do,   and  an   investigation  was  had  be- 
fore   the    court.        It    resulted    in      the 
dismissal  of  the  prisoners,  and  no  riot 
had  been  committed,  they  having  only 
acted  in   the   discharge   of  a  duty  im- 
posed  upon   them   by  the   city  council. 
The  mobbers  refused  to   recognize  the 
writ   of   habeas   corpus,    and    the    deci- 
sion of  the  municipal  court,  and     sent 
runners  through  Hancock  and  the  sur- 
rounding   counties,     to    ignite    the  al- 
ready    inflammable     materials     which 
everywhere   abounded  in  the  shape  of 
virulent  opposers  of  the  truth,  and  hat- 
ers of  Joseph  Smith  and  Nauvoo.     By 
this  means  a  mob  was  raised  to  again 
arrest  Joseph,  or  lay  the  city  in  ashes, 
and    literally    exterminate    its    inhabit- 
ants.      Volunteers    were    actually     in- 
vited from  Missouri  to  join  in  the  un- 
lawful proceeding.      In  this  emergencj', 
the  Nauvoo  Legion,  numbering  between 
3,000  and   4,000   men,   was   placed  under 
arms    to    defend    the    city    against    the 
mob, until  the  governor  should  do  some- 
thing  in   his   official    capacity.       These 
prompt   measures   induced    the   mob    to 
remain  in  Carthage  and  Warsaw,  and 
this   was  the  position     of     the  parties 
when    the    governor    appeared    in    that 
town.       Instead  of  the  mob  being  dis- 
persed and  the  ringleaders  arrested,  it 
was    actually    mustered      into    regular 
service,    the    governor    placing    himself 
at  its  head.       His  first  act  was  to  dis- 
band the  Legion, whose  men  were  stand- 
ing in  defense  of  their  own  lives,  those 
of  their  wives,  children,  and  of  the  citi- 
zens generally.      He  then  requested  the 
mayor,  marshal  and  policemen  who  had 
been  before  arrested  and  discharged, as 
related,   to  repair  to  Carthage  and  ap- 
pear before  a  magistrate  to  answer  the 
charges  preferred  against  them  in  the 
writ;  thus,  in  his  capacity  of  governor 
and     the     representative       of     justice, 
trampling  upon  the  rights  of  a  chart- 
ered city,  habeas  corpus  and  all.      The 
prisoners  were  taken  to  Carthage,  June 
24,  1844,  the  public  arms  were  demanded 
from  the  Legion,  and  the  city  was  left 
defenceless  within  half  a  day's  journey 
of  an   infuriated  mob.       The   prisoners 
arrived  at  Carthage  late  at  night,  and, 
on  the  morning  of  the  25th,  were  ap- 


BIOGRAPHICAL   ENCYCLOPEDIA. 


prehended  on  a  charge  of  treason, 
founded  on  the  affidavits  of  Henry  O. 
Norton  and  Augustine  Spencer.  In  the 
afternoon  the  prisoners  appeared  be- 
fore Robert  F.  Smith,  J.  P.,  to  answer 
to  the  charge  of  riot,  but  by  the  ad- 
vice of  counsel,  and  to  prevent  further 
excitement,  they  voluntarily  entered 
into  recognizances  in  the  sum  of  $500 
each  for  their  appearance  at  the  next 
term  of  the  circuit  court  for  the  coun- 
ty. Joseph  and  Hyrum  had  not  been 
at  liberty  above  half  an  hour  before 
they  were  waited  upon  by  Constable 
Bettesworth,  who  had  arrested  them  in 
the  morning  upon  the  charge  of  trason. 
He  insisted  upon  their  going  to  jail 
with  him,  but  their  counsel,  Messrs. 
Woods  and  Reid,  objected  to  it,  as  they 
were  entitled  to  an  examination  before 
they  could  be  sent  to  jail.  The  con- 
stable holding  a  mittimus  from  Justice 
Smith,  they  were  conveyed  to  jail, 
"there  to  remain  until  discharged  in 
due  course  of  law."  The  next  day  the 
said  justice  commanded  the  constable 
to  bring  them  before  him  for  examina- 
tion. The  jailor  refused  t'^  give  them 
up.  The  justice  then  sent  a  body  of 
"Carthage  Greys,"  of  which  he  was 
captain,  and  they,  by  intimidation  and 
threats,  procured  Joseph  and  Hyrum, 
and  brought  them  before  him.  The 
counsel  for  the  prisoners  expressed  a 
wish  for  subpoenas  for  witnesses  from 
Nauvoo,  which  were  granted,  and  the 
examination  was  postponed  until  12 
o'clock  on  the  27th.  In  the  course  of 
the  day  the  return  of  the  subpoenas 
was  altered  to  the  29th,  but  on  June 
27,  1844,  between  5  and  6  o'clock, 
the  mob  rushed  upon  the  jail,  over- 
powered the  guard,  and  shot  Joseph 
and  Hyrum  dead.  Elder  John  Taylor 
was  wounded  with  four  bullets,  and  a 
fifth  struck  his  watch  which  saved  his 
life.  The  fingers  pointed  to  5  h.,  16 
m.,  26  sec,  leaving  on  record  the  exact 
time  when  the  tragedy  occurred.  On 
the  first  day  of  their  imprisonment.Jo- 
seph  and  Hyrum  were  visited  by  Gov- 
ernor Ford,  who,  after  a  lengthy  con- 
versation upon  the  leading  causes 
which  had  given  rise  to  the  difficulties, 
promised  them  protection,  and  pledged 
his  word  and  the  faith  and  honor  of  the 
State,  that  they  should  be  protected. 
He  had  made  this  pledge  on  a  previous 
occasion.  The  governor  also  stated 
that  he  intended  to  march  into  Nauvoo 
at  the  head  of  the  force  which  had  as- 


sembled, to  gratify  them,  and  that  the 
prisoners  would  accompany  him,  and 
afterwards  return  to  attend  the  trial 
before  the  magistrate,  which  had  been 
postponed  to  the  29th.  This  intention 
was  not,  however,  fully  carried  into 
effect.  The  troops  were  disbanded  ex- 
cept two  companies — one  from  McDon- 
nough  county,  and  the  other  the  Carth- 
age Greys.  At  the  head  of  the  first 
the  governor  marched  to  Nauvoo,  but 
without  the  prisoners;  they  were  left  in 
prison  with  the  Carthage  Greys  to 
protect  them — the  same  men  who  had 
just  previously  mutinied,  and  came 
near  shedding  their  blood  in  the  gov- 
ernor's presence.  After  his  arrival  at 
Nauvoo,  the  governor  called  the  citizens 
together,  and  addressed  them  for  about 
twenty  minutes  in  a  most  insulting 
manner,  and  while  the  outraged  citi- 
zens of  Nauvoo  were  listening  to  this 
harangue,  the  Prophet  and  his  brother 
were  being  murdered  in  jail.  On  leav- 
ing Nauvoo  for  Carthage,  Joseph  ex- 
pressed himself  thus,  "I  am  going  like 
a  lamb  to  the  slaughter;  but  I  am  calm 
as  a  summer's  morning.  I  have  a 
conscience  void  of  offence  towards  God, 
and  towards  all  men.  I  shall  die  in- 
nocent, and  it  shall  yet  be  said  of  me. 
'He  was  murdered  in  cold  blood.'  "  His 
whole  life  was  one  of  extraordinary  ac- 
tivity. In  about  seventeen  years  he 
brought  forth  and  translated  the  Book 
of  Mormon;  received  numerous  revela- 
tions, from  which  the  Book  of  Doc- 
trine and  Covenants  is  mainly  com-^ 
piled;  caused  his  mission  to  be  pro- 
claimed in  the  four  quarters  of  the 
globe,  and  saw,  according  to  many 
authorities,  more  than  50,000  persons 
receive  it;  founded  and  built  up  a  city, 
to  which  people  gathered;  and  built  one 
Temple  at  Kirtland,  and  partially  an- 
other at  Nauvoo.  From  first  to  last 
he  was  involved  in  about  fifty  law- 
suits, arising  out  of  the  persecutions 
of  his  enemies,  but  came  out  of  the 
legal  furnace  "without  the  smell  of 
fire,  or  a  thread  of  his  garment 
scorched."  For  a  period  in  1842,  he 
edited  the  "Times  and  Seasons,"  and  at 
his  death  was  mayor  of  Nauvoo;  lieu- 
tenant-general of  the  Nauvoo  Legion 
(a  portion  of  the  State  militia),  one  of 
the  regents  of  the  Nauvoo  University, 
and  a  member  of  the  Nauvoo  Agricul- 
tural and  Manufacturing  Association. 
He  had  four  sons,  Joseph,  Frederick  G. 
W.,  Alexander,  and  Don  Carlos,  and  a 


8 


LATTER-DAY    SAINT 


fifth,   David   H.,   was  born   about    five 
months   after   his     assRssination.       He 
was    tenderly   attached    to   his   family, 
and  in  private  life  was  always  cheerful 
and  agreeable.      In  public  capacity  he 
was   courteous  and   affable.       He    was 
not   suspicious,   and     believed   that   all 
men  were  honest,   which  drew  around 
him    several    hypocrites   and   designing 
wicked   men,    who     caused     him  much 
sorrow,  and  were  the  source  of  his  chief 
persecutions.       He   was   truly   inspired 
of   God,    and   commensurate     w^ith   his 
holy  calling  ,so  that  "without  learning, 
without  means,  and  without  experience, 
he  met  a  learned  world,  a  rich  century, 
a  hkrd  hearted,  wicked  and  adulterous 
generation,   with   truth  that  could  not 
be    disproved."       The     following     pen 
picture  of  the  Prophet  Joseph  is  drawn 
by  Parley  P.  Pratt:    "Joseph  Smith  was 
in   person   tall   and   well   built,     strong 
and  active;  of  a  light  complexion,  light 
hair,  blue  eyes,  very  little  beard,   and 
of  an  expression  peculiar  to  himself,  on 
which  the  eye  naturally  rested  with  in- 
terest,  and   was  never  weary     of     be- 
holding.      His   countenance     was   ever 
mild,  affable,  beaming  with  intelligence 
and  benevolence;   mingled  with  a  look 
of   interest   and   an   unconscious   smile 
or  cheerfulness,  and  entirely  free  from 
all  restraint  or  affectation  of  gravity; 
and    there    was     something   connected 
with  the  serene  and  steady  penetrating 
glance  of  his  eye,  as  if  he  would  pene- 
trate the  deepest  abyss  of  the    human 
heart,  gaze  into  eternity,  penetrate  the 
heavens,    and    comprehend   all   worlds. 
He  possessed  a  noble  boldness  and  in- 
dependence  of   character;    his   manner 
was  easy  and  familiar;  his  rebuke  ter- 
rible as  the  lion;   his  benevolence   un- 
bounded as  the  ocean;   his  intelligence 
universal,  and  his  language  abounding 
in  original  eloquence  peculiar  to  him- 
self—not     polished— not      studied— not 
smoothed   and   softened     by   education 
and  refined  by  art;  but  flowing  forth  in 
Its  own  native  simplicity,  and  profuse- 
ly abounding  in  variety  of  subject  and 
manner.       He   interested     and   edified, 
while,  at  the  same  time,  he  amused  and 
entertained     his     audience;     and  none 
listened  to  him  that  were  ever  weary 
with  his  discourse.  I  have  even  known 
him  to  retain  a  congregation  of  willing 
and   anxious  listeners  for  many  hours 
together,  in  the  midst  of  cold  or  sun- 
shine,  rain   or   wind,   while   they  were 
laughing  at  one  moment  and  weeping 


the  next.       Even  his  most  bitter  ene- 
mies  were   generally     overcome,   if   he 
could   once   get     their     ears.       I   have 
known   him   when     chained     and   sur- 
rounded with  armed  murderers  and  as- 
sassins   who    were    heaping   upon    him 
every   possible    insult   and    abuse,    rise 
up  in  the  majesty  of  a  son  of  God  and 
rebuke  them  in     the      name     of  Jesus 
Christ,    till    they   quailed     before    him, 
dropped  their  weapons     and     on  their 
knees   begged   his   pardon,    and   ceased 
their  abuse.      In  short,  in  him  the  char- 
acters of  a  Daniel   and  a  Cyrus  were 
wonderfully  blended.       The  gifts,  wis- 
dom   and    devotion    of    a   Daniel    were 
united  with  the  boldness,  courage,  tem- 
perance,  perseverance     and  generosity 
of  a  Cyrus.      And  had  he  been  spared 
a  martyr's  fate     till  mature   manhood 
and  age,  he  was  certainly  endued  with 
powers  and  ability  to  have  revolution- 
ized the  world  in   many  respects,   and 
to    have    transmitted     to    posterity     a 
name   associated   with     more    brilliant 
and   glorious  acts  than  has  yet  fallen 
to   the   lot   of   mortals.       As   it   is,    his 
work  will  live  to  endless  ages,  and  un- 
numbered millions  yet  unborn  will  men- 
tion his  name  with  honor."     (See  His- 
tory  of  Joseph   Smith  as  published   in 
"Mill.      Star,"      Vols.    14   to    25;      "His- 
torical Record,"  Vol.  7;   Life  of  Joseph 
Smith  by  Geo.  Q.  Cannon;   Life  of  Jo- 
seph   Smith    by    Edward    W.    Tullidge, 
and  Church  publications  generally.) 

YOUNG,  Brigham,  second  president 
of  the  Church  of  Jesus  Christ  of  Lat- 
ter-day Saints,  was  born  June  1,  1801, 
in  Wittingham,  Windham  county,  Ver- 
mont. Like  his  predecessor  he  was  of 
purely  American  stock,  dating  back 
many  generations.  His  father,  John 
Young,  fought  in  the  revolutionary 
war,  and  his  grandfather  in  the  French 
and  Indian  war.  His  family  relations 
on  both  sides  were  among  the  staunch- 
est  supporters  of  freedom  in  the  Ameri- 
can colonies.  He  was  the  ninth  child 
in  a  family  of  five  sons  and  six  daugh- 
ters. They  were  inured  to  hard  labor 
and  were  strictly  moral  in  their  habits. 
He  was  trained  in  piety,  but  joined  no 
denomination  until  the  age  of  twenty- 
one,  when  he  identified  himself  with 
the  Methodist  church,  to  which  his  par- 
ents were  allied.  (At  the  age  of  sixteen 
he  commenced  business  for  himself.  He 
learned  the  trades  of  carpenter,  joiner, 
painter  and  glazier,  and  exhibited  trai'.n 


BIOGRAPHICAL   ENCYCLOPEDIA. 


of  a  practical  character  which  in  after- 
life were  brought  into  such  a  broad  field 
of  activity  among  the  people  of  God.be- 
ing  quickened  by  the  inspiration  of  the 
Almighty.  In  the  meantime  his  parents 
had  moved  to  Chenango  county,  New 
York.  Oct.  8,  1824,  he  married  Miss 
Miriam  Works  and  located  in  Cayuga 


BRIGHAM  TOUNG  IN   18.52. 

county,  New  York,  wTiere  he  followed 
his  occupation  of  carpenter,  painter, 
joiner  and  glazier.  Early  in  1829  he  re- 
moved to  Mendon,  Monroe  county,  New 
Yjrk,  where  in  the  spring  of  1830  he 
first  saw  a  copy  of  the  Book  of  Mormon, 
which  was  brought  to  that  neighbor- 
hood by  Elder  Samuel  H.  Smith,  broth- 
er of  the  Prophet.  The  contents  of  this 
sacred  record  he  carefully  read  with  a 
prayerful  desire  to  know  the  truth.  His 
investigation  resulted  in  a  firm  convic-, 
tion  that  Joseph  Smith  was  a  Prophet 
of  the  living  God  and  the  Book  of  Mor- 
mon a  divine  record.  Although  a  Meth- 
odist of  sincere  piety  and  confronted 
with  frowns  and  opposition,  he  had  the 
courage  of  his  convictions,  being  bap- 
tized and  confirmed  a  member  of  the 
Church  of  Jesus  Christ  of  Latter-day 
day  Saints  April  14,  1832,  by  Elder 
Eleazer  Miller.  He  was  ordained  an 
Elder  by  Brother  Miller  the  same  day. 
Three    weeks    later,    his    faithful     wife 


was  baptized.       She   died  In   the   faith 
Sept.  8,  1832.  leaving  him  two  little  girls 
as  the  result  of  their  union.      From  the 
day  of  Elder  Young's  baptism   he  be- 
came a  most  indefatigable  and  fearless 
advocate  of  the  pure  principles  of  the 
gospel  revealed  to  the  Prophet  Joseph 
Smith.       His  parents,   brother     Joseph, 
and    several      other      members    of    the 
Young  family  also   embraced   the   gos- 
pel and  became  active  workers  in  the 
Church.       During   the   summer   subse- 
quent  to   his     baptism,     he   did   much 
preaching  in  the  regions  about  Mendon, 
baptizing  a  goodly  number  and  organiz- 
ing several  branches  of  the  Church.    In 
this  vicinity  also     his  life-long    friend 
counselor  and  associate,  Heber  C.  Kim- 
ball, received  the  gospel.    With  Elders 
Kimball  and    Joseph    Young,    Brigham 
Young    visited    Kirtland,    Ohio,    in    the 
fall   of   1832,   and   for   the   first   time   in 
life  saw  and  became   acquainted   with 
the  Prophet  Joseph  Smith.      They  were 
mutually  impressed  with  the  integrity 
of  each  other.      In  the  evening  of  the. 
day  they    first    met,  the  Prophet  called 
upon  Brother  Brigham  to  pray.      While 
praying   he   spoke     in     tongues.       The 
Prophet  received  the  interpretation  and 
said  it  was  the  pure  language  spoken 
by  Adam  in  the  Garden  of  Eden.     Af- 
ter Brigham  had  left  the  room  Joseph 
Smith  uttered  the  prophecy,  "The  time 
will  come  when  Brother  Brigham  will 
preside  over  this  Church."  In  the  win- 
ter of  18.32-3  Brother  Brigham,  with  his 
brother  Joseph  Young,  labored  as  mis- 
sionaries  in   and     near     "West  Laboro, 
Canada.     They  were  successful  in  bap- 
tizing numbers  of  people  and  organizing 
several  branches  of  the  Church.       His 
labors    continued    the    following   spring 
and  part  of  the  summer  in  Canada  and 
northern  New  York,  with  encouraging 
success.     In  July,  1833,  he  conducted  a 
small   company   of   Saints   to   Kirtland. 
This  may  be  called  the  commencement 
of  his  great  labors  in  the  capacity  of  a 
pioneer  leader, which  he  so  fully  accom- 
plished in  later  years.       In  the  fall  of 
1833   he    removed   with     his     family   to 
Kirtland,     Ohio,     and     was  ever  after- 
ward   an   important   personage   in    the 
growth  and   development  of  that  city* 
In    February,    1834,    he    married     Mar> 
Ann  Angell,   who  took  faithful  care  of 
his  motherless  children.      She  bore  sev- 
eral children  to  him,  among  them  the 
present  Apostle,  Elder  Brigham  Young. 
When  Zion's    Camp    was    organized  in 


10 


LATTER-DAY    SAINT 


1834  to  carry  supplies  and  encourage- 
ment to  the  driven  Saints  In  Missouri, 
and  which  needed  men  of  integrity,  en- 
durance, faith  and  courage,  Brigham 
Young  was  among  the  foremost  of  the 
faithful  few  to  accomplish  that  won- 
derful pilgrimage  to  and  from  Missouri, 
doing  his  work  cheerfully,  and  was 
never  known  to  murmur  against  the 
providences  or  Prophet  of  the  Lord.  On 
his  return  to  Kirttand, having  journeyed 
two  thousand  miles  on  foot,  he  occu- 
pied the  remainder  of  the  year  working 
on  the  pripting  office,  school  room  and 
Temple.  When  the  first  quorum  of 
Twelve  Apostles  of  this  dispensation, 
Feb.  14,  1835,  were  chosen,  Brigham 
Young  was  numbered  among  them; 
from  then  until  1837,  he  spent  his  sum- 
mers, preaching,  baptizing,  organizing 
branches,  as  a  missionary,  and  his 
winters  working  at  his  trade  upon  the 
Kirtland  Temple,  the  painting  and  fin- 
ishing of  which  he  skillfully  superin- 
tended in  the  spring  of  1836.  He  also 
attended  the  Hebrew  school  in  Kirtland 
in  the  winter  of  1835-36.  When  the 
Temple  was  dedicated  he  attended  the 
solemn  assembly  and  received  his  bless- 
ings in  the  House  of  the  Lord.  Soon  af- 
ter this  he  performed  a  faithful  mis- 
sion in  the  Eastern  States,  with  Dr. 
Willard  Richards.  He  returned  in  May, 
1837,  and  later  the  same  year  filled  an- 
other short  mission  in  the  State  of  New 
York.  During  the  financial  panic  of 
1837,  when  apostasy  ran  so  high  in 
Kirtland  and  several  of  the  Twelve 
Apostles  turned  against  the  Prophet, 
with  false  accusations,  and  sought  his 
overthrow,  Brigham  Young  stood  firm 
and  loyal,  declaring  in  the  face  of  bit- 
ter enemies,  that  Joseph  Smith  was 
true  and  faithful  and  still  a  Prophet 
of  God.,'  So  intense  was  the  hatred 
against  Brigham  Young  for  this  bold 
stand  that  he  was  obliged  to  leave 
Kirtland  to  escape  the  fury  of  the  mob. 
He  left  Dec.  22,  1837,  and  arrived 
among  the  Saints  in  Far  West,  Mo., 
March  14,  1838.  Soon  after  this  the 
entire  Church  moved  from  Ohio  to 
Missouri.  In  the  meantime  the 
Prophet  Joseph  and  other  brethren 
were  betrayed  by  apostates,  threatened 
with  death  and  cast  into  prison.  Dur- 
ing this  period  the  coming  Prophet. 
Brigham  Young,  was  industrious  and 
improving  the  land,  and  laboring  dili- 
gently in  the  duties  of  his  Apostleshlp, 
especially    in    preparing   and    planning 


for  the  exodus  of  the  Saints  from  Mis- 
souri under  the  cruel  order  of  extermi- 
nation Issued  by  Gov.  Lilburn  W. 
Boggs.  In  this  exodus  Brigham  Young 
exemplified  those  gifts  of  organization 
and  pioneering,  which  Providence  des- 
tined him  so  thoroughly  to  anlplify  in 
the  great  exodus  of  the  Latter-day 
Saints  a  decade  later.  Brigham  Young 
not  only  directed,  but  worked  as  hard 
in  a  practical  way  as  those  over  whom 
he  was  called  at  this  critical  juncture 
temporarily  to  preside.  He  left  his 
own  family  no  less  than  eleven  times  to 
return  with  teams  to  bring  up  the  poor 
and  helpless.  With  President  Heber 
C.  Kimball  he  had  entered  into  this 
covenant,  that  they  would  not  cease 
their  efforts  until  all  who  would  should 
be  delivered  from  Missouri  and  safely 
harbored  in  a  more  hospitable  State. 
This  covenant  they  most  faithfully 
kept.  April  18,  1839,  with  others  of  the 
Twelve,  he  left  Quincy  to  fulfil  a  reve- 
lation given  to  the  Prophet  Joseph 
Smith  July  8,  1838,  to  the  effect  that  the 
Twelve  should  take  their  departure  on 
their  mission  to  Eng'and  from  the  Tem- 
ple site  in  Far  West.  The  mob  had 
sworn  that  this  should  not  be  fulfilled, 
but  under  the  protection  of  the  Al- 
mighty, with  Brigham  Young  at  the 
head  of  the  Twelve,  this  revelation  was 
signally  fulfilled.  He  returned  to 
Quincy  May  3rd,  and  met  with  Joseph 
and  Hyrum  Smith  the  first  time  since 
their  escape  from  their  enemies  in  Mis- 
souri. On  the  16th  of  the  same  month  he 
left  for  Nauvoo,  and  a  week  later  moved 
his  family  across  the  river  to  Montrose, 
where  he  secured  a  room  in  some  old 
military  barracks  as  a  temporary  home 
for  himself  and  family.  The  climate  was 
sickly  in  Nauvoo  and  his  health  was 
poor,but  Brigham  Young  was  constant- 
ly doing  all  in  his  power  to  establish 
the  Saints  and  build  up  the  city  of  Nau- 
voo. He  continued  this  labor  until 
Sept.  14,  1839,  when  he  started  "without 
purse  or  scrip"  to  perform  his  mission 
in  England.  He  was  sick  when  he 
started,  leaving  a  babe  only  ten  days 
old,  his  wife  and  the  children  being  ill, 
with  no  means  of  support  in  sight.  On 
his  way  to  New  York  he  did  much 
teaching  and  preaching,  sailing  from 
New  York  March  9,  1840,  arriving  in 
England  April  6th.  July  1,  1841,  he 
arrived  in  Nauvoo  from  his  mission  in 
England,  and  was  cordially  welcomed 
by  the  Prophet  Joseph  Smith.      During 


BIOGRAPHICAL,  ENCYCTLOPEDIA. 


11 


his  absence,  while  laboring  in  the  Brit- 
ish Isles,  thousands  of  souls  were  added 
to  the  Church  in  that  foreign  land,  and 
a  permanent  shipping-  agency  was  es- 
tablished. At  the  first  council  of  tho 
Twelve  held  in  a  foreign  land  Brigham 
Young  was  unanimously  sustained  as 
president  of  that  quorum.  Under  his 
direction  steps  were  taken  to  publish 
3,000  hymn  books,  5,000  copies  of  the 
Book  of  Mormon,  and  the  "Millennial 
Star"  was  published,  with  Apostle  Par- 
ley P.  Pratt  as  its  first  editor.  In  a 
revelation  given  through  the  Prophet 
Joseph  Smith,  Jan.  19,  1841,  the  Lord 
says:  "I  give  unto  you  my  servant, 
Brigham  Young,  to  be  a  president  over 
the  Twelve  traveling  council,  which 
Twelve  hold  the  keys  to  open  up  the 
authority  of  my  kingdom  upon  the  four 
corners  of  the  earth,  and  after  that  to 
send  my  word  to  every  creature."  The 
Quorum  of  the  Twelve  stands  next  in 
authority  to  the  Presidency  of  the 
Church,  and  in  case  of  the  decease 
of  the  Prophet  the  Twelve  preside  over 
the  Church  with  their  president  at  the 
head,  and  thus  was  brought  to  the 
front  Brigham  Young,  the  man  whom 
God  designed  should  succeed  the 
Prophet  Joseph  Smith.  On  the  return 
of  Brother  Brigham  to  Nauvoo  he  be- 
came active  in  building  up  the  city,  as 
well  as  constantly  diligent  in  attend- 
ing to  the  duties  of  his  Apostleship.  In 
July  following  the  call  of  President 
Young  to  preside  over  the  Quorum  of 
the  Twelve,  the  Prophet  Joseph  re- 
quested the  Twelve  to  take  the  respon- 
sibilitj'  of  the  Church  in  Nauvoo,  es- 
pecially in  practical  matters.  They  at- 
tended to  the  selling  of  its  lands,  locat- 
ing the  incoming  Saints,  and  attending 
to  such  other  labors  as  would  relieve 
and  lighten  the  burden  resting  upon 
the  Prophet  Joseph  Smith.  In  all  this 
labor  Brigham  Young  was  energetic 
and  efficient,  proving  himself  to  be  a 
great  help  to  the  Prophet  of  God  in  all 
the  labors  incident  to  those  trying 
times.  He  also  served  with  ability 
as  a  member  of  the  city  council  of 
Nauvoo.  July  7,  1843,  he  started  on  a 
mision  to  the  Eastern  States,  one  chief 
purpose  being  to  gather  funds  for  the 
building  of  the  Temple  and  the  Nauvoo 
house.  He  was  absent  until  Oct.  22nd 
the  same  year.  From  this  timf  until 
May  21,  1844,  he  was  busy  in  his  calling, 
often  in  council  with  the  Prophet  and 
other  leading  men,   constantly  alive  to 


the  interest  of  Zion  and  the  spread  of 
the  gospel  throughout  the  world.  On 
the  date  last  named  he  went  on  a  short 
mission  to  the  east.  "While  absent, 
learning  of  the  sad  news  of  the  martyr- 
dom of  Joseph  and  Hyrum  Smith,  he 
immediately  returned  to  Nauvoo.  This 
was  the  first  time  in  this  dispensation 
the  Church  had  been  called  to  mourn 
the  loss  of  their  Prophet,  Seer  and 
Revelator.  The  people  were  young  in 
experience.  False  brethren  sought  to 
establish  themselves  as  the  rightful 
guardians  of  the  Church,  Sidney  Rig- 
don  making  such  a  claim  at  a  confer- 
ence held  in  Nauvoo  Aug.  8,  1844.  When 
the  Twelve  were  sustained  as  the  pre- 
siding authority  of  the  Church,  Brig- 
ham Young  arose  to  speak,  and  in  the 
presence  of  the  multitude  was  trans- 
figured by  the  spirit  and  power  of  God. 
so  that  his  form,  size,  countenance  and 
voice  appeared  as  those  of  the  mar- 
tyred Prophet.  Even  non-members 
were  struck  with  amazement  and  ex- 
pected to  see  and  hear  the  departed 
Seer.  Prom  that  moment  doubt  and 
uncertainty  were  banished  from  the 
hearts  of  the  faithful  and  they  were 
fully  assured  that  the  mantle  of  Jo- 
seph Smith  had  fallen  upon  Brigham 
Young.  After  the  martyrdom  of  Jo- 
seph and  Hyrum,  persecution  did  not 
cease;  the  Prophets  were  slain  but 
truth  did  not  die.  The  man  who  stood 
as  the  earthly  head  was  taken  away, 
but  the  authority  which  he  held  had 
been  conferred  upon  others.  The  work 
of  God  went  on  and  in  the  midst  of 
persecution  and  bitter  hatred  Brigham 
Young  stood  calmly  performing  his  du- 
ties, counseling  the  Saints,  caring  for 
their  wants,  and  pushing  with  zeal 
the  completion  of  the  Nauvoo  Temple, 
which  was  dedicated  and  used  for  sa- 
cred ordinances  before  the  final  exodus 
from  Nauvoo.  Brigham  Young  labored 
much  in  '  the  Temple  until  February, 
1846,  when  he  left  the  beloved  city,  and 
joined  the  emigrating  Saints  on  the 
west  side  of  the  Mississippi.  This  was 
a  trying  time.  Twenty  thousand  Saints 
were  dispossessed  of  their  homes,  and 
turned  out  upon  the  prairies  of  Iowa 
in  winter.  It  required  not  only  a  great 
man  to  be  their  leader,  but  one  whose 
greatness  consisted  in  his  faith  in  God 
and  title  to  the  right  that  God  should 
be  his  strength  and  source  of  inspira- 
tion. Such  a  man  was  Brigham  Young, 
a  veritable   "Lion  of  the  Lord"   in  the 


12 


LATTI-:il-DAY    SAINT 


face  of  persecution  and  trial,  yet  child- 
like,   humble    and      dependent     on    the 
Lord.        The    Saints    were      seeking     a 
country   they  knew  not   where.       They 
were  poor  and  some  were  sick.       Sev- 
eral babies  were  born  in  camp,  just  af- 
ter  leaving   Nauvoo.       To     counteract 
melancholy,  and  aid  them  to  the  exer- 
cise of  cheerful  hope.  President  Young 
would    have    them    meet    around      th'j 
camp  fire,  and  engage  in  songs  and  in- 
strumental  music.       To  aid   the   Saints 
less  well  equipped  than  others     he  es- 
tablished   two    resting     and    recruiting 
points.   Garden   Grove  and    Mount  Pis- 
gah.       The  main  body,   with  President 
Young  at   their   head,    reached   Council 
Bluffs,  on  the  Missouri  river,   in  June. 
While   here   he   was   requested   by   the 
government   to    furnish    a   battalion   of 
five  hundred  men.  to  engage  in  the  war 
with  Mexico.      This  was  promptly  com- 
plied   with,    taking   many   of   the   most 
able-bodied  men  from  the  camp  of  the 
Paints.     After  fitting  out  the   Mormon 
battalion,  he  crossed  the  Mississippi  to 
ihe  Nebraska  side  and  established  Win- 
ter   Quarters,    since      called      Florence, 
about  five  miles  north  of  Omaha.  Here 
he    laid    out   streets   and   blocks,    upon - 
which    comfortable     log     houses    were 
built,  erecting  a  grist  mill,  and  in  num- 
erous ways   providing  for  the   comfort 
of    the    Saints,    while     himself     and    a 
chosen   few    should    fathom    the   unex- 
plored regions  of  the  Rocky  Mountains 
in  quest  of  a  home  for  an  exiled  people. 
In  April,  1847,  President  Young  and  147 
others,    among  whom  were  three  noble 
women,  full  of  faith,  commenced  their 
perilous  journey  across  the  plains,  ar- 
riving in  Salt  Lake  Valley  July  24,  1847. 
President   Young   was   sick   and   riding 
in    the    carriage     of     Apostle     Wilford 
Woodruff,    when   his   eyes   rested   upon 
the  valley,  he  said  "This  is  the  place." 
It   was   a  barren   desert,    but   God  had 
shown  him  in  vision  the  place  to  rest, 
and  he  knew  the  valley  when  he  saw 
it    with    his    natural     eye.       President 
Young  immediately  directed  the  laying 
out   of  a   city,    with   ten     acre   blocks, 
with  eight  lots  in  each,   one  and  one- 
fourth   acres   in  size,    the   streets  eight 
rods  wide,  to  have  a  sidewalk  on  either 
side    one    rod    wide,    and    subsequently 
when  water  could  be  obtained,  a  beau- 
tiful row  of  trees  to  adorn  and   shad? 
the  same,  watered  by  a  crystal  stream 
on  the  outside  of  the  walk.      This  was 
the  pattern,  and   most  of   the  cities  in 


I'tah   bear   the   main   characteristics  of 
the  pioneer  city  of  Salt  Lake.     In  Au- 
gust President  Young  started  on  his  re- 
turn   to   Winter   Quarters,   on   the   way 
meeting    about    two      thousand    Saints, 
who  reached   Salt  Lake  valley  in     the 
fall  of  1847.      At  Winter  Quarters  Dec. 
5,    1847,    President    Young    was    unani- 
mously sustained  by  the  Twelve.  Presi- 
dent of  the  Church,  and  on   Dec.   27th 
by  all     the  authorities  and    Saints  as- 
sembled in  general  conference  at  Coun- 
cil Bluffs.  May  26th  he  started  with  his 
family  on  his  return  to  Salt  Lake  va'- 
ley.       At   Winter   Quarters   he   left     a 
home,  mills  and  other  property.      This 
was   the   fifth   time   he   had   left  home 
and  property  for  the  gospel's  sake.  This 
year   he    superintended   the   emigration 
of  over  two  thousand  souls,  arrived  in 
Salt  Lake  City  Sept.  20,  1848,   and   be- 
gan at  once  giving  counsel  and  plan- 
ning  for    the   general    welfare.       At   a 
coji^ference   held   Oct.   8,  1848,     he     was 
unanTmously  sustained  as  President  of 
the    Church,    with    Heber    C.    Kimball 
and    Willard    Richards,    who    had    also 
been   sustained   in   the    conference     at 
Council  Bluffs,     as    his  counselors.      .V 
■  new   era       now       dawned       upon     the 
Church,  a  thousand  miles  from   bigot- 
ed     intolerance      and      mob    violence. 
The     Saints     found     themselves     in     a 
desert,    but   free   and   happy,    notwith- 
standing the  task  before  them  of     re- 
claiming a  wilderness.      No  man  in  the 
Church,    before   or     since,    was    better 
adapted  to  lead  in  colonizing  and  build- 
ing up  a  great  commonwealth,  than  was 
Brigham   Young.       He     served   as   the 
first    governor    of    Utah,    from    1851    to 
1858,  to  the  satisfaction  of  the  people  of 
the  Territory,  and     to  the  President  of 
the  United  States,  who  appointed  him. 
When   Johnston's   army    was    sent     to 
Utah  for  the  purpose  of  suppressing  an 
imaginary  rebellion,     which     the  lying 
Judge    Drummond    had   induced    Presi- 
dent Buchanan  to  believe  existed,  Pres- 
ident Young  declared  that  if  the  army 
riersisted  in  entering     Salt  Lakr  valley 
as  a  hostile  foe,  they  would  find  it,  as 
the  Latter-day  Saints  had  found   it,  a 
barren     waste.       Accordingly     torches 
were    prepared    to   burn    down    all    the 
houses  and  property  in  Salt  Lake  City, 
and   the     body     of     the   Saints   moved 
southward.      The  move  was  made,  but 
i.hrough  kind  Providence  .and  the    inter- 
vention of  Col.    Thos.  L.  Kane,  the  ad- 
ministration was  convinced  that  no  r'^- 


\,v^;W(v?\* 


BIOGRAPHICAL    ENCYCLOPEDIA. 


13 


bellion  existed  among  the  "Mormons," 
and  that  Judge  Di-ummond  had  basely 
lied  about  the  Latter-day  Saints.  The 
judge  had  reported  that  the  "Mormons" 
had  burned  the  court  records.  The 
committee  who  preceded  the  army  to 
Salt  Lake  City  found  the  court  records 
intact,  while  life  and  property  in  Salt 
Lake  City  was  as  safe  to  all  classes, 
as  in  any  other  part  of  the  Union.  In 
this  trying  circumstance,  the  courage 
and  prompt  action  of  President  Brig- 
ham  Young  displayed  the  character  of 
the  man.  In  April,  1853,  the  corner- 
stones of  a  great  Temple  were  laid  in 
Salt  Lake  City,  which  was  completed 
forty  years  later.  Before  its  com- 
pletion President  Brigham  Young  laid 
the  foundation  of  three  others,  in  St. 
George,  Manti  and  Logan.  The  one  in 
St.  George  he  lived  to  dedicate  to  the 
Lord  and  complete  the  organization  of 


BRIGHAM  YOUNG  IN   1H77. 

the  stakes  of  Zion,  so  far  as  poulation 
required  it  to  be  done.  In  the  St.  George 
Temple  he  explained  the  order  and  du- 
ties of  the  various  offices  in  the  Holy 
Priesthood  During  his  life-time  in 
Utah,  from  1847-1877,  he  labored  most 
industriously  in  both  spiritual  and  tem- 
poral matters  for  the  welfare  of  all  in- 
habitants of  the  Ter^itorJ^  and  indeed 
for  the  benefit  of  all  mankind.  He 
built  mills,  factories  and  granaries, 
etc.,  and  encouraged  every  form  of 
home  industry,  which  the  facilities  of 


this  region  would  justify.  In  the  de- 
velopments of  mines  alone,  he  exercised 
a  check,  stating  that  the  time  had  not 
come  to  develop  them  to  any  consider- 
able extent.  The  wisdom  of  this  sug- 
gestion is  appreciated  by  the  Latter- 
day  Saints,  who  know  what  a  rapid 
development  of  mining  interests  at  that 
time  would  have  brought  to  Utah  an 
element  of  speculators  and  political 
demagogues,  who  would  have  waged  a 
bitter  warfare  against  the  Saints  when 
their  numbers  and  strength  were  too 
limited  to  maintain  their  foothold  in 
this  region.  President  Young  was  the 
prime  mover  in  the  building  of  the  Utah 
Central  and  Utah  Southern  railroads. 
He  was  a  contractor  on  a  large  scale  in 
building  the  Union  Pacific  and  the  tele- 
graph line  across  the  plains,  also  in 
building  the  Deseret  telegraph  line  to 
local  points  in  the  State.  Brig- 
ham  Young  and  his  associates  founded 
the  Deseret  University,  now  called  the 
University  of  Utah,  and  one  of  the  very 
best  educational  institutions  west  of  the 
Missouri  river.  In  later  years,  to  aid 
the  children  of  the  Saints  to  obtain  an 
education  in  religious  truths,  as  well  as 
in  secular  branches,  he  founded  and 
endowed  the  Brigham  Young  Academy 
in  Provo,  and  the  Brigham  Young  Col- 
lege in  Logan.  He  was  in  all  respects 
the  friend  and  promoter  of  all  true  edu- 
cation, though  limited  himself  in  youth 
to  eleven  days'  schooling.  He  founded 
settlements  in  Arizona,  Idaho  and  Ne- 
vada. During  his  administration  of 
thirty  years  as  President  of  the  Church, 
he  made  frequent  tours,  accompanied 
by  his  associates  in  the  Priesthood,  to 
the  settlements  of  the  Saints  through- 
out the  length  and  breadth  of  the  land. 
He  was  diligent  in  sending  the  gospel 
abroad,  opening  up  new  fields  of  labor 
in  various  parts  of  the  earth.  He  was 
a  man  of  God  and  a  man  of  the  people. 
He  loved  God  and  all  mankind.  He  must 
always  know  the  truth  and  righteous- 
ness of  a  movement  before  he  would  es- 
pouse and  aid  it.  Like  his  predecessor, 
Joseph  Smith,  and  nearly  all  great  men, 
he  had  bitter  enemies.  His  character 
and  course  in  life  were  traduced  and 
vilified.  He  was  cast  into  prison  on 
false  charges,  and  the  weapon  of  the 
assassin  was  prepared  to  shed  his  blood. 
But  God  "delivered  him  out  of  them 
all."  Though  he  did  not  utter  so  many 
distinct   prophecies,    he   builded    faith- 


14 


LATTER-DAY    SAINT 


fully  upon  the  foundation  laid  through 
the  Prophet  Joseph  Smith,  and  all  his 
movements  and  counsels  were  pro- 
phetic, as  fully  demonstrated  by  sub- 
sequent events.  He  was  a  Prophet, 
statesman,  pioneer  and  colonizer.  The 
saying  is  attributed  to  William  H.  Sew- 
ard, secretary  of  state  under  the 
administration  of  Abraham  Lincoln, 
that  America  had  never  produced  a 
greater  statesman  than  Brigham 
Young.  His  policy  with  the  Indians 
was  one  of  peace.  "It  is  better  to  feed 
them  than  to  fight  them,"  was  his  theo- 
ry, and  he  carried  it  out  fully.  The 
Indians  loved  and  respected  him.  It 
cannot  be  denied  truthfully  that  the 
policy  of  Brigham  Young  and  his  peo- 
ple and  the  Indians  has  saved  to  our 
nation  life  and  treasure  in  Utah  and 
Arizona.  In  his  family  he  was  kind 
and  indulgent.  Indeed  he  was  a  phil- 
anthropist to  all  who  would  receive  his 
counsel  and  kind  acts,  for  he  was  not 
only  the  husband  of  several  wives  like 
the  Patriarchs  and  Prophets  of  old,  and 
the  father  of  fifty-six  children,  but  he 
provided  means  for  the  support  and 
education  of  orphans  and  others  desti- 
tute of  the  comforts  of  life.  He  be- 
lieved, however,  in  the  strictest  indus- 
try, that  it  was  false  policy  to  feed  men 
in  idleness  if  work  could  be  provided 
for  them.  In  the  face  of  calumny  and 
opposition  he  was  calm  and  serene, and 
bore  persecution  with  that  submission 
and  patience  which  stamped  him  not 
only  a  broad-minded  and  great-hearted 
man,  but  truly  a  follower  of  the  Lord 
Jesun  Christ.  He  departed  this  life 
peacefully  at  his  home  in  Salt  Lake 
City,  Aug.  29,  1877.  His  funeral  was 
attended  by  about  30,000  people,  both  of 
his  faith  and  non-Mormons.  He  was 
a  true  and  undaunted  friend  in  life  to 
the  Prophet  Joseph  Smith,  for  whom  he 
offered  his  life,  wherever  opportunity 
afforded,  and  it  is  not  wonderful  when 
the  spirit  was  taking  flight  from  his 
temple  of  clay,  if  Joseph,  the  Prophet, 
appeared  to  him  and  welcomed  him 
home  to  the  spirit  world,  for  the  last 
words  he  uttered  were,  "Joseph!  Jo- 
seph! Joseph:  Joseph,"  and  Brigham 
Young  had  finished  his  earthly  mission. 
—  Matthias  F.  Cowley.  (For  further  de- 
tails see  "Deseret  News,"(weekly)Vols. 
7  and  8;  "Millenial  Star,"  Vols  25  and 
26:  History  of  Brigham  Young  by  Ed- 
ward W.  Tullidge,  and  the  early  Church 
publications  generally.) 


TAYLOR,  John,  third  president  of 
the  Church  of  Jesus  Christ  of  Latter- 
day  Saints,  was  a  son  of  James  and  Ag- 
nes Taylor,  and  was  born  Nov.  1,  1808,  at 
Milnthorpe,  Westmoreland  county.Eng- 
land.  His  parents  owned  a  small  es- 
tate at  the  village  of  Hale,  in  that 
county.  They  were  members  of  the 
Church  of  England,  and  he  was 
brought  up  in  the  doctrines  of  that 
church  until  he  was  about  fifteen  years 
old.  He  then  joined  the  Methodists, 
and  was  soon  after  appointed  a  local 
preacher,  and  continued  as  such  until 
he  left  England  about  the  year  J.82S 
or  182P  His  father's  family  had 
left  about  two  years  previously  and 
gone  to  the  neighborhood  of  the  city 
of  Toronto,  upper  Canada.  After  a. 
short  residence  in  New  York,  Brooklyn 
and  Albany,  he  visited  his  parents  in 
Canada,  and  took  up  his  residence  at 
Toronto.  At  that  city  he  married  Miss 
Leonora  Cannon,  daughter  of  Captain 
Cannon,  of  the  Isle  of  Man.  who  was 
a  member  of  the  Methodist  society,  to 
which  John  Taylor  had  attached  him- 
self on  his  arrival  at  Toronto.  Here 
he  united  with  a  few  sincere  and  well 
educated  gentlemen  in  the  search  of  the 
Scriptures,  some  of  whom  belonged  to 
the  Methodist  society.  In  the  course 
of  their  researches  they  became  con- 
vinced of  many  important  truths,  such 
as  the  gathering  of  Israel,  the  restora- 
tion of  the  ten  tribes,  and  the  personal 
reign  of  Jesus  on  earth.  They  also 
believed  in  the  necessity  of  revelation: 
of  men  being  called  of  God  to  preach 
as  they  were  formerly;  of  the  gifts  of 
prophecy,  tongues  healings  and  other 
gifts  of  the  Holy  Ghost.  They  came 
to  the  conclusion  that  the  churches  of 
the  day  had  departed  from  the  order 
of  God,  and  were  consequently  corrupt 
and  fallen,  and  that  if  the  Bible  was 
true,  the  religions  of  the  day  were  false. 
With  these  convictions  they  fasted  and 
prayed  much,  that  if  God  had  a  church 
on  the  earth.  He  would  send  a  messen-  j 
ger  unto  them.  John  Taylor  heard,  i 
investigated  and  rejected  Irvingism,  I 
and  shortly  after  was  waited  upon  by  i 
Elder  Parley  P.  Pratt,  with  a  letter  t — 
of  introduction  from  a  merchant  of  . 
their  mutual  acquaintance.  Having  i 
heard  many  of  the  stories  current  about  1 
the  Book  of  Mormon  and  Joseph  Smith, 
he  received  Elder  Pratt  cautiously.  Af- 
ter a  rigid  scrutiny,  however,  he  and 
several  of  his  friends  believed  the  doc- 


BIOGRAPHICAL    ENCYCLOPEDIA. 


15 


trines  laid  before  them,  and  were  bap- 
tized in  1836.  Taylor  was  ordained  an 
Elder  by  Elder  Pratt,  and  was  shortly 
after  set  apart,  by  Elders  Pratt  and 
Orson  Hyde,  as  presiding  Elder  in  up- 
per Canada.  During  a  visit  of  Joseph 
Smith,  Sidney  Rigdon,  and  Thomas  B. 
Marsh  (the  latter  then  being  president 
of  the  quorum  of  the  Twelve),  to  To- 
ronto in  1837,  Elder  Taylor  was  ordained 
(a  High  Prie?t  under  their  hands.  He 
paid  several  visits  to  the  Temple  at 
Kirtland,  Ohio,  and  was  Joseph  Smith's 
guest  while  there.  During  the  great 
apostasy  of  1837,  when  many  leading 
men  turned  away  and  became  so  em- 
bittered against  the  Prophet  that  the 
lives  of  men  who  defended  him  were  en- 
dangered, Elder  John  Taylor  stood  up 
boldly  in  the  Kirtland  Temple  in  the 
midst  of  foes,  and  with  that  eloquent 
power  which  came  from  God, and  which 
ever      characterized      Elder      Taylor's 


JOHN   TAYLOR  IN  1852. 

speech,  declared  that  Joseph  Smith 
was  a  Prophet  of  the  living  God  and 
had  not  fallen,  as  alleged  by  apostates. 
He  was  equally  diligent  in  private  con- 
versation, in  maintaining  the  integrity 
of  the  Prophet  Joseph  and  spreading 
the  gospel  among  the  people.  From 
Canada  he  removed  to  Kirtland  by  re- 
quest of  the  Prophet.  From  Kirtland 
he  removed  to  Missouri,  joining  the 
body  of  the  Church  at  Far  West  in 
1838.  In  his  migration  he  preached 
the  gospel  on  the  way  and  organized 
a  branch  of  the  Church  near  Indiana- 
polis, Ind.  Before  reaching  Far  "West, 
he  and  a  litle  company  of  twenty- 
four  people  encountered  a  mob,  led  by 
two  ministers,  Abbott  Hancock,  a  Bap- 
tist,   and    Sashiel    Woods,      a    Presby- 


terian. July  8,  1838,  the  Lord,  by  reve- 
lation, called  Elder  Taylor  to  the  Apos- 
tleship  to  fill  the  vacancy  occasioned 
by  the  fall  of  John  F.  Boynton.  At 
a    conference    in    Far    West,      Oct.      5, 

1838,  he  was  sustained  by  the  vote  of 
the  Saints,  and  ordained  an  Apostle 
Dec.  19,  1838,  by  Apostles  Brigham 
Young  and  Heber  C.  Kimball.  Elder 
Taylor  entered  immediately  upon  the 
duties  of  his  new  calling,  and  as  in  all 
previous  callings  soon  proved  himself 
truly  an  Apostle  of  the  Lord  Jesus 
Christ.  While  a  resident  of  Missouri 
he  shared  in  all  the  persecutions  heaped 
upon  the  Saints.  |  He  was  so  bold  and 
powerful  in  his  defense  of  their  rights, 
and  so  terrible  in  his  denunciations  of 
the  wicked, that  he  was  desigTiated  "The 
Champion  of  Right,"  and  this  title  was 
ever  after  accorded  him  by  the  Latter- 
day  Saints.  While  Joseph  and  Hyrum 
Smith  were  imprisoned  in  Missouri  El- 
der Taylor  paid  them  several  visits. 
He  was  selected  by  the  Saints  of  Cald- 
well county  one  of  a  committee  to 
draft  a  memorial  to  the  legislature  of 
Missouri,  setting  forth  the  persecutions, 
and  asking  that  body  for  a  redress  of 
the  wrongs  imposed  upon  them.  Him- 
self and  Bishop  Partridge  were  also 
appointed  to  write  a  petition  to  the 
general  government.  Elder  Taylor  was 
among  the  number  who,  after  the  ex- 
pulsion of  the  Saints  from  Missouri, 
returned  to  Far  West  to  fulfil  a  reve- 
lation given  July  8,  1838,  that  the 
Twelve  were  to  take  their  departure 
for   their   mission    to    Europe   April    26, 

1839,  from  the  Temple  grounds  at  Far 
West.  The  enemy  having  learned  of 
this  revelation,  swore  that  it  should 
not  be  verified.  They  were  baffled, 
however.  The  brethren  arrived  upon 
the  spot  soon  after  midnight,  held  a 
conference,  excommunicated  a  number 
of  persons, and  ordained  Wilford  Wood- 
ruff and  George  A.  Smith  to  the  Apos- 
tleship.  On  the  8th  of  August,  Elder 
Taylor  left  Nauvoo  for  England.  He 
was  sick  for  eleven  weeks  on  his  way. 
He  left  his  family  in  the  old  military 
barracks  at  Montrose,  Iowa,  in  very 
poor  circumstances.  Most  of  the  Twelve 
and  many  of  the  Saints  were  sick,  hav- 
ing just  passed  through  the  persecutions 
and  hardships  attending  their  residence 
in  and  exodus  from  Missouri.  Elder 
Taylor  was  a  man  of  great  faith  in  God 
and  believed  thoroughly  in  preaching 
the  gospel     "without     purse  or  scrip." 


16 


LATTER-DAY    SAINT 


"When  traveling  to  a  certain  destina- 
tion, if  he  had  but  a  pittance,  he  would 
purchase  with  that  transportation  in 
the  best  conveyances  attainable,  thus 
placing  himself  among  the  best  edu- 
cated people  in  his  travels.  When  his 
means  were  exhausted,  with  an  inex- 
haustible store  of  faith,  he  would  stop 
and  preach  the  gospel.  The  Lord  would 
raise  up  friends  who  would  give  him 
money,  with  which  he  would  proceed 
on  his  journey.  In  doing  this  he  would 
never  ask  a  human  being  for  help.  He 
asked  the  Lord,  and  his  prayers  never 
went  unanswered.  When  they  were 
about  to  sail  from  New  York  to  Liver- 
pool, he  and  two  other  brethren  were 
almost  destitute  of  means,  not  having 
sufficient  to  pay  one  passage,  much  less 
three.  Notwithstanding  their  predica- 
ment, a  very  short  time  before  the  ves- 
sel was  to  sail  Elder  Taylor  told  one 
of  his  companions  to  go  and  engage 
passage  for  all  three  to  Liverpool.  His 
fellow-laborers  were  non-plussed  and 
asked  where  on  earth  could  they  get 
means  in  so  short  a  time.  Elder  Tay- 
lor answered  that  there  was  plenty  of 
means  in  the  world  and  the  Lord  would 
send  them  enough  before  the  vessel 
sailed  to  pay  their  way.  His  words  were 
most  remarkably  fulfilled.  He  asked  no 
person  for  money,  and  yet  immediately 
after  he  made  the  prediction  one  after 
another  came  to  them  and  proffered  as- 
sistance, until  enough  was  provided  to 
meet  their  expenses  to  Liverpool..  He 
arrivd  in  Liverpool  Jan.  11,  1840,  and 
immediately  commenced  his  missionary 
work,  preaching,  baptizing,  organizing 
branches,  and  with  his  brethren  regu- 
lating the  Church  throughout  the  Brit- 
ish Isles.  He  introduced  the  gospel 
into  Ireland  and  the  Isle  of  Man,  ex- 
tending his  labors  into  Scotland.  He 
published  several  tracts,  setting  forth 
principles  of  the  gospel  and  refuting 
falsehoods.  He  corrected  the  proof 
sheets  of  the  Book  of  Mormon,  and 
with  President  Young  and. Elder  Par- 
ley P.  Pratt  prepared  and  published 
the  first  edition  of  the  Latter-day 
Saints'  Hymn  Book.  While  laboring 
on  the  Isle  of  Man  he  had  secured  the 
printing  of  some  tracts,  which  he  wrote 
in  reply  to  the  falsehoods  circulated 
by  ministers  and  others  regarding  the 
character  and  doctrines  taught  by  the 
Prophet  Joseph  Smith.  When  the  tracts 
were  ready  the  printer  would  not  de- 
liver them  until  every  penny  was  paid 


which  was  due  him.  Elder  Taylor  dlA 
not  have  sufficient  to  meet  the  demand, \ 
and  being  very  anxious  to  obtain  the! 
tracts  went  immediately  into  a  private 
room,  and,  kneeling  down,  told  the 
Lord  in  plain  simplicity  exactly  how 
much  he  needed  to  pay  for  the  matter 
he  had  published  in  defense  of  his 
cause.  In  a  few  minutes  after  his 
prayer  was  offered  a  young  man  came 
to  the  door,  and  upon  being  invited  to 
enter  handed  Elder  Taylor  an  envelope 
and  walked  out.  The  young  man  was 
unknown  to  him.  The  envelope  con- 
tained some  money  and  a  little  note 
which  read:  "The  laborer  is  worthy  of 
his  hire,"  and  no  signature  was  placed 
thereon.  In  a  few  minutes  later  a  poor 
woman  engaged  as  a  fish  vender  came 
to  the  house  and  offered  a  little  money  I 
to  assist  him  in  his  ministerial  labors.  | 
He  told  her  there  was  plenty  of  money/ 
in  the  world  and  he  did  not  wish  toi 
take  her  money.  She  insisted  that  t 
Lord  would  bless  her  the  more  and  sh 
would  be  happier  if  he  would  accep 
it,  whereupon  he  received  the  offerin 
and  to  his  surprise  the  poor  woman' 
mite,  added  to  what  the  young  ma 
had  given  him,  made  exactly  th 
amount  sufficient  to  pay  the  printer  th 
balance  due  him-  .Vfter  a,  very  active 
and  successful  mission  he  returned  to 
America,  arriving  in  Nauvoo  July  1, 
1841.  Upon  his  arrival  home  he  found 
his  wife  very  near  to  death,  being  se- 
riously ill.  He  called  to  his  aid  about 
twenty  Elders.  They  administered  and 
prayed  for  her  and  she  was  restored 
to  health.  In  October,  1841,  John  Tay- 
lor and  Elias  Higbee  were  appointed 
a  committee  to  petition  Congress  for 
a  redress  of  the  wrongs  heaped  upon 
the  Saints  in  Missouri.  He  was  also 
appointed  by  the  Prophet  to  present  the 
petition.  Elder  Taylor  edited  the  last 
three  volumes  of  the  "Times  and  Sea- 
sons," by  appointment  of  the  Prophet. 
He  also  edited  and  published  the  "Nau- 
voo Neighbor."  As  well  as  attending 
to  his  high  calling  in  the  Apostleship, 
he  was  a  city  councilman,  one  of  the 
regents  of  the  University,  and  Judge 
Advocate  of  the  Nauvoo  Legion,  all  of 
which  he  filled  with  ability  and  dis- 
tinction. Elder  Taylor  was  very  firmly 
attached  to  the  Prophet  Joseph  Smith. 
He  often  attended  him  in  scenes  of  per- 
secution and  trial.  When  Joseph  and 
Hyrum  were  taken  to  Carthage  and 
lodged    In   jail   on   false   charges,     and 


c£ 


BIOGRAPHICAL       ENCYCLOPEDIA. 


17 


promised  by  the  governor  of  the  State 
protection  from  mob  violence,  and  a 
fair  trial,  Elders  John  Taylor  and  Wil- 
lard  Richards  accompanied  them  as 
friends,  and  were  in  the  prison  when 
the  awful  traeedy  took  place,  which  re- 
sulted in  the  martyrdom  of  Joseph  and 
Hyrum  Smith.  Just  before  the  assault 
made  upon  the  prisoners.  Elder  Taylor 
sang  the  hymn,  "A  poor  wayfaring  man 
of  grief."  By  request  of  Hyrum  Smith 
he  sang  it  the  second  time,  although 
he  expressed  himself  as  not  feeling  in 
a  verv  favorable  mood  to  sing.  Be- 
tween 4  and  5  o'clock  p.  m.,  June  27. 
1844,  an  armed  mob  rushed  up  the  stairs 
of  Carthage  jail  leading  to  the  apart- 
ment where  the  brethren  were  confined. 
^They  shot  through  the  door,  and  a  ball 
pierced  the  face  of  the  Patriarch  Hy- 
rum Smith.  While  the  mobbers  were 
forcing  the  door  open  and  pushing  their 
guns  through  the  opening,  Elder  Rich- 
ards held  the  door  the  best  he  could, 
while  Elder  Taylor  parried  their  guns 
off  with  his  walking  cane.  Of  a  sud- 
den the  Prophet  Joseph  sprang  to  the 
window  and  leaped  out.  His  motive  in 
doing  this  could  not  have  been  to  save 
his  own  life,  for  he  sprang  into  the 
open  fire  of  his  enemies.  It  must  have 
been,  as  believed  by  Elders  Taylor  and 
Richards,  to  save  the  lives  of  the  two 
last  named  brethren,  by  calling  the 
attention  of  the  mob  from  the  inside  to 
the  outside  of  the  building.  His  action 
had  the  desired  effect,  for  instantly  the 
mob  rushed  from  the  stairway  of  the 
jail  to  the  ground  below,  and  concen- 
trated their  murderous  fury  upon  the 
Prophet,  as  he  fell  a  martyr  by  the 
curb  of  the  old  well  by  the  side  of 
Carthage  jail.  Elder  Taylor  ran  to  the 
window  and  was  shot  in  and  near  the 
thigh  with  four  balls.  He  was  about 
to  fall  out  from  the  window  when  a 
bullet  struck  the  watch  in  his  vest 
pocket  and  forced  him  back.  He  fell 
upon  the  floor,  not  knowing  at  first 
what  had  forced  him  back,  and  thus 
providentially  saved  his  life.  Elder 
Richards,  who  escaped  unhurt,  dragged 
him  to  a  small  room  and  covered  him 
with  an  old  bed.  The  mob  soon  dis- 
persed in  confusion,  and  as  soon  as  con- 
venient thereafter  Elder  Taylor  was  re- 
moved to  Nauvoo,  where  he  recovered, 
but  carried  one  or  more  bullets  to  his 
grave  forty-three  years  later.  He  was 
a  man  of  wonderful  vitality  and  nerve, 
bearing   all   physical   pains,   as   he   did 


trials  and  tribulations  of  another  kind 
with  fortitude  unexcelled.  Upon  his 
restoration  to  health  he  resumed  the 
performance  of  his  duties,  and  was  one 
with  President  Young  and  his  brethren 
of  the  Twelve  Apostles  in  presiding 
over  the  Church.  He  helped  the  Saints 
in  their  troubles  by  every  means  in 
his  power,  assisted  in  tl^e  completion 
of  the  Nauvoo  Temple,  and  suffered  the 
trials  of  another  great  exodus  when 
the  Saints  were  driven  from  their 
homes  in  Nauvoo.  He  journeyed  with 
the  first  company  of  the  brethren  to 
Winter  Quarters,  assisted  in  organizing 
the  Mormon  Battalion,  and  was  from 
this  point  called  with  Elders  Orson 
Hyde  and  Parley  P.  Pratt  on  a  mission 
to  Great  Britain.  He  responded  cheer- 
fully, again  leaving  his  family  in  the 
wilderness  in  tents  and  wagons.  He 
arrived  in  England  Oct.  3,  1846,  and  per- 
formed an  excellent  work,  in  company 
with  his  associates  regulating  the  af- 
fairs of  the  mission.  He  returned  in 
the  following  spring  and  had  charge  of 
a  large  company  of  British  Saints 
which  entered  Salt  Lake  Valley  in 
the  fall  of  1847.  He  now  spent  two 
years  in  Salt  Lake  valley,  and  was 
active  in  founding  and  building  Salt 
Lake  City.  He  was  ingenious  in  mech- 
anism, and  withal  truly  a  philosopher 
under  all  circumstances.  He  built  one 
of  the  first  saw  mills  in  Utah,  and 
worked  in  it  himself.  March  12,  1849 
he  was  chosen  one  of  the  associate 
judges  of  the  provisional  State  of  Des- 
eret.  In  October,  1849,  he  was  called 
on  a  mission  to  France,  which  he  filled 
with  marked  ability  and  success.  Upon 
his  arrival  "in  Boulogne,  1850,  he  was 
challenged  to  a  discussion  with  several 
clergymen,  the  proceedings  of  which, 
were  published  in  pamphlet  form  in 
Liverpool  and  subsequently  in  Orson 
Pratt's  works.  His  opponents  found 
themselves  utterly  powerless  to  meet 
him  upon  Scriptural  or  reasonable 
grounds,  and  speedily  resorted  to  sub- 
terfuges, lying  and  slanderous  reports, 
all  of  which  were  refuted  in  a  masterly 
manner  by  Elder  Taylor.  During  his 
mission  the  Book  of  Mormon  was  trans- 
lated into  French  and  German  under 
his  direction,  the  latter  being  pub- 
lished in  Hamburg,  where  he  intro- 
duced the  gospel.  He  also  edited  and 
published  in  France  a  monthly  paper 
called  "L'Etoile  du  Deseret,"  and  in 
Germany    a    periodical    entitled    "Zions 


Vol.  1,  No.  2. 


Jan.  12,  1901. 


18 


LATTER-DAY    SAINT 


Panier."       During    his    labors     several 
branches  of  the  Church  were  organized 
in  France.      He  also  wrote  while  upon 
this  mission,  and  published  it  after  his 
return,   the   sublime     treatise     entitled 
"The  Government  of  God."      After  his 
return     to     Salt  Lake  valley  Aug.   20, 
1852,    he    labored    with   his    hands,    and 
traveled    much,    preaching    the    gospel 
among  the   Saints.       In     1854,     he  was 
elected   a    member   of     the   Territorial 
legislative  council,  but  subsequently  re- 
signed this  position  to  fill  a  mission  in 
New   York,   and   to     preside     over   the 
Church  in  the  Eastern  States.      At  that 
particular  time  heavy  attacks  were  be- 
ing made   upon   the   Latter-day   Saints 
through  the  press.     Elder  Taylor  pub- 
lished a  paper  called  "The  Mormon"  in 
New  York  City,  establishing  his  head- 
quarters  near   the   office   of   the   noted 
writer  and  editor,  James  Gordon  Ben- 
nett, to  whose  attacks  Elder  Taylor  re- 
plied in  such  a  vigorous  manner  as  to 
surprise  the  anti-Mormon    element    in 
that  city.     His  arguments  were  unan- 
swerable, and  as  usual  the  opponents  of 
the  truth  resorted  to  falsehood  and  buf- 
foonery.  He  continued   "The  Mormon" 
until  1857,  when  he  was  called  home  on 
account  of  the    threatened  war  against 
the  Saints  under  the  administration  of 
President  Buchanan,    During  the  times 
and  circumstances  leading  to  the  action 
of  the  government  in  sending  an  army 
to  Utah,   Elder  Taylor  was  active  and 
fearless  in  defending  the  rights  of  the 
Saints  and  denouncing    the    preachers 
and  politicians  who  were  industriously 
circulating       falsehoods     against     the 
Saints.       His  replies  to  Vice-President 
Schuyler  Colfax's   ungentlemanly     and 
unwarranted   attacks   upon   the   Saints 
exhibit    the    fearless    character   of   the 
man,   as  well   as   the   clearness   of   his 
mind   in     penetrating     the     right   and 
wrong  side  of  every  proposition  under 
consideration.      He  was  very  active  in 
his   efforts   to  secure   the  admission  of 
the   State   of   Deseret    into   the    Union. 
It  was  upon  his  return  from  the  publi- 
cation   of    "The    Mormon"    that    Presi- 
dent Young  designated  Elder  Taylor  as 
the  best  editor  of  a  paper  among  the 
Latter-day  Saints.      From  this  time  on, 
for  many  years,  his  time  was  occupied 
in  traveling,  preaching,  organizing  and 
regulating   the    Church    in    the   various 
settlements  of  the  Saints^He  was  many 
times   a   member  of   the   Utah   legisla- 
ture,  and  speaker  of   the   House.       As 


a  legislator  he  showed  marked  ability. 
He    also    served    as    probate    ji>dge    of 
Utah  county.      He  was  present  at  the 
dedication   of   the   St.    George   Temple, 
the  first  built  in  Utah.       He  took  part 
with  President  Young  in  the  organiza- 
tion   of    the    Stakes    of    Zion.       At    the 
death  of  Pi^sident  Young  IilI&II*  El- 
der Taylor  was  president  of  the  Twelve 
Apostles,  and  in  October,  1880,  was  sus- 
tained  as   President   of   the   Church   of 
Jesus  Christ  of  Latter-day  Saints  and 
Prophet,    Seer   and     Revelator     to    the 
Church  in  all  the  world.    Apostles  Geo. 
Q.   Cannon  and   Joseph  F.   Smith  were 
chosen  as  his  counselors.      During  the 
thirty-three  years  the  Saints  had  lived 
in  Utah, many  had  been  emigrated  from 
distant  countries  by  the  perpetual  emi- 
gration fund  and  many  of  them  were 
very  much  in  debt  to  that  fund.     The 
year  1880  being     the  fiftieth  or  jubilee 
year   since   the     organization     of     the 
Church,  President  Taylor    was     moved 
upon  to  forgive  the  people  their  debts 
to  this  fund,  and  thus  as  in  olden  times 
make  the  captive  free.  This  was  hailed 
with  delight  by  the  Saints,  and  is  re- 
membered by  the  grateful  with  a  sense 
of   love    and    esteem    to^^'ard    President 
John  Taylor/  President  Taylor  presided 
over  the  Church  with  dignity  and  abil- 
ity. He  traveled  and  visited  the  Saints, 
as.  far  as  circumstances  would  permit. 
iWhen  th.e  crusade  against  plural  mar- 
riage came  to  be  waged  with  bitterness, 
under  the  rule  of  the  Edmunds-Tucker 
act.  President  Taylor,  to  prevent  trouble 
and  to  place  himself  beyond  the  possi- 
bility of  prosecution  for  an  infraction  of 
the  law,  lived  in  the  Gardo  House,  hav- 
ing for  housekeeper  his  venerable  sister, 
Agnes  Schwartz,  while  all  his  families 
occupied  their  own   homes.   He   was  a 
just  man.    Yet  notwithstanding  his  ob- 
.servance  of  the  law,  his  enemies    were 
determined  to  arrest  him,  and  if  possi- 
ble precipitate  an  eruption, which  would 
give  them  a  pretense  for  still  stronger 
measures  to  oppress  the  Saints.    Upon 
his  return  from  a  trip  to  Arizona  and 
California    he    appeared      in    the    largf 
Tabernacle   Feb.   1,   1884,   and   preached 
his  last  public  discourse  in  that  build- 
ing.      It  was  a  powerful  address,     ex- 
horting the  Saints  to  faithfulness  and 
forbearance,  long  suffering  and  charity 
in  all  their  trials.       From  this  time  on 
until  his  decease  he  lived  in-  exile,    at- 
tending, however,  from  his  place  of  se- 
clusion by   letters,   epistles  and  other-. 


BIOGRAPHICAL    ENCYCLOPEDIA. 


19 


wise  to  his  public  duties.  During-  his 
exile  one  of  his  wives  died,  after  a  sea- 
son of  illness.  During  her  sickness 
he  was  prevented  from  seeing-  her,  as 
her  home  was  closely  watclied  by  mis- 
erable spotters,  whose  characters  were 
as  far  beneath  that  of  President  Taylor 
as  a  slough  of  corruption  is  beneath 
the  glittering  rays  of  the  celestial  sun. 
Being  denied  necessary  exercise,  to 
which  he  was  accustomed,  he  became 
enfeebled  in  body  and  his  life  short- 
ened. He  died  in  exile  July  25,  1887, 
at  Kaysville,  Davis  co.,  Utah,  truly  a 
double  martyr.  His  life  was  shortened 
by  exile  from  home,  under  the  oppres- 
sion of  unjust  men  and  measures.  Dur- 
ing the  life  of  President  Taylor  he 
traveled  thousands  of  miles  for  the 
gospel's  sake  without  purse  or  scrip, 
baptized  many  people,  organized  num- 
erous branches  of  the  Church,  pub- 
lished many  tracts  and  several  larger 
works  introduced  the  gospel  to  new 
countries.  He  was  the  author  of  many 
choice  hymns  and  poems.  He  received 
many  revelations  to  guide  him  in  his 
duties,    as    well    as      being    a    constant 


JOHN    TAYLOR  IN    1887. 

medium  of  inspiration,  and  received 
several  revelations  which  were  written 
for  the  o-uidance  of  the  Church.  Before 
the  Prophet  Joseph  was  martyred  he 
said  to  President  Taylor:  "Elder  Tay- 
lor, you  have  received  the  Holy  Spirit, 


if  you  heed  His  teachings  the  same  will 
become  within  you  a  constant  stream 
of  revelation."  Those  who  know  what 
revelation  is  and  knew  President  John 
Taylor  know  that  the  Prophet's  words 
were  literally  verified.  Among  the  strik- 
ing prophecies  uttered  by  Elder  Taylor 
was  one  concerning  Gov.  Ford,  of  Il- 
linois, who  had  virtually  betrayed  Jo- 
seph Smith  into  the  hands  of  a  howling 
mob.  President  Taylor  prophesied  that 
Gov.  Ford  would  live  until  the  flesh  had 
well  nigh  withered  from  his  bones, 
that  he  would  lose  his  property  and  die 
a  pauper,  the  subject  of  charity.  A 
non-Mormon  lady  who  heard  this 
prophecv  and  also  attended  the  funeral 
of  Gov.  Ford,  testified  (as  did  all  the 
facts  connected  with  the  subsequent 
life,  death  and  burial  of  Thomas 
Ford),  that  President  Taylor's  pre- 
diction was  fulfilled  to  the  very  letter. 
President  Taylor  was  a  man  of  fine 
appearance;  he  stood  about  six  feet 
high,  his  countenance  was  heavenly, 
and  whosoever  went  into  his  presence, 
either  in  private  or  in  public,  felt  in- 
tuitively that  he  was  in  the  presence  of 
a  great  man.  a  man  of  honor  and 
merit.  His  abilities  were  varied,  and 
though  pre-eminently  spiritual,  he  had 
a  strong  liking  for  good  literature.  In 
pioneer,  exodus  life,  across  the  weary 
plains  afoot  and  with  teams,  under  try- 
ins-  ordeals,  as  in  all  other  experiences, 
John  Taylor  was  master  of  the  situa- 
tion. He  cheered  the  Saints,  by  faith- 
promoting  anecdotes  of  past  experi- 
ence and  history,  with  prophetic  in- 
spiration, pointed  them  to  a  future  of 
long  respite  from  mob  violence.  He 
could  compose  and  sing  hymns  and 
pleasant  songs  with  high  moral  senti- 
ment embodied  in  them.  There  was 
nothing  in  his  nature  and  sentiments 
of  a  pettish  or  groveling  character. 
He  spurned  every  sentiment  that  was 
low  or  dishonorable  in  thought,  word 
or  deed.  His  language  and  manner  of 
address  was  always  chaste  and  digni- 
fied to  the  very  extreme.  He  left  a 
noble  family  of  wives,  sons  and  daugh- 
ters, to  whom  he  bequeathed  as  a  rich 
legacy  his  noble  virtues  of  honor,  self- 
denial,  integrity,  purity,  faith  and  de- 
votion to  God.  He  lived,  labored  and 
died  the  perfect  exemplification  of  his 
favored  motto.  "The  Kingdom  of  God 
or  nothing."— Partly  by  Matthias  F. 
Cowley. 


20 


LATTER-DAY  SAINT 


"WOODRUFF,      "Wilford,        fourth 
president  of  the  Church  of  Jesus  Christ 
of  Latter-day  Saints,  was  born  March 
1,    1807,    in     Farmington      (now    Avon). 
Hartford   county,   Conn.       He,   like  his 
predecessors  in  the  Prophetic  office  of 
the  Church,   came  of  a  sturdy,   indus- 
trious  race   of   men   and   women.     His 
progenitors  were  among  the  early  set- 
tlers of  New  England.       They  figured 
nobly  in  the  American  revolution,  and 
naturally    transmitted    to    posterity     a 
love  of  liberty  and  traits  which  go  to 
make  patriots  and  martyrs.      Wilford 
Woodruff  possessed  all  these  admirable 
Qualities    of      character,     which    were 
crowned  with  a  veneration  for  God,  and 
strong  religious  element  in   his   being. 
This  led  him  in  early  youth  to  the  con- 
sideration  of   spiritual     subjects.       He 
was  also  very  industrious.      His  father, 
Aphek  Woodruff,     was     a  miller,   and 
Wilford    assisted    him    in    running    the 
Farmington   grist   mills,    and,      though 
tender  in  years,  proved  himselr  a  man 
in   thought   and   labor.       From   1827    to 
1832  he  took  charge  of  a  fliour  mill  for 
his   aunt.       Although   religious   he   did 
not  join  any  denomination  until  he  was 
twenty-six   years   of     age,   because   ho; 
found  none  which  harmonized  in   doc- 
trine and  organization  with  the  Church 
of  Christ  as  described  in  the  New  Tes- 
tament.     When  only  a  boy  he  would 
ask  his     Sunday      school  teacher  why 
there  were  no  Apostles  and  Prophets  in 
this  age,  as  in  olden  times.       The  an- 
swer he  received  only  tended  to  disgust 
him  with  sectarianism.      It     was     the 
same  old  story,  "Apostles  and  Prophets 
are    all    done    away    with,    because    no 
longer   needed,"    and   yet   with   all    the 
learning  of  modern  ministers, they  were 
unable  to  come  to  a  unity  of  the  faith 
as  taught  by  the  Savior  and  His  Apos- 
tles.     Under  these  circumstances  Wil- 
ford Woodruff  could  only  turn  to   the 
Lord  in  prayer  for  guidance,   and  find 
comfort  in  reading  and  believing     the 
prophecies   and   doctrines   of   the   Holy 
Bible.      In  1832  he  felt  a  strong  inspira- 
tion to  go  to  Rhode  Island.      Why,  he 
did  not  know,  and  having  already  ar- 
ranged   to    remove     with     his   brother, 
Azmon  Woodruff,  to  Richland,  Oswego 
county.  New  York,  he  did  not  heed  the 
inspiration   to  visit   Rhode   Island,    bui 
moved  to  the  State  of  New  York.  They 
purchased   a   farm   and   saw   mill,   set- 
tling down  to  the  business  of  farming 
and  milling.      Dec.  29,  1833,  over  a  year 


from  the  time  they  left  Connecticut, 
two  "Mormon"  Elders,  Zera  Pulsipher 
and  Elijah  Cheeney,  came  to  that  sec- 
tion of  country  preaching  that  an  angel 
had  visited  the  earth,  restored  the  ever- 
lasting gospel,  and  that  Joseph  Smith 
was  a  Prophet  of  the  Lord.  Wilford 
and  Azmon  Woodruff,  who  went  to  hear 
them    preach,    immediately    received    a 


WILFORD  WOODRUFF  IN    1852. 

testimony  of  the  genuineness  of  their 
message,  and  offered  themselves  for 
baptism.  Wilford  was  baptized  Dec. 
31,  1833,  by  Zera  Pulsipher.  Bro. 
Woodruff  now  learned  that  at  the  time 
he  received  the  impression  to  visit 
Rhode  Island  there  were  Elders  preach- 
ing in  that  State,  and  had  he  gone 
there,  the  opportunity  to  receive  the 
gospel  would  have  been  afforded  him 
one  year  earlier.  From  the  time  of  his 
baptism  until  he  departed  for  a  better 
sphere,  Wilford  Woodruff  proved  by  a 
life  of  devotion  to  the  cause  of  God 
that  he  was  grateful  for  his  existence 
in  this  age  of  the  world.  A  branch  of 
the  Church  was  organized  in  Richland 
Jan.  2,  1834,  and  Bro.  Woodruff  was 
ordained  a  Teacher.  During  this 
winter  Elder  Parley  P.  Pratt  and  others 
visited  Richland.  Elder  Pratt  became 
much  impressed  with  Bro.  Woodruff, 
and  immediately  told  him  that  his 
duty  was  to  repair  to  Kirtland,  join 
Zion's  Camp,  and  go  with  that  body  to 
Missouri.  He  took  this  counsel,  closed 
his  business  in  Richland,  and  left  for 
Kirtland,  where  he  arrived  April  25, 
1834.  He  was  invited  to  be  the  guest 
of  the  Prophet  Joseph  Smith,  which  in- 
vitation he  accepted,  and  he  had  a 
glorious  time  in  his  acquaintance  with 
the    Prophet     and    other    leading   men 


BIOGRAPHICAL    ENCYCLOPEDIA. 


21 


of  the  Church.  He  started  with  Zion's 
Camp  for  Missouri  May  1,  1834,  which 
journey  was  accomplished  with  consid- 
erable hardship,  but  throughout  all  the 
varied  experiences  incidental  to  the 
journey,  Wllford  Woodruff  was,  like 
Caleb  and  Joshua,  among  the  number 
who  sustained  the  Prophet,  and  never 
complained  nor  murmured  because  of 
trial  and  privation.  After  accom- 
plishing all  that  could  be  done  as  a 
body,  the  Prophet  advised  the  young 
men  without  families  to  remain  in  Mis- 
souri. Bro.  "Woodruff  sojourned  with 
Lyman  Wight  in  Clay  county,  spending 
the  summer  quarrying  rock,  cutting 
wheat,  making  brick  and  doing  other 
kinds  of  hard  manual  labor.  During 
this  time  he  was  possessed  of  a  strong 
desire  Jo  go  into  the  world  and  preach 
the  gospel,  but  did  not  express  his  de- 
sires, lest  he  should  be  considered  as- 
piring, this  being  farthest  from  his 
humble  unassuming  disposition.  The 
Lord,  however,  knew  the  honest  desire 
of  his  heart,  and  one  day,  while  walk- 
ing along  the  road,  he  was  met  by  one 
of  the  leading  Elders  in  that  section, 
who  said  to  him  in  substance,  "Bro. 
Woodruff,  it  is  the  will  of  the  Lord 
that  you  should  be  ordained  a  Priest 
and  go  on  a  mission."  Bro.  Woodruff 
answered,  "I  am  ready."  He  was  or- 
dained a  Priest  and  went  on  a  mission 
to  Arkansas  and  Tennessee  in  the  fall 
of  1834.  On  this  mission  he  was  gross- 
ly asailed  by  an  apostate  named  Ake- 
man.  who,  when  Bro.  Woodruff  was 
leaving  his  premises,  came  towards  him 
in  a  savage  manner  as  if  to  do  him 
violence,  when  the  apostate  suddenly 
fell  dead  at  his  feet.  This  event  had 
been  shown  to  Bro.  Woodruff  in  a 
dream,  though  he  did  not  understand 
the  full  import,  until  it  was  fulfilled. 
He  and  companion  traveled  on  foot 
without  purse  or  scrip,  and  on  their 
journeyings  they  passed  through  Jack- 
son county,  Missouri,  where  it  was 
dangerous  for  a  Latter-day  Saint  to  be 
seen.  They  were  frequently  preserved 
in  a  providential  manner  from  mobo- 
crats.  Bro.  Woodruff's  first  attempt 
at  preaching  was  at  a  tavern,  one 
Sunday  in  December,  1834.  He  was 
weary  from  a  long  walk  through  mud 
and  slush,  but  the  people  desired  to 
hear  him.  He  enjoyed  the  inspiration 
of  the  Holy  Spirit,  speaking  with  free- 
dom and  power,  testifying  to  the  re- 
storation of  the  everlasting  gospel.     In 


their  travels  Bro.  Woodruff  and  his 
companion  frequently  lost  their  way 
and  were  obliged  to  wade  swamps, 
and  to  avoid  expenses  would  travel 
down  some  of  the  rivers  in  small 
canoes.  Between  Little  Rock,  Ark.,  and 
Memphis,  Tenn.,  they  became  exhaust- 
ed while  crossing  an  alligator  swamp. 
Bro.  Woodruff's  companion  left  him  in 
the  swamp  suffering  with  a  severe  pain 
in  his  back.  He  knelt  down  in  the 
mud  and  prayed  intently,  when  the 
Lord  healed  him,  and  he  went  on  his 
way  rejoicing.  Being  joined  by  Elder 
Warren  Parrish  in  April,  1835,  they 
traveled  together  over  seven  hundred 
miles  in  less  than  four  months,  preach- 
ing the  gospel  every  day.  They  bap- 
tized twenty  in  their  travels.  Elder 
Parrish  also  ordained  Bro.  Woodruff 
an  Elder,  placing  him  in  charge  of  the 
branches  they  had  organized  in  Ten- 
nessee. Elder  Woodruff  being  left  to 
travel  alone,  he  extended  his  field  of 
labor,  and  baptized  quite  a  number, 
among  whom  were  several  of  the  Camp- 
bellite  persuasion.  In  1835,  he  traveled 
3,248  miles,  baptized  43,  organized  three 
branches,  and  held  170  meetings.  Sub- 
sequently, in  the  spring  of  1836,  he 
traveled  respectively  with  Abraham  O. 
Smoot  and  Apostle  David  W.  Patten. 
After  performing  a  faithful  two  years' 
mission,  accomplishing  the  conversion 
and  baptism  of  many  souls,  Elder 
Woodruff  returned  to  Kirtland,  Ohio,  in 
the  fall  of  1836.  In  May  of  that  year 
he  was  ordained  into  the  second  Quo- 
rum of  Seventy  by  Apostle  Patten  and 
"Warren  Parrish.  He  also  received  his 
blessings  in  the  Kirtland  Temple,  and 
attended  school.  April  13,  1837,  he  mar- 
ried Phebe  W.  Carter,  of  the  State  of 
Maine.  A  few  days  later  he  received 
a  remarkable  Patriarchal  blessing  un- 
der the  hands  of  Patriarch  Joseph 
Smith,  senior,  in  which  much  of  his  fu- 
ture life  was  plainly  foretold.  During 
the  troubles  of  1837,  when  many  lead- 
ing men  became  embittered  against  the 
Prophet  Joseph  Smith,  Wilford  Wood- 
ruff was  among  the  number  who  did 
not  murmur,  and  was  true  to  the 
Prophet  of  the  Lord.  In  May,  1837, 
he  started  on  a  mission  to  Fox  Islands. 
En  route  he  preached  the  gospel  to  his 
relatives  in  Connecticut  and  baptized 
a  number  of  them.  Together  with 
Jonathan  H.  Hale  he  landed  on  North 
Fox  Island,  Aug.  20,  1837,  where  they 
immediately  commenced  preaching  the 


22 


LATTER-DAY    SAINT 


gospel.       The   first    fruits   of   their     la- 
bors was  Justin  Eames,  a  sea  captain, 
and  his  wife,  who  were  baptized  Sept. 
3rd.      These  were  the  first  to  embrace 
the  gospel  in  this  dispensation  upon  an 
island  of  the  sea.      A  Baptist  minister 
by   the   name   of   Newton   first  allowed 
them   to  nreach   in   his  chapel,   but   he 
afterwards  opposed  them,  and  was  hu- 
miliated by  seeing  the  best  of  his  flock 
leave   him   and   embrace   the   gospel   as 
taught  by  these  Elders.     Two  branches 
of  the  Church  were  organized  and  the 
two    Elders    returned    to    Scarborough, 
Maine,  in  October,  where  Elder  "Wood- 
ruff had  left  his  wife  with  her  father's 
family.       Elders     Woodruff   and    Hale 
having  parted,   the  former  returned  to 
Fox    Islands    in    November,      this    time 
accompanied  by  his  wife.      He  contin- 
ued missionary  work,  baptizing  a  good- 
ly number  until  persecution  became  so 
intense   that   he   deemed   it   wisdom   to 
return  to  Maine.      Accompanied  by  El- 
der James  Townsend,  he  introduced  the 
gospel  in  the  city  of  Bangor  and  other 
places  in   the   State  of  Maine.       From 
this  labor  he  returned  to  Fox  Islands. 
In  harmonv     with       counsel     from  the 
Prophet  Joseph,  he  advised  the  Saints 
to   sell   their  property   and  accompany 
him    +o   the   !and   of   Zion.       Early     in 
1838  he  visited  Providence,  New  York; 
also  Boston  and  his  native  town,  Farm- 
ington.  Conn.  In  this  place  he  preached 
the  gospel  to  and  baptized  his  father, 
stepmother,   sister  and   other   relatives 
and  organized  a  branch  of  the  Church. 
Bidding  his  relatives  a  loving  farewell, 
he   returned     to     Scarborough,    Maine, 
where  his  first  child,  a  daughter,  was 
born,   July  14,   1838.       He  again  visited 
Fox   Islands   to   encourage   the     Saints 
and  prepare  them  for  gathering  to  Mis- 
souri.     W^hile  laboring  in  North  Vinal 
Haven.  Aug.  9,  1838,  he  received  an  offi- 
cial    communication       from     Thos.    B. 
Marsh,  president  of  the  Twelve,  to  the 
effect  that  he  had  been  called  by  reve- 
lation,  in  connection  with   three  other 
brethren,   to  bear  the  Apostleship  and 
occupy  a   place   in   the   Council   of   the 
Twelve.       Thus     his     early  dreams  of 
Apostolic  days  were  coming  to  a  living 
reality, in  which  Wilford  Woodruff  him- 
self was  to  be  one  of  the  Apostles.    He 
was    requested    to   come    to   Far   West, 
Mo.,   as  soon  as   he   could  arrange  his 
affairs  and   prepare   himself  to   preach 
the  gospel   in   Great   Britain,    with   his 
associates,   the   Twelve,     the   following 


year.       AVith   great    promptness  he   set 
about   preparing     the     Saints     on   Fox 
Islands  to  gather  to  Missouri.       About 
one  hundred  people  had  embraced  the 
gospel,  chiefly  through  his  labors,  upon 
the  islands.       About  fifty  of  these  now 
prepared    to   gather   with    him   to   Mis- 
souri.     Bro.  Nathaniel  Thomas  sold  his 
property  and  had   considerable   money. 
To  assist  his  brethren  and  sisters  Bro. 
Thomas  loaned  them  about  $2,000,  which 
was  placed     in     the     hands     of    Elder 
Woodruff   for   their   benefit.    With   this 
he  purchased  ten  new  wagons,  ten  sets 
of  harness   and  twenty  horses.       After 
making     these       preparations     he  pre- 
ceded   the   emigrating    Saints   to    Scar- 
borough,  Maine,     to     prepare  his  own 
family  for  the  journey.     The  company 
were  counseled  by  President  Woodruff 
to   start   by    Sept.    1st,    but    they   failed 
to   do    so,   and   did   not   leave   until   the 
early  part  of  October.      In  consequence 
of   this   late   start   the   journey   proved 
a  very  hard  one.       Oct.  13,   1838,   while 
crossing   the   Green     Mountains,    Elder 
Woodruff  was  taken  very  sick.    A  little 
later  his  wife  was  stricken   down  and 
came  nigh    to  the  gates  of  death.  Both, 
however,  were  restored  to  health  by  the 
power  of  the  Almighty.  Respecting  this 
new  experience  of  migration,  of  which 
he  did   so   much   in   later  years.   Elder 
Woodruff  wrote   the   following     in    his 
journal:     "In  the  afternoon  of  Oct.  9th, 
we   took   leave   of    Father   Carter   and 
family  in  Scarborough  and  started  upon 
our  journey  of  two  thousand  miles,  at 
this  late  season  of  the  year,  taking  my 
wife  with  a  suckling  babe  at  her  breast 
with    me    to   lead   a   company   of   fifty- 
three  souls     for       their     journey  from 
Maine  to  Illinois,  to  spend  nearly  three 
months  in  traveling  in  wagons  through 
rain,  mud,  snow,  and  frost."  Upon  ar- 
riving  in   Rochester,    Illinois,    Dec.    19, 
1838,  he  learned  of  the  persecutions  and 
unsettled  condition  of  affairs  in  Missou- 
ri and  concluded  to  stop  in  that  place 
the  rest  of  the  winter.       In  the  spring 
of  1839  he  removed  his  family  to  Quin- 
cy,    111.,    and    from    this    point    accom- 
panied  the   Twelve   to   Far  West,   and 
was  ordained  with  Elder  Geo.  A.  Smith 
to  the  Apostleship  April  26,  1839,  on  the 
Temple  site,     by      President     Brigham 
Young,    assisted   by   other   members   of 
the  Twelve.      After  returning-  from  Mis- 
souri, he  moved  his  family  to  Montrose, 
Iowa,  where  he  was  severely  attacked 
with  chills  and  fever.      While  still  sick 


BIOGRAPHICAL,    ENCYCLOPEDIA. 


23 


he  started  Aug.  8,   1839,  on  his  niisslon 
to  England,  leaving  his  wife  also  sick, 
and  like  all  the  families  of  the  Twelve, 
in    destitute    circumstances,    so    far   as 
temporal  necessities     were     concerned. 
To  New  York  he  traveled  with  private 
conveyance,   hy  stage,   on   foot  and   as 
best  he  could.       In  company   with  El- 
eers    John   Taylor   and    Theodore    Tur- 
ley   he  arrived    in   Liverpool,    England, 
Jan.   11,   1840,   having  been  five  months 
on   the  journey.       He  was  assigned   to 
labor   in     the     Staffordshire   Potteries, 
where  he  was  successful.       In  the  fol- 
lowing March     the     spirit     of  the  Lord 
prompted   him   to   go    south.       He   had 
plenty  to  do  where  he  was,  but  he  heard 
the  voice  of  the  spirit  and  obeyed.  He 
went  south  to  "\;\''orcester,  where  he  met 
Mr.    John    Benlow,    a    wealthy    farmer, 
who  told  him  that  in  that  vicinity  there 
W'Cre  about  six  hundred  people,  includ- 
ing   forty-five    ministers, who    had    dis- 
solved  themselves   from   the  Wesleyan 
Methodists  for  the  purpose  of  indepen- 
dent research  after  truth.    They  owned 
several   houses  of  worship,   and   styled 
themselves  "The  United  Brethren."    El- 
der "Woodruff  commenced  at  once  to  lay 
before   these   people   the   truth   as    God 
had  revealed  it  to  the  Prophet  Joseph 
Smith,   bearing  witness   as   an   Apostle 
of  the  Lord  to  the  ministry  of  angels, 
and  the  complete  restoration  of  the  an- 
cient  gospel   in   these   last   days.     The 
ministry  of  Elder  "Woodruff  was  not  at- 
lended    with    the    eloquence    of    speech, 
nor    the    well    skilled    argument    which 
attend    the    labors    of    some    men,    but 
there   was   an   earnestness   in   his    talk 
and  movement,  and  an  honest  straight- 
forward,   God-like     simplicity     in     his 
plain  statement  of  truth,   accompanied 
by   the    influence    of    the     Holy    Spirit, 
which  carried  early  conviction     to    the 
hearts  of  all  who  were  honestly  seek- 
ing after  truth.  Through  eight  months'- 
labor,  chiefly    by    Elder     "Woodruff     in 
Herefordshire,       Worcestershire,       and 
Gloucestershire,  eighteen  hundred  peo- 
ple were  brought  into  the  Church.  This 
included  the  six  hundred  United  Breth- 
ren,  all   but   one.       Two   large   confer- 
ences were  organized.      In  August,  1840, 
he  accompanied  Elders  Heber  C.  Kim- 
ball   and    Geo.    A.    Smith    to    London, 
where  they  introduced  the  gospel  under 
very  difficult  circumstances.      The    first 
convert  in   London   was  baptized   Aug. 
31,  1840.       Elder  "Woodruff  remained  in 
London  but  a  short  time  when  he  re- 


turned to  Herefordshire,  and   Stafford- 
shirc%  strengthening  the  Saints.       From 
thence  he  attended  conference  in  Man- 
chester, and  labored  most  of  the  follow- 
ing winter  In  London,  visiting  also  sev- 
eral other  parts  of  the  country.      While 
in    England    the    adversary    made    des- 
perate  efforts    to    impede    the   progress 
of  the  Elders  in  their  ministry.  At  one 
time   evil     spirits       attacked     Apostles 
AVoodruff  and  Smith,  in  a  literal  man- 
ner, when,  by  the  exercise  of  faith  and 
the   authority  of   God   by   these    breth- 
ren, these  spirits  departed.  Bro.  Wood- 
ruff saw  them  as  literally  as  he  could 
see  the  physical  being  of  people  taber- 
nacled in  the  fiesh.      After  a  very  pros- 
perous mission,   he  returned  to  Ameri- 
ca, arriving  in  New  York  May  20,  1841; 
he  met  his  wife  at  Scarborough,  Maine, 
after   two   years'    absence.       A   month 
later  they   returned  to   Nauvoo,   where 
they  were  heartily  welcomed  home  by 
the  Prophet  Joseph  Smith.  Bro.  "Wood- 
ruff became  a  member  of  the  city  coun- 
cil of  Nauvoo,  and  served  the  interests 
of  that  city  with  energy  and  efficiency. 
His   time  during  the   winter  of  1841-42 
was   mainly     occupied       in     attending 
meetings  and  performing  manual  labor. 
In  February,  1842,  he  became  the  busi- 
ness manager  of  the  "Times  and  Sea- 
sons."      In  July  of  the   same   year  he 
went  on  a  mission  to  the  Eastern  States 
for  the  purpose  of  collecting  funds  to 
further  the  building  of  the  Temple  and 
Nauvoo  House.       He  returned  to  Nau- 
voo Nov.  4th,  and  again  spent  the  win- 
ter in  Nauvoo,  and  much  of  the  ensuing 
year.      He  received  his  endowments  in 
the  Nauvoo  Temple  under  the  direction 
of  the  Prophet  Joseph  Smith.    He  built 
a  brick  dwelling  for  himself  and  family 
on  a  lot  given  him  by  the  Prophet  Jo- 
seph.      In  the  spring  of  1844,     he   was 
called  on  another  mission  to  the  East- 
ern States.      When  about  to  take  pass- 
age on  a  steamer  from  Portland,  Maine, 
to  Fox  Islands,  he  learned  of  the  mar- 
tyrdom   of   Joseph   and   Hyrum    Smith. 
He    immediately    went    to    Boston    and 
met    in    council    with    the   Twelve,    and 
with  them  returned  to  Nauvoo,   where 
he  arrived  Aug.  6,  1844,  and  took  part 
with    his   brethren   of  the     Twelve     in 
presiding  over     the       affairs       of     the 
Church.      Wilford  "Woodruff  was  a  per- 
sonal  witness  to   the  power  of  God  as 
it    rested     upon       President     Brigham 
Young,  on  the  occasion  when  the  latter 
was  transfigured  in  the  presence  of  the 


24 


LATTER-DAT    SAINT 


people,  so  that  he  appeared  in  person, 
and    spoke   as   with   the     voice   of   the 
Prophet  Joseph   Smith.       Aug-.  12,  lS4i. 
Apostle  Woodruff  ^N-as   called   to     pre- 
side over  the  British  Mission.     He  left 
Nauvoo,    Aug.    28,    1844.      and     reached 
Liverpool  Jan.  3,  1845.  He  presided  with 
ability  and  much  industry  over  the  mis- 
sion about    one  year,  when  he  returned 
to  Nauvoo,  early  in  1846,  just  in  time  to 
participate    with    the    Saints    in    their 
great  exodus  from  Illinois.       He,     with 
many   others,   left     their     homes     and 
property,  which  they  had  toiled  to  pro- 
cure, under  trying  ordeals,   to  the  dis- 
position of  their  enemies,  very  few  re- 
ceiving more  than  a  nominal  price  for 
their  hard  earned  homes.      He  was  ac- 
tive  in  helping  the   Saints  to  migrate, 
not  only  looking  to  the  comfort  of  him- 
self and  family,  but  to  the  well  being 
of    his    brethren    and    sisters    on    every 
hand.      Early  in  1847  he  joined  the  Pio- 
neer company,   consisting  of  148  souls. 
After  a  toilsome  journey  they  entered 
the  valley  of  the  Great  Salt  Lake,  July 
24,  1847.      President  Young  was  in  fee- 
ble  health   when   the   pioneers   entered 
the  valley,  and  Apostle  Woodruff  had 
the  honor  of  conveying  him  in  his  car- 
riage into  the  valley.       Later,   in  1847, 
Elder   Woodruff     returned     to   Winter 
Quarters,  and  w^as  present  Dec.  5,  1847, 
when  Brigham  Young  was  chosen  Pres- 
ident of  the  Church.       In  1848,  he  was 
sent  on  a  mision  to  the  Eastern  States, 
from  which   he   returned  to  the  valley 
in  1850,  and  in  December  of  that  year 
he  was  elected  a  member  of  the  senate 
of   the   Provisional     State     of   Deseret. 
Subsequently   he   served    several   terms 
in   the    Territorial   legislature.     In   the 
spring   of  1852,    he   accompanied   Presi- 
dent  Young  on   an   exploring     trip     to 
southern  Utah,  and  at  the  October  con- 
ference,   1853,    he   and    Ezra    T.    Benson 
were  called  to  gather  fifty  families  to 
strengthen   the     settlements     in  Tooele 
county.       When    the    Horticultural   So- 
ciety was  organized  in  Salt  Lake  City, 
Sept.  13,  1855,  he  was  chosen  its  presi- 
dent.     At  the  semi-annual  conference 
of  the  Church  held     in     October,   1883, 
Apostle  Woodruff     was     sustained     as 
Church   Historian  and  general  Church 
recorder;     he     had     been  sustained     as 
assistant  Church  historian     since  1856. 
From  the  time  he  was  a  boy  he  kept  a 
complete  journal  of  his  daily  life.  Many 
items   of     important       history       would 
doubtless   have    been    lost,    had    It   not 


been  for  the  jouinal  of  Wilford  Wood- 
ruff.  His  long  i)ersonal  experience  and 
the   accuracy   of   his     journal   assisted 
him   very   much   as     Church   historian. 
When  President  John  Taylor  succeeded 
to    the   Presidency   of    the    Church,     in 
ISSO,  Elder  Woodruff  became  the  Pres- 
ident  of   the   Twelve   Apostles,     which 
place  he  filled  with   honor,   until,   sub- 
sequent  to    the   decease    of     President 
Taylor,  he  became  the  President  of  and 
Prophet,     Seer    and     Revelator    to  the 
Church  of  Jesus   Christ   of  Latter-day 
Saints  in  18S9.     During  his   presidency 
of    the    Twelve,      President     Woodruff 
spent  much  of  his  time  in  exile,  owing 
to    the    unholy    crusade      against      the 
Latter-day  Saints.       During  this  time, 
like   John   the   Revelator,    he    was     fa- 
vored  with  visions   and   revelations  of 
the  Holy  Spirit.      On  one  occasion  the 
departed  Prophet,  President  Young,  ap- 
peared to  him,  as  he  traveled  along  a 
road  in  Arizona,  to  attend  a  conference, 
and  urged  upon  President  Woodruff  the 
necessity  for  the  Saints  to  more  thor- 
oughly secure  the  companionship  of  the 
Holy   Spirit   and     keep     it   with   them. 
President  Woodruff  was  greatly  inter- 
ested in  the  salvation  of  the  dead.  Com- 
bining works  with  his  faith,  he  secured 
from  New  England  much  genealogical 
information  concerning  his  dead     pro- 
genitors,  and   for  their     salvation     he 
would  work  in   the     Temple  whenever 
possible;   his  family  and  friends  would 
assist.      He  was  so  thoroughly  loved  by 
the  Saints  and  respected  for  his  inter- 
est in   the   salvation  of  the  dead   that 
on   one   anniversary     of     his    birthday 
several   hundred   of   the    Saints     in    St. 
George  and  vicinity  joined  him  in  the 
St.   George  Temple  and   received   ordi- 
nances in  behalf  of  his  deceased  rela- 
tions.      About    tl)is     time     one   of   his 
choicest    and      most     spiritual-minded 
sons,     Brigham       Y.       Woodruff,     was 
drowned  in  Bear  river,  in  Cache  valley. 
President   Woodruff,     having   attached 
considerable  importance  to  the    future 
of   this   noble     son,     was     very   much 
grieved  because  of  his  death.  Although 
he  never  murmured  at  the  providences 
of    the    Almighty,    he    inquired    of    the 
Lord  to  know  why  it  should  be  thus. 
The  Lord   revealed   to  him   that  as  he 
was  doing  such  an  extensive  work  in 
the  Temples  for  the  dead,  his  son  Brig- 
ham was  needed  in  the  spirit  world  to 
preach  the     gospel     and     labor  among 
those   relatives       there.       Many     other 


BIOGRAPHICAL    ENCYCLOPEDIA. 


25 


manifestations  of  the  Spirit  were  given 
to  President  Woodruff  from  the  time 
he  embraced  the  gospel  until  the  time 
of  his  decease.  During  his  adminis- 
tration as  President  of  the  Church,  dat- 
ing from  April  7,  1889,  George  Q.  Can- 
non and  Joseph  F.  Smith,  acting  as 
counselors,  President  Woodruff  did 
much  to  encourage  the  cause  of  Church 
school  education,  making,  as  trustee  in 
trust,  as  liberal  appropriations  as  the 
Church  could  afford  to  sustain  the  Stake 
academies  and  other  Church  schools.  In 
1890  PresidentWoodruff  issued  the  mani- 
festo respecting  the  discontinuance  of 
plural  marriages  in  the  United  States, 
and  later  the  political  address,  which 
provides  that  men  who  are  called  to 
spend    all    their    time    in    the    ministrj- 


WILFORD  WOODKUrr  IN   1898. 

shall  not  run  into  politics  to  the  neg- 
lect of  their  spiritual  calling  without 
being  properly  released  for  that  pur- 
pose. President  Woodruff  was  for  many 
years,  and  up  to  his  death,  president 
of  the  organization  instituted  by 
President  Young,  known  as  the  Young 
Men's  Mutual  Improvement  Associa- 
tion, throughout  the  Church.  In  this 
capacity  he  was  greatly  loved  and  re- 
spected by  the  young  people  of  the 
Church.  He  attended  their  con- 
ferences whenever  it  was  feasible,  and 
constantly  bore  to  them  his  earnest  tes- 
timony as  an  Apostle  of  the  Lord, 
that  Jesus  is  the  Christ  and  that  Jo- 


seph Smith  was  a  mighty  Prophet  of 
the  Lord.  President  Woodruff's  90th 
birthday  was  celebrated  March  1,  1897, 
by  a  grand  gathering  of  his  friends  and 
admirers  at  the  Tabernacle,  Salt  Lake 
City.  He  officiated  at  the  great  Pio- 
neer Jubilee  celebration,  July  20,  1897, 
when  the  statue  of  President  Brigham 
Young  was  unveiled  and  the  dedicatory 
prayer  was  offered  by  him.  In  the  af- 
ternoon, he  attended  a  meeting  of  the 
pioneers,  which  was  held  in  the  Taber- 
nacle, and  was  there  presented  with  the 
g-old  Pioneer  badge,  which  had  been 
designed  for  the  oldest  Pioneer  pres- 
ent. July  22,  1897,  he  was  honored  by  be- 
ing crowned  with  flowers  in  the  Taber- 
nacle by  the  children  who  had  marched 
in  the  procession  to  the  number  of 
about  ten  thousand.  During  the  lat- 
ter years  of  his  life  he  suffered  from 
insomnia,  and  occasionally  went  to  the 
Pacific  coast,  where  upon  the  sea  level 
he  could  sleep  better  and  would  recruit. 
It  was  upon  one  of  these  visits  to  the 
coast  that  he  became  prostrated,  and 
passed  peacefully  away,  Sept.  2,  1898, 
to  his  e-lorious  rest.  A  portion  of  his 
family  and  President  Geo.  Q.  Cannon 
and  others  were  at  his  bedside.  His 
remains  were  brought  home  for  inter- 
ment. The  funeral,  which  occurred  Sept. 
9,  1898,  in  the  large  Tabernacle,  was  at- 
tended by  many  thousands  of  people, 
who  "knew  and  loved  President  Wood- 
ruff as  a  Prophet  of  the  Lord,  a  hum- 
ble, honest,  upright  man  of  God.  Presi- 
dent ^\^ilford  Woodruff  can  be  classed 
among  the  most  industrious  men  the 
world  has  ever  produced.  He  attended 
as  first  consideration  to  the  duties  of 
his  calling,  and  then  his  manual  labors 
in  building  homes  and  redeeming  the 
soil  from  sterility  were  unexcelled. 
Every  position,  whether  religious  or 
otherwise,  into  which  he  was  called, 
he  filled  with  distinction  and  credit.  No 
man  took  greater  interest  in  fruit-rais- 
ing and  farming,  as  well  as  in  all  enter- 
prises looking  to  the  general  well-be- 
ing and  self-sustaining  powers  of  the 
people  than  Apostle  Woodruff.  He  la- 
bored with  his  hands  as  well  as  his 
head.  Much  younger  men  than  him- 
self were  not  his  equals  in  the  perform- 
ance of  heavy  labor.  No  class  of  labor, 
however  laborious  or  undesirable, which 
was  honorable  in  the  sight  of  God, 
would  he  ever  ask  any  man  to  do,  if 
he  was  not  willing  to  do  it  himself.  He 
cut  hay  with  a  scythe;  he  cradled  wheat 


26 


LATTER-DAY  SAINT 


by  hand:  he  followed  the  reaper,  and 
bound  the  golden  grain  in  bundles;  he 
pitched  to  the  rack  the  bunches  of 
hay  and  the  bundles  of  grain;  he 
worked  upon  the  threshing  machine; 
he  planted,  irrigated,  gathered  and 
hauled  from  the  farm,  potatoes,  corn 
and  all  other  products  of  his  well  tilled 
land;  he  planted  vineyards,  orchards, 
made  ditches,  watered,  and  pruned  the 
trees  and  bushes  of  his  orchard;  he 
made  roads,  built  bridges,  hauled  wood 
from  the  canyon,  made  adobies  and  did 
all  forms  of  manual  labor  which  came 
in  his  way.  There  was  not  an  idle 
thought  in  his  brain,  not  a  useless  nor 
impure  sentiment  in  his  heart,  not  an 
idle  bone  nor  a  drop  of  idle  blood  in  his 
body.  He  was  honest,  unassuming, 
faithful  and  industrious,  and  in  the 
days  of  Joseph  he  was  designated  as 
"Wilford  the  Faithful."  He  deserved 
such  a  title,  and  maintained  it  to  the 
end.  His  industry  was  so  conspicuous 
a  part  of  his  being  that  when,  at  the 
age  of  ninety  years,  one  of  his  grand- 
sons excelled  him  a  very  little  in  hoeing 
some  vegetables  in  the  garden,  he  said 
with  apparent  humiliation:  "Well,  it  is 
the  first  time  in  my  life  that  one  of 
my  children  has  ever  outdone  me  in 
hoeing."  He  continued  his  hard  labors 
upon  the  farm,  whenever  at  home,  un- 
til beyond  the  ripe  age  of  seventy-five 
years,  when  the  duties  and  conditions 
associated  with  his  calling  were  such 
as  to  occupy  his  entire  time  and  atten- 
tion. During  the  fifty-one  years  of  his 
life  in  Utah,  he  performed  missions  at 
home  and  abroad,  in  America  and 
Eurone  and  filled  many  positions  of 
honor  with  credit  and  distinction.  From 
the  year  1834  to  the  close  of  1895  he 
traveled  172.369  miles,  held  7,555  meet- 
ings, attended  75  semi-annual  confer- 
ences and  344  quarterly  conferences; 
preached  3,526  discourses;  established 
77  preaching  places  in  the  missionary 
field;  organized  51  branches  of  the 
Church;  received  18,977  letters;  wrote 
11,519  letters;  assisted  in  the  confirma- 
tion into  the  Church  of  8,952  persons, 
and  in  addition  to  his  work  in  the  St. 
George  temple,  labored  603  days  in  the 
Endowment  House  in  Salt  Lake  City. 
He  traveled  through  England,  Scotland, 
Wales,  six  islands  of  the  sea,  and 
twenty-three  States  and  five  Territories 
of  the  United  States.  He  frequently 
testified  that  two  powers  had  been  at 
work  with  him  all  his  life,  one  to  des- 


troy him,  the  other  to  protect  him  and 
enable  him  to  complete  his  mission  in 
honor  upon  the  earth.  During 
his  very  eventful  life,  he  met  with 
a  number  of  severe  accidents,  many  of 
which  would  have  killed  an  ordinary 
person.  He  frequently  remarked  that 
he  had  broken  nearly  every  bone  in  his 
body  except  those  of  his  spine  and  neck. 
Because  of  his  remarkable  recovery 
from  these  disasters,  he  reached  the 
conclusion  that  there  were  two  powers 
seriously  affectinug  his  life — one  en- 
gaged to  destroy  him,  and  the  other  to 
preserve  him.  He  recognized  in  the 
latter  the  hand  of  divine  Providence, 
protecting  him  for  a  wise  purpose. 
(For  further  details  see  "Historical 
Record,"  Vol.  5.  p.  93;  "Tullidge's  Quar- 
terly Magazine."  Vol.  3,  p.  1:  "Faith 
Promoting  Series,  book  3:"  "Sketch  by 
Matthias  F.  Cow-ley  in  "Southern  Star," 
Vol.  2,  p.  112,  etc.) 

SNOAV,  Lorenzo,  fifth  President  of 
the  Church  of  Jesus  Christ  of  Latter- 
day  Saints,  was  born  April  30,  1814,  in 
Mantua,  Portage  county.  Ohio.  He  is 
the  eldest  son  of  Oliver  Snow  and  Ro- 
setta  L.  Pettibone.  His  parents  were  of 
the  old  Puritan  stock,  and,  naturally 
enough,  from  them  he  inherited  the 
sterling  qualities  which  characterized 
the  early  promoters  of  civil  and  re- 
ligious liberty  in  America.  Ohio,  at 
that  time,  was  considered  in  the  ex- 
treme west  and  although  President 
Snow  was  reared  upon  a  farm  in  the 
"wild  west,"  and  inured  to  hard  manual 
labor,  he  early  exhibited  a  strong  de- 
sire to  secure  a  good  education  and 
was  often  found  by  those  seeking  his 
company  "hid  up  with  his  book."  He 
also  entertained  an  inclination  to  mili- 
tary tactics  and  gave  them  considerable 
attention.  His  faithful  sister,  Eliza  R., 
made  him  a  suit  of  uniform.  She  be- 
came somewhat  alarmed  at  her  broth- 
er's aspirations,  lest  he  should  become 
a  military  n.^n.  become  identified  with 
the  armies  of  his  country  and  end  his 
career  upon  the  gory  battlefield.  Her 
anxiety,  however,  w^as  relieved  when 
she  found  him  turning  his  attention 
more  completely  to  a  collegiate  course 
of  education.  He  attended  the  cele- 
brated Oberlin  college,  which  at  that 
time,  was  strictly  Presbyterian.  In  the 
meantime  his  sister  Eliza  had  identified 
herself  with  the  Latter-day  Saints.  He 
would   write   home   and  ask  her  many 


BIOGRAPHICAL-    ENCYCLOPEDIA. 


27 


questions  regarding  the  subject  of  re- 
ligion, on  one  occasion  stating  in  a  let- 
ter that  if  he  found  nothing  better  than 
he  did  at  Oberlin  college,  "good-bye  to 
all  religions."  During  these  years  the 
Saints  were  building  up  the  town  of 
Kirtland,  Ohio,  and  regions  round 
about  which  were  not  very  distant 
from  the  home  of  the  Snow  family. 
This  brought  them  in  close  contact  with 
the  Latter-day  Saints.  On  one  occa- 
sion while  journeying  to  Kirtland  he 
fell  into  the  company  of  Elder  David 
W.  Patten,  who  engaged  him  in  con- 
versation on  religious  matters.  The 
ideas  advanced  by  Elder  Patten  were 
both  reasonable  and  Scriptural.  They 
made  such  a  lasting  and  favorable  im- 
pression upon  the  youthful  seeker  after 
truth,  that  he  constantly  meditated  up- 
on them  until  he  became  fully  convinced 
of  the  truth  and  embraced  the  gospel. 
In  Kirtland  he  joined  the  Hebrew  class 
and  applied  his  mind  closely  to  the 
study.  He  became  intimately  acquaint- 
ed with  the  Prophet  Joseph  Smith,  and 
as  his  association  increased,  so  did  his 
love  and  admiration  for  the  Prophet  of 
God.  In  June,  1836,  he  was  baptized  by 
Apostle  John  F.  Boynton  and  confirmed 
by  Hyrum  Smith.  Upon  joining  the 
Church  he  was  filled  with  the  desire  to 
obtain  a  testimony  for  himself,  and 
while  pondering  upon  the  promised  wit- 
ness, the  adversary  sought  to  darken 
his  mind  and  weaken  his  faith.  While 
in  this  frame  of  mind  he  retired  to  a 
secret  place  and  sought  the  Lord  in 
humble  prayer.  The  following  is  a  de- 
scription of  the  result,  given  in  his  own 
(■^ords:  "I  had  no  sooner  opened  my 
ips  in  an  effort  to  pray  than  I  heard  a 
ound  just  above  my  head  like  the  rush- 
ing of  silken  robes;  and  immediately 
the  Spirit  of  God  descended  upon  me, 
completely  enveloping  my  whole  person, 
filling  me  from  the  crown  of  my  head 
to  the  soles  of  my  feet,  and  oh,  the 
joyful  happiness  I  felt!  No  language 
can  describe  the  almost  instantaneous 
transition  from  a  dense  cloud  of 
spiritual  darkness  into  a  refulgence  of 
light  and  knowledge,  as  it  was  at  that 
time  imparted  to  my  understanding.  I 
received  a  perfect  knowledge  that  God 
lives,  that  Jesus  Christ  is  the  Son  of 
God,  and  of  the  restoration  of  the  Holy 
Priesthood,  and  the  fulness  of  the  gos- 
pel. It  was  a  complete  baptism — a 
tangible  immersion  in  the  heavenly 
principle  or  element,   the  Holy  Ghost; 


and  even  more  physical  in  its  effects 
upon  every  part  of  my  system  than  the 
immersion  by  water."  In  the 
winter  of  1836-37  he  was  ordained 
an  Elder  by  Alva  Beeman.  Sub- 
sequent to  the  dedication  of  the  Kirt- 


LOBENZO  SNOW   IN   1852. 

land  Temple,  President  Snow  attended 
meetings  there  with  the  Prophet  of  the 
Lord,  and  other  leading  men  of  the 
Church.  He  enjoyed  the  rich  outpour- 
ing of  the  Holy  Spirit  in  that  sacred 
edifice.  During  the  trouble  and  apos- 
tasy in  Kirtland,  Elder  Snow  remained 
faithful  and  true  to  the  Prophet  Joseph 
Smith.  In  the  spring  of  1837  he  per- 
formed his  first  mission,  traveling  in 
the  State  of  Ohio  "without  purse  or 
secrip."  In  the  year  1838  the  Snow 
family  joined  the  Saints  in  Missouri, 
and  there  witnessed  the  scenes  of  mob- 
ocracy  enacted  in  that  State.  From 
Missouri  Lorenzo  Snow  went  on  his 
second  mission,  on  which  he  labored  in 
Kentuck^'^  Illinois  and  Missouri.  While 
in  Kentucky  he  learned  of  the  expulsion 
of  the  Saints  from  Missouri,  and  walked 
five  hundred  miles  to  Kirtland,  Ohio. 
The  two  winters  following.  Elder  Snow 
was  occupied  in  Portage  county,  Ohio, 
as  a  school  teacher,  in  which  profes- 
sion he  was  very  successful.  He  was 
ordained  a  Seventy  July  17,  1840,  by 
Joseph  Young,  and  the  following  day 
ordained  -  High  Priest  by  Don  Carlos 
Smith.  Soon  afterwards  he  went  on  a 
mission  to  England.  It  was  prior  to 
his  mission  in  England  that  President 
Snow  had  revealed  unto  him  this  glori- 
ous principle,  "As  man  now  is,  God  once 
was;  as  God  now  is,  man  may  be." 
This  sublime  truth  was  not  then  known 
to   the   Latter-day   Saints.     It   had   not 


28 


LATTER-DAY    SAINT 


Ijeen  taught  by  the  Prophet,  and  Broth- 
er Snow  wisely  kept  the  matter  to  him- 
self, except  that  he  confided  in  his  sis- 
ter Eliza  R.  Snow  and  President  Brig- 
ham  Young.  The  latter  also  cautioned 
him  not  to  confide  the  matter  to  oth- 
ers. He  presided  over  the  London  con- 
ference, besides  laboring  in  Manchester, 
Liverpool  and  Birmingham.  After  the 
Twelve  had  left  England,  he  acted  as 
counselor  to  Parley  P.  Pratt,  who  pre- 
sided over  the  European  mission.  Be- 
fore leaving  England,  President  Brig- 
ham  Young,  who  had  succeeded  in 
raising  means  to  publish  the  Book  of 
Mormon,  gave  directions  for  copies  to 
be  specially  prepared  and  richly  bound 
for  presentation  to  her  Majesty  and  the 
Prince  Consort.  The  honor  of  this  de- 
volved on  Lorenzo  Snow,  who  was  at 
that  time  president  of  the  London  con- 
ference. The  presentation  was  made 
in  1S42,  through  the  politeness  of  Sir 
Henry  Wheatley;  and  it  is  said  her 
Majesty  condescended  to  be  pleased 
with  the  gift.  A  pamphlet  entitled  "The 
Only  Way  to  be  Saved,"  which  Elder 
Snow  published  while  on  this  mission, 
has  been  translated  into  nearly  every 
language,  w-here  the  fulness  of  the  gos- 
pel has  been  preached  under  the  "Mor- 
mon"' dispensation.  At  the  close  of 
this  mission  of  nearly  three  years,  he 
took  charge  of  a  large  company  of 
Saints,  with  whom  he  safely  landed  in 
Nauvoo,  via  New  Orleans  and  the  Mis- 
sissippi river,  April  12,  1843.  On  his  re- 
turn to  Nauvoo  he  was  welcomed  by 
the  Prophet  Joseph.  President  Young 
now  informed  Brother  Snow  that  the 
doctrine  he  had  mentioned  concerning 
God  and  man  was  true,  the  Prophet 
Joseph  Smith  having  taught  it  to  the 
Twelve.  Until  that  time  Elder  Snow  was 
unmarried,  his  intellectual  and  spiritual 
pursuits  having  excluded  from  his  mind 
to  a  very  considerable  degree  the  sub- 
ject of  matrimony.  While  on  a  brief 
mission  to  Ohio  Eld^r  Snow  heard  of 
the  martyrdom  of  Joseph  and  Hyrum 
Smith.  Previous  to  the  Prophet's  death 
he  taught  Elder  Snow  the  doctrine  of 
celestial  marriage,  including  a  plural- 
ity of  wives.  He  left  with  the  exodus 
from  Illinois,  when  the  companies  for 
emigration  were  organized  by  President 
Young,  and  he  became  a  captain  of  ten. 
At  Mount  Pisgah,  a  temporary  resting 
place  for  the  Saints,  Elder  Snow  was 
appointed  to  preside.  Here  he  distin- 
guished himself  as  a  leader  by  organ- 


izing and  planning  to  alleviate  the  suf- 
ferings of  the  people  and  to  provide  for 
their  maintenance.  He  moved  to  Great 
Salt  Lake  Valley  in  the  fall  of  1848.  In 
his  new  location  he  was  among  the 
most  industrious  and  cheerful  in  the 
performance  of  every  labor  and  duty 
incidental  to  building  a  city  in  the 
desert.  Early  in  1849  he  was  called  to 
the  Apostleship  and  was  ordained  a 
member  of  the  Council  of  the  Twelve 
Feb.  12,  1849,  by  Brigham  Young,  Heber 
C.  Kimball  and  Willard  Richards. 
As  an  Apostle  of  the  Lord  President 
Lorenzo  Snow  has  labored  with  ability 
and  energy  since  his  ordination,  cover- 
ing a  priod  of  over  half  a  century.  At 
the  October  conference,  1849,  he  was 
called  on  a  mission  to  Italy,  to  introduce 
and  establish  the  gospel  in  that  land; 
his  mission  also  extended  to  other  na- 
tions and  countries  wherever  the  oppor- 
tunity should  present  itself.  En  route 
he  visited  London  and  Paris,  and  ar- 
rived in  Genoa,  Italy,  June  25,  1850. 
Among  the  Catholics  Elder  Snow  and 
companions  made  but  little  progress, 
but  in  the  Piedmont  valley  they  labored 
with  considerable  success  among  the 
Protestant  Waldenses.  In  the  prosecu- 
tion of  missionary  work  Elder  Snow  is- 
sued a  number  of  pamphlets  which 
were  as  widely  circulated  in  their  mis- 
sion as  circumstances  would  permit. 
Among  these  were  "The  Voice  of 
Joseph"  and  "The  Ancient  Gospel  Re- 
stored." He  caused  the  Book  of  Mor- 
mon to  be  translated  into  Italian  and 
under  his  direction  the  gospel  was  in- 
troduced to  Switzerland,  where  good 
success  attended  the  Elders.  Elder  Snow, 
was  so  thoroughly  filled  with  the  spirit 
of  preaching  the  gospel  to  all  nations, 
that  he  planned  for  missions  to  Turkey, 
Russia,  Malta  and  other  countries. 
He  also  sent  missionaries  to  Calcutta 
and  Bombay,  where  branches  of  the 
Church  were  organized.  While  engaged 
in  missionary  labors  on  Malta,  he  re- 
ceived his  release  to  return  home.  He 
arrived  in  Salt  Lake  City,  Aug.  30, 
1852.  The  following  year  he  was  elect- 
ed a  member  of  the  Utah  legislature, 
and  he  subsequently  served  in  that 
body  for  twenty-nine  years.  During 
several  sessions  he  presided  over  the 
council.  In  1853  he  was  called  by  Presi- 
dent Young  to  remove  to  Box  Elder 
county,  and  locate  fifty  families  there. 
He  cheerfully  consented,  and  for  forty 
years  made  his  home  at  Brigham  City, 


BIOGRAPHICAL.    ENCYCLOPEDIA. 


29 


where  he  was  the  leading  spirit,  not 
only  in  spiritual  matters,  but  in  every 
laudable  enterprise  looking  to  the  de- 
velopment of  the  country  and  the 
growth  of  the  people  in  every  desirable 
way.  He  also  presided  for  years  over 
Box  Elder  Stake  of  Zion.  He  organized 
the  Brigham  City  Mercantile  and 
Manufacturing  Association,  under 
which  several  industries  were  brought 
into  successful  operation,  such  as  a 
woolen  mill,  tannery,  shoe  factory,  hat 
factory,  sheep  and  cattle  herd,  cheese 
factory,  saw  mills,  tailor,  furniture, 
blacksmith,  wagon  and  tin  shops.  The 
products  of  these  industries  in  1875 
amounted  in  value  to  $260,000.  The  en- 
terprises were  conducted  as  nearly  as 
possible  under  the  existing  conditions 
in  the  spirit  of  the  United  Order.  Al- 
though the  organization  became  ex- 
tinct, and  the  industries  ceased.  Presi- 
dent Snow  fully  demonstrated  the  fact 
that  under'  a  more  perfect  condition  of 
the  people  spiritually  the  United  Order 
is  an  absolute  possibility.  In  1864  El- 
der Snow,  with  Elders  Ezra  T.  Benson, 
Joseph  F.  Smith  and  others  Elders,  went 
on  a  short  mission  to  the  Sandwich 
Islands.  While  attempting  to  land  at 
Lahaina,  Maui,  the  small  boat  carry- 
ing them  was  capsized  and  President 
Snow  was  thrown  into  the  sea.  When 
rescued  he  was  to  all  appearances  dead. 
The  brethren  exercised  great  faith  and 
worked  over  him  for  more  than  an  hour, 
when  life  came  back  to  his  body.  He 
concluded  his  mission  in  Hawaii  suc- 
cessfully and  returned  to  resume  his 
labors  in  Zion.  In  1873,  he,  with  his  sis- 
ter Eliza  R.,  and  other  tourists,  visited 
the  land  of  Palestine.  The  interesting 
account  of  their  visit  will  be  found  in 
"The  Palestine  Tourist."  Upon  his  re- 
turn home  President  Snow  was  active  in 
his  calling,  frequently  visiting  the  set- 
tlements of  the  Saints  in  company  with 
President  Brigham  Young  and  other 
leading  men.  During  the  crusade 
against  the  Saints  under  the  Edmunds- 
Tucker  act,  President  Snow  personally 
suffered  the  persecution  incidental  to 
those  times.  He  was  arrested  by  seven 
United  States  deputy  marshals  at  his 
residence  at  Brigham  City,  Nov. 
20,  1885,  on  a  charge  of  unlawful  co- 
habitation, three  indictments  having 
been  found  against  him  by  the  grand 
jury  of  the  First  District  court.  There 
were  three  regular  trials,  the  first  one 
commencing     Dec.     30,     1885,     and     the 


last  one  ending  Jan.  5,  1886,  con- 
viction being  the  result  in  each  case. 
He  was  sentenced  by  Judge  O.  W.  Pow- 
ers, Jan.  16,  1886,  the  judgment  be- 
ing the  full  penalty  of  the  law— impris- 
onment for  six  months  and  a  fine  of 
$300  and  cost— under  each  conviction. 
Under  this  segregation  process  in- 
augurated by  the  Utah  courts,  but  af- 
terwards reversed  by  the  United  States 
supreme  court,  President  Snow  served 
eleven  months  without  a  murmur  or 
complaint.  Before  being  sentenced  he 
was  offered  his  liberty  if  he  would  do 
violence  to  his  own  conscience  by 
making  a  certain  promise.  This  he  re- 
fused to  do.  After  being  sentenced,  the 
defendant  took  an  appeal  to  the  Terri- 
torial supreme  court  and  was  in  the 
meantime  allowed  to  remain  at  large 
under  bonds.  The  decision  of  the  Ter- 
ritorial supreme  court  confirmed  the 
judgment  of  the  lower  court.  Chief 
Justice  Zane  concurring  with  Associ- 
ate Justices  Boreman  and  Powers  in 
the  first  case,  but  dissenting  from  them 
in  the  other  two.  The  two  associate 
justices  held  that  unlawful  cohabita- 
tion was  proved,  in  the  absence  of  any 
other  evidence,  when  it  was  shown  that 
the  defendant  had  lived  with  a  plural 
wife  while  he  had  a  legal  wife  living 
and  undivorced.  They  held  that  the  law 
presumed  the  living  with  the  legal  wife. 
In  this  view  Judge  Zane  did  not  con- 
cur. The  defendant  took  an  appeal 
to  the  supreme  court  of  the  United 
States.  In  order  to  have  the  cases  ad- 
vanced upon  the  calendar  of  the  court 
of  last  resort,  it  was  necessary  that  he 
should  be  in  durance.  For  the  benefit 
of  many  of  his  brethren  who  had  been 
indicted  and  others  who  were  likely  to 
be  under  the  "segregating"  process,  he 
elected  to  go  to  prison  to  have  the  ques- 
tion of  the  right  of  the  lower  courts  to 
so  construe  and  administer  the  law, 
and  other  points,  tested  as  early  as 
practicable.  The  cases  were  argued  and 
submitted,,  and,  on  May  10,  1886,  the 
United  States  supreme  court  dismissed 
the  cases  for  want  of  jurisdiction. 
Oct.  22,  1886,  Brother  Snow  petitioned 
the  First  District  court  for  a  writ  of 
habeas  corpus,  which  was  denied  the 
following  day,  but  on  the  25th,  pursuant 
to  section  9  of  the  Organic  Act  of  Utah 
and  section  1909  of  U.  S.  Revised  Stat- 
utes, an  appeal  to  the  supreme  court 
of  the  United  States  was  allowed.  This 
finally     came     up     for     hearing,     Jan. 


30 


LATTER-DAT    SAINT 


20.  1887,  and  a  decision  was  rendered 
on  Feb.  7th  to  the  efEect  that: 
(1.)  There  was  but  one  entire  offense 
for  the  continuous  time.  (2.)  The  trial 
court  had  no  jurisdiction  to  inflict  a 
punishment  in  respect  of  more  than  one 
of  the  convictions.  (3.)  As  the  want  of 
jurisdiction  appeared  on  the  face  of  the 
proceedings,  the  defendant  could  be  re- 
leased from  imprisonment  on  a  habeas 
corpus.  (4.)  The  order  and  judgment 
of  the  court  below  must  be  reversed, 
and  the  case  remanded  to  that  court, 
with  a  direction  to  grant  the  writ  of  ha- 
beas corpus  prayed  for.  The  next  day 
(Feb.  8th),  agreeable  to  this  decision, 
A^^ostle  Snow  was  liberated  from  the 
Utah  Penitentiary.  At  the  general  con- 
ference, April  7,  1889,  Lorenzo  Snow  was 
sustained  as  President  of  the  Twelve 
Apostles,  which  position  he  filled  with 
distinction  until  he  became  President 
of  the  ChurchC  subsequent  to  the  death 
of  President  Woodruff)  October  13,  1898. 
Soon  after  the  dedication  of  the  Salt 
Lake  Temple  in  1893,  President  Snow 
was  installed  in  it  as  president,  which 
honored  position  he  still  holds.  No 
more  fitting  appointment  could  pos- 
sibly have  been  made.  He  had  ever 
been  interested  in  Temple  work.  He  is 
spiritually  minded  to  a  very  high  de- 
gree, and  with  his  heavenly  counte- 
nance and  sweet,  gentle  dignity,  no  one 
living  was  better,  if  so  well,  qualified 
to  stand  as  the  watchman  at  the  door 
which  opens  between  the  living  and  the 
dead.  ^Vhen  President  Snow  succeeded 
to  the  Presidency  of  the  Church,  he  said 
to  his  brethren:  "I  do  not  want  this 
administration  to  be  known  as  Lorenzo 
Snow's  administration,  but  as  God's  in 
and  through  Lorenzo  Snow."  Presi- 
dent Snow  chose  for  his  counselors 
George  Q.  Cannon  and  Joseph  F.  Smith, 
who  had  served  faithfully  in  the  same 
relationship  to  Presidents  Taylor  and 
Woodruff.  During  the  first  and  very 
foremost  subjects  of  consideration  with 
President  Snow  was  how  to  relieve  the 
Church  from  the  heavy  burden  of  debt 
which  has  rested  upon  it  since  the  con- 
fiscation of  Church  property  by  the 
government.  He  issued  Church  bonds, 
and  with  money  borrowed  almost  en- 
tirely from  our  own  people,  liquidated 
the  most  pressing  obligations  of  the 
Church.  Soon  after  this  he  was  im- 
pressed to  make  a  tour  among  the  set- 
tlements of  the  Saints  in  southern  Utah. 
While  in  St.  George  the  Lord  revealed 


to  him  that  the  Saints  must  repent  of 
their  indifference  to  the  law  of  tithing, 
reform  and  do  better  or  many  blessings 
would  be  withdrawn  from  them.  On 
the  other  hand,  if  the  Latter-day  Saints 
would  do  their  duty  in  this  regard  the 
obligations  of  the  Church  would  be  fully 
met,  the  land  more  thorouglily  sancti- 
fied as  a  land  of  Zion,  and  the  people 
prepared  for  the  great  redemption. 
President  Snow  and  the  brethren  have 
visited  many  Stakes  of  Zion,  and  in  all 
1899  was  a  year  of  tithe  preaching  and 
tithe  paying.  The  spirit  of  obedience  to 
this  law  has  permeated  every  Stake  of 
Zion  and  every  land  and  clime  where  a 
mission  is  established,  and  the  Elders 


LORENZO  SNOW  IN  1900. 

are  found  proclaiming  the  gospel  to  the 
nations  of  the  earth.  With  the  ad- 
vancement made  as  a  result  of  this 
movement,  it  may  be  safely  believed 
that  the  administration  of  the  Lord 
through  President  Snow  will  be  one  of 
the  most  remarkable  the  Church  has 
ever  seen.  President  Snow  is  now 
87  years  of  age;  he  has  been  true 
and  absolutely  undeviating  from 
the  testimony  he  received  sixty- 
five  years  ago.  In  reviewing  the 
history  of  his  life,  we  find  him  a  hum- 
ble farmer's  boy,  a  student  at  college, 
a  teacher  and  a  missionary  in  many 
lands,  "without  money  and  without 
price,"  a  pioneer  colonizer,  a  promoter 


BIOGRAPHICAL    ENCYCLOPEDIA. 


31 


and  manager  of  financial  enterprises,  a 
legislator  and  an  Apostle  of  the  Lord,  a 
Prophet  of  God;  truly  a  man  who  can 
sympathize  with  the  people  in  all  the 
conditions  of  life,  especially  those  com- 
mon to  the  experiences  of  a  Latter-day 
Saint,  thus  aptly  fitting  him  by  experi- 
ence for  the  high  station  he  now  oc- 
cupies. He  has  suffered  privation,  hard- 
ships, persecutions,  bonds  and  impris- 
onment, yet  through  it  all  he  bears  the 
same  testimony  given  over  sixty-five 
years  ago.  President  Snow  stands  erect, 
is  active  in  body  and  bright  in  every 
faculty  of  his  mind,  and,  as  said  of 
Moses,  "his  natural  force  abateth  not, 
neither  doth  his  eye  wax  dim.' 
(For  further  information  see  Biog- 
raphy and  Family  Record  of  Lorenzo 
Snow,  by  Eliza  R.  Snow  Smith;  "His- 
torical Record,"  Vol.  6,  p.  138;  sketch  by 
Matthias  F.  Cowley  in  "Southern  Star," 
Vol.  2,  p.  193,  etc.) 

RIGDON,  Sidney,  first  counselor  to 
President  Joseph  Smith,  from  1833  to 
1844,  was  born  Feb.  19,  1793,  in  St. 
Clair  township,  Alleghany  county,  Pa.; 
he  was  the  youngest  son  of  William  and 
Nancy  Rigdon.  Sidney's  father  was 
a  farmer  and  had  three  sons,  Carvil, 
Loami  and  Sidney,  and  a  daughter 
Lucy. When  Sidney  was  seventeen  years 
old,  his  father  died,  and  when  he  was 
twenty-six  shears  of  age  his  mother 
also  passed  away.  In  his  twenty- 
fi.fth  year  he  became  a  member  of  the 
society  of  "Regular  Baptists,"  and  the 
next  year  he  left  the  farm  and  went 
to  live  with  Andrew  Clark,  a  Baptist 
preacher.  While  there,  Sidney  received 
a  license  and  commenced  to  preach,  and 
after  March,  1819,  he  gave  up  farming 
altogether.  In  May,  1819,  he  went  to 
Trumbull  county,  Ohio,  and  while  liv- 
ing with  Adamson  Bentley,  another 
Baptist  preacher,  he  became  acquainted 
with  Phebe  Brook,  a  native  of  Bridge- 
town, Cumberland  county.  New  Jersey, 
whom  he  married  June  12,  1820.  He  con- 
tinued to  preach  in  that  region  until 
November,  1821,  when  he  left  Warren 
to  take  charge  of  the  First  Baptist 
Church  in  Pittsburg,  where  he  preached 
with  considerable  success,  and  the 
church  soon  rose  fi-om  a  very  low,  con- 
fused state  to  a  rapid  increase  of  mem- 
bers, and  to  be  one  of  the  most  re- 
spectable churches  of  the  city.  He  be- 
came a  most  popular  preacher,  but  af- 
ter   awhile    he    was    greatly   perplexed 


with  the  idea  that  the  doctrines  taught 
by  the  church  with  which  he  was  con- 
nected was  not  altogeter  in  accordance 
with    Scripture,    and    after    great      de- 
liberation and     reflection     and   solemn 
prayer  he   resolved   to   follow   his   con- 
victions;   and   in   August,    1824,    he   an- 
nounced to  the  members  of  the  church 
that    he    had    determined    to    withdraw 
from  it,   as  he  could  no  longer  uphold 
its    doctrines.       In   consequence   of   his 
great    popularity,    this   unexpected    an- 
nouncement caused  amazement,  sorrow 
and     tears     to     his  congregation.       At 
that  time  Alexander  Campbell,  a  native 
of  Ireland,  was  a  member  of  the  Bap- 
tist association,  but  he  afterwards  sep- 
arated from  it.      Walter  Scott,  a  native 
of   Scotland,    and   a  printer   by     trade, 
also  left  it  about  the  same  time.    After 
leaving  the  Baptist  church,  these  three 
gentlemen,   being  very  friendly,     often 
met  together  to  discuss  religious  topics. 
Eventually.from  this  connection, sprang 
a  church,  the  members  of  which  called 
themselves   "Disciples,"   but   which  are 
generally  known  as  Campbellites.     For 
the  maintenance  of  his  family,   Sidney 
Rigdon    labored    for   two    years     as     a 
tanner,    after   which     he     removed     to 
Bainbridge.Geuaga  county,  Ohio,  where 
he   was   solicited    to   preach,    it   having 
become  known  that  he  had  been  a  pop- 
ular preacher.       Thenceforth  he  devot- 
ed himself  to  the  work  of  the  ministry, 
confining  himself   to   no   special   creed, 
but   holding   the   Bible    as   his   rule   of 
faith    and    advocating    repentance    and 
baptism  for  the  remission  of  sins  and 
the  gift   of   the   Holy   Ghost— doctrines 
which  he  and  Alexander  Campbell  had 
been  investigating.      He  labored  in  that 
vicinity   one   year   with    much    success, 
and    built   up   a   large   and    respectable 
church    at     Mantua,      Portage    county, 
Ohio.       His   doctrines   were     new,    and 
crowded  houses  assembled  to  hear  him, 
though  some  opposed  and  ridiculed  his 
doctrines.      He  was  then  pressingly  in- 
vited  to   remove   to   Mentor,   an   enter- 
prising town,   about  thirty  miles  from 
Bainbridge,  and  near  Lake  Erie,  which 
he  did  soon  afterwards.      At  this  place 
there  were     remnants       of     a  Baptist 
church,  the  members  of  which  became 
interested  in  his  doctrines.      But  many 
of  the  citizens  were  jealous  of  him,  and 
slanderous  reports  were  circulated  con- 
cerning him.    By  continuing  his  labors, 
however,      the      opposition     weakened, 
prejudice  gave  way  and  he  became  very 


32 


LATTER-DAY    SAINT 


popular.  Calls  came  from  every  direc- 
tion for  him  to  preach,  and  his  fame 
increased  and  ppread  abroad.  Both 
rich  and  poor  crowded  his  churches 
Many  became  convinced  and  were  bap- 
tized, whole  churches  became  converted 
/and  he  soon  had  large  and  flourishing 
V  societies  throughout  that  region.  He 
was  a  welcome  visitor  wherever  he 
went,  and  his  society  was  courted  by 
the  learned  and  intelligent.  With  his 
wife  and  six  children  he  lived  in  a 
small  unfinished,  frame  building,  but 
the  members  of  his  church,  resolving 
to  erect  him  a  suitable  residence,  pur- 
chased a  farm  and  commenced  the 
erection  of  a  good  house  and  outbuild- 
ings for  him.  His  prospects  with  re- 
gard to  temporal  things  had  thus  be- 
come brighter  than  ever  before,  when, 


in  the  fall  of  1830.  Elders  Parley  P. 
Pratt,  Oliver  Cowdery,  Ziba  Peterson 
and  Peter  Whitmer,  jun.,  called  at  Men- 
tor  on  their  mission  to  the  Indians  on 
the  western  boundaries  of  MissourL 
Elder  Pratt  had  been  a  preacher  in  the 
same  church  as  Sidney  Rigdon  and  had 
resided  at  Amherst,  Lorain  county, 
Ohio.  He  had  gone  on  a  mission  for 
his  church,  into  the  State  of  New 
York, where  he  became  acquainted  with 
the  circumstances  of  the  coming  forth 
of  the  Book  of  Mormon  and  was  in- 
troduced to  Joseph  Smith  and  other 
Latter-day  Saints.  After  reading  the 
Book  of  Mormon,  Mr.  Pratt  became 
convinced  that  it  was  of  God,  was 
baptized   and   ordained   an   Elder,    and 


began  to  preach.  Being  called  on  a 
mission  to  the  west  he  resolved,  during 
his  journey  through  Ohio,to  call  on  his 
old  friends  and  associates  in  that  State, 
believing  that  many  of  them  were 
honest  seekers  after  truth.  Arriving 
at  Mentor,  Sidney  Rigdon's  house  was 
the  fii'st  place  Elder  Pratt  and  his 
missionary  companions  visited.  They 
presented  him  with  a  copy  of  the  Book 
of  Mormon,  saying  that'it  was  a  revela- 
tion from  God.  He  had  not  heard  of 
it  before,  and  was  much  prejudiced  at 
the  assertion,  replying  that  he  was  ac- 
quainted with  the  Bible  which  he  be- 
lieved was  a  revelation  from  God,  but 
he  had  considerable  doubts  regarding 
their  book.  He,  however,  consented  to 
read  it,  and  after  a  fortnight's  careful 
perusal  of  the  sacred  volume,  and 
after  much  prayer  and  meditation,  he 
was  convinced  of  its  truth.  His  wife, 
also,  became  a  believer,  and  both  were 
baptized  Nov.  14,  1830.  Together  with 
others  who  were  baptized  about  the 
same  time,  they  were  organized  into  a 
branch  of  the  Church.  Brother  Rig- 
don and  others  were  ordained  to  the 
ministry,  after  which  Elder  Pratt  and 
missionary  companions  continued  their 
journey  further  west.  In  December, 
1830,  Elder  Rigdon  visited  Joseph  the 
Prophet  in  Fayette,  New  York,  and 
was  commanded  by  revelation  to  preach 
the  gospel  and  assist  the  Prophet  in  his 
labors.  From  that  time  till  Joseph's 
death,  the  two  were  closely  associated 
together.  Early  in  1831,  the  Prophet 
Joseph  and  wife  accompanied  Sidney 
Rigdon  and  Edward  Partridge  to  Kirt- 
land,  Ohio,  where  they  were  kindly  re- 
ceived and  welcomed  by  Bro.  Newel  K. 
Whitney  and  family.  Soon  afterwards, 
the  Prophet  Joseph  and  Sidney  Rig- 
don were  called -by  revelation  to  preach 
the  gospel,  and  in  June,  accompanied 
by  others,  they  started  for  Missouri, 
where  Sidney  Rigdon  dedicated  the 
land  of  Zion  for  the  gathering  of  the 
Saints.  He  also  wrote  a  description  of 
the  country.  After  his  return  to  Ohio, 
Sidney  Rigdon  assisted  the  Prophet  Jo- 
seph in  translating  the  holy  Scriptures, 
and  while  thus  employed  in  the  town 
of  Hiram,  Portage  county,  he,  together 
with  Joseph,  was  attacked  by  a  party 
of  mobocrats,  abused  most  shamefully 
and  tarred  and  feathered.  He  was 
dragged  out  of  his  house  by  the  heels 
and  injured  so  much  that  he  became  de- 
lirious  and   remained     so     for   several 


BIOQRAPHICAL   ENCYCLOPEDIA. 


33 


days.       Elder  Rigdon  and  family,  who 
were   sick   with    the   measles,    then   re- 
moved to  Kirtland,  but  he  soon  after- 
wards accompanied  the  Prophet  on  an- 
other visit  to  Missouri,  from  which  he 
returned  to  Kirtland  in  June,  1832-.     He 
then  spent  most  of  the  summer     with 
Joseph   in    translating-     the   Scriptures. 
March   18,    1833,      Sidney     Rigdon     and 
Frederick    G.    Williams   were    ordained 
and  set  apart  as   counselors  to  Joseph 
Smith   in   the   First   Presidency.     After 
preaching  extensively  in  Ohio,     Sidney 
Rigdon  accompanied  the  Prophet  on  a 
missionary  trip  to  upper  Canada  in  Oc- 
tober, 1833.      While  on  this  mission  Sid- 
ney Rigdon  was  called  by  revelation  to 
be  a  spokesman  to  Joseph.  After  their 
return.     Joseph       wrote       as     follows: 
"Brother  Sidney  is  a  man  whom  I  love, 
"^ut  he  is  not  capable  of  that  pure  and 
steadfast    love    for    those    who    are    his 
benefactors,   as     should       possess     the 
breast  of  a  president  of  the  Church  of 
Christ.      This,    with    some    other    little 
things,   such  as  selfishness     and  inde- 
pendence  of    mind,     which,     too    often 
manifested,   destroy  the     confidence  of 
those  who  would     lay  down  their  lives 
for   him.       But,   notwithstanding  these 
things,    he    is    a   very    great    and    good 
man— a  man  of  great  power  of  words, 
and   can  gain     the     friendship     of  his 
hearers    very    quickly.       He    is   a   man 
whom  God  will  uphold,  if  he  will  con- 
tinue   to    his    calling.'^  Early    in    1834 
Sidney    Rigdon    assisted     in    obtaining 
volunteers  for  Zion's  Camp,  and  while 
Joseph  journeyed  to  and  from  Missouri 
with   that  body  of  men,   Elder  Rigdon 
had  charge  of  affairs  at  Kirtland.     He 
was  also  one  of  the  trustees  and  con- 
ductors of  the  "Kirtland  school,"  where- 
in    penmanship,      arithmetic,     English 
grammar    and    geography  were  taught 
during  the  winter.  He  was  also  a  mem- 
ber   of    a    committee    apointed    to     ar- 
range   "the    items    of    the    doctrine    of 
Jesus    Christ,    for    the    government    of 
the   Church,"    which    resulted     in     the 
"Book  of  Doctrine  and  Covenants"  be- 
ing published  in  1835.       At  the  time  of 
the  dedication  of  the  Kirtland  Temple, 
March  27,  1836,  Sidney  Rigdon  preached 
a   powerful    discourse,    and    afterwards 
took   an   active    part     in     blessing   his 
brethren.      Soon      afterwards     he    per- 
formed a  short  mission  to  the  Eastern 
States.       In   1837,    he    accompanied    the 
Prophet    on    another    trip    to    Missouri 
"to  appoint  other  Stakes  or  places  of 


gathering."       On  their  return  to  Kirt- 
land,   Ohio,   they   found     the     spirit  of 
apostasy     and     mobocracy     prevailing 
there    to   an    alarming   extent,    in    con- 
sequence   of    which    Elder    Rigdon,    to- 
gether  with   the   Prophet,    was   obliged 
to  flee  from  Kirtland,  in  January,  1838. 
Elder    Rigdon    and    family   arrived     at 
Far  West,  Mo.,  April  4,  1838.       He  as- 
sisted  in   organizing     a  Stake   of  Zion 
called    Adam-ondi-Ahman     in    Daviess 
county,  and  preached  and  sat  in  coun,- 
cil  with  his  brethren.      July  4,  1838,  he 
delivered   an   oration   at   Far   West,    in 
which  he  denounced  the  enemies  of  the 
Saints    in   very     strong     terms,    which 
caused     much       bitterness     of   feeling 
among  the  non-Mormons.  In  the  mean- 
time,    the       persecutions     against   the 
Saints  in  Missouri  were  renewed,   and 
Sidney       Rigdon       was       among       the 
brethren      who      were      betrayed    into 
the     hands     of     the     mob-militia     by 
Geo.  M.  Hinkle,  Oct.  31,  1838.     Together 
with  the  Prophet  Joseph  and  other  fel- 
low-prisoners, he  was  sentenced  to  be 
shot;   but  this  being  prevented  Jie  was 
incarcerated   in  Liberty  jail   from  No- 
vember, 1838,   till  February,  18.39,  when 
he   was   released   on   bail.       After     his 
escape   into   Illinois,    he   advocated   the 
cause   of   the   persecuted    Saints     with 
much  diligence,  and  his  arraignment  of 
the      actions       of       the       Missourians 
aroused  much  sympathy    on     the    part 
of     the     inhabitants     of     Quincy,   who 
showed  the  exiled  Saints  many  acts  of 
kindness.       A^fter    the    escape     of     the 
Prophet  .Joseph  from  his  imprisonment 
in  Missouri,  Elder  Rigdon  took  an  ac- 
tive  part   in    the   founding   of   Nauvoo, 
where  he  passed  through  sickness  and 
much  suffering.      He  also  accompanied 
Joseph    the    Prophet    to      Washington, 
D.  C,  to  present  the  grievances  of  the 
Saints  to  the  government  and  to  Con- 
gress.     When  Nauvoo  became  a  char- 
tered  city,   Sidney  Rigdon  was  elected 
a    member    of     the    city    council.        He 
also  served  as  city  attorney  and  post- 
master, and  in  other  public  capacities: 
but  he  did  not  discharge  his  duties  as 
counselor    to    President    Joseph    Smith 
with     that     religious     zeal   and  ability 
which  had  characterized  his  early  ca- 
reer in  the  Church.       He  was  accused 
of  being  associated   with   the   plans  of 
John  C.  Bennett  and  other  enemies  of 
the    Church,    but    this    he    always    de- 
nied.      At     the     general  conference  of 
the  Church,  held  at  Nauvoo  in  October, 


Vol.  1,  No,   3. 


Jan.   19,   1901. 


34 


LATTER-DAY    SAINT 


1843,  President  Joseph  Smith  rejected 
him  as  his  counselor:  but  through  the 
intercession  of  Hyrum  Smith,  he  was 
retained  In  his  offlce.  Early  in  1844, 
when  Joseph  Smith  became  a  candidate 
for  president  of  the  United  States,  the 
same  convention  that  nominated  Joseph 
nominated  Sidney  Rigdon  for  vice-pres- 
ident. Soon  afterward  Bro.  Rigdon  left 
Nauvoo,  for  Pittsburg,  Pa.,  where  he 
remained  until  after  the  Prophet's 
death.  The  news  of  the  terrible  trage- 
dy at  Carthage  having  reached  him,  he 
hastened  back  to  Nauvoo  to  offer  him- 
self as  a  guardian  for  the  Church.  His 
claims  were  duly  considered,  but  at 
the  memorable  meeting,  held  at  Nau- 
voo, Aug.  8,  1844,  he  was  rejected  by 
the  people,  and  the  Twelve  Apostles 
were  recognized  as  the  head  of  the 
Church.  The  subsequent  course  of 
Elder  Rigdon,  however,  not  being  at 
all  satisfactory,  his  case  was  taken 
before  the  High  Council  at  Nauvoo. 
Sept.  8,  1844,  and  carefully  tried.  It 
resulted  in  his  excommunication  from 
the  Church.  Soon  afterwards  he  left 
Nauvoo  and  located  in  Pennsylvania; 
but  in  1847  he  made  his  home  in  the 
village  of  Friendship, Alleghany  county. 
New  York,  where  he  lived  uninterrupt- 
edly till  his  death,  which  occurred  at 
that  place  July  14,  1876.  The  "Regis- 
ter," a  paper  published  in  Friendship, 
stated  at  the  time  of  his  death  "that 
numerous  pilgrimages  had  been  made 
to  him  from  different  parts  by  various 
persons  desirous  of  obtaining  further 
information  from  him  relative  to  the 
origin  of  the  Book  of  Mormon;  but  he 
unwaveringly  adhered  to  his  original 
theory  on  this  matter,  being  the  same 
as  that  held  by  the  Mormons;  and  he 
treated  with  great  scorn  and  contempt 
the  statement  of  parties  imputing  the 
authorship  of  the  work  to  himself." 
fFor  further  particulars,  see  History  of 
Joseph  Smith,  and  early  Church  publi- 
cations generally;  also  "Improvement 
Era,"  Vol.  3.) 

KIMBAIili,  Heber  (ha.se,  first  oun- 
selor  to  President  Brigham  Young 
from  1847  to  1868,  was  born  June  14, 
ISOl,  at  Sheldon,  Franklin  county,  "Ver- 
mont. He  was  the  son  of  Solomon  F. 
Kimball  (born  1771),  who  was  the  son 
of  James  Kimball  (born  1736),  \vho  was 
the  son  of  Jeremiah  Kimball  (born 
1707),  who  was  the  son  of  David  Kim- 
Ijall   (born   1671),   who  was  the  son     of 


Benjamin  Kimball  (born  1637),  who 
was  the  son  of  Richard  Kimball  (or 
Kemball),  who  was  born  at  Rattlesden, 
county  of  Suffolk,  England,  in  1595,  and 
who  emigrated  to  America  in  1634, 
crossing  the  Atlantic  in  the  ship  "Eliza- 
beth," and  settled  in  Massachusetts. 
Heber  C.  Kimball  removed  with  the 
rest  of  his  father's  family  from  Shel- 
don, Vermont,  to  West  Bloomfield,  On- 
tario county,  N.  Y.,  in  1811.  His  father 
was  a  blacksmith  and  farmer.  In  1806, 
Heber  first  went  to  school,  continuing 
most  of  the  time  until  he  was  14  years 
of  aee.  when  he  began  to  learn  black- 
smithing  with  his  father.  During' 
the  war  of  1812,  his  father  lost  his  prop- 
erty, and  when  Heber  arrived  at  the 
age  of  nineteen,  he  found  himself  de- 
pendent on  his  own  resources,  and  fre- 
quently suffering  for  the  necessaries  of 
life.  His  elder  brother  Charles,  hear- 
ing of  his  destitute  condition,  offered  to 
teach  him  the  potter's  trade.  The 
offer  was  accepted,  and  he  continued 
with  his  brother  until  he  was  twenty - 
one  years  old.  In  this  interim  they 
moved  to  Mendon, Monroe  county,wherfc 
they  pursued  the  pottery  business. After 
having  learned  his  trade,  Heber  worked 
six  months  for  his  brother  for  wages. 
In  November,  1822,  he  married  Vilate 
Murray, daughter  of  Roswell  and  Susan- 
nah Murray,  who  was  born,  in  Florida, 
New  York,  June  1,  1806,  and  immediate- 
ly afterwards  he  purchased  the  prem- 
ises from  his  brother  Charles,  and  went 
into  business  for  himself  as  a  potter, 
which  trade  he  followed  for  upwards 
of  ten  years.  Sometime  in  1823  he  re- 
ceived the  three  first  degrees  of  mason- 
ry, and  in  1824,  with  five  others,  he  pe- 
titioned the  Chapter  at  Canandaigua, 
asking  to  receive  all  the  degrees  up  to 
that  of  Royal  Arch  Mason.  The  peti- 
tion was  granted,  but  just  previous  to 
the  time  they  were  to  receive  those  de- 
grees, the  anti-Masons  burned  the 
chapter  buildings.  In  his  early  life  He- 
ber C.  Kimball  received  many  pressing 
invitations  to  unite  himself  with  the 
different  religious  sects  of  the  day,  but 
did  not  see  fit  to  comply  until  a  revival 
occurred  in  his  neighborhood,  shortly 
after  which  he  and  his  wife  were  bap- 
tized, and  they  joined  the  Baptists. 
About  three  weeks  after  this  occur- 
rence, some  Elders  of  the  Church  of 
Jesus  Christ  of  Latter-day  Saints  came 
from  Pennsylvania  to  the  residence  of 
Phineas  H.  Young,  in  Victor,  and  learn- 


BIOGRAPHICAL,    ENCYCLOPEDIA. 


35 


ing  of  their  arrival,  curiosity  prompted 
Heber  to  see  them,  and  he  then  heard 
for  the  first  time  the  everlasting  gos- 
pel. He  desired  much  to  learn  more, 
and  in  company  with  Brigham  and 
Phineas  H.  Younf  and  their  wives,  he 
started  for  Pennsylvania,  where  they 
stayed  with  the  Church  six  days,  regu- 
larly attending  the  meetings.  In  April, 
1832,  Alpheus  GifEord  called  at  Heber  C. 
Ximball's  shop;    after  a  few  moments' 


•conversation,  he  expresed  his  readiness 
to  be  baptized,  and  he  went  with  El- 
der Gifford  to  a  small  stream  in  the 
woods,  about  one  mile  distant,  where 
the  holy  ordinance  was  administered 
to  him.  About  two  weeks  later,  his 
wife  Vilate  was  baptized  by  Joseph 
Young.  Brother  Kimball  was  ordained 
P"  Elder  by  Joseph  Young,  and  in  com- 
pany with  him  and  Brigham  Young,  he 
preached  in  Genesee,  Avon  and  Lyons- 
town  where  they  baptized  many  and 
built  up  branches.  In  September,  1832, 
Avith  Brigham  and  Joseph  Young,  he 
went  to  Kirtland,  Ohio,  and  visited  the 
Prophet  Joseph  Smith.  In  the  fall  of 
1833,  having  sold  his  possessions,  he 
started  for  Kirtland,  accompanied  by 
Brigham  Young,  arriving  there  about 
the  1st  of  November.  May  5,  1834,  he 
left  Kirtland,  in  company  with  Presi- 
dent Joseph  Smith  and  about  a  hundred 


oth;rs,  and  arrived  in  New  Portage, 
where  Zion's  Camp  was  organized.  He 
was  appointed  captain  of  the  third  com- 
pany. At  the  reorganization  of  the 
Camp  at  Salt  river.Mo.,  he  was  selected 
as  one  of  President  Smith's  life  guards. 
While  on  Fishing  river,  and  after  as- 
sisting to  inter  a  number  of  the  breth- 
ren who  fell  by  the  cholera,  he  himself 
was  very  severely  attacked.  Shortly 
after  he  receive"  an  honorable  dis- 
charge in  writing,  and  (in  accordance 
with  the  instructions  of  President  Jo- 
seph Smith)  on  the  30th  he  started  for 
home.reaching  Kirtland  July  26th.About 
two  weeks  after  his  return,  he  estab- 
lished a  pottery  and  continued  to  work 
at  his  business  until  cold  weather  set 
in.  In  the  winter  of  1834-5  he  attended 
the  theological  schools— established  in 
Kirtland.  He  was  chosen  and  ordained 
one  of  the  Twelve  Apostles,  Feb.  14^ 
1S35.  In  May  following,  he  started,  in 
company  with  his  fellow  Apostles,  on  a 
mission  to  the  Eastern  churches,  and 
visited,  among  other  places,  Sheldon, 
where  he  was  born,  preaching  to  his 
friends  and  relatives.  He  crossed  the 
Green  Mountains  on  foot  and  alone, 
and  attended  a  conference  in  St.  Johns- 
bury  with  the  Twelve.  Returning 
home  he  met  others  of  the  Twelve  at 
Buffalo.  They  arrived  at  Kirtland 
Sept.  25th.  Elder  Kimball  attended 
the  dedication  of  the  House  of  the  Lord 
at  Kirtland,  March  27,  1836,  and  re- 
seived  his  washings  and  anointings 
with  the  Twelve  Apostles.  From  Mgiy 
to  October  he  was  engaged  on  a  mission 
in  the  northern  part  of  the  United 
States.  Having  been  called  on  a,  mis- 
sion to  England  by  the  Prophet  Jo- 
seph, he  left  Kirtland  in  June,  1837,  ac- 
companied by  Orson  Hyde,  Willard 
Richards  and  Joseph  Fielding.  As  a 
passenger  on  the  ship  "Garrick,"  he 
sailed  from  New  York,  July  1,  1837,  ac- 
companied by  other  missionaries,  and 
landed  in  Liverpool  on  the  20th.  Two 
days  later  they  went  to  Preston  and 
on  the  following  Sunday,  they  preached 
in  the  church  of  the  Rev.  James  Field- 
ing to  a  large  congregation.  A  number 
of  people  believed  and  rejoiced  in  thd 
message  they  had  heard.  Mr.  Fielding, 
however,  shut  his  doors  against  the  El- 
ders and  would  not  suffer  them  to 
preach  again  in  his  church;  but  Elder 
Kimball  and  his  companions  continued 
to  preach  in  private  houses,  on  street 
corners  and  in  market  places,   and  by 


36 


LATTER-DAY    SAINT 


Christmas  there  were  about  one  thous- 
and   members   of   the   Church    in    Eng- 
land.   The  history  of  Apostle  Kimball's 
first  mission  in  England  would  make  an 
interesting     little     volume  of  itself,  as 
thrilling  and  accompanied  by  the  power 
of  Cod  as  thoroughly  as  was  the  travels 
of  the  Apostle  Paul  in  Southern  Europe 
more    than    eighteen    centuries     before. 
Elder   Kimball     returned     to   Kirtland 
May    22,      1S3S,      being     absent     eleven 
months,    and    with    his    associates    was 
instrumental  in  baptizing  nearly  fifteen 
hundred  persons,  and  organizing  large 
branches  in  various  parts  of  England, 
thus  opening  and  establishing  the  Eu- 
ropean mission  from  which  has  come  to 
the  Church  of  Christ  in  the  last  days 
more  than  one  hundred  thousand  peo- 
ple.      Joseph   Smith  and  other  leading 
men   having   removed   to  Missouri,   El- 
der  Kimball   removed   with   his   family 
to  Far  West.       They  journeyed  chiefly 
by  water,  on  the  Ohio,  Mississippi  and 
Missouri  rivers,     reaching     Far     West 
July   25,    1S38,    and     enjoyed     a   happy 
meeting   with    the   Prophet     and   other 
leading  men.      Elder  Kimball  immedi- 
ately   set    to    work     building     a    small 
house  for  his  family.      During  its  erec- 
tion the  family  lived  in  a  small  shanty 
about  eleven   feet   square-so   low   that 
Elder  Kimball  could  scarcely  stand  up- 
right  in   it.       During     the   summer  he 
went   with    the     Prophet     Joseph     and 
others  to  Daviess  county    to  afford  the 
Saints  protection  against  mob  violence. 
At    the    invasion   of    Far   West   by   the 
mob  militia,   Elder  Kimball  was  pres- 
ent to  offer  his  life  or  undergo  any  or- 
deal that  might  come  upon  the  Saints. 
He  visited,  in  company  with  President 
Young,   the  Prophet  in  prison  and   did 
all  he  could  to  secure  his  release,  and 
was    also    active    in    providing    for    the 
comfort   of   the    wounded    and    helpless 
who  had  suffered  from  the  outrages  of 
their  enemies.      He  attended  the  secret 
conference  on  the  Temple  grounds  April 
26.  1S39,  at  which  Wilford  Woodruff  and 
fJeorge  A.   Smith  were  ordained  Apos- 
tles  and    afterwards     went     with    the 
Twelve  to  Quincy,  111.,  where  his  family 
awaited  him.       From  thence  he  moved 
to  Xauvoo,   where  he  built  him  a  resi- 
dence.      In    September,     1S39,    together 
with   President     r.righam     Young,     he 
.started  for  England  on  his  second  mis- 
sion.      He  was  hailed   with  delight  by 
his    former    acciuaintances    throughout 
the   mission.       He    laVjored    with    great 


diligence    for    over      one    year.        They 
leached    Liverpool    April    6,    1840,      and 
returned   to  Nauvoo  July  1,   1841.       He 
was  elected  a   member  of  the   Nauvoo 
city  council   Oct.    23,   1841,   and   labored 
in    various    capacities    to    promote    the 
growth  and  development  of  the  city  and 
the  Church.       From  Septenaber  to  No- 
vember, 1842,  he,  with  Brigham  Young, 
George    A.    Smith    and    Amasa    M.    Ly- 
man,   labored    diligently    in    Illinois    to 
allay  excitement,  remove  prejudice  and 
correct  false  doctrines.       In  July,   1843, 
he  went  on  a  preaching  mission  to  the 
Eastern    States,    returning    to    Nauvoo, 
Oct.  22nd  of  the  same  year.       In  May, 
1844,  he  started  for  Washington,  D.  C, 
to   petition   the   authorities   of   the   na- 
tion  to   redress   the   grievances   heaped 
upon    the    Saints    by    their    enemies    in 
Missouri   and   Illinois.       On   his   return 
trip  he  heard  the  sad  news  of  the  mar- 
tyrdom  of   Joseph   and    Hyrum    Smith. 
Apostle  Kimball  was  active  in  sustain- 
ing the  Saints  in  the  great  affliction  by 
his  encouraging  councils,     and    united 
with  his  brethren  to  finish  the  Nauvoo 
Temple,   and   in  every  way  nobly  met 
under  trying  circumstances  the  respon- 
sibilities of  his  high  calling  as  an  Apos- 
tle of  the  Lord.      What  the  people  suf- 
fered he  suffered,  and  the  labors  which 
they  performed  were  his  also.       After 
the    trying    experiences    of    the    exodus 
from  Nauvoo,  and  the  journey  to  Win- 
ter Quarters,  he  became  one  of  the  his- 
toric one  hundred  and  forty-eight  who 
constituted   the   Pioneer   company   that 
entered  Salt  Lake  in  July,  1847.     Elder 
Kimball  was  one  of  the  foremost  men 
in   all   the   important  labors   incidental 
to  founding  a  great  commonwealth   in 
a  desert  land.      In  December,  1847, when 
President  Young  was  sustained  as  Pres- 
ident  of   the   Church,   Apostle   Kimball 
was  chosen  as  his  first  counselor,  and 
sustained  this  position  with  credit  and 
ability  until  his  death  in  1868.      He  was 
also   lieutenant-governor  in  the  Provi- 
sional   State    of    Deseret    until    his    de- 
cease.   For  a  number  of  years  he  was  a 
member     of  the  legislative  council,  the 
last  three  years  being  president  of  that 
body.       He    was    ever    constant    in    his 
devotion  to  the  Church,  the  State  and 
the  nation.  He  was  a  typical  American, 
like  his  ancestors  for  many  generations. 
He  officiated  in  the  Hou.se  of  the  Lord. 
He    visited    every    settlement    in   Utah, 
most    of    them    many    times,    preached 
the    gospel,    uttered    many    prophecies 


BIOGRAPHICAL,    ENCTCLOPEDIA. 


37 


which  have  received  literal  fulfillment, 
and  gave  counsel,  spiritual  and  tem- 
poral, to  advance  the  work  of  God  upon 
the  earth.  In  May,  1868,  he  received 
a  severe  fall  at  Provo,  which  brought 
on  sickness  and  resulted  in  his  death 
June  22,  1868,  at  his  home  in  Salt  Lake 
City.  He  died  as  he  had  lived,  true, 
full  of  faith  and  in  the  hope  of  a  glo- 
rious resurrection.  President  Kim- 
ball was  a  man  of  dignified  bearing, 
standing  about  six  feet  in  height  and 
well  proportioned.  His  complexion  was 
•dark  and  his  hair  thin.  His  piercing 
dark  eyes  seemed  to  penetrate  one's 
very  soul  and  read  the  very  thoughts  of 
the  human  heart.  He  was  broad  and 
magnanimous  in  his  ways,  kind  to  the 
widow  and  the  fatherless,  beloved  by 
his  associates  in  the  Apostleship  and 
by  all  the  Saints.  He  fulfilled  the 
characteristics  of  an  honest  man,  "the 
noblest  work  of  God."  Many  times  he 
told  men  what  they  had  done,  and  what 
would  befall  them,  not  by  any  human 
knowledge,  but  by  the  spirit  of  discern- 
ment and  revelation.  He  had  many  odd 
sayings,  which,  said  by  him,  left  a  last- 
ing impression  upon  his  hearers  in  pub- 
lic and  private.  Witn  all  his  frank  and 
fearless  manner  of  telling  the  men  what 
many  would  shrink  from  telling,  he  was 
a  loving,  peaceful  man,  and  was  desig- 
nated as  the  "Herald  of  Peace."  During 
the  hard  times  in  Salt  Lake  City,Presi- 
dent  Kimball  was  so  blessed  with  tem- 
poral subsistence,  breadstuff  chiefly, 
that  he  was  able  to  feed  his  own  nu- 
merous family  and  loan  to  men  con- 
sidered much  better  financiers  than 
himself.  His  special  gift  of  the  Spirit 
was  that  of  prophecy.  His  predictions 
and  their  fulfillment  would  make  a  long 
chapter  of  themselves,  and  full  of 
thrilling  interest.  When  the  Saints 
were  about  to  settle  in  Commerce,  111., 
and  though  received  with  open  arms 
by  the  good  people  of  Illinois,  Apostle 
Kiinball  looked  upon  the  beautiful  site 
arid  said  sorrowfully,  "This  is  a  beau- 
tiful place,  but  not  a  long  resting  place 
for  the  Saints."  Sidney  Rigdon  was 
vexed  at  the  prediction,  but  its  fulfill- 
ment is  too  well  known  to  need  re- 
peating here.  When  hard  times  pressed 
the  Saints  in  Salt  Lake  City,  and  a 
thousand  miles  separated  them  from 
commercial  points.  President  Kimball 
stood  up  in  the  Tabernacle  and  prophe- 
sied that  in  less  than  six  months  cloth- 
ing and  other  goods  would  be  sold  in 


the  streets  of  Great  Salt  Lake  City 
cheaper  than  they  could  be  bought  in 
New  York.  This  astonished  the  people. 
One  of  his  brethren  said  to  him  after 
meeting  that  he  did  not  believe  it. 
"Neither  did  I,"  said  Brother  Kimball. 
"but  I  said  it.  It  will  have  to  go."  No 
one  saw  the  possibility  of  its  verifica- 
tion. Six  months,  however,  had  not 
passed  away  when  large  companies  of 
emigrants,  burning  with  the  gold  fever 
from  the  East,  came  into  the  city,  and 
becoming  eager  to  reach  the  glittering 
gold  fields  of  California,  they  sold  their 
merchandise  on  the  streets  for  a  less 
price  than  the  New  York  prices.  They 
sold  their  large  animals  for  pack  ani- 
mals, and  thus  more  than  literally  ful- 
filled the  remarkable  prophecy  of  Presi- 
dent Heber  C.  Kimball.  These  are  but 
examples  of  many  like  predictions  ut- 
tered by  this  great  Apostle  of  the  Lord. 
(For  further  information,  see  Life  of 
Heber  C.  Kimball  by  Orson  F.  Whit- 
ney; "Contributor,"  Vol.  8;  "Historical 
Record,"  Vol.  5,  p.  33;  "Southern  Star," 
Vol.  2.  p.  345;  Faith-Promoting  Series, 
Book  7,  etc.) 

SMITH,  George  Albert,  first  coun- 
selor to  President  Brigham  Young, 
from  1868  to  1875,  was  the  son  of  Pa- 
triarch John  Smith  and  Clarissa  Ly- 
man, and  a  cousin  to  Joseph  the 
Prophet.  He  was  born  June  26,  1817,  in 
Potsdam,  St.  Lawrence  county,  N.  Y.. 
and  vvas  trained  strictly  in  the  religion 
of  the  Congregational  church,  of  which 
his  father  and  mother  were  members, 
until  he  was  fifteen  years  of  age.  While 
living  on  a  farm  on  Rackett  river  and 
attending  school  in  the  village  of  Pots- 
dam, George  A.  grew  very  rapidly,  at- 
taining his  full  growth  several  years 
before  he  became  of  age.  This  gave 
him  an  awkward  address,  as  of  an 
overgrown  boy;  and  as  children  grow- 
ing fast  are  usually  weak,  it  was  so 
with  him.  In  adition  to  these  mis- 
fortunes for  a  school  boy,  he  was  near- 
sighted, and  being  contented  with  his 
studies,  the  society  of  older  people  and 
the  companionship  of  his  own  thoughts, 
he  paid  little  attention  to  cultivating 
the  good  will  and  currying  favor  with 
the  boys  at  school..  The  consequence 
was  that  they  made  fun  of  him,  bullied 
him  more  or  less,  and  at  one  time.short- 
ly  after  a  period  of  illness,  carried  their 
fun  to  such  an  extreme  that  George  A. 
resolved   on   retaliation;     but   knowing 


38 


LATTER-DAY    SAINT 


his  weakness  at  the  time,  he  refrained 
attempting  his  revenge  then  and  har- 
bored his  strength  until  a  favorable 
opportunity  should  be  presented.  The 
time  came,  and  it  developed  a  phase  of 
his  character  which  was  new  to  his 
schoolmates  but  distinguished  him  then 
and  ever  after.  His  sensitive  nature 
had  been  repeatedly  outraged;  he  felt 
that  he  had  been  abused  by  his  school- 
mates, that  they  had  taken  advantage 
of  him  unfairly  and  that  the  insult 
to  his  honor  and  manhood  demanded 
reparation.  If  any  of  the  boys  were 
not  guilty  of  this  general  arraignment, 
he  did  not  stop  to  discriminate  in  their 
favor.  He  felt  that  all  were  down  on 
him,  and  he  determined  to  whip  the 
school.  And  he  succeeded.  He  started 
in  and  kept  at  it  until  he  had  whipped 
every  boy  of  his  size  and  age.  They 
never  made  fun  of  him  after  that.  In 
the  winter  of  1828,  Father  John  Smith 
received  a  letter  from  his  nephew  Jo- 
seph, who  then  lived  in  western  New 
York,  in  which  a  very  striking  predic- 
tion occurred,  foretelling  awful  judg- 
ments upon  the  present  generation  be- 
cause of  wickedness  and  unbelief.  The 
letter  made  a  deep  impression  upon  the 
mind  of  George  A.,  who,  but  a  boy  of 
eleven  years,  was  capable  of  appreciat- 
ing the  statements  it  contained,  which 
he  treasured  in  his  memory.  His  father 
observed  on  reading  them.  -iJoseph 
jaales  like  a  PrnnhPf  -  in  August. 
1S30.  the  father  of  the  Prophet  and  his 
brother  Don  Carlos  visited  their  rela- 
tives in  Potsdam  and  vicinity.  They 
brought  with  them  a  copy  of  the  Book 
of  Mormon,  which  they  left  with 
George  A.'s  father,  unile  they  went  on 
to  visit  with  Father  Asahel  Smith  and 
family.  During  their  absence  George 
A.  and  his  mother  read  a  great  deal  in 
the  strange  new  book,  or  "Golden  Bi- 
ble," as  it  was  popularly  called.  The 
neighbors,  who  often  came  in  and  heard 
portions  of  it  read,  ridiculed  it  and  of- 
fered many  objections  to  its  contents. 
These  young  George  A.  soon  found 
himself  trying  to  answer,  and  although 
he  professed  no  belief  in  the  book  him- 
self, having  in  fact  noted  manv  serious 
objections  to  it,  he  was  so  successful 
in  refuting  the  charges  the  neighbors 
brought  against  it  that  they  generally 
turned  from  the  argument  discomfited, 
with  the  observation  to  his  mother 
that  her  boy  was  a  little  too  smart 
for   them.       When   his   uncle  and   Don 


Carlos  returned,  George  A.  laid  before 
them  his  objections,  which  he  believed 
to  be  unanswerable.  His  uncle  took 
them  up  carefully,  quoted  the  Scrip- 
tures upon  the  subject,  showed  the 
reasonableness  of  the  record,  and  was 
so  successful  as  to  entirely  remove 
every  objection,  and  to  convince  him 
that  it  was  just  what  it  purported  to 
be.  George  A.  from  that  time  ever 
after  advocated  the  divine  authenticity 
of  the  Book  of  Mormon.  He  was  also 
convinced  of  the  necessity  of  religion, 
and  not  being  sufficiently  instructed  by 
his  relatives- how  to  obtain  it,  after  they 


had  left,  he  attended  a  protracted  se- 
ries of  Congregational  revival  meet- 
ings. These  lasted  seventeen  days, 
and  effected  the  "conversion  of  every 
sinner  in  Potsdam"  who  attended  them 
except  George  A.,  who  went  to  the 
meeting  regularly,  sat  in  the  gallery 
listening  attentively,  but  waited  in 
vain  for  *^he  sensation  of  religion  which 
should  bring  him  down  to  the  anxious 
bench.  Finally,  prayers  and  exhorta- 
tions having  failed,  the  minister.  Rev. 
Frederick  E.  Cannon,  pronounced  him 
reorobate  and  sealed  him  up  unto  eter- 
nal damnation,  saying,  "Thy  blood  be 
U""  m  thine  own  head!"  Nine  times 
he  thus  delivered  this  inoffensive  but 
unsatisfied  seeker  for  religion  to  the 
buffetlngs  of  Satan  and  the  burning  of 
;in  endless  hell.  For  two  years  George 
A.  had  performed  the  greater  part  of 
the  labor  on  his  father's  farm,  but  in 
the  winter  of  1832-33,  he  attended 
school,  and  gave  considerable  attention 
to  studying  the  gospel  and  its  require- 
ments. He  was  baptized  by  Joseph  H. 
Wakefield  Sept.  10,  1832.  In  May,  1833. 
he  started  with  his  parents  to  Kirtland, 
Ohio;  they  arrived  there  on  the  25th  of 


BIOGRAPHICAL.    ENCYCLOPEDIA. 


39 


that  month,  and  were  warmly  wel- 
comed by  the  Prophet  Joseph  Smith 
and  by  the  Saints  who  had  gathered 
there,  numbering  about  five  hundred. 
Immediately  on  reaching  Kirtland 
George  A.  became  interested  in  the  af- 
fairs of  the  Church,  and  was  delighted 
with  his  cousin,  the  Prophet,  whom  he 
had  never  seen  before.  He  was  on 
hand  for  any  duty  required,  and  spent 
many  nights  guarding  the  houses  of  the 
brethren  who  were  in  much  danger 
from  mobs.  During  the  summer  and 
fall  he  was  engaged  in  quarrying  and 
hauling  rock  for  the  Kirtland  Temple 
attending  masons  and  performing  other 
labor  about  the  walls.  The  first  two 
loads  of  rock  taken  to  the  Temple 
ground  were  hauled  from  Stanard's 
quarry  by  George  A.  and  Harvej'  Stan- 
ley. In  May,  1834,  George  A.  started 
from  Kirtland  with  Zion's  Camp  for  the 
State  of  Missouri,  and  returned  again 
to  Kirtland  in  the  summer,  walking  on 
foot  two  thousand  miles.  He  was  or- 
dained a  Seventy  March  1,  1835,  under 
the  hands  of  Joseph  Smith,  sen.,  Jo- 
seph Smith,  jun.,  and  Sidney  Rigdon, 
the  latter  being  spokesman.  He  was 
the  junior  member  of  the  First  Quorum 
of  Seventy.  On  the  30th  of  the  fol- 
lowing May  he  was  appointed  to  a  mis- 
sion to  preach  the  gospel  in  the  East. 
Elder  Lyman  Smith,  a  second  cousin, 
and  member  of  the  same  quorum,  was 
his  traveling  companion.  They  started 
June  5,  1835,  traveled  on  foot  about  two 
thousand  miles,  without  purse  and 
scrip,  held  about  eighty  meetings  in 
the  States  of  Ohio,  Pennsylvania  and 
New  York,  baptized  fight,  and  returned 
to  Kirtland,  where  George  A.  arrived 
October  5th.  In  the  spring  of  1836, 
he  received  his  endowments  in  the 
Kirtland  Temple,  ^fter  which  he  per- 
formed a  mission  in  Ohio,  traveling  on 
foot  about  twelve  hundred  miles.  In 
the  spring  of  1837  he  commenced  a  mis- 
sion in  Ohio  and  Virginia,  which  con- 
thiued  about  one  year.  On  this  mis- 
sion he  traveled  about  two  thusand 
and  five  hundred  miles;  nearly  half  of 
his  journeyings  were  on  foot.  In  1838, 
he  emigrated  with  his  father's  family  to 
Daviess  county,  Mo.,  where  he  was 
ordained  a  High  Councilor  June  28. 
1838.  In  the  autumn,  he  was  sent  on  a 
mission  to  Kentucky  and  Ten- 
nessee, traveling  some  eight  hun- 
dred miles  on  foot  and  about 
seven      hundred      by      water,      includ- 


ing the  return  journey.  After  his 
return,  he  removed  his  father's  family 
to  Illinois.  In  1839,  he  returned  to  Far 
West,  in  Missouri.  On  the  morning  of 
April  26,  1839,  he  was  ordained  one  of 
the  Twelve  Apostles,  on  the  southeast 
corner  stone  of  the  intended  Temple 
at  Far  West.  He  returned  to  Illinois, 
whence  he  started  for  England  on  a 
mission  in  September,  and  arrived  in 
Liverpool  April  6,  1S40.  He  labored 
for  over  one  year  with  much  success, 
and  returned  to  Nauvoo,  111.,  where  ho 
arrived  July  5,  1841.  On  the  25th  of 
the  same  month  he  married  Bathsheba 
W.  Bigler,  who  is  still  alive.  In  the 
fall  of  1842,  he  preached  in  the  principal 
places  in  Illinois,  and  returned  to  Nau- 
voo  Nov.  4th.  In  the  summer  and  fall 
of  1843,  he  traveled  about  six  thousand 
miles,  preaching  in  the  middle  and 
eastern  States.  In  the  spring  of  1844, 
he  attended  conferences  and  preached 
in  Illinois,  Indiana  and  Michigan,  and 
was  in  the  last  named  State  when  he 
heard  of  the  death  of  the  Prophet  and 
Patriarch  of  the  Church.  He  immedi- 
ately returned  to  Nauvoo  and  took  an 
active  part  in  the  councils  and  delib- 
erations consequent  upon  that  sad 
event.  He  was  elected  quartermaster 
of  the  Nauvoo  •  Legion,  Sept.  17,  1844; 
was  also  elected  a  trustee  of  the  Nau- 
voo House  Association,  and  labored  ac- 
tively in  forwarding  the  erection  of  that 
building.  He  continued  these  labors 
until  the  mob  commenced  its  outrages 
upon  the  Saints  in  the  fall  of  1845,  from 
which  period  he  was  active  in  counsel- 
ing, fervent  in  his  labors  on  the  Tem- 
ple and  diligent  in  making  preparations 
for  the  exodus  of  the  Saints  from  Nau- 
voo. "Before  leaving  the  Temple  of 
Nauvoo,"  writes  George  A.,  "my  wife, 
under  the  law  of  Abraham  and  Sarah, 
gave  me  five  wives,  viz:  Lucy  Smith, 
born  February  9,  1817,  at  Newry. 
Maine;  Nancy  Clement,  born  October 
31,  1815,  at  Dryden,  Tompkins  county, 
N.  Y.;  Zilpha  Stark,  born  July  3, 
1818,  at  Hartland,  Niagara  county,  N. 
Y.;  Sarah  Ann  Libby,  born  May  7, 
1818,  at  Ossipee,  Stratford  county, 
N.  H.,  and  Hannah  Maria  Libby,  born 
June  29,  1828,  at  Ossipee,  Strat- 
ford county,  N.  H."  He  also  mar- 
ried Susan  E.  West  after  he  reached 
G.  S.  L.  Valley.  Five  of  Brother  George 
A.'s  wives  survived  him.  They  bore 
unto  him  twenty  children,  eleven  of 
whom,  among-  them  Apostle  John  Hen- 


40 


LATTER-DAY  SAINT 


ry  Smith,  are  yet  living.  Early  in  Feb- 
ruary he  crossed  the  Mississippi  river 
with  his  family,  on  his  way  to  find  an 
asylum  in  the  Far  West  from  the  rage 
of  mobs  and  the  persecutions  of  bigoted 
professors  of  religion.  The  ensuing 
winter  he  tarried  with  the  main  camp 
While  there   the 


nt  Winter   Quarters, 
people   suffered   severely   from   scurvy, 
disease  induced  through  lack  of  vege- 
table diet.      George  A.'s  third  wife  and 
four  children  died  of  this  disease.     He 
visited   all   the   camps,    and   urged   the 
cultivation  of  the  potato  as  a  cure  for 
the  scurvy.    But  little  seed  could  be  ob- 
tained;   what   was,   however,   produced 
in  a  marvelous  manner.      As  they  had 
no  vegetables  for  one  year,  their  bread 
was  mostly  made  of  corn,  bought  two 
\  hundred  miles  away,  in  Missouri.     The 
season  after  Geo.  A.  had  left  Pottawat- 
tamie   county    the    potato  crop    was  a 
failure,  and  the  saying  went  forth  that 
it  was  because  George  A.,   "the  potato 
Saint,"  had  gone  to  the  mountains.     In 
1847   he   accompanied   President   Young 
and  the  company  of  pioneers  in  search- 
ing out   and   making  the  road   to   anl 
finding  the  location  for  the  Church  in 
the  Great  Basin.      During  this  journey 
he  walked  seventeen  hundred  miles,and 
rode,  mostly  on  horseback,  eight  hun- 
dred;   much   of  the  distance  with  raw- 
hide soles  on   his  shoes.       He  was  six 
weeks    without    bread,    though    he   was 
beter  off  than  most  of  the  pioneer  com- 
pany,   for   he   had     about     twenty-five 
pounds  of  flour  locked  up  in  his  trunk, 
unknown  to  any  one.      He  lived  as  the 
rest,    on   buffalo   bulls   and   other   wild 
meat,  which  was  not  always  plentiful. 
He   issued   his   reserved   flour   by   cup- 
fuls   to    the    sick,    some     of   whom   at- 
tribute to  this  circumstance   the  pres- 
ervation   of    their    lives.       He    planted 
the   first   potato   that   was   put   in    the 
ground  in   Salt  Lake  valley,  and  built 
a  house  for  his  father  in  the  fort,  be- 
fore starting  on  his  return   to  Winter 
Quarters,  where  he  arrived  Oct.  31st  of 
the  same  year.      In  1848  he  removed  to 
the   neighborhood   of     Kanesvllle     and 
opened  a  farm.      In  1849  he  took  charge 
of  the  emigration  in  Council  Bluffs,  or- 
ganizing  and    starting   the   companies. 
With  the  last  of  these  he  started  west- 
ward with  his  family,  July  4,  1849.  Their 
teams  were  heavily  laden,  and  they  en- 
countered hall  and  rain  storms.     Their 
cattle  also  stampeded,  and  at  the  South 
Pass  they  were  overtaken  by  a  heavy 


.-torm,  in  which  70  animals  were  frozen. 
They  made  the  journey  to  G.  S.  L.  City, 
1034   miles,   in   155   days,     arriving   Oct. 
27th.     George  A.  was  elected  a  member 
of  the  senate  of  the  Provisional  State 
of  Deseret,  and  reported  a  bill  for  the 
organization   of     the     judiciary,   which 
was  the  first  bill  printed  for  the  consid- 
eration of  members.      He  also  reported 
a  bill  in  relation  to  the  construction  of 
a  national    railway    across     the  conti- 
nent.      In  December,  1850,   he  raised  a 
company  of  one  hundred  and  eighteen 
volunteers,  accompanied  by  about  thir- 
ty families,  and  started  for  the  purpose 
of   planting  a  colony     near   the   Little 
Salt  I^ake.      The  day  after  they  started 
the    thermometer   was     at   zero.       His 
company   was   organized  at  Peteetneet 
creek      (Payson),    Utah     county,     and 
consisted  of  twenty-five  cavalry,  thirty- 
two  infantry — picked     men — and     thir- 
teen men  in  charge  of  a  piece  of  artil- 
lery;   the   residue   was   organized   as   a 
permanent  camp  guard.      They  crossed 
five  ranges  of  mountains,   and  arrived 
at   Centre   Creek,   265  miles   from     Salt 
Lake  City,  Jan.  13,  1851.    This  place  had 
been    designated    by    Elder    Parley     P. 
Pratt,  and  a  company  of  explorers,  as 
the  place  in  the  Little  Salt  Lake  val- 
ley most  suitable  for  a  settlement.      As 
soon  as  the  site  of  the  town  was  de- 
termined upon,  the  settlers  commenced 
working  a  road   into  a  canyon     about 
six  miles,  which  cost  them  five  hundred 
days'  work,  where  they  cut  down  a  pole 
ninety-nine      feet      long,      which      they 
erected  and  on   which  they  raised  the 
"Stars    and    Stripes."      They    dedicated 
the  ground  by  prayer,  and  saluted  the 
emblem    of    civil    and    religious    liberty 
by  the  firing  of  cannon.  The  organiza- 
tion of  Iron  county  had  been  provided 
for  by  the   General  Assembly   of  Des- 
eret, which  had  elected  Geo.  A.  its  chief 
justice,  with  power  to  proceed  with  its 
further  organization.      An  election  was 
held,    when    two   associate   justices,     a 
county    recorder,    a    treasurer,    sheriff, 
assessor    and    collector,    justice   of   the 
peace,  constable,  and  a  member  of  the 
House  of  Representatives  of  the  Gen- 
eral Assembly  of  Deseret,  were  elected. 
In  the  winter  of  1850-1,   though  it  was 
very  cold,  the  settlers  built  a  fort.   In 
which  were  located  dwelling  houses  and 
a    meeting   house,     which     served    for 
meetings,  schools  and  watch  tower.    It 
was  in  the  shape  of  a  Greek  cross,  and 
was  of  hewn  logs.      It  served  the  town. 


BIOGRAPHICAL    ENCYCLOPEDIA. 


41 


which  was  named  Parowan,  for  fifteen 
years,  when  it  was  replaced  by  a  state- 
ly stone  edifice.  Geo.  A.  taught  school 
during-  the  first  winter,  having  thirty- 
five  pupils  to  whom  he  lectured  on  Eng- 
lish grammar  around  the  evening  camp 
fires.  At  the  first  Territorial  election, 
in  August,  1851,  Geo.  A.  was  elected 
a  member  of  the  council  of  the  legis- 
lative assemblj'.  He  was  commissioned 
by  Postmaster-General  Hall,  Oct.  2S, 
1851,  postmaster  of  Centre  Creek,  Iron 
■county,  and  on  the  29th  of  November, 
by  Governor  Young,  colonel  of  cavalry 
In  the  Iron  Military  District.  After- 
wards he  was  placed  in  command  of 
the  militia  of  the  southern  part  of  the 
Territory,  and  was  instructed  to  take 
measures  for  the  defense  and  safety  of 
the  inhabitants  against  the  Utah  In- 
dians, who  had  commenced,  under  their 
chief  Walker,  to  rob  and  kill  the  in- 
habitants. In  1852  he  left  Iron  county, 
and  was  appointed  to  preside  over  the 
affairs  of  the  Church  in  Utah  county. 
He  traveled  and  preached  a  great  deal 
in  all  the  settlements,  over  which  he 
liad  the  watch  care.  At  the  general 
conference  of  the  Church,  in  April,  1854, 
Tie  was  elected  Historian  and  General 
Church  Recorder,  and  immediately 
went  to  work  compiling  the  docu- 
mentary history  of  Joseph  Smith.  Feb. 
2,  1855,  he  was  admitted  as  a  member 
•of  the  bar  of  the  Supreme  Court  of  the 
Territory  of  Utah,  and  received  his 
certificate  as  an  attorney,  counselor-at- 
law  and  solicitor  in  chancery.  He  was 
■elected  a  member  of  the  convention  and 
one  of  the  committee  which  drafted  a 
constitution,  and  on  March  27,  1856,  was 
■elected  by  said  convention,  in  connec- 
tion with  Elder  John  Taylor,  a  delegate 
to  Congress,  to  present  the  constitu- 
tion and  accompanying  memorial,  ask- 
ing for  admission  into  the  Union  on  an 
equal  footing  with  the  original  States. 
This  mission  was  a  respite  from  his 
close  application  In  the  Historian's 
Office,  where  he  had,  with  the  assist- 
ance of  four  clerks,  compiled  and  re- 
corded, in  large  records,  the  history  of 
Joseph  Smith  from  Feb.  20,  1843,  until 
his  martyrdom  in  June,  1844.  He  also 
supplied,  from  memory  and  otherwise, 
"blanks  in  the  history  and  records  com- 
piled by  President  Willard  Richards, 
his  predecessor  In  the  Historian's  Of- 
fice, who  had,  with  prophetic  pencil, 
written    on    the    margin,    opposite    the 


blanks,  "to  be  supplied  by  George  A. 
Smith."  In  1856-57,  during  a  sojourn 
of  about  eleven  months  in  the  States, 
in  addition  to  his  duties  as  delegate. 
Geo.  A.  preached  in  the  States  of  Con- 
necticut, New  York,  New  Jersey,  Penn- 
sylvania, A''irginia,  Ohio,  Illinois,  Iowa 
and  Missouri.  April  11,  1866,  he  re- 
ceived from  Governor  Durkee  the  com- 
mision  of  brigadier-general  and  was 
appointed  aid-de-camp  to  the  lieu- 
tenant-general of  the  Nauvoo  Legion. 
At  the  October  conference,  in  1868,  he 
was  appointed  to  succeed  the  late  Pres- 
ident Heber  C.  Kimball  as  first  coun- 
selor to  President  Brigham  Young.  The 
political  career  of  President  Geo.  A. 
Smith  covered  almost  the  whole  period 
of  his  residence  in  Utah.  He  was  an 
earnest  worker  in  establishing  the  pro- 
visional government  of  the  State  of 
Deseret,  and  afterwards  in  organizing 
and  enacting  laws  for  the  government 
of  the  Territory  of  Utah.  He  was 
elected  a  member  of  the  first  legis- 
lature and  re-elected  to  every  succeed- 
ing session  but  one,  when  absent  in 
the  States,  until  1870.  The  last  six 
years  he  was  president  of  the  council, 
and  was  distinguished  for  his  punctu- 
ality and  impartiality  in  the  discharge 
of  his  official  duties.  More  than  half 
of  his  life  was  occupied  in  traveling 
and  preaching  the  gospel.  He  had, 
before  1870,  delivered  three  thousand 
eight  hundred  discourses  in  various 
parts  of  the  world,  as  a  labor  of  love, 
and  never  failed  to  use  every  oppor- 
tunity to  advocate  the  principles  of  the 
gospel,  which  his  long  and  laborious 
missionary  experience  afforded  him.  In 
the  internal  affairs  of  the  Territory, 
Pres.  Smith  was  an  active  laborer.  He 
was  recognized  as  the  father  of  the 
southern  settlements,  the  chief  of 
which,  St.  George,  was  named  in  his 
honor.  He  was  president  of  several 
irrigating  canal  companies,  and  was 
foremost  in  public  enterprises  leading 
to  the  occupation  and  development  of 
the  country,  the  establishment  of  home 
industries  and  of  commercial  relations 
among  the  people  that  would  tend  to 
make  them  free  and  independent  of 
other  communities,  and  at  the  same 
time  utilize  the  natural  resources  with 
which  the  Territory  abounds.  Oct.  15, 
1872,  he  started  on  a  mission  and  visit 
to  the  various  European  nations  and 
to  Jerusalem,  from  whence  he  returned 


42 


LATTER-DAY    SAINT 


June   18,    1873.     During  his   absence   on 
this   tour,   he  was  appointed  and  sus- 
tained   as     Trustee-in-Trust     for     the 
Church,   wnich  office  he  held  until  his 
death.      After  his  return  he  gave  con- 
siderable  attention   to   the   building   of 
the   Temple  at   St.    George,     where   he 
spent  a  great   deal   of  time.       He  was 
a  zealous  advocate  and  laborer  in  the 
establishment     of       the     United   Order 
among  the  people.      The  discourses  he 
delivered  in  many  of  the  towns  of  Utah, 
upon  that  subject,  were  pre-eminently 
characteristic  of  him  as  a  political  and 
domestic  economist.     In  the   spring  of 
1875,  about  the  time  of  his  return  from 
St.   George,  he  was  attacked  by  a  se- 
vere cold,  which,  locating  on  his  lungs, 
inflamed  and  irritated  them  in  such  a 
manner  as  to  prevent  their  use  in  pub- 
lic speaking.       This  affliction  was  sup- 
plemented with  a  very  peculiar  affec- 
tion   preventing   sleep,     except     in   an 
upright  posture,  and  then  but  at  short 
intervals.       He  suffered  intensely  from 
this  combination  of  diseases  for  several 
months,  resisting  the  power  of  the  de- 
stroyer   with    all    the    fortitude      of      a 
strong  will  and  a  desire  to  live,  aided 
by  the  most  sublime  faith.    He  had  the 
support  of  the  prayers  of  all  the  peo- 
ple, among  whom  he  was  ever  a  great 
favorite;  but  they  did  not  prevail  over 
the  decree  of  Him  who  doeth  all  thing? 
well.       "Brother  George  A.'s  time  had 
come,"    was   the   expression   of   all   his 
friends,    and    on    Wednesday    morning. 
Sept.  1,  1875,  they  bowed  to  the  eternal 
fiat.       President   Young   remarked     on 
the   morning    of   his    death:        "I    have 
known   Brother   George   A.    Smith     for 
forty-two  years,  have  traveled  and  la- 
bored   in   the     ministry     with   him   for 
many  years,  and  have  believed  him  to 
be  as  faithful  a  boy  and  man  as  ever 
lived;    and,   in  my  opinion,   he  had   as 
good   a   record    on   this   and   the   other 
side  of  the  vail  as  any  man.      I  never 
knew  of  his  neglecting  or  overdoing  a 
duty;  he  was  a  man  of  sterling  integri- 
ty,  a  cabinet   of  history,   and     always 
true   to   his   friends."       President   Geo. 
A.    Smith    was      a     wise    counselor,    a 
great   preacher,   a  sound   statesman,   a 
pioneer    and    colonizer    of    the    highest 
ability,    an    able    lawyer    and    an    effi- 
cient educator.      He  was  always  ready 
in    public    and    private.      No    one    ever 
wearied    of    his    preaching.        He     was 
brief  and  interspersed  his  doctrinal  and 
historical  remarks  with  anecdotes  most 


appropriate  and  timely  in  their  appli- 
cation. Short  prayers,  short  blessings, 
short  sermons,  full  of  spirit,  was  a  hap- 
py distinction  in  the  ministry  of  Geo. 
A.  Smith.  He  was  humble  and  meek, 
yet  full  of  courage  and  unbounded  en- 
ergy in  the  cause  of  right.  He  always 
had  time  to  notice  young  people  an>l 
children  and  leave  his  impress  of  love 
and  kindness  upon  the  tablets  of  their 
hearts.  (For  further  particulars  see 
'•Contributor,"  Vol.  6;  "Southern  Star," 
Vol.  2,  p.  345;  "Historical  Record,"  Vol. 
5,  etc.) 

YOUNG,  John  W'illard,  first  coun- 
selor to  Pres.  Brigham  Young  from 
1876  to  1877,  is  the  son  of  Pres.  Brig- 
ham  Young,  and  Mary  Ann  Angell,  and 
was  born  Oct.  1  1844,  in  Nauvoo,  Han- 
cock county,  111.  He  was  baptized 
when  about  eight  years  old  and  con- 
firmed by  Brigham  Young,  by  whom 
also  he  was  ordained  an  Apostle  Feb. 
4.  1864.  In  1866  and  1867  he  filled  a 
mission  to  Europe.  Later,  he  was  ap 
pointed  an  assistant  counselor  to  Pres. 
Brigham  Young,  and  after  the  death  of 
Geo.  A.  Smith,  in  1876,  he  was  chosen 
and  sustained  as  first  counselor  in  the 
First  Presidency.  After  the  death  of 
his  father.  President  Brigham  Young, 
in  1877,  he  was  sustained  for  several 
years  as  a  counselor  to  the  Twelve 
Apostles.  Of  late  years  he  has  been 
engaged  in  railroad  enterprises. 

CANNON,  George  Quayle,  first 
counselor  to  Presidents  John  Taylor, 
Wilford  Woodruff  and  Lorenzo  Snow 
successively,  was  born  on  Thursday, 
Jan.  11,  1827,  in  Liverpool,  Lancashire, 
England.  His  parents,  George  Cannon 
and  Ann  Quayle,  were  natives  of  Peel, 
on  the  Isle  of  Man.  The  Cannon  or 
Cannan  family  oame  originally  from 
the  borders  of  England  and  Scotland. 
The  earliest  mention  of  the  name  in  the 
parish  record  of  Kirk  Michael,  on  the 
Isle  of  Man,  is  the  burial  in  1598,  of  one 
Marian  Cannan.  The  name  is  spelled 
on  the  records  both  Cannan  and  Can- 
non, though  Cannan  appears  to  be  the 
earlier  and  more  common  style.  The 
family  removed  from  Scotland  to  the 
Isle  of  Man  on  account  of  political  or 
religious  troubles,  in  which  they  became 
involved,  and  they  had  to  flee  there 
for  refuge.  Several  of  the  Cannons 
were  engaged  in  the  wars  of  that  peri- 
od.   The  name  of  the  place,  which  has 


BIOGRAPHICAL,       ENCYCLOPEDIA. 


43 


been  owned  by  the  family  on  the  Isle 
of  Man  for  nearly  three  hundred  years, 
and  which  is  still  in  the  possession  of 
an  older  branch  (the  present  owner  be- 
ing a  cousin  of  George  Q.'s  grand- 
father), is  Cooilshallagh.  Train,  in  his 
History  of  the  Isle  of  Man,  Vol.  1,  page 
85,  note  2,  alluding  to  this  homestead, 
says:  "Cooil,  in  the  Manx  language, 
signifies  a  'hiding-place'  ".  He  then 
mentions  Cooilshallagh  in  Kirk  Mi- 
chael. Whether  this  place  received  its 
name  from  the  Cannons  because  of  it 
having  proved  a  "hiding-place"  or  place 
of  refuge  for  the  family,  does  not  ap- 
pear, though  it  is  not  improbable. 
George  Q.  Cannon  was  the  eldest  of  his 
parents'  children.  The  other  children 
were:     Mary  Alice  Cannon,  wife  of  the 


late  Charles  Lambert,  of  Salt  Lake 
City;  Anne  Cannon,  widow  of  Brother 
Orrin  N.  T\"oodbury,  of  St.  George, 
Angus  M.  Cannon;  David  H.  Cannon; 
Leonora  Cannon,  the  wife  of  Brother 
Robert  Gardner,  of  St.  George;  and 
Elizabeth  Cannon  (the  daughter  of  his 
father  by  a  second  marriage),  the  wife 
of  Brother  William  Piggott  of  Bloom- 
ington.  These  are  all  alive  and  in  full 
fellowship  today  in  the  Church.  Miss 
LeonQxa^_Cannon,  his  father's  sister, 
had  a  very  intimate  friend  who  married 
a  gentleman  by  the  name  of  Bacon,  a 
colonel  in  the  British  army,  who  had 
received  the  appointment  of  Secretary 
to  the  governor  of  Canada.    This  friend 


exacted  a  promise  from  her  that  when 
she  married  and  went  to  Canada,  she 
(Miss  Cannon)  should  accompany  her 
on  her  weddinp'  tour  to  that  country. 
She  kept  the  promise  and  sailed  with 
her  friend;  and  while  in  Canada,  she 
being  a  devout  Methodist  and  greatly 
attached  to  her  religion,  made  the  ac- 
quaintance of  the  late  President  John 
Taylor,  who  was  at  that  time  a  local 
preacher  in  the  Methodist  church.  This 
was  in  the  city  of  Toronto.  She  had 
fully  expected,  when  she  left  her  home, 
to  return  there;  but  in  consequence  of 
a  dream  which  she  had,  she  felt  con- 
vinced that  it  was  her  duty  to  accept 
the  offer  of  marriage,  which  she  had 
received  from  John  Taylor,  and  remain 
in  Canada.  Some  time  after  their 
marriage.  Elder  Parley  P.  ^^ratt  visited 
Toronto,  having  been  drawn  there  by 
the  prayers  of  a  number  of  persons  who 
were  diligently  seeking  for  the  truth, 
among  whom  President  Taylor  was 
very  prominent.  They  felt  that  Meth- 
odism was  not  strictly  in  accordance 
with  the  Scriptures,  and  that  there 
were  many  blessings  and  gifts  which 
God  had  given  to  His  church  in  an- 
cient days,  of  which  their  church  was 
destitute.  They  met  together  often, 
examined  the  Scriptures  with  great 
earnestness  and  care,  and  prayed  fer- 
vently for  additional  light,  and  that,  if 
there  was  a  church  on  the  earth  which 
possessed  these  heavenly  powers  and 
gifts,  they  might  be  made  acquainted 
with  it.  Elder  Pratt's  arrival  in  the 
city  of  Toronto  in  the  summer  of  1836 
created  some  excitement.  A  few  of  thih> 
band  of  seekers  after  tr'uth  received 
his  testimony  and  were  baptized  into 
the  Church;  among  them  Bro.  John 
Taylor  and  his  wife.  The  history  of 
the  events  connected  with  Bro.  Tay- 
lor's espousal  of  the  truth  are  related 
in  his  own  biography.  Suffice  it  to  say, 
that  after  his  wife  received  the  gospel, 
she  was  convinced  in  her  own  mind 
that  her  brother  George  would  receive 
it  also;  for  when  she  had,  previous  to 
her  departure  for  Canada,  reasoned 
with  him  and  urged  him  to  espouse  re- 
ligion, that  his  soul  might  be  saved, 
he  had,  on  one  occasion,  remarked  to 
her  that  her  religion  could  not  satisify 
him;  that  it  was  not  according  to  the 
Bible,  which  he  could  prove  to  her. 
"But,"  continued  he,  "of  what  use  is  it 
for  me  to  unsettle  you  in  your  faith; 
it  gives  you  joy  and  satisfaction,   and 


44 


LATTER-DAY    SAINT 


I  cannot  offer  you  anything  better;  but 
it  would  not  satisfy  me."  From  this 
and  other  conversations  which  they 
had  had,  she  was  convinced  that  he 
was  only  waiting  for  the  true  gospel 
to  be  preached  to  receive  it  gladly. 
When  h^r  husband,  therefore,  with  the 
other  brethren  of  the  Twelve  Apostles, 
took  their  mission  to  England  in  1840, 
he  repaired,  upon  his  landing  at  Liver- 
pool, to  the  house  of  his  brother-in-law. 
George  Cannon.  The  latter  was  not  at 
home  at  the  time,  and  after  conversing 
with  his  wife,  he  (President  Taylor)  re- 
turned to  the  vessel.  After  he  went 
out  of  the  house,  George  Q.'s  mother 
remarked  to  him,  he  being  then  a  child 
of  twelve  years  of  age,  "Your  uncle  is 
a  man  of  God."  As  soon  as  he  preached 
the  gospel,. therefore,  to  the  family  she 
was  ready  to  be  baptized,  knowing 
for  herself,  as  she  said,  that  the  prin- 
ciples which  he  taught  were  the  true 
gospel  of  the  Son  of  God.  Her  hus- 
band. George  Cannon,  the  father  ot 
George  Q..  read  the  Book  of  Mormon 
through  carefully  twice  before  his  bap- 
tism, and  on  laying  it  down  after  fin- 
ishing it  the  second  time,  he  remarked, 
"No  wicked  man  could  write  such  a 
book  as  this;  and  no  good  man  would 
write  it,  unless  it  were  true  and  he 
were  commanded  of  God  to  do  so." 
They  joined  the  Church,  and  three  of 
their  children,  who  were  old  enough  to 
enter  the  Church,  were  baptized  some 
months  afterwards  (June  18.  1840). 
Upon  hearing  the  doctrines  of  the 
Church  taught  by  his  uncle  and  his  fel- 
low-laborer. Elder  Joseph  Fielding. 
George  Q..  though  so  young,  drank 
them  in  eagerly.  He  believed  every 
word  they  said,  and  his  joy  was  un 
bounded;  for  he  had  been  a  close  reader 
of  the  Bible,  and  had  asked  his  father 
why  it  was  that  the  ancient  gifts  and 
blessings  of  the  gospel  were  not  mani- 
fested in  these  days  as  they  were  aa- 
ciently.  More  than  once  he  had  wept 
because  it  had  been  his  privilege  to 
live  in  the  days  of  the  Savior  and  His 
Apostles  and  witness  the  mighty  works 
which  they  performed.  His  gratitude 
to  the  Lord,  therefore,  was  great  when 
he  learned  that  once  more,  and  in  his 
own  days,  the  gospel  had  been  restored 
to  the  earth  in  the  plenitude  of  its 
power,  and  that  the  everlasting  Priest- 
hood had  been  again  given  to  man  to 
administer  its  ordinances.  Long  be- 
fore   his    marriage,    the    father   of    the 


family  had  a  dream  concerning  the 
death  of  his  wife,  and  when  emigra- 
tion was  talked  about,  they  both 
seemed  to  be  aware  that  she  would  not 
live  to  reach  Zion.  Her  relatives 
remonstrated  with  her  for  going  with 
the  Saints,  but  in  reply  she  said  to 
them,  that  though  she  knew  she  never 
would  live  to  reach  the  body  of  the 
Church,  she  was  determined  to  under- 
take the  journey  for  the  sake  of  her 
children,  and  she  never  shrank  at  the 
prospect  before  her.  The  manifesta- 
tion that  they  had  received  proved  to 
be  true.  They  started  for  Zion,  sail- 
ing from  Liverpool  in  the  ship  "Sid- 
ney," Sept.  17,  1842,  but  she  died  and 
was  buried  in  the  ocean.  The  family 
continued  their  journey  until  they 
reached  Nauvoo.  The  day  after  their 
arrival  there  was  a  large  gathering  of 
people  at  the  steamboat  landing  to 
meet  a  company  of  Saints  who  had  ar- 
rived from  St.  Louis.  Among  them  were 
the  Prophet  Joseph,  his  brother  Hy- 
rum.  and  a  number  of  other  leading 
men  who  had  gone  there  to  welcome 
the  people.  Though  no  one  had  point- 
ed the  Prophet  out  to  George  Q.. 
and  he  had  never  seen  a  portrait  of 
him.  he  knew  him  instantly.  It  seemed 
to  him  as  if  he  had  always  been  ac- 
quainted with  him.  and  that  he  would 
have  known  him  to  be  the  Prophet  Jo- 
seph anywhere  in  the  world.  August 
19  1844.  George  Q.  and  his  brothers  and 
sisters  were  bereft  of  their  father,  who 
died  at  St.  Louis  while  there  on  a  short 
visit  from  Nauvoo.  At  that  time  Presi- 
dent Taylor  was  editor  and  publisher 
of  the  "Times  and  Seasons"  and  the 
"Nauvoo  Neighbor."  George  Q.  Can- 
non learned  the  printing  business  in 
his  office,  having  gone  to  live  with  him 
shortly  after  the  asrrival  of  the  family 
at  Nauvoo.  From  that  time  until 
October,  1849.  he  was  a  member  of  the 
household  of  President  Taylor.  He  was 
ordained  an  Elder,  under  the  hands  of 
President  Taylor.  Feb.  9,  1845.  and  on 
the  same  day  was  ordained  a  Seventy 
and  became  a  member  of  the  19th  Quo- 
rum of  Seventy.  He  acted  in  the  ca- 
pacity of  clerk  to  that  quorum  for  sev- 
eral years.  In  1846  he  traveled  with 
the  main  body  of  the  Saints  from  Nau- 
voo to  Winter  Quarters,  and  from 
Winter  Quarters  to  Great  Salt  Lake 
valley  in  the  summer  of  1847.  arrivinj^ 
in  the  valley  on  the  3rd  of  October  of 
that  year.       During  the  two  following 


BIOGRAPHICAL    ENCYCLOPEDIA. 


45 


years  he  was  occupied  in  all  the  labors 
incident  to  the  founding  of  Great  Salt 
Lake  City,  and  in  the  fall  of  1849,  with 
a  number  of  other  brethren,  was  called 
to  go  to  California,  under  the  direction 
of  Brother  Charles   C.   Rich.       After  a 
hazardous  journey,  during  which   they 
attempted  to  reach  California  by  way 
of  a  "cut  off"  that  added  greatly  to  the 
dangers  and   duration   of   the   trip,   the 
company  reached   Lower   California   in 
a  starving  condition.       During  the   re- 
mainder  of   1849   and    the   greater   part 
of  1850  he  was  in  various  parts  of  Cali- 
fornia,   which   had   not   then   become   a 
State.       In  the  latter  part  of  the  sum- 
mer of  1850  he  was  called,  in  company 
with   nine   others,    to   go   on   a   mission 
to  the  Sanwich  Islands.       Elder  Hiram 
Clark  was  appointed  to  preside.  Apos- 
tle Charles  C.  Rich,  before  leaving  for 
home,    set    them     all-    apart,    and   they 
landed  at  Honolulu  Dec.  12,1850.  Though 
they  were  sent  to  preach  to  the  whites, 
the    Elders    soon    saw    that    but     little 
could  be  done  among  this  class  on  the 
Islands.       The   majority   of   the    Elders 
were  in  favor  of  returning  without  at- 
tempting   to    teach     the     natives;    but 
Brother  George  Q.,  seeing  himself  sur- 
rounded by  a  whole  nation  which  was 
ignorant  of  the  principles  of  the  gospel 
and  who  ought  to  be  taught  the  mess- 
age  of  salvation     which   God  had  em- 
powered them  to  carry,  was  so  power- 
fully  impressed    with    the   feeling   that 
he  ought  to  stay  and  warn  the  nation, 
that  he  declared  that  if  all  should  leave, 
he   w'ould,   though  the  youngest  of  the. 
party,   remain  and  learn  the  language 
and   do   his   dutv   as   an   Elder   to   that 
people,   even   if   he"  did   not   baptize     a 
soul.       Consequently  he,   together  with 
Elders  Henry  W.  Bigler,  James  Keeler, 
William    Farrer    and    James    Hawkins, 
remained,  acquired  the  language,     and 
w^ere   the  means   in  the   hands   of   God 
of     bringing     large       numbers     to    the 
knowledge   of   the    truth.       George     Q. 
acquired  the  language  with  great  ease, 
and  was  soon  able  to  preach  and  bap- 
tize, and  organize  branches.       He  also 
P       translated  the  Book  of  Mormon  into  the 
Hawaiian  language.       This  translation 
demanded   much   care.       Elder  Cannon 
could    get   no   aid    from   white   men   in 
this   labor;    but  he   had   the  assistance 
of   several    of   the    natives,      who    were 
pretty  well  educated  in  their  own  lan- 
guage.       He    read     his    translation    to 
them   as   it   progressed,    and   conversed 


with    them   upon    the    principles    to   see 
if    they    obtained    the    same    idea   from 
the  translation  that  the  English  edition 
gave   to   its   readers.       In   this   way  he 
went     through     the    whole      book  very 
carefully  while  the  work  of  translation 
was    going   on.       After    the    work   was 
completed,    he    went    through    it    again 
with    a   number   of    the    best    educated 
and  most  intelligent  natives     he  could 
meet,  all  of  whom  were  members  of  the 
Church.     He   afterwards  examined   the 
translation   carefully   with   the     aid   of 
Brother  William   Farrer  and   a  native 
who  belonged  to  the  Church,  who  was 
credited  with  being  the  best  master  of 
the  Hawaiian  language  in  the  kingdom. 
When  Elder   Cannon,    accompanied   by 
other  Elders,   sailed  from  Honolulu  on 
his   return    to   America,     July   29,    1854, 
there  were  upwards  of   four   thousand 
members  in  the  Church  in  Hawaii.    El- 
der Cannon  remained  in  San  Francisco 
about  six  weeks,  helping  Brother  Par- 
ley P.  Pratt  on  his  autobiography,  and 
then  repaired  to   San  Bernardino,   and 
thence  traveled,  in  company  with  Elder 
Charles   C.   Rich,    to   Great   Salt     Lake 
City,   where  he   arrived   Nov.   28,     1854. 
Before  returning  from   the  Islands,   he 
was  chosen  to  be  one  of  the  presidents 
of  th  30th  Quorum  of  Seventy,  and  upon 
his  arrival  at  Great  Salt  Lake  City  was 
set  apart  to  that  position.  He  was  soon 
afterwards  notified  to  prepare  for  an- 
other mission  to  the   Islands,     as     the 
Elders  there  desired  him  to  return  and 
take  charge  of  the  press  which  he  and 
they  had  purchased,  and  which  ha.d  ar- 
rived after  his  departure.     Subsequent- 
ly,   however,    the    press    and    printing 
materials,  with  the  stock  of  paper  sent 
with  it,  were  forwarded  to  Elder  Par- 
ley P.  Pratt,  at  San  Francisco,  and  he 
wrote  to  the  First  Presidency  desiring 
the  return  of  Elder  Cannon  to  Califor- 
nia, to  assist  him  in  the  publication  of 
a  paper;  the  prospectus  of  which  he  had 
issued.        Consequently,    Elder    Geo.    Q. 
Cannon  left  Great  Salt  Lake  City  May 
10,   1855,   accompanied   by  his  wife  and 
two    missionaries — Elders    Joseph    Bull 
and  Matthew  F.  Wilkie — having     been 
appointed  to  publish  the  Book  of  Mor- 
mon in  the  Hawaiian  language  and  to 
assist  Elder  Parley  P.  Pratt  in  the  pub- 
lication of  a  paper.      Elder  Orson  Hyde, 
who  was  appointed  at  the  same  time  to 
establish   a  settlement  at  Carson  Val- 
ley and  to  labor  in  California,  had  al- 
so   been    instructed    to    assist    in    this 


46 


LATTER-DAY  SAINT 


work.  Upon  Brother  Cannon's  ar- 
rival at  San  Francisco,  he  found  that 
Elder  Parley  P.  Pratt  had  started  on 
his  return  home.  He  followed  him  to 
the  place  appointed  for  the  camp  to 
start  from,  and  had  an  interview  with 
him,  and  was  bv  him  set  apart  to  pre- 
side over  the  mis.sion  in  California  and 
Oregon.  The  difficulties  which  he  had 
to  contend  with  in  establishing  an  office 
in  San  Francisco,  in  printing  the  Book 
of  Mormon,  and  afterwards  in  the  pub- 
lication of  the  "Western  Standard," 
form  a  very  interesting  chapter  of  his- 
tory. It  required  great  energy  and  the 
exercise  of  much  faith  and  persever- 
ance to  accomplish  the  work  entrusted 
to  them;  b iil_the__missian^ 3y_as -a_sucr. 
.xessfuL-Oxi^  In  printing  the  book,  he 
had  no  one  to  help  him  read  the  proofs, 
as  Brothers  Bull  and  Wilkie,  who  set 
the  type,  could  not  understand  the  lan- 
guage, though  they  acquired  remark- 
able facility  before  the  work  was  fin- 
ished in  reading  the  manuscript  and 
setting  the  type.  His  method  of  read- 
ing the  proofs  was  to  have  his  wife 
read  from  the  English  Book  of  Mormon, 
while  he  read  the  proofs  in  Hawaiian, 
and,  from  his  familiarity  with  the  lan- 
guage, he  was  able  to  correct  the 
proofs.  The  entire  translation  thus 
underwent  three  revisions, in  addition  to 
the  first  reading  and  examination.  The 
book  was  printed  and  bound  and  sent 
to  the  Islands;  the  "Western  Stand- 
ard" was  published,  and  did  creditable 
work  in  defending  and  advocating  the 
principles  of  the  gospel.  When  the 
news  of  the  march  of  Buchanan's  army 
and  the  attitude  assumed  by  Governor 
Brigham  Young  and  the  Saints  in  re- 
gard thereto  reached  California,  it 
created  great  excitement;  and  as  it  was 
thought  that  perhaps  evil  would  be- 
fall the  army,  it  was  strongly  advo- 
cated in  one  or  two  of  the  leading  jour- 
nals that  George  Q.  Cannon  should  be 
seized  and  held  as  a  hostage  for  the 
safety  of  the  officers  of  the  army.  All 
this  talk,  however,  was  confined  to  the 
newspapers.  Before  matters  had  pro- 
gresed  that  far,  he  thought  it  wise  un- 
der' the  circumstances  to  send  his  wife 
and  child  home  with  those  who  were 
leaving  for  Utah  and  in  charge  of  hi.s 
brother  David,  who  had  joined  him  on 
a  mission  in  California.  He  remained 
to  attend  to  affairs  there  until  Elder 
Orson  Pratt,  Ezra  T.  Benson,  John  A. 
Ray,  John  M.  Kay,  William  Miller  and 
John  Scott  came  to  San  Francisco  from 


England,  on  their  way  to  the  Valley. 
Under  the  counsel  of  the  two  Apostles 
he  wound  up  his  business  and  arranged 
the  affairs  of  the  mission  to  the  best 
posible  advantage,  and  left  with  thena 
for  Great  Salt  Lake  City,  by  way  of 
San  Bernardino.  He  reached  the  city 
Jan.  19,  1858.  On  the  night  of  his  ar- 
rival home  he  was  appointed  adjutant 
in  the  standing  army  that  was  being 
organized  for  defense,  and  from  that 
time  until  the  move  southward  w^as  de- 
cided upon  the  ensuing  spring,  he  was 
busily  engaged  in  organizing  and  ar- 
ranging for  service.  After  the  decision 
was  reached  that  Great  Salt  Lake  City 
and  the  settlements  north  should  be 
abandoned  with  the  view  to  their  being 
burned.  President  Young  appointed 
Brother  George  Q.  Cannon  to  take  the 
"Deseret  News"  press  and  a  portion  of 
its  material,  with  a  few  printers,  and 
move  to  Fillmore^  where  the  President 
wished  that  paper  to  be,  issued  in  re- 
duced size.  He  reached  Fillmore  in 
April,  and  from  that  time  until  the 
succeeding  September  published  the  pa- 
per there.  On  his  return  from  Fill- 
more with  his  family,  he  w^as  met  at 
Payson,  Utah  county,  in  September, 
1858,  by  a  messenger  from  President 
Young,  who  bore  a  note  to  him,  in 
which  it  was  stated  that  he  had  been 
appointed  a  mission  to  the  Eastern 
States,  and  that  a  company  of  breth- 
ren were  waiting  for  him  who  expected 
to  start  the  next  day.  As  the  note 
was  dated  on  Sunday,  and  the  next  day 
was  the  day  that  he  received  the  mes- 
sage, he  saw  that  there  w^as  no  time 
to  be  lost.  He  had  just  stopped  for 
dinner  at  the  house  of  Brother  Wm. 
B.  Preston,  wlio  was  then  residing  at 
Payson.  In  three-quarters  of  an  hour 
after  receiving  th^  message  hj_  was 
ready  for  his  mission,  and  left  his 
family  on  the  road  side,  in  the  care  of 
his  brother  David,  who  was  but  a 
youth,  and  to  the  tender  mercies  of  his 
Heavenly  Father.  He  had  no  home  in 
Great  Salt  Lake  City  or  anywhere  else, 
but  he  felt  that  the  same  kind  Provi- 
dence which  had  blessed  him  thus  far 
in  his  life,  would  still  care  for  his  loved 
ones,  i^_he  rnanifested  willingness  to 
c]o_his_diity.  Probably  this  was  as  short 
a  notice  as  any  Elder  in  the  Church 
ever  received  for  a  mission  of  such  du- 
ration. He  reached  Great  Salt  Lake 
City  the  next  morning  before  daylight, 
and  after  receiving  his  instructions, 
started   the   same   day   for   the   States, 


BIOGRAPHICAL   ENCYCLOPEDIA, 


47 


and  was  gone  only  a  few  days  short  of 
two    years.       This    mission      was    of    a 
semi-political  character.       At  the  time 
that   Buchanan's   army   had   been   sent 
to   Utah   the   whole   country   had   been 
flooded    with     misrepresentationg     and 
falsehoods    concerning    Utah    and      its 
condition.       These  falsehoods  had  fur- 
nished the  administration  with  a  basis 
for  its  action  in  sending  the  army.     It 
had  been  charged  that  the  court  records 
and    the   Territorial    library     had   been 
destroyed,  that  the  lives  of  the  federal 
judges    had    been    threatened    and    en- 
dangered, and  ihat  Utah  was  in  a  state 
of   rebellion.       The     whole   affair     had 
been  "ingeniously  and   artfully   worked 
up  by  persons  who  were  interested  in 
creating  hostility  between  the  general 
government    and    the    people    of   Utah. 
Besides  the  politicians,  the  contractors 
were   deeply  interested  in   the   scheme, 
and   it   became   literally  a  contractors' 
war;     for     the     government  made  the 
most  extravagant  contracts  for  trans- 
portation,   etc.,    with      various    parties 
who  in  many  instances     had     contrib- 
uted   to    create    the    prejudice    against 
the  people   of  Utah,    and  who  were   in 
this   way   profiting   by   their  villainous 
schemes.        When    the    peace    commis- 
sioners,   sent    by   President    Buchanan, 
came  to  Utah,  they  found  how  baseless 
the    stories    were    which    had    obtained 
currency    in    the     country.        Governor 
Cumming    had    already    informed      the 
government  that  the  court  records  and 
territorial  library  were  intact,  and  that 
he    had    found    upon    his    arrival    here 
that  the  government    had  been  grossly 
deceived.       These    representations    had 
been   made     and       authenticated,     but 
scarcely  a  word  had  been  permitted  to 
leak    out    to    give    the    public    a    true 
knowledge  of  the  situation.      The  feel- 
ing in  the  United  States  was  very  gen- 
eral   that    Utah   had    actually   been   in 
rebellion,     and     that     the     "Mormons" 
merited  severe  punishment.      It  was  to 
help    correct     these       falsehoods     that 
Brother   George    Q.    was    sent     to     the 
States.  By  means  of  influential  friends, 
esnecially  the  late  General  Thomas  L. 
Kane,    he    secured    excellent    letters    of 
introduction  to  leading  editors  and  to 
prominent    senators    and    members     of 
Congress,   and   labored   assiduously     to 
bring  a   true  knowledge  of  the   condi- 
tion of  affairs  to  public  men  generally. 
By  this  means  much  ignorance   which 
existed  concerning  Utah  and  her  people 


was  removed,  and  many  falsehoods 
were  corrected.  Besides  attending  to 
this  business,  he  had  been  appointed 
to  take  chare-e  of  the  branches  of  the 
Church  in  the  East,  and  in  1859  and  1860 
he  acted  as  agent  of  the  emigration  at 
New  York.  He  also  purchased  oxen, 
waerons  and  provisions  for  the  people 
at  the  frontiers  and  organized  them 
into  companies  to  cross  the  plains.  In 
this  labor  at  Florence  the  first  year 
(1859)  he  worked  with  the  late  Elder 
Joseph  "W.  Young,  being  assisted  also 
by  the  experienced  supervision  of  Pres- 
ident Horace  S.  Eldradge.  While  on 
that  mission  he  received  notification 
from  the  First  Presidency  and  the 
Twelve  Apostles  that  he  had  been 
chosen  to  fill  the  place  made  vacant  in 
the  Quorum  of  the  Twelve  Apostles  by 
the  death  of  Elder  Parley  P.  Pratt. 
He  was  selected  to  this  office  Oct.  2^, 
1859,  and  his  ordination  took  place,  af- 
ter his  return  from  his  mission,  Aug. 
26,  1860.  He  was  ordained  by  President 
Brigham  Young.  Six  weeks  after  his 
return  he  started  on  another  mission, 
being  appointed,  together  with  Elders 
Chas.  C.  Rich  and  Amasa  M.  Lyman 
(who  had  preceded  him  to  Liverpool), 
to  preside  over  the  European  Mission. 
The  duties  asigned  him  by  the  First 
Presidency  were  to  take  charge  of  the 
"Millennial  Star"  and  the  publishing 
business  connected  therewith,  and  also 
of  the  business  of  the  emigration.  He 
reached  Liverpool  on  the  night  of  Dec. 
21,  1860.  Soon  after  his  arrival  he  es- 
tablished a  Church  printing  office,  the 
printing  for  the  Church  up  to  that  time 
having  been  done  by  contract  with 
other  ofl^ces.  These  three  Apostles  pre- 
sided over  the  European  Mission  until 
May  14,  1862,  when  Elders  Amasa  M. 
Lyman  and  Charles  C.  Rich  leturned 
home,  and  Elder  George  Q.  Cannon  re- 
paired to  Washington,  D.  C,  to  which 
place,  he  had  been  called  by  a  dispatch 
from  home,  which  informed  him  that 
he  and  Hon.  W.  H.  Hooper  had  been 
elected  United  States  Senators,  and 
that  he  was  to  join  Brother  Hooper  at 
Washington  and  endeavor  to  get  the 
Territory  admitted  into  the  Union  as  a 
State.  They  labored  faithfully  in  this 
direction  until  the  adjournment  of  Con- 
gress; after  which  Brother  George  Q. 
returned  again  to  England,  reachinn' 
there  July  26,  1862;  and  from  that  time 
until  his  return  home  in  1864.  he  pre- 
sided over  the  European  Mission,  vis- 


48 


LATTER-DAY    SAINT 


iting  twice  the  branches  of  the  Church 
in  Scandinavia,  Germany,  Holland, 
Switzerland  and  France.  During  the 
four  years  he  was  on  this  mission  and 
in  charge  of  the  emigration  business, 
there  were  upwards  of  thirteen  thousand 
Saints  shipped  from  Liverpool  for  Zion, 
and  it  x\as  a  cause  of  pleasure  to  all 
engaged  in  the  work  at  that  time  to 
know  that  more  souls  had  joined  the 
Church  during  the  same  period  than 
had  emigrated.  In  company  with  El- 
der John  W.  Young  he  sailed  from  Liv- 
erpool Aug.  27,  1864,  but  they  were  de- 
tained in  New  York  and  at  Atchison 
by  an  Indian  war,  in  which  the  settle- 
ments on  the  frontiers  and  many  of  the 
stage  stations  were  destroyed.  They 
went  through  by  the  first  stage  after 
the  interruption  and  incurred  consid- 
erable risk  in  making  the  journey.  His 
return  from  this  mission  was  almost  fif- 
teen years  to  a  day  from  the  time  of 
his  departure  in  1849  on  his  first  mis- 
sion. During  these  fifteen  years  he 
had  been  constantly  away  from  Great 
Salt  Lake  City  on  missions  with  the 
exception  of  about  nine  months.  Upon 
his  arrival  home  at  this  time  President 
Brigham  Young  desired  him  to  be  his 
jirivate  secretary.  He  acted  in  this 
capacity  for  the  three  succeeding  years. 
The  comparatively  barren  results  of 
the  labors  of  the  Elders  abroad  in  the 
missionary  field  had  drawn  his  atten- 
tion to  the  vast  field  of  usefulness  open 
and  only  imperfectly  occupied  at  home. 
Thousands  of  children  were  growing  up, 
whose  opportunities  for  becoming  ac- 
(luainted  with  tb--  doctrines  and  history 
fif  the  Church  were  too  meagre.  Dur- 
ing the  winter  after  his  return  from 
Europe  (1864-65)  he  organized  and 
taught  a  Sunday  school  in  the  14th 
AVard  of  Great  Salt  Lake  City.  In 
.lanuary,  1866,  he  commenced  the  pub- 
lication of  the  "Juvenile  Instructor," 
designed  expressly  for  the  education 
jind  elevation  of  the  young.  This  pe- 
liodical  has  now  entered  upon  the 
thirty-sixth  year  of  its  publication,  and 
has  been  of  great  value  in  giving  to 
the  children  and  youth  of  Zion  a  knowl- 
edge of  the  principles  of  the  gospel  and 
of  the  historical  events  connected  with 
the  establishment  of  the  Latter-day 
Sninls-^  Sunday  Schools.  George  Q. 
Cannon's  name  has  always  been 
identified  with  the  Sunday  school 
movement.  At  the  organization 
of     the       Sunday       School       Union     in 


1867,  he  was  made  general  superinten- 
dent, which  position  he  held  till  the  last 
day  of  his  earthly  career.  His  heart 
was  in  this  work  and  thousands  upon 
thousands  of  the  children  of  Zion  will 
revere  his  name  and  memory.  He  wa.s 
also  a  strong  supporter  of  the  other 
(^hurch  schools.  He  was  a  member  of 
the  General  Board  of  Education  from 
the  day  of  its  organization,  April  5, 
1888,  and  never  relaxed  his  interest  and 
energies  in  that  capacity.  Besides  hla 
labors  on  the  "Juvenile  Instructor"  he 
wrote  many  interesting  works,  such  as 
"My  First  Mission,"  "Life  of  Joseph 
Smith,"  "Life  of  Nephi,"  "The  Latter- 
day  Prophet,"  etc.,  and  assisted  in  writ- 
ing "The  Life  of  Brigham  Young,"  and 
other  publications.  In  the  fall  of  1867, 
by  the  appointment  of  President  Brig- 
ham Young,  he  took  charge  of  the 
"Deseret  News"  and  issued  a  daily  edi- 
tion this  being  the  commencement  of 
the  "Deseret  Evening  News."  For  a 
number  of  years  he  continued  to  oc- 
cupy the  position  of  editor  and  pub- 
lisher of  the  "Deseret  News,"  traveling, 
as  circumstances  w-ould  permit,  with 
the  First  Presidency  and  the  Twelve, 
during  the  summer  months  through  the 
various  settlements  and  holding  meet- 
ings with  them,  as  was  the  custom  in 
those  days,  every  year.  During  the 
fall  of  1871  a  great  many  articles  ap- 
peared in  various  papers  on  the  sub- 
ject of  admitting  Utah  into  the  Union 
as  a  State,  on  the  condition  that  the 
Latter-day  Saints  relinquish  their  prac- 
tice of  plural  marriage.  So  much  was 
said  in  favor  of,  and  so  little  said  In 
opposition  to,  this  method  of  dealing 
with  the  question, that  Presidents  Brig- 
ham Young  and  Geo.  A.  Smith,  who 
were  then  at  St.  George,  felt  that 
there  was  danger  of  the  Latter-day 
Saints  being  put  in  a  false  position, 
and  they  telegraphed  Brother  George  Q. 
Cannon  to  proceed  at  once  to  Washing- 
ton. D.  C,  and  define  the  true  position 
of  the  Saints  on  this  important  point. 
He  remained  in  Washington  until  Con- 
gress adjourned  for  the  holidays,  when 
ho  returned  to  Utah.  A  constitutional 
convention  met  early  in  February,  1872, 
and  he  was  elected  a  member  and 
helped  to  frame  the  constitution  which 
was  then  adopted.  Together  with  Hon. 
Thomas  Fitch  and  Hon.  Frank  Fuller, 
he  was  chosen  a  delegate  to  present 
the  constitution  to  Congress  and  work 
for  Utah's  admission  as  a  State.     With 


BIOGRAPHICAL,    ENCYCLOPEDIA. 


49 


them  he  proceeded  to  Washington,  and 
remained  there  with  Delegate  Hooper, 
until  the  adjournment  of  that  session. 
Upon  Brother  Hooper  declining  to  be 
again  nominated  for  delegate.  George 
Q.  Cannon  was  nominated  and  elected 
in  August,  1S72.  He  spent  the  next 
winter  with  Delegate  Hooper,  at  Wash- 
ington. At  four  successive  elections 
he  carried  the  Territory  as  delegate  to 
Congress  by  a  very  heavy  majority  in 
his  favor.  Thejjiistorv  of  the  part  he 
took,  in  Congress  during  his  terms  of 
office^— and  the  -£aKLcess_of  his  efforts 
and  lattars_in__that  capacity._,form_aJi 
-important  chapter  in  the  history  of^the^ 
Latter-day  S_aints,  and,  when  compiled, 
will  prove  interesting  reading.  To  the 
chagrin  of  a  great  many  enemies,  and 
to  the  surprise  of  many  of  the  Latter- 
day  Saints,  he  obtained  his  seat  when 
first  elected,  though  a  most  determined 
effort  was  made  to  prevent  this.  It  was 
only  by  Governor  Murray  breaking  his 
official  oath,  and  being  guilty  of  an  in- 
famous abuse  of  the  authority  of  his 
position,  that  he  was  refused  his  certi- 
ficate of  election  in  1881.  Though  George 
Q.  Cannon  had  been  elected  by  a  vote 
of  18,568— a  majority  of  17,211  votes  over 
his  competitor— this  man  Murray  de- 
termined to  bring  matters  to  an  issue 
by  refusing  to  give  him  the  certificate 
of  election,  but  which  he  gave  to  his 
opponent,  who  had  only  received  1,357 
out  of  19,925  votes.  But  the  instrument 
whom  these  conspirators  used — for 
Murray  was  not  alone  in  this  conspira- 
cy against  the  rights  of  the  people — 
did  not  have  the  satisfaction  of  get- 
ting his  seat.  Congress  was  not  pre- 
pared to  readily  join  in  a  scheme  of 
^  i'lainy  of  this,  transparent  character, 
though  there  were  many  public  men 
who  hated  the  "Mormons"  sufficiently 
to  take  advantage  of  the  opportunity 
which  :Murray's  perfidy  offered  to  them. 
It  was  not,  however,  until  the  Edmunds 
hill  had  pased  and  become  law — March 
-2.  1SS2 — that  Congress  took  action  on 
the  case.  It  is  probable  that  a  ma- 
joiity  of  the  House  could  not  have  been 
secured  in  favor  of  denying  George  Q. 
Cannon  his  seat  had  not  the  Edmunds 
bill  been  passed;  and  this  was  rushed 
through  with  unceremonious  and  inde- 
cent haste,  and  by  wilfully  and  flag- 
lantly  trampling  upon  the  rules  of  the 
House,  in  order  to  furnish  members  who 
had  scruples  respecting  this  transac- 
tion  with   a  justifiable   basis   of  action 

Vol.  1,  No.  4. 


in  voting  against  the  measure.  April 
19,  1882,  the  case  came  before  the  House 
and  was  decided  against  the  duly  elect- 
ed delegate  taking  his  seat,  by  a  vote 
of  123  against  79.  Before,  however, 
taking  his  departure  from  the  place 
where  he  had  labored  for  so  many 
years,  he  had  the  opportunity  of  de- 
livering a  speech  in  vindication  of  his 
own  case  and  that  of  the  people  whom 
he  represented.  President  Brigham 
Young  died  Aug.  29,  1877.  He  had  made 
his  will  in  1873,  and  had  sent  his  son 
Brigham  and  Elder  George  Q.  Cannon 
east  to  get  a  form  of  will  that  would 
be  suitable  to  his  circumstances  and 
family  relations.  This  will  was  adopted 
by  him, and  under  his  direction,  Brother 
George  Q.  Cannon  prepared  it  and  was 
made  the  principal  executor,  Brigham 
Young,  jun.,  and  Albert  Carrington  be- 
ing the  co-executors.  The  settlement 
of  this  estate  during  1878  and  1879  en- 
grossed nearly  his  entire  time  when  he 
was  not  in  Washington.  In  1879  a  suit 
was  commenced  by  some  few  dissatis- 
fied heirs  against  the  Church  and 
against  the  executors.  The  executors 
were  under  $300,000  bonds,  but  Judge 
Boreman  was  determined  to  place  them 
under  additional  bonds  and  so  decided. 
This  they  refustd  to  comply  with, think- 
ing the  bonds  they  had  already  given 
sufficient  for  all  purposes,  and  they 
were  adjudged  by  him  guilty  of  con- 
tempt and  ordered  to  the  penitentiary. 
They  accepted  the  alternative  and  went 
to  the  penitentiary.  Aug.  4,  1879,  and 
remained  there  upwards  of  three  weeks, 
when  they  were  relased  by  action  of 
Chief  Justice  Hunter,  who  had  been  re- 
cently appointed  chief  justice  of  the 
Territory.  Shortly  afterwards  the  suit 
was  settled,  and  the  settlement  of  the 
estate  was  proceeded  with.  Probably 
no  estate  in  America  had  ever  present- 
ed so  many  diniculties  in  the  settlement 
as  this  had,  because  of  the  various  in- 
terests involved  and  the  number  of 
heirs  to  be  settled  with.  In  October, 
ISSO,  the  Church  having  been  under  the 
]ire«idency  of  the  Tv/elve  Apostles  for 
a  little  more  than  three  years,  the  First 
Presidency  was  re-organized  with  John 
Taylor  as  President,  George  Q.  Cannon 
as  first  counselor  and  Jospph  F.  Smith 
as  second  counselor.  In  lS8o,  when  the 
anti-polygamy  raid  under  the  Edmunds 
art  was  inaugurated.  President  Cannon 
accompanied  President  Taylor  into  se- 
clusion, and  they  directed  the  affairs  of 

Jan.  26,  1901. 


50 


LATTER-DAY    SAINT 


the  Church  in  secrecy,  their  residences 
being     searched     for     them  by   deputy 
marshals  on  several  occasions.     Under 
counsel    from    President    Taylor    Presi- 
dent Cannon  took  train  for  California, 
but  was  arrested   at   Humboldt  Wells, 
Feb.  13.  1SS6.     On  the  way  back  he  fell 
from   the   train  while   in   rapid   motion 
and    injured    his    face    somewhat    and 
was  badly  shaken  un.  Marshal  Ireland 
sent  for  a"  company  of  soldiers  to  guard 
his  prisoner,  and  he  was  brought  into 
gait   Lake   City   under   military   escort. 
He   was   placed  under   bonds   in  $20,000 
*ind  again  in  $25,000,  making  the  enor- 
mous sum  of  $45,000  while  he  was  only 
charged    with    a    simple    misdemeanor, 
namely,  living  with  his  wives;  but  un- 
der two  indictments  for  the   same  of- 
fense.      The  feeling  against  the  "Mor- 
mon" leaders  was  so  bitter,  that  Pres- 
ident Taylor  counseled  him  not  to  ap- 
pear when  his  case  was  called,   so  his 
excessive    bail    was    declared    forfeited. 
But  subsequently  the  amount  was  re- 
stored, an  act  of  Congress  being  passed 
to  reimburse  him,  he  having  previous- 
ly settled  in  full  with  his  sureties.     In 
1888  affairs  having  assumed  a  less  pas- 
sionate  state   in   the   courts,   President 
Cannon  surrendered  himself    to    U.    S. 
Marshal   Dyer,   Sept.   17,   1888,   and  was 
sentenced  by  Judge  Sanford  under  the 
two  indictments  to  175  days'  imprison- 
ment and  a  fine  of  $450.     He  served  the 
time   and    paid    the    fine   and   was     re- 
leased Feb.  21,  1889.     At  the  decease  of 
President  Taylor,   the  Twelve  Apostles 
again   took  charge  of  the  Church,  and 
Presidents  Cannon  and  Smith  resumed 
their  places  in     the       Quorum     of   the 
Apostles.      On  the  accession  of  Wilford 
AVoodruff     to     the     presidency,    George 
Q.    Cannon   was    chosen   again   as   first 
counselor  and  Joseph  F.  Smith  as  sec- 
ond   counselor.       After     the     death    of 
President  Woodruff.and  when  President 
Lorenzo   Snow   succeeded  to  the   presi- 
dency  Sept.   13,   1898,     he   also   selected 
George  Q.  Cannon  as  his  first  counselor, 
and  Jos.  F.  Smith  as  his  second  coun- 
selor.    This  was  ratified  at  the  general 
conference  on  Oct.  9th  of  the  same  year. 
President  Cannon  remained  in  this  im- 
portant  position  until  his  demise.       In 
addition    to    the   onerous    duties    of   his 
position  as  one  of  the  First  Presidency 
of    the    Church,    in    which    he    traveled 
very  extensively  among  the   Stakes  of 
Zion.  attending  conferences,  dedicating 
meeting  houses,   counseling  the  people 


in  things  temporal  and  spiritual,  he  was 
engaged  jn  many  enterprises  of  impor^ 
tance  to  the  public    He  was  a  director 
in  the  Union  Pacific  Railroad  company, 
and  in  the  Salt  Lake  and  Los  Angeles 
company.       He  was  vice  president  and 
director  of  Z.  C.  M.  I.  for  many  years. 
He   founded   the   publishing  and     book 
firm  of  George  Q.  Cannon  and  Sons  Co., 
of   which   he  was   president.       He   was 
president  of  the  Utah  Sugar  Co.;   vice 
president   and   director   of   Zion's    Sav- 
ings  Bank  and   Trust  Co.;    director  of 
the    Co-op.    Wagon    and    Machine    Co.; 
president  of  Brigham  Young  Trust  Co.; 
president  of  the  Utah  Light  and  Power 
Co.;    director  of   the   Bullion-Beck  and 
Champion    Mining      Co.;      also    of    the 
Grand    Central    Mining    Co.        He    re- 
cently organized  the  George  Q.  Cannon 
association,  of  which  he  was  the  presi- 
dent,   and    in   which    he   placed   all    his 
property.     In  the  interest  of  these  as- 
sociations he  took  repeated  trips  to  the 
East  and  the  West  and  gave  them  each 
the    benefit    of    his      wisdom      and    ex- 
perience.    He   was   president       of     the 
Trans-Mississippi  Commercial  Congress 
for  one  term  and  attended  all   its  ses- 
sions  as   a   member   with    great   regu- 
larity.      He   was   also     president     and 
afterwards  vice   president  of  the   Irri- 
gation    Congress     and     addressed     its 
meetings   on  several  occasions     as     an 
authority  "on  irrigation  and  kindred  af- 
fairs.     Nov.  29,  1900,  President  Cannon, 
accompanied  by  a  few  friends,  left  Salt 
Lake   to   attend     the     jubilee     of     the 
Sandwich   Islands   mission,    which   was 
held    December    12th     and     13th.        He 
landed  at  Honolulu  December  10th,  and 
the  next  day  received  the  most  magni- 
ficent greeting  ever  accorded  a  guest  in 
Hawaii.        The      native      Saints    fairly 
adored   him   ks   tjie   instrument   in   the 
hands  of  God  in  the  introduction  of  the 
gospel  among  them.  Some  of  them  he 
baptized   fifty   years   before.       He   was 
crowned    with   the   yellow   lei,    the   em- 
blem   of    royalty.       Several    prominent 
people  in  the  present  and  former  gov- 
ernments also  waited  upon  him.     Dur- 
ing the  <"°=tivities,  lasting  several  days, 
he  was  honored  and  almost  worshipped 
by  the  islanders.  Ex-Queen  Lilioukalani 
also   attended   a   meeting   at   which   he 
spoke  half  an  hour  in  Hawaiian,  which 
he   was  able   to  recall  in   a  surprising 
manner.      President  Cannon  afterwards 
visited  the  ex-queen,  and  at  her  request 
blessed  her.  On  the  day  of  his  depart- 


BIOGRAPHICAL   ENCYCLOPEDIA. 


51 


\ 


ure  to  return  home  he  was  literally 
covered  with  flowers.  He  arrived  in 
Salt  Lake  Citv  January  16th,  and  by  re- 
quest addressed  the  great  Live-Stock 
convention  which  met  in  the  Assembly 
Hall  that  morning-,  and  was  received 
with  immense  applause.  The  health 
of  President  Cannon  had  been  occasion- 
ally interrupted  by  spells  of  sickness 
for  some  time  before  the  fatal  attack. 
He  had  been  robust  and  strong  until 
the  fall  from  the  train  already  men- 
tioned. After  that  he  experienced  once 
in  a  while  a  weakness  in  contrast  to 
his  former  vigor.  While  on  visits  to 
the  East  he  was  seized  with  serious 
symptoms.  At  New  York  in  Novem- 
ber, 1889,  he  was  severely  attacked  with 
pneumonia,  and  but  for  his  abstemious 
life  and  good  constitution  would  prob- 
ably have  then  succumbed.  This  un- 
doubtedly prepared  the  way  for  the  last 
illness  that  laid  him  low.  Early  in 
March,  1901,  he  was  stricken  with  the 
grippe,  which  caused  a  number  of  un- 
favorable complications  to  arise;  and 
it  was  decided  that  a  change  of  climate 
would  do  him  good.  Consequently,  he 
left  Salt  Lake  City,  March  13,  1901,  for 
Monterey,  Cal.,  where  quarters  were  se- 
cured for  him  in  a  large  and  comforta- 
ble cottage  situated  on  an  eminence 
overlooking  the  bay,  where  he  could 
receive  the  full  benefits  of  the  gentle 
ocean  breezes;  but  the  change  failed 
to  restore  him  to  health,  though  his 
condition  seemed  to  improve  for  a  few 
days.  He  gradually  grew  worse  and 
early  on  the  morning  of  April  12,  1901, 
he  passed  away.  The  remains  were 
brought  home  and  the  funeral  took 
place  from  the  Tabernacle,  Salt  Lake 
City,  April  16,  1901.  President  Cannon 
left  a  large  family— four  wives  and 
twenty-eiR-ht  children — to  mourn  his  de- 
mise. He  was  a  good  husband,  a  con- 
siderate parent  and  wise  counselor,  who 
always  provided  well  for  the  needs  of 
those  dependent  upon  him.  He  was  a 
strong  advocate  of  the  patriarchal 
family  system,  and  was  never  happier 
than  when  surrounded  by  the  members 
of  his  own  household  while  some  re- 
union was  being  held  or  birthday  cele- 
brated. He  was  firmly  of  the  opinion 
that  such  occasions  were  productive  of 
untold  benefit.  The  last  family  gath- 
ering held  at  his  home  was  just  after 
his  return  from  Hawaii  in  January. 
1901,  when  his  severtty-fourth  birthday 
was  observed  in  a  most  pleasant  man- 


ner. President  Cannon  was  a  man  of 
medium  height,  well  rounded  and  erect. 
His  shapely  head,  which  in  his  younger 
days  was  crowned  with  a  liberal 
growth  of  black  hair,  and  his  high, 
broad  forehead,  impressed  everyone 
who  met  him.  His  nose  was  somewhat 
lar°-e  and  aqueline,  almost  approaching 
the  Israelitish  in  contour;  a  pair  of 
grey  eyes,  and  a  well-formed  mouth  ex- 
pressed amicability  and  kindness  at 
all  times.  He  was  a  gifted  speaker, 
and  for  many  years  he  ranked  among 
the  foremost  speakers  of  the  nation. 
In  his  earlier  experience  he  was  much 
more  deliberate  in  utterance  than  later 
in  life.  Added  to  his  wide  range  of 
information  and  deep  and  sometimes 
tremendous  earnestness,  he  was  aided 
by  a  clear,  resonant  voice.  When 
warmed  to  his  theme  he  occasionally 
reached  the  highest  fiights  of  oratory, 
thrilling  and  captivating  his  hearers  by 
the  forcefulness  of  his  thought  and  the 
persuasiveness  of  his  address. 

WILLIAMS,    Frederick    Granger, 

second  counselor  to  President  Joseph 
Smith  from  1833  to  1837, was  born  Oct. 28, 
1787,  in  Suffield,  Hartford  county.  Conn., 
was  baptized  in  October,  1830,  near 
Kirtland,  Ohio,  and  soon  afterwards 
accompanied  Oliver  Cowdery  and  fel- 
low misionaries  on  their  journey  from 
Ohio  to  Missouri.  After  his  return  to 
Ohio,  he  became  one  of  the  leading  and 
influential  men  of  the  Church,  at 
Kirtland,  and  according  to  revelation 
(Doc.  &  Cov.,  90:  6),  he  was  ordained 
and  set  apart  as  second  counselor  in 
the  First  Presidency  by  Joseph  Smith, 
March  18,  1833.  In  a  subsequent  reve- 
lation he  was  called  to  preach  the 
gospel.  He  labored  as  a  member  of  a 
committee  to  arrange  the  interior  of 
the  Kirtland  Temple,  and  also  took  a 
leading  part  in  establishing  a  printing 
office  at  Kirtland,  after  the  destruction 
of  the  press  in  Jackson  county.  Mo.  In 
1S34  he  went  to  Missouri  as  a  member 
of  Zion's  camp,  acting  as  paymaster  in 
that  organization.  After  his  return  to 
Ohio,  he  accompanied  the  Prophet  Jo- 
seph on  a  short  mission  to  Michigan. 
As  a  counselor  in  the  First  Presidency 
he  took  an  active  part  in  everything 
pertaining  to  the  building  up  of  Kirt- 
land as  a  Stake  of  Zion,  and  especially 
in  the  erection  of  the  House  of  the 
Lord  at  that  place,  for  which  purpose 
he  contributed  liberally  of  his  time  and 


52 


LATTER-DAY    SAINT 


means.  When  the  sacred  edifice  was 
dedicated  in  March,  1836,  he  enjoyed 
the  glorious  privilege  of  seeing  an  an- 
gel. Soon  afterwards  he  yielded  to 
improper  influences,  and  became  re- 
creant to  the  duties  pertaining  to  his 
high  and  holy  calling,  in  consequence 
of  which  he  was  rejected  as  a  counse- 
lor in  the  First  Presidency  at  an  im- 
portant conference  held  at  Far  West, 
Mo.,  Nov.  7,  1837.  He  was  finally  ex- 
communicated from  the  Church  at  a 
conference  held  at  Quincy,  111.,  March 
17,  1839.  At  a  genei-al  conference,  held 
at  Nauvoo,  111.,  in  April,  1840,  he  pre- 
sented himself  on  the  stand  and  hum- 
bly asked  forgiveness  for  his  past  con- 
duct and  expressed  his  determination 
to  do  the  will  of  God  in  the  future. 
His  case  was  presented  to  the  confer- 
ence by  Hyrum  Smith,  and  he  was 
freely  forgiven.  Soon  afterwards  he 
was  received  into  the  fellowship  of  the 
Church  by  baptism.  He  died  as  a  faith- 
ful member  of  the  Church  Oct.  10,  1842, 
at  Quincy,  Illinois.  His  only  living 
son,  Ezra  Granger  Williams,  resides  at 
Ogden,  Utah. 

SMITH,  Hyrum,  second  counselor 
to  President  Joseph  Smith,  from  1837  to 
1841,  was  the  second  son  of  Joseph 
Smith  and  Lucy  Mack,  and  was  born 
Feb.  9,  1800,  at  Tunbridge,  Vermont,  and 
removed  with  his  father's  family  to 
western  New  York  when  about  nineteen 
years  old.  He  married  Jerusha  Bar- 
den,  at  Manchester,  N.  Y.,  Nov.  2,  1826, 
by  whom  he  had  six  children,  Lovina, 
Mary,  John,  Hyrum,  Jerusha  and  Sa- 
rah. He  became  a  widower  Oct.  13, 
1837,  while  absent  at  Far  West,  Mo., 
and  married  Mary  Fielding  the  same 
year,  b-"  whom  he  had  two  children, 
Joseph  F.  and  Martha.  Like  his  brother 
Joseph,  Hyrum  spent  his  early  years  in 
ae-ricultural  labors,  and  nothing  of  par- 
ticular note  characterized  that  period 
of  his  life.  He  speedily  became  a  be- 
liever in  Joseph's  mission,  and  by  him 
was  baptized  in  Seneca  lake,  in  June, 
1829.  He  was  one  of  the  eight  persons 
permitted  to  view  the  plates  from 
which  the  Book  of  Mormon  was  trans- 
lated, and  his  name  is  prefixed  to  it 
as  a  witness.  Nov.  7,  1837,  at  a  con- 
ference assembled  in  Far  West,  Mo., 
he  v/as  appointed  second  counselor  to 
Pres.  Joseph  Smith,  instead  of  Fred- 
erick G  Williams,  who  was  rejected. 
Jan.  19,  1841,  he  was  called  by  revelation 


to  take  the  oflice  of  Patriarch  to  the 
whole  Church,  to  which  he  had  been 
appointed  by  his  deceased  father,  by 
blessing  and  also  by  birthright,  and 
was  likewise  appointed  a  Prophet,  Seer 
and  Revelator.  He  was  personally 
connected  with  manj'^  of  the  principal 
events  of  the  Church,  up  to  the  time 
of  his  death,  and  in  the  various  offices 
he  filled  won  the  love  and  esteem  of 
all  persons.  In  the  revelation  calling 
him  to  be  the  chief  Patriarch,  the  Lord 


thus  spoke  of  him:  "Blessed  is  my 
servant  Hyrum  Smith,  for  I  the  Lord 
love  him,  because  of  the  integrity  of 
his  heart,  and  because  he  loveth  that 
which  is  right  before  me,  saith  the 
Lord."  (Doc.  &  Cov.,  124:  15.)  He 
was  tenderly  attached  to  his  brother 
Joseph,  whom  he  never  left  more  than 
six  months  at  one  time,  during  their 
lifetime.  He  was  arrested  with  him 
at  Far  West,  Mo.,  and  imprisoned  with 
him  at  Liberty,  and  finally  spilt  his 
blood  with  him  at  Carthage,  111.,  June 
27,  1844.  In  this  catastrophe  he  fell 
first,  exclaiming,  "I  am  a  dead  man," 
and  Joseph  responding,  "O  dear  Brother 
Hyrum!"  In  the  "Times  and  Seasons" 
we  find  the  following  beautiful  eulogy: 
"He  lived  so  far  beyond  the  ordinary 
walk  of  man,  that  even  the  tongue  of 
the  vilest  slanderer  could  not  touch  his 
reputation.  He  lived  godly,  and  he 
died  godly,  and  his  murderers  will  yet 
have  to  confess,  that  it  would  have 
been  better  for  them  to  have  had  a 
millstone  tied  to  them,  and  have  been 


BIOGRAPHICAL,    ENCYCLOPEDIA. 


53 


cast  into  the  depths  of  the  sea,  and  re- 
main there  while  eternity  goes  and  eter- 
nity comes,  than  to  have  robbed  that 
noble  man  of  heaven  of  his  life."  At 
his  death  he  held  various  military  and 
rivil  offices  in  the  Nauvoo  Legion  and 
in  the  municipality.  (For  further  par- 
ticulars see  sketch  of  Joseph  Smith 
jun.  and  early  Church  publications 
generally.) 

LAW,  William,  second  counselor  to 
President  Joseph  Smith,  from  1841-44, 
was  born  Sept.  8,  1809.  In  the  early 
daj'^s  of  the  Church,  when  Elders  John 
Taylor  and  Almon  W.  Babbitt  labored 
in  Canada  as  missionaries,  William 
Law,  who  lived  twenty-five  miles  from 
Toronto,  became  a  convert  to  "Mormon- 
ism,"  and  it  is  stated  in  the  history  of 
Joseph  Smith  that  he  arrived  at  Nau- 
voo, 111.,  in  the  latter  part  of  1839,  "with 
a  company  of  Saints,  traveling  in  seven 
wagons  from  Canada."  He  soon  became 
a  prominent  man  in  Nauvoo,  where  he 
served  as  a  member  of  the  municipal 
council,  a  captain  in  the  Nauvoo  Le- 
gion, etc.  He  also  kept  a  store,  owned 
several  mills  and  was  considered 
wealthy.  In  the  revelation  given 
through  Joseph  the  Prophet,  at  Nau- 
voo, Jan.  19,  1841,  he  was  called  to 
the  office  of  second  counselor  to  Presi- 
dent Joseph  Smith,  succeeding  Hyrum 
Smith,  who  was  called  to  the  position 
of  presiding  Patriarch.  Soon  after- 
wards he  filled  a  short  mission  to  the 
East,  and  was  for  a  season  considered 
a  good  and  faithful  man.  He  was 
among  the  chosen  few  who  on  May  26, 

1843,  received  their  endowments  under 
the  administration  of  Joseph  the 
Prophet.and  who  were  instructed  in  the 
Priesthood  and  on  the  new  and  ever- 
lasting covenant.  Towards  the  close 
of  1843  he  began  to  show  symptoms  of 
apostasy  and  associated  himself  with 
the  enemies  of  Joseph  and  the  Saints 
generally.  This  led  to  his  excom- 
munication from   the  Church  April  18, 

1844,  in  a  council  meeting  held  at  Nau- 
voo and  attended  by  the  leading  au- 
thorities of  the  Church.  After  this 
occurrence  Wm.  Law  came  out  openly 
as  an  enemy  and  was  one  of  the  pro- 
moters and  owners  of  the  libel  sheet 
called  the  "Nauvoo  Expositor,"  pub- 
lished at  Nauvoo.  His  name  is  classed 
in  history  with  those  of  his  brother 
Wilson  Law,  Robert  D.  Foster,  Charles 
A.  Foster,   Francis  M.   Higbee,   Chaun- 


cey  L.  Higbee,  Joseph  H.  Jackson,  Syl- 
vester Emmons  and  others,  who  were 
the  instigators  and  abettors  of  the 
murder  of  Joseph  and  Hyrum  Smith. 
In  1887  he  was  interviewed  by  a  news- 
paper reporter  at  ShuUsburg,  Lafayette 
county,  Wisconsin,  where  he  then  re- 
sided with  his  son,  Judge  Thomas  Law. 
On  that  occasion  he  still  exhibited  great 
animosity  towards  Joseph  the  Prophet 
and  the  "Mormon"  people,  and  related 
some  extraordinary  stories  concerning 
his  experience  with  the  Saints  at  Nau- 
voo. The  interview  is  published  in 
full  as  a  part  of  an  appendix  to  an 
anti-Mormon  work,  entitled  "The 
Prophet  of  Palmyra,"  written  by 
Thomas  Griggs,  of  Hamilton,  111.  Wm. 
Law  died  at  ShuUsburg,  Wis.,  Jan.  19, 
1892,  in  the  83rd  year  of  his  age. 

RICHARDS,  Willard,  second  coun- 
selor to  President  Brigham  Young.from 
1847  to  1854,  was  the  son  of  Joseph  and 
P.hoda  Richards,  and  was  born  June 
24,  1804,  at  Hopkinton,  Middlesex  coun- 
ty, Mass.;  and  from  the  religious 
teachings  of  his  parents,  he  was  the 
subject  of  religious  impressions  from 
his  early  childhood,  although  careless 
and  indifferent  in  his  external  deport- 
ment. At  the  age  of  ten  years  he  re 
moved  with  his  father's  family  to 
Richmond,  Mass.,  where  he  witnessed 
several  sectarian  "revivals"  and  offered 
himself  to  the  Congregational  church 
at  that  place  at  the  age  of  seventeen, 
having  previously  passed  the  painful 
ordeal  of  conviction  and  coaversion, 
even  to  the  belief  that  he  had  com- 
mitted the  unpardonable  sin.  But  the 
total  disregard  of  that  church  to  his 
request  for  admission  led  him  to  a 
more  thorough  investigation  of  the 
principles  of  religion,  when  he  became 
convinced  that  the  sects  were  all  wrong 
and  that  God  had  no  church  on  the 
earth,  but  that  He  would  soon  have  a 
church  whose  creed  would  be  the  truth, 
the  whole  truth,  and  nothing  but  the 
truth.  From  that  time  he  kept  him- 
self aloof  from  sectarian  influence, 
boldly  declaring  his  belief,  to  all  who 
wished  to  learn  his  views, until  the  sum- 
mer of  1835,  when,  while  in  the  practice 
of  medicine,  near  Boston,  the  Book  of 
Mormon,  which  President  Brigham 
Young  had  left  with  his  cousin  Lucius 
Parker,  at  Southborough,  accidentally 
or  providentially  fell  in  his  way.  This 
was    the    first    he    had    seen    or    heard 


54 


LATTER-DAY    SAINT 


of  the  Latter-day  Saints,  except  the 
scurrillous  records  of  the  public  prints, 
which  amounted  to  nothing  more  than 
that  "a  boy  named  Jo  Smith,  some 
where  out  west,  had  found  a  Gold 
Bible."  He  opened  the  book,  without 
regard  to  place,  and  totally  ignorant 
of  Its  design  or  contents,  and  before 
reading  half  a  page,  declared  that, 
"God  or  the  devil  has  had  a  hand  in 
that  book,  for  man  never  wrote  it." 
He  read  it  twice  through  in  about  ten 


days;  and  so  firm  was  his  conviction 
of  the  truth,  that  he  immediately  com- 
menced settling  his  accounts,  selling 
his  medicine,  and  freeing  himself  from 
every  Incumbrance,  that  he  might  go 
to  Kirtland,  Ohio,  seven  hundred  miles 
west,  the  nearest  point  he  could  hear 
of  a  Saint,  and  give  the  work  a  thor- 
ough investigation;  firmly  believing, 
that  if  the  doctrine  was  true,  God  had 
some  greater  work  for  him  to  do  than 
peddle  pills.  But  no  sooner  did  he 
commence  a  settlement,  than  he  was 
smitten  with  the  palsy,  from  which  he 
suffered  exceedingly,  and  was  prevent- 
ed executing  his  design,  until  October, 
1836,  when  he  arrived  at  Kirtland,  in 
company  with  his  brother  (Doctor  Levi 
Richards,  who  attended  him  as  phy- 
sician), where  he  was  most  cordially 
and    hospitably     received      and    enter- 


tained by  his  cousin,  Brigham  Young, 
with  whom  he  tarried,  and  gave  the 
work  an  unceasing  and  untiring  in- 
vestigation, untl  Dec.  31,  1836,  when  he 
was  baptized  by  Brigham  Young,  at 
Kirtland.  He  was  ordained  an  Elder 
by  Alva  Beeman  March  6,  1837.  A  few 
days  later  he  left  Kirtland  on  a  missior* 
to  the  Eastern  States,  from  which  he 
returned  June  11th.  On  the  day  fol- 
lowing he  was  blessed  and  set  apart 
by  the  Prophet  Joseph  to  accompany 
Heber  C.  Kimball,  Orson  Hyde  and 
others  on  a  mission  to  England.  They 
started  on  the  13th.  Having  arrived 
?afely  in  England,  and  the  gospel  dooi 
having  been  successfully  opened  in 
Preston,  Doctor  Richards  was  sent  to 
Bedford, and  surrounding  country,where 
he  labored  with  much  success,  notwith- 
standing bitter  opposition.  He  re- 
turned to  Preston  in  February,  1838, 
and  on  April  1st  attended  a  general 
conference,  where  he  was  ordained  a 
High  Priest  and  appointed  first  coun- 
selor to  Joseph  Fielding,  who  was  ap- 
pointed to  preside  over  the  mission  af- 
ter Elders  Kimball  and  Hyde  returned 
to  America.  Elder  Richards  married 
Jennetta  Richards,  daughter  of  the 
rtev.  John  Richards,  Sept.  24,  1838.  Dur- 
ing the  following  year  he  continued  his> 
misionary  labors  in  Manchester,  Bol- 
ton, Salford,  Burslem,  Preston  and  other 
places.  After  the  arrival  of  the  Apostles 
from  America,  Doctor  Richards  was 
ordained  one  of  the  Twelve  Apostles 
April  14,  1840,  to  which  high  and  holy 
position  he  had  been  called  by  direct 
revelation,  and  after  the  publication 
of  the  "Millennial  Star"  was  com- 
menced, he  assisted  Parley  P.  Pratt  in 
its  editorial  department,  and  also  per- 
foi-med  the  general  duties  of  presiding 
over  the  mission.  In  February,  1841, 
he  removed  his  family  from  Preston  to 
Manchester,  and  in  the  following  April 
left  England  with  others  of  the  Twelve 
to  return  to  Nauvoo,  where  he  arrived 
Aug.  16th.  Agreeable  to  the  council  of 
the  Twelve,  he  located  at  Warsaw,Han- 
cock  county.  111.,  for  a  short  time.  He 
was  elected  a  member  of  the  city  coun- 
cil of  Nauvoo  Oct.  30,  1841,  and  removed 
to  that  city  In  December  following.  Two 
days  later  (Dec.  13th)  he  was  appointed 
recorder  for  the  Temple,  private  secre- 
tary to  Joseph  Smith  and  general 
Church  clerk.  He  commenced  his  la- 
bors in  Joseph's  new  ofllce.  In  the  brick 
store.       From  the  time  he  entered  Jo- 


BIOGRAPHICAL.    ENCYCLOPEDIA. 


65 


seph's  office,  with  the  exception  of  a 
short  mission  to  the  East  after  his 
family,  he  was  with  Joseph  until  the 
Prophet's  death,  continually  at  work 
with  his  pen,  while  he  was  able  to  sit 
up.  He  was  recorder  of  the  city  coun- 
cil and  clerk  of  the  municipal  court, 
and  kept  Joseph  Smith's  private  jour- 
nals, making  an  entry  only  a  few 
minutes  previous  to  the  awful  trag-edy 
at  Carthage.  And  in  the  face  of  a 
hundred  muskets,  in  the  hands  of  in- 
furiated mobbers,  he  thrust  his  head 
out  of  the  window  to  catch  a  glimpse 
of  his  dying  president,  and  there  re- 
mained gazing  intently  upon  the  man- 
gled body  until  he  was  satisfied  that  the 
innocent  spirit  had  fled.  His  "Two 
Minutes  in  Jail"  is  one  of  the  most 
thrilling  documents  ever  written,  and 
his  parrying  muskets  with  a  walking 
stick  is  one  of  the  most  unequal  con- 
tests on  record.  God  preserved  him 
with  the  loss  of  a  drop  of  blood,  and 
without  a  "hole  in  his  robe."  During 
uhe  catastrophe  of  Joseph  and  Hyrum's 
death,  and  the  emergency  into  which 
the  Church  was  suddenly  thrown,  Doc- 
tor Richards  felt  the  burden  of  giving 
directions  to  the  affairs  of  the  Church 
in  Hancock  county,  in  consequence  of 
the  absence  of  the  Twelve  Apostles.. 
Though  standing  in  the  midst  of  tht 
murderous  mob  at  Carthage,  with  tht 
mangled  bodies  of  his  martyred  friends, 
and  that  of  Elder  Taylor,  under  hib 
charge,  his  letters  and  counsels  at  that 
time  indicated  great  self-command  and 
judgment.  His  ability  was  happily 
commensurate  with  such  an  occasion. 
At  the  time  of  the  expulsion  from  Nau- 
voo,  he  acted  as  Church  Historian,  hav- 
ing being  appointed  to  that  position  as 
early  as  December,  1842.  In  the  spring 
of  1847  he  was  enrolled  in  the  memor- 
able band  of  Pioneers,  under  President 
Young,  that  first  marked  out  a  high- 
way for  the  immigrating  Saints  to 
Great  Salt  Lake  valley.  After  his  re- 
turn to  Winter  Quarters  he  was  elected 
second  counselor  to  President  Young, 
in  which  capacity  he  continued  to  act 
until  his  death.  In  the  fall  of  1848  he 
arrived  in  the  Valley  a  second  time, 
as  captain  of  a  large  company  of 
Saints.  As  a  civil  officer,  he  served  as 
secretary  to  the  government  of  the 
State  of  Deseret,  and  did  the  greatest 
share  of  the  business  of  the  secretary 
of  the  Territory  of  Utah,  after  its  or- 
ganization as  a  Territory,  and  presided 


over  the  council  of  the  legislative  as- 
sembly for  about  the  same  period.  He 
was  also  postmaster  of  Great  Salt  Lakt- 
City  up  to  the  time  of  his  death,  and 
enjoyed  the  full  confidence  of  the  Post- 
master-General, who  respected  his 
judgment  touching  postal  arrange 
ments  throughout  the  mountain  Terri- 
tories. He  was  an  efficient  member  of 
the  Perpetual  Emigrating  Fund  com- 
pany, whose  duties  affected  the  inter- 
est and  gathering  of  tens  of  thousands. 
In  the  quorum  of  the  First  Presidency, 
he  magnified  his  high  calling  to  the  day 
of  his  death,  ever  shedding  light  and 
consolation,  in  his  sphere,  upon  the 
minds  of  thousands  and  tens  of  thou- 
sands to  whom  he  ministered.  He  was 
the  editor  and  proprietor  of  the  "Des- 
eret News;"  also  general  Historian  ot 
the  whole  Church,  and  Church  recor- 
der, for  which  offices  he  was  eminently 
gifted.  He  chronicled  events,  dates, 
circumstances,  and  incidents,  with  rare 
accuracy  of  judgment  and  great  tena- 
city of  memory.  The  number  of  offi- 
ces which  he  held  at  the  time  of  his 
death  indicate  the  confidence  which 
the  Church  reposed  in  his  great  integ- 
rity and  varied  abilities.  That  ardent 
love  of  truth,  and  intuitive  perception 
of  the  same,  which  impelled  him  to 
investigate  the  claims  of  the  everlast- 
ing gospel  in  the  beginning,  grew  with 
his  pas  iing  years,  and  became  more 
and  more  manifest,  by  his  unwaverinfe 
and  unflinching  adherence  to  it,  in  thi- 
most  perilous  and  troublesome  time^ 
of  the  Church  history  in  after  life.  He 
possessed  a  calm  and  even  mind,  and 
yet  was  rather  reserved,  and  naturally 
diffident  of  his  own  superior  ability. 
This  diffidency  may  have  caused  the 
early  part  of  his  ministry  to  be  under- 
valued. From  being  familiar  with  the 
minutiae  of  the  medical  profession  and 
a  careful  observer  of  clerical  deport- 
ment, and  a  handsome  proficient  in 
science  generally,  the  change  that 
swept  over  his  past  attainments  and 
brought  him  down  to  the  altar  of 
revelation  by  the  Holy  Ghost,  showed 
forth  the  reality  of  a  new  birth  per- 
sonified in  all  his  subsequent  life.  On 
great  and  rare  occasions,  his  masterly 
energies  came  forth  like  a  well  dis- 
ciplined and  invincible  troop, that  knew 
their  place  and  prerogative  to  act  in 
defense  of  the  truth.  Beloved  and  re- 
spected by  all  who  knew  him.  Dr.  Wil- 
lard  Richards   died  in   Salt  Lake  City, 


56 


LATTER-DAY   SAINT 


March  11,  1854,  from  palsy,  which  dis- 
ease had  preyed  upon  his  system  ever 
since  he  began  to  investigate  the  Book 
of  Mormon.  (For  further  details  see 
'•-Millennial  Star,"  Vol.  27,  p.  118, 
"Southern  Star,"  Vol.  2,  p.  353,  etc.) 

(ilt.WT,  Jcdediah   Morfjan,    second 
counselor  to  President  Brigham  Young 
from  1S54  to  1856,  was  the  son  of  Joshua 
and  Thalia  Grant,   and  was  born  Feb. 
21,  1816,  in  Windsor,  Broome  county,  N. 
Y.,       He   was   baptized   March  21,   1833, 
by   John    F.    Boynton.       In    the   spring 
or   the     following     year,   when  he  was. 
eighteen  years  of  age,  he  accompanied 
"Zion's  Camp"  in  the  wonderful  march 
to    :Missouri,      and     the     fatigues,    pri- 
vations, trying  scenes  and  arduous  la- 
bors endured   by   that   handful   of   val- 
liant  men  exhibited  a  goodly  portion, for 
one  so  young,  of  that  integrity,     zeal, 
and    unwavering   effort   and    constano 
in  behalf  of  the  cause  of  truth,  that  in 
variably  characterized     his   life.       The 
experience   the  young  men  of  this  ex- 
pedition   obtained     on    this    memorablt 
journey,    was   such   as   few   ever     pass 
through  in  life.       While  the  history  ot 
Zion"s   Camp   has   not   been   fully  writ- 
ten, and,   like   the  history  of  the  Lat- 
ter-day   Saints   in   general,    never   will 
be  in  its  fulness,  enough  is  known   to 
show  that  every  man,  who  carried  him- 
self   faithfully,      without      murmuring, 
through  the  dangers,  diseases  and  diffi- 
culties of  that  most  trying  period,  was 
a  hero  of  the  first  quality  and  had  laid 
foundation   stones   of   life  on  which  ho 
could   forever  build.       On  returning  to 
Kirtland,   Brother  Grant  was  ordained 
an  Elder,  and  later  (Feb.   28,   1835),  he 
was   ordained     a     Seventy     under   the 
hands  of  Joseph  Smith  and  others.     In 
co-^.nection  with  Elder  Harvey  Stanley 
he    was    also    appointed    to    his    first 
Pleaching  mission.      They  started  May 
22,   1835,   and  spent  the  summer  in   th'e 
labors  of  the   ministry,   preachmg  and 
baptizing  converts        In   the  winter  of 
1835-6,    Bro.    Grant   assisted   in    the    la- 
bors upon  the  Kirtland  Temple,   where 
he  received  the  blessings  of  the  House 
of  the  Lord.       He   was  appointed  to  a 
mission   in   the  East,   but   participated, 
before  leaving  the  Temple,  in  the  great 
manifestations  of  the  power  and  glory 
of  God,  which  characterized  the  laborb 
there  from   the   time  of  its  dedication, 
March    27,    1S36,    until    the    Elders,    who 


were  then  called  to  go  on  missions,  de- 
parted for  their  fields  of  labor.  He 
was  among  that  happy  number  who  re- 
ceived  from  the  lips  of  the  Prophet 
much  valuable  counsel  and  instruction 
relating  to  the  duties  of  the  Priesthood. 
Bro.  Grant  started  upon  his  mission 
April  13,  1836,  going  to  New  York  State, 
where  he  preached  a  great  deal  in  many 
places  and  raised  up  a  branch  of  the 
Church  at  Fallsburg.  He  baptized 
twenty-three  persons,  among  whom 
was  his  brother  Austin.  He  returned 
to  Kirtland,  March  6,  1837,  and  re- 
mained there  until  the  6th  of  the  fol- 
lowing June,  when  he  commenced  a 
missionary  tour  to  the  south — the  field 


in  which  his  greatest  missionary  la- 
bors and  achievements  were  accom- 
plished. He  passed  through  the  States 
of  Ohio,  New  York,  Pennsylvania,  etc., 
and  reached  North  Carolina,  where  he 
labored  assiduously,  proclaiming  the 
gospel  in  court  houses,  chapels  and 
other  places  of  assembly  as  frequently 
as  circumstances  permitted.  He  be- 
came extensively  known  and  acquired 
considerable  fame,  as  an  adroit  scrip- 
torian  and  debater,  in  certain  discus- 
sions held  with  Methodist  divines  whom 
he  never  feared  nor  declined  to  meet. 
His  uniform  success  in  overthrowing 
their  sophistry  and  false  theology  by 
the  forcible  and  conclusive  way  he 
presented  the  truth,  won  many  friends 
and  some  converts.  On  the  conclusion 
of  his  mii'sion  he  returned  to  Kirtland 
lind    m'.uie    preiiarations    for    linal      re- 


BIOGRAPHICAL    ENCYCLOPEDIA. 


67 


moval  to  Missouri.  He  started  Oct. 
S,  1838,  and  arrived  at  Far  West  on  the 
12th  of  November.  He  called  at  thib 
time  at  Richmond  jail  to  see  his  brother 
Georg-e  D.  Grant,  to  whom  he  had  pre- 
viously first  presented  the  gospel,  and 
who  was  then  imprisoned  with  the 
Prophet  and  others  on  account  of  their 
religious  faith.  Brother  Grant  passed 
through  the  trials  of  the  expulsion 
from  Missouri,  being'  driven,  with  his 
father  s  family  from  Far  West  to  Il- 
linois; they  located  in  Knox  county, 
where  Jedediah  remained  several 
months  preaching  and  baptizing.  In 
May,  lSo9,  he  made  a  trip  to  Nauvoo. 
but  hastened  to  Quincy  to  attend  a 
conference  held  there  June  1,  1839,  at 
which  time  he  was  called  on  a  mis- 
sion to  "Virginia  and  North  Carolina. 
This  wp.s  the  signal  for  opening  the 
Southern  States  mission  in  earnest. 
With  the  Elders  associated  with  him, 
among  them  his  brother  Joshua,  an  ex- 
tensive field  was  at  once  occupied; 
meetings  were  held  in  all  available 
places'  baptisms  were  quite  numerous 
and  several  large  branches  were  organ- 
ized. At  Burk's  Garden,  Tazewell 
county,  "Virginia,  where  Brother  Grant 
made  headquarters,  a  branch  of  more 
than  sixty  members  soon  sprang  up 
and  great  interest  excited  by  the  pop- 
ulace in  the  labors  of  the  traveling  and 
local  Priesthood.  Brother  Grant's 
name  was  everywhere  spoken  of;  his 
ready  speech,  logical  argument,  fear- 
less and  daring  denunciation  of  sin, 
powerful  exhortations  to  repentance 
iind  testimony  of  the  restoration  of  the 
gospel,  were  taken  up.  by  rich  and  poor, 
high  and  low,  and  commented  upon. 
They  won  many  converts  and  left  im- 
pressions on  many  others  which  arfe 
fresh  in  their  memories  even  to  the 
present  time.  Many  very  interesting 
episodes  marked  this  active,  incessant- 
ly laborious  period  of  his  life,  among 
others  one,  which  led  to  a  painful  a)id 
disagreeable  accident,  resulting  in 
breakirig  the  bones  of  his  nose.  The 
Saint.s  siill  living  in  that  region  re- 
jnemVjer  the  striking  peculiarities  of 
his  I'lln^ttry  and  events  wnioh  nisde 
it  so  tucc'-'Fsful.  Several  Elders  who 
l:n.\  e  labored  in  the  Southern  States 
of  late  years  have  brought  with  them 
home  many  anecdotes  about  Elder 
Grant,  which  show  that  his  memory 
is  still  kept  sacred  among  the  people  of 
the  South.      Among  these  anecdotes  we 


present  two  which  the  late  Elder  Theo-  - 
dore  B.  Lewis  very  graphically  tells  in 
ihe  "String  of  Pearls:"  "In  the  early 
part  of  President  Grant's  ministry  in 
that  lountry.  he  gained  quite  a  reputa- 
tion as  a  ready  speaker,  frequently  re- 
sponding to  invitations  to  preach  from 
such  subjects  or  texts  as  might  be  se- 
lected ai,  Lhe  time  of  commencing  his 
sermon,  oy  those  inviting  him.  In 
time  it  became  a  matter  of  wonder 
\vith  many  as  to  how  and  when  he  pre- 
pared his  wonderful  sermons.  In  re- 
ply to  their  queries  he  informed  them 
that  he  never  prepared  his  sermons  asi 
other  ministers  did.  'Of  course,  I  road 
and  store  my  mind  with  a  knowledge 
of  gospel  truths,'  said  he,  'but  I  never 
study  up  a  sermon.'  Well,  they  did  not 
believe  he  told  the  truth,  for,  as  they 
thought,  it  was  impossible  for  a  man 
to  preach  such  sermons  without  care- 
ful preparation.  So,  in  order  to  prove 
it,  a  number  of  persons  decided  to  put 
him  to  test,  and  asked  him  if  he  would 
pieacli  at  a,  certain  time  and  plade, 
and  from  a  text  selected  by  them.  Thay 
proposed  to  give  him  the  text  on  his 
arrival  at  the  place  of  meeting,  thus 
giving  him  no  time  to  prepare, 
grotily  them  hij  consented.  The  pla 
selected  was  Jeffersonville,  the  seat 
Tazewell  county,  at  that  time  the  horn- 
of  the  late  John  B.  Floyd,  who  subse 
Quently  became  secretary  of  war,  and 
ri'anv  other  prominent  men.  The  room 
chosen  was  in  the  court  house.  At 
the  hour  appointed  the  house  was 
packed  to  its  utmost  capacity.  Mr. 
Floyd  and  a  number  of  lawyers  and 
ministers  were  present  and  occupied 
front  seats.  Elder  Grant  came  in, 
walked  to  the  stand  and  opened  the 
meeting  as  usual.  At  the  :;lose  of  the 
second  hymn,  a  clerk,  appomtod  lor 
the  occasion,  stepped  forward  and 
handed  the  paper  (the  text)  to  Elder 
Grant,  who  unfolded  it  and  found  it  to 
be  blank.  Without  any  mark  of  sur 
prise,  he  held  the  paper  up  before  the 
audience,  and  said:  'My  friends,  I 
am  here  today  according  to  agreement, 
to  preach  from  such  a  text  as  these 
gentlemen  might  select  for  me.  I  have 
it  here  in  my  hand.  I  don't  wish  you 
to  become  offended  at  me,  for  I  am  un- 
der promiSH  to  preach  from  the  text 
selected;  and  if  any  one  is  to  blame, 
you  mu.st  blame  those  who  selected  it. 
I  knew  nothing  of  what  text  they 
would  choose,   but  of  all  texts   this 


rj 


58 


LATTER-DAY    SAINT 


my  favorite  one.  You  see  the  paper  is 
blank  (at  the  same  time  holding  it  up 
to  view).  You  sectarians  down  there 
believe  that  out  of  nothing  God  creat- 
ed all  things,  and  now  you  wish  nie  to 
create  a  sermon  from  nothing,  for  thiss 
paper  is  blank.  Now,  you  sectarians 
believe  in  a  God  that  has  neither 
body,  parts  nor  passions.  Such  a  God 
I  conceive  to  be  a  perfect  blank,  just 
as  you  find  my  text  is.  You  believe 
in  a  church  without  Prophets,  Apostles, 
Evangelists,  etc.  Such  a  church  would 
be  a  perfect  blank,  as  compared  with 
the  Church  of  Christ,  and  this  agrees 
with  my  text.  You  have  located  youi 
heaven  beyond  the  bounds  of  time  and 
space.  It  exists  nowhere,  and  conse- 
quently your  heaven  is  blank,  like  un- 
to my  text.'  Thus  he  went  on  until 
he  had  torn  to  pieces  all  the  tenets  of 
^'aith  professed  by  his  hearers,  and  then 
proclaimed  the  principles  of  tho  gospel 
in  .'4rcul  pcwer.  He  wound  up  b.v  ask- 
ing, 'Have  I  stuck  to  the  text  and  does 
that  satisfy  you?'  As  soon  as  he  Sr;t 
down,  Mr.  Floyd  jumped  up  and  said; 
'Mr.  Grant,  if  you  are  not  a  lawyer, 
Vyou  ought  to  be  one.'  Then  turning  ro 
the  people,  he  added:  'Gentlemen,  you 
have  listened  to  a  wonderful  'Jiscourso, 
and  with  amazement.  Now,  take  a 
look  at  Mr.  Grant's  clothes.  Look  at 
his  coat:  his  elbows  are  almost  out: 
and  his  knees  are  almost  through  his 
pants.  Let  U3  take  up  ^  collection. 
As  he  sat  down  another  eminent  lawyer 
Joseph  Stras,  Esq.,  still  living  in  Jef- 
fersonville,  arose  and  said:  'I  am  good 
for  one  sleeve  in  a  coat  and  one  leg  in 
a  pair  of  pants,  for  Mr.  Grant.'  The 
presiding  elder  of  the  M.  E.  church, 
South,  was  requested  to  pass  the  hat 
around,  but  he  replied  that  he  would 
not  take  up  a  collection  for  a  'Mor- 
mon' preacher.  'Yes  you  will,'  said 
Mr.  Floyd;  'Pass  it  around,'  said  Mr. 
Stras,  and  the  cry  was  taken  up  and 
repeated  by  tho  audience,  until,  for  the 
sake  of  peace,  the  minister  had  to  yi'.l  1. 
He  accordingly  marched  aroand  -^'Jlh 
a  hat  in  his  hand,  receiving  contribu- 
tions, which  resulted  in  a  collection  suf- 
ficient to  purchase  a  fine  suit  of  clothes, 
a  horse,  paddle  and  bridle  for  i:>rother 
Grant,  and  noi  one  contributor  a  mem- 
ber of  tJ.e  Church  of  Jesus  Christ  (f 
Latter-day  f^aints,  though  some  joined 
subsequently.  And  this  from  a  ser- 
mon produced  from  a  blank  text.  At 
another  time.   Elder     Grant  was  chal- 


s  a 
—a 


lenged  by  a  very  eminent  Baptist  1 
preacher,  named  Baldwin,  to  a  discus- 
sion. Brother  Grant  consented.  The 
place  chosen  was  the  fine,  large  church 
of  his  proud  and  imperious  antagonist. 
Mr.  Baldwin  was  described  to  me,  as  a 
man,  overbearing  in  his  manner 
regular  browbeater.  When  the  timb 
came  lor  the  discussion,  the  house  vas 
densely  crowded.  Umpires  were  chosen, 
and  everything  was  ready  to  proceed, 
when  riioiher  Grant  arose  and  sa.id: 
'Mr  Baldwin.  I  would  like  to  ask  you 
a  question  before  we  proceed  any  far- 
ther.' 'Certainly  so,'  said  Baldwin 
'Who  stands  at  the  head  of  you 
church  in  south-west  Virginia?'  Mr 
Baldwin  very  quickly  and  austerely  re 
plied,  'I  do,  sir;  I  do.'  'All  right,'  sail 
Brother  Grant;  'I  wished  to  know  that 
I  had  a  worthy  foe.'  Mr.  Baldwi  i 
looked  a  little  confused  for  a  momen  ,, 
and  then  said:  'Mr.  Grant,  I  would  liks 
to  ask  you,  who  stands  at  the  head  c  f 
your  church  in  south-west  Virginia'' 
Brother  Grant  arose  and  with  bowe  I 
head  replied,  'Jesus  Christ,  sir.'  Th  i 
shock  was  electrical.  This  inspired  an- 
swer completely  disarmed  the  prou 
foe,  and  the  humble  servant  of  Go 
again  came  off  victor."  Having  com 
pleted  his  southern  mission  in  1842,  El- 
der Grant  returned  to  Nauvoo.  He  left 
the  kind-hearted  people  of  Virginia 
with  tears  in  their  eyes.  They  had 
learned  the  principles  of  life  from  his 
utterances  and  daily  example, and  loved 
him  as  the  messenger  of  heaven  sent 
to  save  them.  For  five  days  previous 
to  his  departure,  a  protracted  series  ot 
meetings  was  held  at  Burk's  Garden, 
when  hundreds  attended  and  the  El- 
ders were  kept  busy  preaching  to  the 
large  congregations,  and  baptizing  and 
confirming  converts.  In  June,  1843, 
Brother  Grant  went  to  Philadelphia  to 
preside  over  the  Saints  there.  He  re- 
mained in  that  city,  making  many 
valued  friends  and  officiating  in  the 
duties  of  his  office,  until  March,  1844, 
when  he  again  reached  Nauvoo.  His 
stay,  however,  was  short,  for  on  the 
9th  of  the  following  May  he  started,  in 
company  with  Elders  Wilford  Wood- 
ruff and  George  A  Smith,  on  a  preach- 
ing expedition  through  Illinois,  the  in- 
tention being  to  continue  the  tour  east- 
ward through  several  States.  Fronr» 
this  mission,  however,  he  was  suddenly 
recalled,  and  was  in  Nauvoo  at  the 
time  of  the  martyrdom  of  the  Prophet 


BIOGRAPHICAL.   ENCYCLOPEDIA. 


59 


and  Patriarch  June  27,  1844.  He  pro- 
ceeded at  once  to  carry  the  tidings  of 
this  awful  tragedy  to  the  Apostles  and 
other  Elders  in  the  Eastern  States  and 
resumed  his  station  at  Philadelphia. 
Previous  to  leaving-  Nauvoo,  July  2nd, 
he  was  married  to  Miss  Caroline  Van- 
dyke, Bishop  Newel  K.  Whitney  offici- 
ating. His  wife  accompanied  him  to 
Philadelphia.  His  mission  there  was 
m.ade  particularly  remarkable  by  the 
position  he  took  in  regard  to  Sidney 
Rigdon's  peculiar  apostate  doctrines 
and  the  efforts  of  his  followers  to  es- 
tablish his  claim  to  the  guardianship 
of  the  Church.  Certain  letters,  which 
Brother  Grant  published  upon  these 
subjects,  were  so  clear,  as  were  all  his 
writings,  and  the  strictures  upon  Rig- 
don's course  so  manifestly  just,  that 
they  at  once  quelled  the  fears  of  the 
doubting  Saints,  and  exhibited  in  plain- 
ness the  true  position  of  the  faithful  as 
well  as  the  assumption  of  the  ambi- 
tious apostate.  In  May,  1845,  Eldei 
Grant  returned  to  Nauvoo,  and  in  the 
following  winter  received  the  blessings 
of  the  House  of  the  Lord,  assisting,  al- 
so, in  administering  those  sacred  or- 
dinances to  many  others.  He  was 
chosen  and  set  apart  as  one  of  the  First 
Seven  Presidents  of  Seventies  Dec.  2, 
1845,  under  the  hands  of  Apostles  Brig- 
ham  Young,  and  others.  He  was  among 
the  first  who  left  Nauvoo  in  the  exodus 
of  1846,  crossing  the  river  in  February, 
and  with  the  body  of  the  Saints  turn- 
ing his  back  upon  the  tyrannical  op- 
pression of  mobs  and  treacherous 
friends  to  seek  an  asylum  of  peace  in 
the  fastnesses  of  the  mountains  of  the 
great  West.  From  Winter  Quarters 
he  went  east  in  the  winter  of  1846-7,  on 
a  short  mission,  during  which  he  pur- 
chased the  materials  for  making  a 
flag,  which  for  several  years  floated 
over  "the  land  of  the  free  and  the 
homes  of  the  blest"  in  Salt  Lake  City, 
and  was  familiarly  known  as  "the 
mammoth  flag."  After  transacting  im- 
portant business  in  the  interests  of  th« 
exodus,  he  returned,  in  June,  1847,  to 
the  Missouri  river,  and  was  appointed 
captain  of  the  third  hundred  of  the 
emigrating  Saints  which  he  success- 
fully led  to  Great  Salt  Lake  valley, 
arriving  in  the  following  October.  A 
year  after,  with  characteristic  energy 
and  promptness,  he  went  out  beyond 
Fort  Bridger  with  several  men  and 
teams    to     relieve     President     Willard 


Richards  and  company  and  assist  them, 
in.  May  26,  1849,  he  was  elected  brig- 
adier-general of  the  first  brigade  of 
the  Nauvoo  Legion,  and  later  (Oct.  23. 
1852),  he  was  promoted  to  the  major- 
generalship  of  the  First  Division,  which 
military  ofllce  he  held  until  his  death. 
He  was  an  efficient  officer,  valiant,  en- 
ergetic and  just.  In  the  difficulties 
with  the  Indians  he  manifested  con- 
siderable skill,  and  always  was  re- 
garded as  eminently  jealous  of  the 
rights  of  the  red  men  as  well  as  of  the 
safety  of  the  whites.  In  the  fall  of 
1849,  Elder  Grant  went  to  the  States 
on  business,  together  with  about  forty 
missionaries,  who  elected  him  captain 
of  the  company.  Among  the  number 
were  Apostles  John  Taylor,  Erastus 
Snow,  Lorenzo  Snow  and  Franklin  D. 
Richards,  Bishop  Edward  Hunter,  and 
several  other  prominent  Elders.  They 
had  reached  the  banks  of  the  Platte 
river  some  distance  west  of  Fort  Lara- 
mie, and  were  camped  for  noon  on  a 
cold,  wintry  day,  in  a  horseshoe  bend  of 
the  river,  when  they  were  attacked  b> 
;i  large  war  party  of  the  Cheyennes. 
who  were  painted  and  equipped  for 
war,  on  their  way  out  to  engage  with 
a  hostile  band  of  the  Crows.  With  the 
utmost  energy  the  animals  were  got 
together  and  fastened,  and  a  line  in 
open  rank  formed  from  the  river's  bank 
to  face  the  Indians  and  prevent  then* 
from  surrounding  the  party.  The  mis- 
sionaries pursued  their  way  without 
further  molestation.  Elder  Grant  ac- 
complished the  object  of  his-  mission 
and  returned  to  the  Valley  the  follow- 
ing yepr,  in  charge  of  a  merchant  train. 
Great  Salt  Lake  City  was  incorporated 
Jan.  1.0,  1851,  and  at  the  first  election 
held  under  the  charter  on  the  first 
Monday  of  the  next  April,  Jedediah  M. 
Grant  was  elected  Mayor,  which  office 
he  magnified  in  an  eminent  degree  and 
held  uninterruptedly,  by  the  unanimous 
vote  of  the  people,  until  his  death. 
During  the  period  of  his  administration, 
the  first  ordinances  for  the  government, 
safety  and  general  welfare  of  the  peo- 
ple were  enacted,  forming  the  basis 
of  the  municipal  regulations  undei 
which  the  city  has  grown  and  pros- 
pered to  the  present  time.  On  the, 
organization  of  the  Territory  of  Utah, 
certain  officials  appointed  by  the  Presi- 
dent of  the  United  States  found  the 
situation  in  Utah,  on  their  arrival 
there,   not  to  their  liking;   and  after  a 


fiO 


LATTER-DAY    SAINT 


few  months'  sojourn,  during  which  they 
did  nothing  for  their  own  glory,  nor 
for  the  government  or  the  people,  they 
returned  to  the  East  and  united  in 
framing  a  report  to  the  administration 
at  ^V■ashington,  which  grossly  misrepre- 
sented the  people  of  Utah  and  con- 
tained many  outrageous  charges 
against  them,  calculated  to  Influence 
public  opinion  and  to  prejudice  the 
government  officials  in  their  intercourse 
with  the  Territory.  For  the  purpose 
of  countera.cting  whatever  evil  effects 
the  "runaway  judges'  "  report  might 
have  and  of  setting  fairly  before  the 
country  the  situation  of  the  people  in 
the  mountains — then  so  isolated  and 
remote  from  the  inhabited  part  of  the 
continent — Mayor  Grant  was  called  to 
go  to  Philadelphia  and  New  York,  and 
do  wnit  he  could  to  gain  the  public 
attention,  while  he  exploded  the  false- 
hoods of  the  judges  and  set  the  matter 
right  respecting  the  new  Territorial 
ward  which  had  been  adopted.  He  ad- 
dressed some  letters  to  James  Gordon 
Bennett,  the  elder,  which  were  pub- 
lished in  the  New  York  "Herald."  They 
had  an  electrical  effect.  The  "report" 
fell  flat  and  the  runaway  officials  never 
recovered  from  the  wholesome  exposure 
of  their  conduct.  The  New  York 
"Herald"  letters,  after  creating  consid- 
erable sensation  in  the  great  cities  and 
doing  most  effectual  work  in  Washing- 
ton, were  printed  in  pamphlet  form  and 
widely  circulated  in  the  East.  A  high- 
Iv  characteristic  feature  of  this  pam- 
phlet was  the  introduction  of  pungent 
proverbs  as  head  and  foot  lines  on 
each  page,  in  black  type,  which  were 
selected  with  singular  discernment  foi 
their  appropriate  relation  to  the  text 
as  well  as  for  their  finer  humor  and 
superior  sense.  Brother  Grant  was 
chosen  speaker  of  the  House  of  Rep- 
resentatives in  the  legislative  assembly 
of  Ctah,  in  1852,  and  at  the  three  sub- 
sequent sessions,  filling  that  office  with 
dignity  and  honor,  to  the  fullest  satis- 
faction of  the  members  over  whom  he 
presided.  As  a  legislator  he  was  quick 
and  talented  and  brought  to  the  law- 
making department  a  high  practical 
sense  of  justice  and  right,  which  quali- 
fied him  to  propose  and  render  valuable 
aid  in  framing  wholesome  laws  for  the 
political  and  domestic  welfare  of  the 
community.  But  his  great  work,  which 
preserves    the     memory     of    President 


Grant  in  the  hearts  of  the  Latter-day 
Saints,  was  in  his  ecclesiastical  call- 
ing. In  1854  he  was  ordained  an 
Apostle  and  chosen  and  set  apart  to  be 
second  counselor  in  the  First  Presiden- 
cy, succeeding  Willard  Richards  in 
that  calling.  In  this  position  he  was 
distinguished  for  the  burning  zeal  that 
seemed  to  fire  his  bosom  and  keep  him 
ever  at  work  dispensing  the  blessings 
of  the  gospel  to  the  people  and  awak- 
ening within  them  that  enthusiasm 
and  sincerity  necessary  to  the  faithful 
believer  in  pursuing  the  life  of  a  Saint, 
and  which  was  ever  exemplified  in  the 
career  of  Brother  Grant.  His  zeal 
hardly  had  bounds,  except  those  of  the 
God-given  intelligence  which  preserved 
him  from  fanaticism,  but  he  loved  the 
work  of  the  Lord  with  his  whole  heart 
and  dedicated  without  reserve  his 
might,  mind  and  strength  to  its  ac- 
complishment. The  exemplary  faith 
and  devotion  of  such  a  man  inspired  his 
fellows  to  efforts  of  godliness  that  they 
would  never  dream  of  if  left  to  them- 
selves, and  this  quality  so  pre-emi- 
nently displayed  by  Brother  Grant, 
brought  him  to  the  front  as  the  main 
leader,  under  the  counsel  of  President 
Young,  of  the  Great  Reformation  of 
1856-7.  The  last  six  months  of  his  life 
he  labored  indefatigably  and  beyona 
his  physical  strength  in  starting  and 
rolling  on  that  famous  revival  which 
kindled  a  fire  in  the  midst  of  Zion  that 
was  joyfully  felt  by  the  Saints  the 
whole  world  over,  and  caused  sinners 
to  tremble  and  many  to  flee  from  the 
habitations  of  the  Saints.  The  thou- 
sands who  responded  to  the  eloquent 
appeal  of  this  inspired  speaker  as  he 
journeyed  from  town  to  town,  pro- 
claiming the  truth  to  the  people,  is  the 
best  evidence  of  his  power  that  could 
be  given.  Among  the  reforms  urged 
were  cleanliness  of  person  and  proper- 
ty, repentance  and  confession  of  wrongs 
committed  between  man  and  man,  ac- 
cording to  the  Church  law  governing 
offences,  and  a  very  great  deal  was  said 
in  regard  to  training  children  in  habits 
of  industry,  to  make  them  self-reliant 
and  independent.  Restitution  for 
wrongs  done  was  required,  and  the 
people  were  urged  to  purify  them- 
selves from  every  shadow  or  stain  of 
evil  doing,  that  they  might  participate 
in  the  blessings  of  the  sacrament  and 
other   ordinances   worthily.     The   spirit 


BIOGRAPHICAL    ENCYCLOPEDIA. 


61 


of  the  Reformation  was  one  of  humility 
and  mutual  forgiveness  rather  than  of 
strict  discipline  or  law.  There  were 
comparatively  few  excommunications, 
but  there  was  a  universal  revival  of 
spiritual  life  and  energy,  such  as  the 
Saints  had  never  before  witnessed  in 
the  Church.  The  pre-eminently  useful 
labors  of  President  Grant  in  the  re- 
formation exhausted  the  vital  force 
of  his  strong-  constitution,  and  were  fol- 
lowed by  a  brief  and  severe  illness, 
from  which  he  was  unable  to  recover. 
His  prostration  caused  gloom  among 
the  people,  but  was  made  the  occasion 
to  him  of  receiving,  before  death,  some 
of  the  most  remarkable  manifestations 
that  are  ever  given  to  men  in  the  flesh. 
At  Elder  Grant's  funeral  Heber  C. 
Kimball  gave  the  following  account 
thereof:  "I  will  not  stoop  to  the  prin- 
ciple of  death.  I  could  weep,  but  I 
Avill  not.  There  is  a  spirit  in  me  that 
rises  above  that  feeling,  and  it  is  be- 
cause Jedediah  is  not  dead.  I  went  to 
see  him  one  day  last  week,  and  he 
reached  out  his  hand  toward  me.  He 
could  not  spea.k,  but  he  shook  hands 
warmly  with  me.  *  *  *  i  laid  my  hands 
upon  him  and  blessed  him,  and  asked 
God  to  strengthen  his  lungs  that  he 
might  be  easier;  and  in  two  or  three 
minutes  he  raised  himself  up  and  talked 
for  about  an  hour  as  busily  as  he  could, 
telling  me  what  he  had  seen  and  what 
he  understood,  until  I  was  afraid  he 
would  weary  himself,  when  I  arose  and 
left  him.  He  said  to  me:  "Brother 
Heber,  I  have  been  into  the  spirit 
world  two  nights  in  succession,  and  of 
all  the  dreads  that  ever  came  across 
iTie,  the  worst  was  to  have  to  again 
return  to  my  body,  though  I  had  to  do 
it.  'But  oh,'  says  he,  'the  order  and 
government  that  were  there.  When  in 
the  spirit  world,  I  saw  the  order  of 
righteous  men  and  women;  I  beheld 
them  organized  in  their  several  grades, 
and  there  appeared  to  be  no  obstruc- 
tions to  my  vision;  I  could  see  every 
man  and  woman  in  their  grade  and 
order.  I  looked  to  see  if  there  was 
any  disorder  there,  but  there  was  none; 
neither  could  I  see  any  death,  nor  any 
darkness,  disorder  or  confusion.'  He 
said  that  the  people  he  saw  were  or- 
ganized in  family  capacities,  and  when 
he  looked  at  them,  he  saw  grade  after 
grade,  and  all  were  organized  and  in 
perfect  harmony.  He  would  mention 
one  item  after  another,  and  say,  'Why, 


it  is  just  as  Brother  Brigham  says  it 
is;  it  is  just  as  he  has  told  us  many 
a  time.'  He  saw  the  righteous  gath 
ered  together  in  the  spirit  world,  and 
there  were  no  wicked  spirits  among 
them.  He  saw  his  wife  Caroline,  who 
was  the  first  person  that  came  to  him. 
He  saw  many  that  he  knew,  but  did 
not  have  conversation  with  any  but 
his  wife.  She  came  to  him,  and  he 
said  that  she  looked  beautiful  and  had 
their  little  child  that  died  on  the  plains, 
in  her  arms.  She  said,  'Mr.  Grant, 
here  is  little  Margaret;  you  know  the 
wolves  ate  her  up,  but  it  did  not  hurt 
her;  here  she  is  all  right.'  'To  my  as- 
tonishment,' he  said,  'when  I  looked 
at  families,  there  was  a  deficiency  in 
some;  there  was  a  lack,  for  I  saw 
families  that  would  not  be  permitted 
to  come  and  dwell  together,  because 
they  had  not  honored  their  calling 
here.'  He  asked  his  wife,  where  Jo- 
seph and  Hyrum  and  Father  Smith 
and  others  were.  She  replied,  'They 
have  gone  away  ahead,  to  perform  and 
transact  business  for  us.'  He  also 
spoke  of  the  buildings  he  saw  there, 
remarking  that  the  Lord  gave  Solomon 
Avisdom  and  poured  gold  and  silver  into 
his  hands,  that  he  might  display  his 
skill  and  ability;  and  said  that  the 
temple  erected  by  Solomon  was  much 
inferior  to  the  most  ordinary  building 
he  saw  in  the  spirit  world.  'In  regard 
to  gardens,'  said  Brother  Grant,  'I 
have  seen  good  gardens  on  this  earth, 
but  I  never  saw  any  to  compare  with 
those  that  were  there.  I  saw  flowers 
of  numerous  kinds,  and  some  with  fif- 
ty or  a  hundred  different  colored  flowers 
growing  on  one  stalk.'  We  have  many 
kinds  of  flowers  on  the  earth,  and  I 
suppose  those  very  articles  came  from 
heaven,  or  they  would  not  be  here.' 
Some  may  marvel  at  my  speaking 
about  these  things,  for  many  profess  to 
believe  that  we  have  no  spiritual  ex- 
istence. But  do  you  not  believe  that 
my  spirit  was  organized  before  it 
came  to  my  body  here?  And  do  you 
not  think  there  can  be  houses  and  gar- 
dens, fruit  trees  and  every  other  good 
thing  there?  The  spirits  of  those 
things  are  made  as  well  as  our  spirits, 
and  it  follows  that  they  can  exist  upon 
the  same  principles.  After  speaking  of 
the  gardens  and  the  beauty  of  every- 
thing there.  Brother  Grant  said  that  hb 
felt  extremely  sorrowful  at  having  to 
leave    so    beautiful    a   place   and   coma 


62 


LATTER-DAY  SAINT 


back  to  earth,  for  he  looked  upon  his 
body  with  loathing,  but  was  obliged 
to  enter  it  again."  This  imperfect  ac- 
count of  the  wonderful  vision  of  those 
two  nights  as  related  by  Elder  Kimball 
was  listened  to  with  rapt  attention  by 
the  large  audience,  and  was  repeated 
for  years  after  by  many  who  heard  it. 
A  profound  sensation  was  produced  b> 
its  narration,  for  it  unfolded  to  many 
minds  details  of  the  glory  of  the  spirit 
world  that  they  had  not  realized  from 
reading  the  general  expressions  in 
which  the  revelations  tell  of  them. 
President  Grant  breathed  his  last,  Dec. 
1,  1856,  and  his  spirit  went  joyfully  to 
mingle  with  those  of  his  friends,  faml 
ly  and  brethren  who  had  gone  before. 
He  was  forty  years  of  age  when  h-- 
died,  but  ha4  spent  those  years  to  such 
advantage  in  laboring  for  the  welfare 
of  his  fellow  men  that  he  was  mourned 
by  thousands,  and  left  in  their  mem- 
ories a  name  that  will  be  forever  cher- 
ished as  a  symbol  of  virtue,  integTit> 
and  honor.  The  editor  of  the  "Deserei 
News,"  in  closing  his  obituary,  says. 
"Brother  Grant  needs  no  eulogy,  and 
least  of  all  such  an  one  as  our  lan- 
guage could  portray,  for  his  whole  life 
\Nas  one  of  noble  and  diligent  action 
upon  the  side  of  truth,  of  high  toned 
and  correct  example  to  all  who  desire 
to  be  saved  In  the  Kingdom  of  our  God. 
As  a  citizen,  as  a  friend,  a  son,  a 
husband,  a  father,  and  above  all  as  a 
Saint,  and  in  every  station  and  cir- 
cumstance of  life,  whether  military, 
civil,  or  religious,  he  everywhere,  and 
at  all  times,  shed  forth  the  steady  and 
brilliant  light  of  lofty  and  correct  ex- 
ample, and  died,  as  he  lived  and  coun- 
.seled,  with  his  'armor  on  and  burn- 
ished." Though  the  Saints  deeply  feel 
liis  departure,  yet  they  can  fully  realize 
that  it  redounds  to  his  and  our  infinite 
gain."  (For  further  particulars  see 
"Contributor,"  Vol.  4;  "Millennial 
Star,"  Vol.  19,  p.  185,  Vol.  42,  p.  755; 
Faith  Promoting  Series,  Book  2,  pp. 
43-52.) 

WKIiliS,  Daniel  Haniner,  second 
counselor  to  President  Brigham  Young 
from  1857  to  1877,  was  the  son  of  Daniel 
Wells  and  Catherine  Chapin,  and  was 
born  at  Trenton,  Oneida  county,  New 
York,  Oct.  27,  1814.  His  father  served 
In  the  war  of  1812  and  was  a  "lecend- 
ant  of  the  celebrated  Thomas  Wells, 
the  fourth  governor  of  Connecticut, who 


was  several  times  elected  alternately 
as  governor  and  lieutenant-governor  of 
that  colony.  Daniel  H.  Wells'  mother 
was  the  daughter  of  David  Chapin,  a 
revolutionary  soldier  and  connected 
with  one  of  the  oldest  and  most  dis- 
tinguished New  England  families.  He 
served  under  the  immediate  command 
of  Washington  during  the  greater  part 
of  the  War  of  Independence.  In  1826, 
when  he  was  but  twelve  years  of  age, 
Daniel  H.  lost  his  father,  and  six  years 
later,  together  with  his  mother  and 
sister,  he  moved  to  Ohio  and  the  fol- 
lowing spring  to  Illinois.  He  took  up 
his  abode  at  Commerce,  then  a  small 
village,  but  afterwards  noted  as  the 
"Mormon"   city  of  Nauvoo.       Here     he 


was  elected  constable  and  later  justice 
of  the  peace;  he  was  also  an  officer 
in  the  first  militia  organization  of  the 
district.  In  politics  he  was  a  Whig 
and  figured  prominently  in  the  political 
conventions  of  the  period.  As  an  ar- 
dent champion  of  universal  liberty 
and  a  foe  to  oppression  in  every  form, 
he  was  highly  esteemed  by  people  of 
all  parties  and  creeds,  and  frequently 
acted  as  arbitrator  in  difficulties  be- 
tween neighbors  and  families.  "Squire 
Wells"  was  noted,  in  that  early  day, 
as  a  man  of  strict  integrity,  with 
a  high  sense  of  justice  and  impartiali- 
ty. In  1839,  when  the  Saints,  fleeing 
from  Missouri,  settled  at  Commerce, 
he  aided  in  securing  for  them  a  cordial 
welcome.  Among  other  pieces  of 
property,    he   owned    eighty     acres     of 


BIOGRAPHICAL    ENCYCLOPEDIA. 


63 


land  on  the  bluff.  This  he  platted 
into  city-lots,  which  he  let  the  poor  and 
persecuted  refugees  have  at  very  \ov, 
figures  and  on  long  time  for  payment. 
This  endeared  him  to  the  people  and 
determined  the  location  of  the  chief 
part  of  the  city,  and  of  the  Temple 
v^'hich  was  built  on  land  that  had  be- 
longed to  him.  On  making  the  ac- 
quaintance of  the  Prophet  Joseph 
Smith  he  became  strongly  attached  to 
bim,  though  then  unconnected  with  the 
Church.  When  the  charter  was  grant- 
ed by  the  Illinois  legislature  to  the 
City  of  Nauvoo,  he  was  elected  an  al- 
derman and  a  member  of  the  city 
council;  also  a  regent  of  the  Universi- 
ty and  a  brigadier-general  in  the  Nau- 
voo Legion.  He  was  prominent  in  the 
citv  affairs  and  supported  every  public 
measure  for  the  progress  and  welfare 
of  the  citizens.  When  the  opposition 
to  the  "Mormons"  reached  its  height, 
General  Wells  remained  on  the  side  of 
the  assailed  people  and  would  not  join 
in  any  of  the  movements  for  their 
injury.  The  murder  of  the  Prophet 
and  Patriarch  (Joseph  and  Hyrum) 
aroused  his  deepest  indignation,  and  he 
strongly  protested  against  the  demand 
of  the  governor  of  the  State  for  the 
arms  of  the  Legion,  which  was  made 
under  the  pretext  that  the  people  of 
Nauvoo  might  attempt  to  avenge  the 
slaughter  of  their  leaders.  But  it  was 
not  until  the  exodus  of  the  main  body 
of  the  Church,  and  the  people  who  re- 
mained in  the  city  were  in  their  direst 
extremity,  being  attacked  by  their  ene- 
mies in  violation  of  a  solemn  compact, 
that  this  sterling  champion  of  the  op- 
presed  cast  in  his  lot  for  life  with  the 
Latter-day  Saints.  After  his  baptisn. 
on  Aug.  9,  1846,  he  gave  the  Church  his 
full  faith  and  support.  In  the  battle 
of  Nauvoo,  General  Wells  was  prac- 
tically the  leading  spirit.  Col.  John- 
son was  taken  sick  and  Lieutenant- 
Colonel  Cutler  assumed  the  command. 
Brother  Wells  was  his  aide,  and  on  his 
white  charger  was  a  prominent  target 
for  the  enemy's  bullets.  His  house 
also  was  fired  upon  repeatedly.  He 
escaped  unharmed,  and  during  the 
three  days'  siege  was  a  tower  of 
strength  to  the  men  who  were  fighting 
for  home  and  fam.ily.  When  the  cit> 
was  evacuated,  he  was  one  of  the  last 
to  leave,  and  being  fired  upon  by  the 
<?nemy's  cannon  after  crossing  the  river 
into  Iowa,  he  sent  one  of  the  balls  with 


his  compliments  to  the  governor  of  that 
State,  as  a  specimen  of  Illinois'  respect 
for  its  obligations.  One  of  the  terms 
of  the  treaty  between  the  Saints  and 
the  mob  was  that  the  former  should 
cross  into  Iowa  unmolested  and  have 
their  arms  returned  to  them.  Brother 
Wells  rode  day  and  night  in  a  one 
horse  buggy  to  reach  the  main  body  ot 
the  exiled  "Mormons,"  that  teams 
might  be  immediately  sent  back  for  the 
remnant  that  had  been  expelled  from 
Nauvoo.  After  settling  up  his  affairs 
in  Illinois,  he  started  for  the  West  and 
came  to  Utah  in  1848,  acting  as  aide- 
de-camp  to  President  Brigham  Young 
on  the  second  journey  of  the  pioneers. 
When  Great  Salt  Lake  City  was  laid 
out,  Brother  Wells  drew  a  lot  in  the 
Eighth  Ward,  but  as  President  Young 
desired  his  near  presence,  he  moved  tt. 
the  east  side  of  the  Eagle  Gate,  ana 
subsequently  to  the  land  east  of  thts 
"Deseret  News"  ofllice,  where  he  occu- 
pied the  small  adobie  houses  which 
stood  there  until  a  recent  date,  and 
where  most  of  his  children  were  born. 
Brother  Wells  took  an  active  part  in 
the  organization  of  the  provisional 
State  of  Deseret,  and  was  elected  to 
the  first  legislative  council  and  ap- 
pointed as  State  attorney,  and  was  also 
elected  major-general  of  the  Nauvoo 
Legion  (the  State  militia),  by  the  Gen- 
ei-al  Assembly  May  26,  1849.  He  re- 
ceived the  rank  of  lieutenant-general  of 
the  Legion  March  27,  1852,  and  was 
commissioned  to  that  office  by  Gover- 
nor Brigham  Young  March  7,  1855.  On 
the  passage  of  the  Territorial  militia 
law  providing  for  the  election  of  gen- 
eral officers,  he  was  re-elected  lieu- 
tenant-general April  6,  1857.  In  the 
Indian  troubles  that  arose  in  Utah 
county  and  afterwards  in  Sanpete 
county,  General  Wells  took  the  field  in 
person,  routing  the  savages  at  Provo, 
and  other  places,  and  saving  the  San- 
pete and  Sevier  settlements  from  the 
disasters  that  subsequently  threatened 
them.  These  Indian  campaigns  were 
conducted  with  great  military  skill  and 
success,  and  cost  a  great  deal  of  money, 
men,  munitions  and  provisions  having 
to  be  largely  furnished  from  Salt  Lake 
City  and  the  north.  A  claim  for  over 
a  million  dollars  against  the  United 
States  remains  to  this  day  unpaid, 
though  made  out  in  due  and  detailed 
form,  in  the  same  manner  as  the  Ore- 
gon claim,    -vhich  was  settled  long  ago. 


64 


LATTER-DAY    SAINT 


General  Wells  was  in  command  of  the 
Echo  Canyon  exi)eclition  in  ISoT-TiS,  anl 
conducted  it  with  signal  skill,  under  the 
direction  of  Governor  Brigham  Young, 
without  shedding  "one  diop  of  blood." 
His  fearless  character,  cool  head  and 
executive  talent  were  here  exhibited  in 
a  manner  that  won  for  him  unfading 
renown  among  the  "Mormon"  people. 
Hon.  Daniel  H.  Wells  was  a  member 
of  the  legislative  council  in  the  Terri- 
torial assembly  for  many  terms,  and 
of  most  of  the  conventions  that  framed 
constitutions  for  Utah's  Statehood.  His 
clear  perception  of  legal  points  and 
strong  regard  for  constitutional  prin- 
cijiles  rendered  him  a  valuable  adviser 
and  able  legislator.  He  was  appointed 
second  counselor  to  President  Brigham 
Young,  Jan.  4,  1857,  filling  the  vacancy 
occasioned  by  the  death  of  President 
Jedediah  M.  Grant.  Brother  Wells  had 
pre\  iously  been  ordained  an  Apostle, 
and  with  Presidents  Brigham  Young 
and  Heber  C.  Kimball  he  visited  the 
Saints  throughout  the  Territory,  aided 
in  locating  and  organizing  many  settle- 
ments, and  gave  counsel  in  relation  to 
the  affairs  of  the  Church.  He  was  al- 
so the  superintendent  of  public  works, 
occupying  that  position  until  1864.  In 
the  absence  of  President  Young  he  was 
frequently  left  in  charge  of  affairs,  and 
was  looked  to  for  advice  in  important 
matters.  Oct.  28,  1871,  President  Wells 
was  arrested  on  a  trumped  up  charge 
of  being  accessory  to  the  murder  of 
Richard  Yates  at  the  mouth  of  Echo 
canyon  in  1857.  The  notorious  "Bill" 
Hickman  confessed  to  having  done  the 
deed,  but  was  induced  to  implicate  Gen- 
eral AVells,  alleging  that  the  occurrence 
took  place  while  he  was  in  charge  of 
the  Echo  canyon  expedition.  He  was 
sent  to  Fort  Doug!as  for  safe  keeping, 
where  he  received  the  most  courteous 
treatment  from  Gen.  Morrow,  who  re- 
garded the  whole  proceeding  as  an 
outrage.  However,  on  Monday,  the 
31st,  being  brought  before  Judge  Mc- 
Kean,  api)lication  was  made  that  he 
be  admitted  to  bail.  His  attorneys  ad- 
vised him  that  such  an  application 
would  be  in  vain,  but  his  confidence  was 
comi'lete  that  he  would  be  successful, 
and  he  insisted  that  the  attempt  should 
be  made.  In  spite  of  the  claim  of  the 
prosecution  that  this  was  a  chaige  of 
murder  in  the  first  degree.  Judge  Mc- 
Kean  took  into  consideration  all  the 
circumstances,   including  the  fact  that 


the  defendant  was  mayor  of  the  city, 
ami  to  the  surprise  of  the  entire  com- 
munity he  accepted  bail  in  the  sum  of 
$.'iO,000— the  prosecution  demanding  half 
.-1  million— and  the  prisoner  was  re- 
hased.  The  whole  charge,  of  course, 
fell  to  the  ground,  as  there  was  not 
the  slightest  foundation  for  it  in  fact. 
In  the  summer  of  1876  he  was  placed 
in  charge  of  a  company  to  visit  and 
encourage  the  newly  started  settle- 
ments in  Arizona.  While  crossing  the 
Colorado  river  at  Lee's  Ferry,  the  boat, 
containing  his  traveling  wagon  and 
outfit  and  a  number  of  the  party,  was 
capsized  and  thrown  into  the  rushin.g 
and  turbulent  stream.  He  was  only 
an  indifferent  swimmer,  but  though 
weighed  down  with  his  boots  and  cloth- 
ing he  calmly  struck  out  for  the  shore, 
reaching  it  without  wetting  his  necktie. 
He  always  regarded  his  escape  as 
miraculous,  feeling  as  though  unseen 
hands  were  supporting  him.  Bishop 
Lorenzo  W.  Roundy,  who  was  regarded 
£is  an  expert  swimmer,  was  drowned, 
and  the  whole  outfit  was  swept  away 
and  lost.  His  position  as  one  of  the 
First  Presidency  he  occupied  until  the 
decease  of  President  Young,  Aug.  29, 
1877.  When  the  Twelve  Apostles  suc- 
ceeded to  the  presidency.  Brother  Wells 
was  appointed  a  counselor  to  that  quo- 
rum, which  position  he  held  until  his 
death.  In  1864  he  went  on  a  mission 
to  Great  Britain,  and,  with  Elder  Brig- 
ham Young,  jun.,  presided  over  all  the 
missions  in  Europe,  visiting  various 
countries,  ministering  to  the  people  and 
superintending  the  emigration.  He  re- 
turned to  Utah  in  the  fall  of  1865,  and 
in  1868  took  charge  of  the  Endowment 
House,  where  he  ministered  in  the  sa- 
cred ordinances  for  the  living  and  the 
dead  for  many  years.  In  February, 
1866.  he  was*  elected  Mayor  of  Salt 
Lake  City.  He  was  re-elected  succes- 
sively until  1876.  The  first  occasion  on 
which  women  exercised  the  elective 
franchise  in  Utah  was  on  Feb.  14.  1870, 
\\  hen  they  cast  their  ballots  for  Daniel 
H.  Weils  for  jnayor  and  for  the  other 
members  of  the  city  council.  In  1872 
he  was  one  of  the  prime  movers  in 
starting  the  gas  works  in  Salt  Lake 
rity.  in  which  he  largely  invested  and 
whifh  proved  a  successful  enterprise. 
At  the  general  election,  held  August  3. 
1^74.  when  a  delegate  to  Congress  was 
to   be   elected,    Robert   N.   Baskin     had 


BIOGRAPHICAL.   ENCYCLOPEDIA. 


es 


been   nominated  as  the  "Liberal"   can- 
didate, in  opposition  to  Hon.  George  Q. 
Cannon;  and  the  U.  S.  marshal,  General 
Maxwell,  attempted  to  take  control  of 
the  election.      No  trouble  occurred  ex- 
cept at  the  Fifth   precinct,   the  polling 
place  for  which  was  at  the  City  Hall. 
Here  a  large  number  of  armed  deputy- 
marshals  with  a  mob  of  "Liberals"  in- 
terfered with  the  police  in  their  efforts 
to  preserve   the  peace.       Some  arrests 
being  made  by  the  police,  they  were  in 
turn  arrested  by  deputy  marshals,  and 
excitement    ran    high.       Mayor     Wells 
was  on  the  spot  and  endeavored  to  keep 
down  the  tumult.      He  was  set  upon  by 
the  mob,  brutally  struck  and  his  coat 
nearly  torn  from  his  back.     The  police 
came  to  his  rescue,  the  mob  was  forced 
back,   and  the  mayor  appeared  on  the 
balcony,  and,  amid  cries  of  "shoot  him, 
shoot   him,"    he   read   the   riot   act   and 
commanded  the  police   to   disperse  th? 
crowd.      This  was  done  at  the  expense 
of  some  broken  heads,  but  w-as  effect- 
ual,   and   the   mayor     and   police    held 
their    places    and    vindicated    the    law. 
The  next  morning  Mayor  Wells  was  ar- 
rested and  put  under  $4,000  bonds.  The 
chief  of  police  and  several  of  his  offi- 
cers were  also  arrested;   but  the  whole 
matter  was  dropped,  and  it  was  every- 
where acknowledged  that  the  city  offi- 
cials  simply   did    their   duty,    and    that 
Mayor  Wells  had  exhibited  fearless  de- 
termination, maintained  the  dignity  of 
his  office  and  prevented  the  serious  con- 
flict desired  by  those  who  provoked  the 
disturbance,    to    be    used    for    political 
purposes.      When  President  Young  was 
sent  to  the  Penitentiary  for  contempt 
of  court  March  11,  1875,  for  not  comply- 
ing with  an  absurd  order  by  Judge  Mc- 
Kean,    President     Wells     accompanied 
him  and  stayed  with  him  until  his  re- 
lease;     his       imprisonment,      however, 
lasted  but  one  day.  Judge  McKean  lost 
his  official  head    for  this  act  of  tyran- 
nical   folly.        In    1879    Brother     Wells 
again  saw  the  inside  of  the  Utah  peni- 
tentiary,   this    time      being    imprisoned 
himself   for   contempt   of   court,    in   re- 
fusing to  disclose  the  secret  and  sacred 
rites  of  the  Endowment  House.      As  a 
witness  in  the  Miles  polygamy  case  on 
May  2,  1879,  he  was  interrogated  by  the 
prosecuting  attorney     in     relation     to 
clothing  worn  in  those  ceremonies.     He 
declined  to  answer,   for  which   he  was 
remanded   to   the  custody  of  the  Mar- 

Vol.  1,  No.  5 


shal,    and    next    day,    being     cited      to 
appear   and    questioned    again,    he    re- 
plied, "I  declined  to  answer  that  ques- 
tion yesterday,     and  do  so  to-day,  be- 
cause  I  am   under  moral     and   sacred 
obligations  to  not  answer;  and  it  is  in- 
terwoven in  my  character  never  to  be- 
tray a  friend,  a  brother,  my  country.my 
God  or  my  religion."    This  was  a  clear 
exhibition  of  the  character  of  the  man. 
Not  for  w-orlds  would  he  swerve  from 
that  position.      He  was  sentenced  to  a 
fine  of  a  hundred  dollars  and  imprison- 
ment for  two  days.    He  paid  the  penal- 
ty,  and   on   May   6th   he   was   escorted 
from  the  penitentiary  by  a  procession, 
hastily  but  thoroughly  organized,  con- 
sisting of  about  ten   thousand     people 
with  banners,  mottoes,  flags  and  signs 
of  rejoicing,   one  of  the   most  remark- 
able gatherings  and  demonstrations  of 
respect,   ever  witnessed   in   the   United 
States  of  America.       An   immense   but 
peaceful  meeting  was  subsequently  held 
in  the  Tabernacle,     where    appropriate 
speeches  w-ere     made.      In     December, 
1884,  Counselor  Wells  crossed  the  ocean 
again  and  presided  over  the  European 
Mission,  visiting  the  branches  and  con- 
ferences  throughout    the     British   Isles 
and  also  in  Scandinavia,  Germany  and 
Switzerland.       His    health    was    feeble, 
but  he  labored  energetically  until     his 
release  in  January,   188?,  when  he     re- 
turned to  the  United  States,  and  after 
visiting  relatives  in   the  East,   reached 
his   home   again   in   July  of   that  year, 
and  was  joyfully  welcomed  by  his  fami- 
ly and  friends.      When  the  Manti  Tem- 
ple   was    completed    and    dedicated    he 
was  appointed  to  take  charge  as  presi- 
dent,  May  21,   1888.       Here  he  was     in 
congenial   element.       The     salvation  of 
the   dead   was   the   chief   attraction   to 
him  in  the  doctrines  expounded  to  him 
by  Joseph  Smith  the  Prophet,  and  led 
to  his  investigation  and  acceptance  of 
the  gospel.       He  officiated  in  the  Tem- 
ple and  performed  his  duties    as  coun- 
selor to  the  Twelve  until  stricken  with 
the    illness    which     culminated     in    his 
death.       He  came    to     Salt  Lake  City, 
March  14,   1891,  and  received  every  at- 
tention  that  loving  hearts    and   hands 
could  bestow.  He  had  suffered  for  many 
years  with  a  painful  physical  ailment, 
but  his  heroic   nature   and   strong  will 
enabled   him   to  surmount   the   difficul- 
ties it  occasioned.       Pleuro-pneumonia 
supervened,  and  at  1  o'clock,  March  24, 

Feb.  2,  1901. 


66 


LATTER-DAY    SAINT 


1S91.  he  iieacefuUy  departed,  being 
without  pain  and  conscious  to  the  last. 
Brother  Wells  would  have  been  a 
leading  character  in  any  community. 
Standing  six  feet  in  height,  with  promi- 
nent features  and  organs  of  perception, 
his  appearance  was  striking  while  his 
manner  was  unassuming.  Apparently 
stern  in  his  demeanor  he  was  really  one 
of  the  V-indest  of  men,  full  of  sympathy 
and  affection,  ready  to  aid  the  dis- 
tress«^d  and  with  a  heart  so  big  that  he 
would  welcome  the  world  to  partake 
of  his  hospitality  and  share  with  him 
whatever  he  had.  His  house  was  al- 
ways open  to  his  friends,  and  while 
acting  as  mayor  of  Salt  Lake  City  he 
entertained  many  distinguished  vis- 
itors, both  Americans  and  foreigners, 
who  respected  him  for  his  virtues, while 
disagreeing  with  his  views  on  re- 
ligion. He  was  a  firm  friend  and  sup- 
porter of  education, was  for  many  years 
chancellor  and  regent  of  the  Universi- 
ty of  Deseret  and  considered  that  a 
good  education  was  the  best  legacy  he 
could  bequeath  to  his  children.  He  was 
also  a  great  reader,  an  ardent  admirer 
of  the  drama,  which  was  his  chief 
amusement,  and  a  promoter  of  music, 
science  and  art.  In  politics  he  was  a 
Republican  from  the  time  of  the  or- 
ganization of  the  party.  He  took  ear- 
nest interest  in  national  politics,  in 
which  he  was  thoroughly  versed,  and 
was  ever  ready  to  maintain  his  views 
though  never  a  bitter  or  contentious 
partizan.  He  was  engaged  in  many 
business  enterprises,  but,  placing  his 
public  duties  first,  his  own  affairs  be- 
came somewhat  complicated  and  at  one 
time  he  was  heavily  involved.  But  of 
late  years  he  was  gradually  extricated 
fr»)m  embarrassment  and  was  able  "o 
leave  his  family  the  possessors  of  un- 
incumbered yet  modest  homes.  Brother 
Wells  had  seven  wives  (six  of  whorn 
survived  him),  by  whom  he  had  thirty- 
seven  children.  Of  these  twenty-four, 
namely  thirteen  sons  and  eleven 
daughters,  were  living  at  the  time  of 
his  demise.  He  left  twenty-five  living 
grandchildren.  His  faith  in  God  and 
in  the  system  called  "Mormonism"  was 
unbounded,  and  his  integrity  to  the 
principles  of  the  gospel  was  unwaver- 
ing. His  testimony  to  the  divine  mis- 
sion of  Joseph  Smith  was  powerful,  and 
from  the  time  he  received  it  by  the 
manifestation    of    the    Holy    Spirit,    he 


never  doubted  it  or  feared  to  face  the- 
opposition  of  its  enemies.  His  was  a 
noble  spirit  and  he  performed  a  noble 
work  on  the  earth. 

SMITH,  Joseph  Fielding,  second 
counselor  to  Presidents  John  Taylor^ 
Wilford  Woodruff  and  Lorenzo  Snow, 
successively,  is  the  son  of  Hyrum  Smith 
and  Mary  Fielding,  and  was  born 
Nov.  13,  1838,  at  Far  West,  Caldwell 
county,  Missouri.  His  father,  Hyrum 
tSmitn,  was  all  and  perhaps  more  to  the 
Prophet  Joseph  Smith,  his  younger 
brotner,  than  Jonathan  anciently  was 
to  David.  Mary  Fielding,  the  mother 
of  Joseph  F.  Smith,  was  a  native  of 
England,  and  for  energy,  faith  and  de- 
termination, coupled  with  good  busi- 
ness abilities,  was  a  most  worthy  and 
suitable  companion  for  her  noble  hus- 
band. The  period  of  Joseph  F.  Smith's 
aavent  into  this  world  was  a  stormy 
and  memorable  one  in  the  history  of 
the  Church.  A  few  days  previous  to- 
his  birth,  his  father,  together  with  Jo- 
seph Smith,  the  Prophet,  and  other 
leading  men  of  the  Cnuixh,  were  be- 
trayed into  the  hands  of  armed  mobo- 
crais,  through  the  cruel  treachery  of 
George  M.  Hinkle,  who  was  a  "Mor- 
mon" and  at  the  same  time  an  officer 
in  the  Missouri  militia.  The  prisoners 
were  courtmartialed  and  sentenced  ta 
be  shot,  but  were  saved  through  the 
interference  of  Gen.  Alexander  W. 
Doniphan.  They  were  then  hustled 
off  to  prison,  but  before  starting  were 
allowed  a  few  minutes  to  bid  farewell 
to  their  families.  While  such  scenes 
were  being  enacted  and  while  mobs, 
plunderings,  drivings,  imprisonments 
without  trial,  or  conviction,  poverty 
and  distress  held  full  sway,  Joseph  F. 
Smith  was  born.  .His  childhood  days 
were  spent  amid  scenes  of  persecution 
and  hardship  which  resulted  in  the 
martyrdom  of  his  father  and  his  uncle, 
Joseph,  June  27,  1844.  His  widowed 
mother  left  Nauvoo  in  1846  as  an  exile 
from  her  home  and  country  for  no- 
other  cause  than  that  of  worshiping 
God  according  to  the  dictates  of  her 
own  conscience.  Although  Joseph  F. 
at  that  time  was  but  a  lad  eight  years 
of  age,  he  drove  an  ox  team  for  his 
mother  acros  the  State  of  Iowa.  Dur- 
ing the  sojourn  of  the  family  at  Winter 
Quarters  (now  Florence,  in  the  State  of 
Nebraska),  Joseph  F.  was  occu- 
pied as    a    herd  boy,  in  which  he  took. 


BIOGRAPHICAL.   ENCYCLOPEDIA. 


67 


special  pride,  feeling  that  his  mother's 
cattle  were  the  only  means  by  which 
they  would  be  able  to  make  their  exodus 
across  the  great  plains  of  the  "far 
West."  Even  after  reaching  Great  Salt 
Lake  valley,  he  was  engaged  in  herd- 
ing, and  so  close  and  conscientious  was 
his  attention  to  duty  that  he  never  lost 
a  "hoof"  through  neglect  or  careless- 
ness; this  attention  and  devotion  to 
responsibilities  placed  upon  him  has 
always  marked  his  character,  and  is 
seen  in  all  the  labors  of  his  life.  Dur- 
ing' his  trials  at  Winter  Quarters,  while 
herding  cattle,  he  passed  through  a 
thrilling  experience  with  Indians,  who 
suddenly  came  upon  him  and  his  com- 
panions for  the  purpose  of  driving  off 
their  cattle.  In  the  exciting  chase,  two 
Indians  rode  up  to  Joseph  F.,  one  on 
either  side  of  him,  and  taking  hold  of 


his  arms  lifted  him  from  the  saddle. 
They  would  probably  have  scalped  him, 
but  for  the  unexpected  appearance  of 
a  number  of  men  who  were  going  to 
the  hay  field.  The  Indians  suddenly 
drorioed  him  to  the  ground,  and  thus 
by  the  aid  of  Providence  his  life  was 
saved;  his  bravery  and  fidelity  to  trust 
saved  the  cattle.  Joseph  F.  was 
taught  by  the  example  and  precept  of 
his  noble  mother  that  in  the  perform- 
ance of  all  duties  and  labors,  he  should 
go  to  the  Lord  in  prayer.  As  a  striking 
illustration  of  the  faith  with  which  he 
became  imbued  in  his  early  boyhood,  by 
the  example  of  his  mother,  we  present 


the  following  incident,  related  by  Jo- 
seph F.,  in  his  own  language:  "In  the 
spring  of  1847  a  portion  of  our  family 
crossed  the  plains,  following  the  pio- 
neers to  the  valley  of  the  Great  Salt 
Lake,  the  remainder  of  the  family  in- 
tending to  proceed  on  their  journey  to 
the  west  in  the  following  spring.  In. 
the  fall  of  1847  my  mother  and  her 
brother.  Joseph  Fielding,  made  a,  trip 
down  the  Missouri  river  to  St.  Joseph, 
Mo.,  about  fifty  miles,  for  the  purpose 
of  obtaining  provisions  and  clothing  for 
the  family  for  the  coming  winter,  and 
for  the  journey  across  the  plains  the 
following  spring.  They  took  two 
wagons  with  two  yokes  of  oxen  on  each. 
I  was  almost  nine  years  of  age  at  this 
time,  and  accompanied  my  mother  and 
uncle  on  this  journey  as  a  teamster.  The 
weather  was  unpropitious,  the  roads 
were  bad,  and  it  rained  a  great  deal 
during  the  iourney,  so  that  the  trip  was 
a  very  hard,  trying  and  unpleasant 
one.  At  St.  Joseph  we  purchased  our 
groceries  and  dry  goods,  and  at  Sav- 
annah we  laid  in  our  store  of  flour, 
meal,  corn,  bacon  and  other  provisions. 
Returning  to  Winter  Quarters,  we 
camped  one  evening  in  an  open  prairie 
on  the  Missouri  river  bottoms,  by  the 
side  of  a  small  spring  creek,  which 
emptied  into  the  river  about  three- 
quarters  of  a  mile  from  us.  We  were 
in  plain  sight  of  the  river,  and  could 
aprarently  see  over  every  foot  of  the 
little  open  prairie  where  we  were 
camped,  to  the  river  on  the  southwest, 
to  the  bluffs  on  the  northeast,  and  to 
the  timber  which  skirted  the  prairie  on 
the  right  and  left.  Camping  near  by,  on 
the  other  side  of  the  creek,  were  some 
men  with  a  herd  of  beef  cattle,  which 
they  were  driving  to  Savannah  and  St. 
Joseph  for  market.  We  usually  un- 
yoked our  oxen  and  turned  them  loose 
to  feed  during  our  encampments  at 
night,  but  this  time,  on  account  of  the 
proximity  of  this  herd  of  cattle,  fearing 
that  they  might  get  mixed  up  and 
driven  off  with  them,  we  turned  our 
oxen  out  to  feed  in  their  yokes.  Next 
morning  when  we  came  to  look  them 
up,  to  our  great  disappointment  our 
best  yoke  of  oxen  was  not  to  be  found. 
Uncle  Fielding  and  I  spent  all  the 
mornine.  well  nigh  until  noon,  hunting 
for  therr  but  without  avail.  The  grass 
was  tall,  and  in  the  morning  was  wet 
with  heavy  dew.  Tramping  through 
this  grass  and  through  the  woods  and 


68 


LATTER-DAY    SAINT 


over  the  bluffs,  we  were  soaked  to  the 
skin,  fatigued,  disheartened  and  ahnost 
exhausted.  In  this  pitiable  plight  I 
was  the  first  to  return  to  our  wagons, 
and  as  I  approached  I  saw  my  mother 
kneeling  down  in  prayer.  I  halted  for 
a  moment  and  then  drew  gently  near 
enough  to  hear  her  pleading  with  the 
j^ord  not  to  sufier  us  to  be  left  in  this 
helpless  condition,  but  to  lead  us  to  re- 
cover our  lost  team,  that  we  might 
continue  our  travels  in  safety.  When 
she  arose  from  her  knees  I  was  stand- 
ing near  by.  The  first  expression  I 
caug-ht  upon  her  precious  face  was  a 
lovely  smile,  which,  discouraged  as  I 
was,  eave  me  rene"-  '  '  -^e  and  an  as- 
surance I  had  not  felt  before.  A  few 
moments  later  Uncle  Fielding  came  to 
the  camp,  wet  with  the  dews,  faint, 
fatigued  and  thoroughly  disheartened. 
His  first  words  were:  'Well,  Mary,  the 
cattle  are  gone!'  Mother  replied  in  a 
voice  which  fairly  rang  with  cheerful- 
ness, 'Never  mind,  your  breakfast  has 
been  waiting  for  hours,  and  now,  while 
you  and  Joseph  are  eating,  I  will  just 
take  a  walk  out  and  see  if  I  can  find 
the  cattle."  My  uncle  held  up  his  hands 
in  blank  astonishment,  and  if  the  Mis- 
souri river  had  suddenly  turned  to  run 
up  stream,  neither  of  us  could  have 
been  much  more  surprised.  'Why, 
Mary,'  he  exclaimed,  "what  do  you 
mean?  We  have  been  all  over  this 
country,  all  through  the  timber  and 
through  the  herd  of  cattle,  and  our 
oxen  are  gone— they  are  not  to  be 
found.  I  believe  they  have  been  driven 
off,  and  it  is  useless  for  you  to  attempt 
to  do  such  a  thing  as  to  hunt  for  them. 
■Never  mind  me,'  said  mother,  'get  your 
breakfast  and  I  will  see,'  and  she  start- 
ed toward  the  river,  following  down 
ceeded  out  of  speaking  distance,  the 
ceeded  out  of  speaking  distance  the 
man  in  charge  of  the  herd  of  beef  cattle 
rode  up  from  the  opposite  side  of  the 
creek  and  called  out;  'Madam,  I  saw 
your  oxen  over  in  that  direction  this 
morning  about  daybreak,'  pointing  in 
the  opposite  direction  from  that  in 
which  mother  was  going.  We  heard 
plainly  what  he  said,  but  mother  went 
right  on,  paid  no  attention  to  his  re- 
mark and  did  not  even  turn  her  head 
to  look  at  him.  A  moment  later  the 
man  rode  off  rapidly  toward  his  herd, 
which  had  been  gathered  in  the  open- 
ing near  the  edge  of  the  woods,  and 
they  were  soon  under  full  drive  for  th.i 


road  leading  toward  Savannah,  and 
soon  disappeared  from  view.  My  mother 
continued  straight  down  the  little 
stream  of  water,  until  she  stood  almost 
on  the  bank  of  the  river,  and  then  she 
beckoned  to  us.  (I  was  watching  her 
every  moment  and  was  determined  that 
she  should  not  get  out  of  my  sight.) 
Instantly  we  rose  from  the  'mess-chest,' 
on  which  our  breakfast  had  been 
spread, and  started  toward  her,and,  like 
John,  who  outran  the  other  disciple  to 
the  sepulchre,  I  outran  my  uncle  and 
came  first  to  the  spot  where  my  mother 
stood.  There  I  saw  our  oxen  fastened 
to  a  clump  of  willows  growing  in  the 
bottom  of  a  deep  gulch  which  had  been 
washed  out  of  the  sandy  banks  of  the 
river  by  the  little  spring  creek,  per- 
fectly concealed  from  view.  We  were 
not  long  in  releasing  them  from  bond- 
age and  getting  back  to  our  camp, 
where  the  other  cattle  had  been  fast- 
ened to  the  wagon  wheels  all  the  morn- 
ing, and  we  were  soon  on  our  way 
homeward  bound,  rejoicing.  This  cir- 
cumstance was  one  of  the  first  prac- 
tical and  positive  demonstrations  of 
the  efficacy  of  prayer  I  had  ever  wit- 
nessed. It  made  an  indelible  impression 
upon  my  mind,  and  has  been  a  source 
of  comfort,  assurance  and  guidance  to 
me  throughout  all  my  life."  The  im- 
pression made  upon  Joseph's  mind  by 
this  striking  answer  to  his  mother's 
prayer,  has  never  left  him,  but  has 
done  much  to  encourage  him  in  meet- 
ing every  responsibility;  causing  him 
to  realize  that  no  matter  how  arduous 
the  task  the  Lord  will  not  fail  those 
who  put  their  trust  in  Him.  Crossing 
the  plains  from  Missouri  river,  to  the 
Great  Salt  Lake  valley,  Brother  Smith 
(though  less  than  ten  years  of  age  at 
that  time)  drove  two  yoke  of  oxen  at- 
tached to  a  heavily  laden  wagon,  the 
entire  distance  of  more  than  one  thou- 
sand miles.  Reaching  the  valley  of  Salt 
Lake  with  his  mother,  Sept.  23,  1848,  he 
continued  in  charge  of  the  cattle  as 
herd  boy  for  several  years,  and  never 
lost  an  animal,  notwithstanding  the 
great  number  of  large  v;olves  in  the 
valley.  This  work  of  herding  was 
interchanged  with  plowing,  harvesting, 
canyon  work,  etc.,  idleness  taking  no 
part  in  the  life  of  this  noble  man.  The 
opportunities  for  education  in  those 
early  days  of  trying  experiences  of  the 
Church,  were  limited.  Such  learning 
as  Brother  Joseph  F.  possessed  he  ac- 


BIOGRAPHICAL.   ENCYCLOPEDIA. 


69 


ciuired    chiefly    from    his    mother.      She 
taught  him   to  read   the   Bible     during 
their  pilgrimage   across    the   plains,    in 
the  tent,   and  by  the  camp  fire.     Such 
facilities    as    have    been    afforded    him 
have  not  passed  by  unimproved.       Be- 
ing fond  of  books,  he  reads  extensive- 
Iv  the  best  of  them,  always  for  the  pur- 
pose  of   learning  lessons   of   worth   for 
practical  use  in   life,   and  it  is  safe   to 
say   that   no   man   living   applies    them 
better  to  himself  an.d  family  than  doe.s 
President  Joseph  F.  Smith.    His  mother 
died    Sept.    21,    1852,    leaving     him      an 
orphan  at  the  age  of  fourteen.     When 
fifteen  years  of  age  he  was  called  on  a 
mission   to  the   Sandwich  Islands.     He 
received    his    endowments    in    the    Old 
Council  House,  and  was  set  apart  in  the 
same   building   by   Apostles   Parley     P. 
Pratt  and  Orson  Hyde.     Brother  Pratt, 
who   was   spokesman     in     setting   him 
apart,   declared  that  he  should  receive 
the     knowledge       of       the      Hawaiian 
language   "by  the  gift  of  God  as  well 
as   by  study."     This  prophecy  was  lit- 
erally  fulfilled,   for   in     less   than   four 
months   from   his   arrival   he   was   able 
to  make  a  tour  of  the  island  of  Maui, 
to  preach,   baptize  and   administer  the 
Sacrament,  etc.,  all  in  the  native  lan- 
guage.      He  left  his  mountain  home  to 
fulfill    this    mission.    May    27,    1854,      in 
company  with  other  missionaries.     The 
southern  route  was  taken,  accompany- 
ing as     far    as     Cedar    City  President 
Brigham  Young  and  party,  who  were  on 
their  tour  to  the  southern  settlements. 
This    little    band    of    missionaries    was 
headed  by  Parley  P.  Pratt.     In  cross- 
ing the  desert  country,   from  southern 
Utah  to  California,  they  were  followed 
a    long    distance    by     numbers    of    the 
Pah-Ute    Indians,    who      were      almost 
famishing   for   food.       The   only   alter- 
native  was   to   share   food   with   them, 
which  they  did    to      keep    on  friendly 
terms.       As   a   result    the   missionaries 
were  compelled  to  subsist  on  very  short 
rations,    consuming    the    last    of    their 
supplies    the    day   they   reached    Cajon 
Pass.       During  the  sojourn  of  Brother 
Joseph  P.  in  California,  he  worked  hard 
to  earn  means  sufficient  to  pay  his  pass- 
age   across    the    Pacific     to    Honolulu; 
much   of   his    time   being   spent   in   the 
manufacture  of  cut  shingles.     He  and 
his  fellow  missionaries  embarked  upon 
the  "Vaquero,"  and  after  a  somewhat 
disagreeable     voyage     they     landed  at 
Honolulu,  Sept.  27,  1854.      Joseph  F.  was 


assigned  to  the  Island  of  Maui,   to  la- 
bor in  company  with  his  cousin,   Silas 
Smith,   Smith  B.   Thurston  and  Wash- 
ington B.  Rogers.      He  was  assigned  to 
Kula,   the   place  where   President   Geo. 
Q.   Cannon   first  introduced   the   gospel 
to  the  Hawaiian  race.      He  pursued  the 
study  of  the  language  with  much  dili- 
gence and  faith,  soon  being  able  to  bear 
witness    that   "by    the   gift   of   God,    as 
well  as  by  study,"   were  the  words  of 
Brother   Pratt   concerning  his    acquisi- 
tion of  the  language  verified;    his  ex- 
periences brought  him  near  to  the  Lord. 
Relative   to   the   manifestations   of   the 
Spirit  to  him  he  says:     "Of  the  many 
gifts  of  the  Spirit  which  were  manifest 
through  my  adminstration,  next  to  my 
acquirement  of  the  language,  the  most 
prominent  was  perhaps  the  gift  of  heal- 
ing,  and   by   the   power   of     God,     the 
casting  out  of  evil  spirits     which    fre- 
quently  occurred."       One   instance  oc- 
curred at  Wailuku,  where  he  sojourned 
with    a    native    family,    being   engaged 
in  the  study  of  the  language.  One  night 
the   woman  was   suddenly   seized  with 
evil   spirits.       She      went     through  all 
manner  of   hideous   contortions.       Her 
husband  was  overcome  with  such  fear 
that  he  trembled  as  a  leaf  in  the  wind. 
Brother  Joseph  F.  was  seized  with  fear 
at  this  new  and  unexpected  demonstra- 
tion,  but  suddenly  all  fright  left  him, 
the    power   of    the    Holy    Ghost    rested 
upon  him,  and  he  stood  upon  his  feet, 
facing  the  woman  possessed  of  demons. 
"In  the  name  of  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ 
I  rebuke  you,"  he  said,  when  suddenly 
the  woman  fell  limp  to  the  floor     and 
became    as    one    dead.       The    husband 
pronounced  her  dead,  and  then  set  up 
a   hideous     howl,       which     Joseph    F. 
promptly  rebuked,     after     which  quiet 
and  peace  was  restored  and  the  young 
missionary  proceeded  with  his  studies. 
Joseph  F.  labored  upon  the  island     of 
Maui  over  eighteen  months  with  great 
success.       The   readiness   by   which   he 
acquired  and  used  the  language  aston- 
ished his  brethren  and  the  natives.  Af- 
ter  President   Hammond   took   his   de- 
parture for  his  home  in  Utah,   Joseph 
P.  presided  over  the  Maui  conference; 
later  he  presided  over  the  Kohala  con- 
ference for  six  months,  and  still  later 
over  the  Hilo  conference;   the  two  lat- 
ter conferences  were  on   the  island  of 
Hawaii.     He   was   laboring   upon     this 
island  at  the  time  of  the  great  volcanic 
eruption  of  1855,  about  which  he  writes: 


70 


LATTER-DAY    SAINT 


"I  experienced  the  tremendous  shocks 
of  earthquake  which  Immediately  pre- 
ceded the  eruptions,  and  subse- 
•quently  visited  the  great  lava 
flow  which  Issued  from  the  cra- 
ter. It  was  said  that  this  eruption, 
In  the  quantity  of  lava  thrown  out,  has 
probably  never  been  surpassed  during 
the  residence  of  foreigners  on  the 
islands.  The  flow  continued  for  about 
thirteen  months,  reaching  to  within 
six  or  seven  miles  of  the  city  of  Hilo, 
more  than  sixty  miles  from  the  crater. 
The  city  and  bay  of  Hllo  were  in  im- 
minent danger  of  destruction  for 
months.  I  have  seen  it  stated  since 
that  the  area  covered  by  lava  from  this 
eruption  exceeded  three  hundred  square 
miles,  or  about  one-thirteenth  of  the 
area  of  the  island  of  Hawaii."  After 
laboring  a  year  upon  the  island  of 
Hawaii,  Joseph  F.  was  transferred  to 
the  presidency  of  the  Molokai  confer- 
«nce  with'  Elder  Thos.  A.  Dowell  as  an 
assistant.  On  this  island  they  found 
many  of  the  Saints  on  the  back-ground 
and  most  of  the  people  afflicted  with  a 
scarcity  of  food.  In  making  a  journey 
from  the  east  to  the  west  end  of  the 
island,  they  were  compelled  to  journey 
nearly  thirty  miles  on  foot  in  the  hot 
J3un,  without  either  food  or  water  to 
•drink  the  .whole  distance,  until  Brother 
Dowell  flagged  and  flnally  declared  his 
inability  to  go  further;  but  Joseph  stood 
by  him,  urged  and  helped  him  along 
until  they  reached  the  home  of  Mr.  R. 
W.  Meyers,  a  German,  who  kindly  re- 
ceived them  and  administered  to  their 
necessities,  and  with  whom,  by  his  re- 
•quest,  they  spent  several  days.  Mr. 
Myers,  from  this  time  forward,  became 
their  warm  and  faithful  friend,  and 
ever  made  them  welcome  at  his  home. 
He  furnished  Joseph  F.  with  a  good 
riding  horse  to  visit  the  branches  of  the 
Church,  from  time  to  time.  During 
Joseph  F.'s  sojourn  on  the  island  of 
Molokai  he  passed  through  a  very  try- 
ing and  prolonged  spell  of  sickness,  in 
consequence  of  which  he  returned  to 
Lanal,  which  for  some  time  had  been 
the  headquarters  of  the  mission.  Pre- 
vious to  this,  the  conference  house  of 
Palawai,  Lanai,  was  burned  down  and 
Bro.  Joseph  F.'s  trunk  with  its  con- 
tents, together  with  effects  belonging 
to  other  Elders,  were  destroyed,  leav- 
ing them  almost  destitute  of  clothing. 
Joseph  F.  remained  on  Lanal  till  the 
fall  of  1857,  and  having  in  the  meantime 


regained  his  health,  he  went  to  Honolu- 
lu and  there  met  with  the  Elders  of  the 
mission  in  conference.  About  this  time 
instructions  oatne  from  the  First  Presi- 
dency to  release  the  foreign  Elders  to 
return  home  to  Utah,  in  consequence  of 
the  movement  of  the  U.  S.  army  to- 
wards the  Territory.  Accordingly,  on 
the  6th  dav  of  October,  1857,  Joseph  F. 
embarked  on  board  the  bark  "Yankee" 
for  San  Francisco,  in  company  with 
other  returning  Elders.  On  landing  at 
San  Francisco  in  the  latter  part  of  Oc- 
tober, 1857,  they  at  once  reported  them- 
selves at  the  offlce  of  the  "Western 
Standard,"  to  Pres.  Geo.  Q.Cannon,  who 
was  then  editing  that  paper.  He  per- 
ceived the  destitute  condition  that  El- 
ders Joseph  F.  and  Edward  Partridge 
were  in  and  took  them  to  a  clothing 
store,  where  he  fitted  them  out  with  a 
good,  warm  overcoat  each  and  a  pair 
of  blankets  between  them.  With  this 
outfit  the  two  Elders  started  down  the 
coast  to  Santa  Cruz  county,  Cal.,  where 
they  joined  a  company  of  Saints  under 
the  captaincy  of  Charles  W.  Wandell, 
with  whom  they  traveled  through  the 
country  southward  as  far  as  the  Mo- 
jave  river,  where  Joseph  F.  and  others 
left  the  company  and  made  a  visit  to 
San  Bernardino.  Here  he  found  a 
number  of  his  old  friends,  who  were 
very  kind  to  him  and  provided  him 
with  means  to  clothe  himself  very 
comfortably  for  the  remainder  of  the 
journey  home.  Being  under  no  obliga- 
tions to  continue  traveling  with  Charles 
W.  Wandell's  company  any  further,  he 
engaged  to  drive  team  for  George 
Crismon,  and  accordingly  crossed  the 
desert  as  teamster.  He  arrived  in 
Great  Salt  Lake  City  Feb.  24.  1858.  hav- 
ing been  absent  from  home  about  three 
years  and  ftine  months.  Immediately 
upon  his  return  home  he  joined  the 
militia,  and  started  with  an  expedition 
to  intercept  the  hostile  army,  which 
had  been  sent  to  Utah.  He  served 
under  Col.  Thomas  Callister,  and  later 
was  chaplain  of  the  regiment  under 
Col.  Heber  C.  Kimball.  He  says,  In 
speaking  of  his  enlistment  and  experi- 
ences in  the  Utah  army:  "The  day  fol- 
lowing my  arrival  home  I  reported  my- 
self to  President  Young  and  immedlate- 
Iv  enlisted  in  the  Legion  to  defend  our- 
selves against  the  encroachment  of  a 
hostile  and  menacing  army.  From  that 
time  until  the  proclamation  of  peace, 
and  a  free  and  full  pardon,  by  Presl- 


BIOGRAPHICAL    ENCYCLOPEDIA. 


71 


dent  Buchanan,  came,  I  was  constant- 
ly in  my  saddle,   prospecting  and     ex- 
ploring the  country  between  Great  Salt 
Lake  City  and  Fort  Bridger,  under  the 
■command    of   Col.    Thos.    Callister    and 
■others.      I  was  on  picket  guard  with  a 
partv  of  men  under  Orrin  P.  Rockwell, 
when   Commissioners   Powell   and   Mc- 
•Collough  met  us  near  the  Weber  river 
^vith  the  President's  proclamation.  Sub- 
sequently I  was  on  detail  in  the  desert- 
ed city  of  Great  Salt  Lake,  until  after 
the  army  pased  through  the  city,   and 
thence   to   Camo   Floyd.       After   this   I 
assisted  my  relatives  to  return  to  their 
homes,   from  which  they  had  fled,   go- 
ine  to  the  south  some  time  previous." 
At   the   session   of   the   legislature   held 
in  the  winter  of  1858-59, Joseph  F.  Smith 
officiated   as   sergeant-at-arms   in     the 
council,  and  on  March  29,  1858,  he  was 
ordained    into    the    Thirty-second    Quo- 
rum of  Seventy.      He  was  married  April 
5,   1859,   and  on  Oct.   16th,   of  the  same 
year,  was  ordained  a  High  Priest,  also 
"being    made    a    member    of    the    High 
Council  of  Salt  Lake  Stake  of  Zion.  At 
the  April  conference.  1860,  he  was  called 
on  a  mission  to  Great  Britain.    He  was 
in  straightened  circumstances  financial- 
ly   and   was   almost  obliged   to   discon- 
tinue housekeeping,  and  allow  his  wife 
to   return    to   her   mother's   home     for 
the  time  being.       He  was  soon  on  his 
"vvay,   in   company     with       his     cousin, 
■Samuel    H.    B.    Smith,    each    driving    a 
four-mule    team,      to      pay    their    way 
across  the  plains.     They  had  an  inter- 
esting trip  to  the  Missouri  river;   from 
that  point  to  New  York  they  went  by 
Avay  of  Nauvoo  and  viewed  the  homes 
of   their  childhood   days,    calling   upon 
The   wife   and   children   of   the   Prophet 
Joseph  Smith.       They  sailed  for  Liver- 
pool July  14,  1860,  arriving  in  that  port 
on  the  27th  of  that  month.     During  his 
mission   in   England,  Elder   Smith   tra- 
veled in  various  conferences,  and  in  all 
bis  ministrations  among  the  Saints  and 
■strangers    left    an  impression  for  good 
that  can    never    be  effaced.      President 
George   Q.    Cannon   was   also    in    Great 
^Britain  on  a  mission  at  the  same  time, 
and  it  was  while  there,  perhaps,  more 
than   any  other  place,   they  learned  to 
love  and  esteem  each  other,  and  where 
a    friendship    was     established      which 
grew   stronger   as    the   years   went   by. 
During  his  mission  in  Europe, Joseph  F.. 
Avith  President  George  Q.  Cannon,  vis- 
ited several  of  the  conferences  in  Den- 


mark, and  with  Elder  Brigham  Young 
jr.    and    others,    visited    Paris,    France. 
He  was  released  after  filling  a  most  hon- 
orable and  efficient  mission,   returning 
home  in  1863.     Crossing  the   plains,   he 
was  chaplain  in  Capt.  John  W.  Wool- 
ley's     company.       Arriving     home,     he 
found  his  wife  in  a  very  poor  sta,«»  of 
health, which  for  some  time  grew  worse; 
but  he  waited  upon  her  day  and  night 
with  little  or  no  rest  for  many  weeks, 
when     she       gradually     recovered   her 
health.      It  was  not  in  the  providences 
of  the  Lord  that  Joseph  F.  should  re- 
main long  at  that  period  of  his  life  to 
enjoy  the  quiet  and  peace  of  home,  for 
in  March,  1864,  he  started  on  his  second 
mission  to  Hawaii.       He  went  in  com- 
pany with  Apostles  Ezra  T.  Benson  and 
Lorenzo  Snow  and  other  Elders.       Tho 
purpose  of  their  mission  was  to  regu- 
late  the   affairs   of  the    Church  on   the 
Islands,  which  had  been  greatly  inter- 
fered with  by  Walter  M.   Gibson,   who 
had  presumptuously  established  himself 
as    leader   of    the    Church     in   Hawaii. 
They  labored  faithfully  to  convert  Mr. 
Gibson   from   his    wrong  doing,    but   to 
no  avail.      The  man  was  not  honest  at 
heart,   and  they  were  obliged,   for  the 
protection  of  the  native  Saints,  to  ex- 
communicate Gibson  from  the  Church. 
The  trouble  being  settled,  the  Apostles 
soon  returned  to  America,  leaving  Jo- 
seph F.  in  charge  of  the  mission.      He 
returned  home  in  the  winter  of  1864-65. 
While   upon    this    mission    an   incident\ 
occurred  which  is  worthy  of  note.    The 
ship  upon  which  the  brethren  arrived 
was   anchored   in   the   channel   off   La- 
haina,  where  the  sea  was  usually  ver> 
rough.       A  breakwater  had  been     con- 
structed,  and   by   the   protection     of  it 
the  natives  successfully  ran  their  boats 
ashore.       However,     in  approaching  it, 
there   was   always   danger   of   disaster. 
It  was  proposed  to  land  the  passengers 
in   the   ship's   freight   boat,   which   wa.s- 
unwieldy  and  not  easily  managed.    Jo 
seph  F.  at  f  .ice  apprehended  the  dan 
ger  and   stoutly   protested   against   the 
proposition,  warning  the  brethren  of  the 
great  danger  of  capsizing  the  boat  at 
the   breakwater.       He     refused   to   ac- 
company them  in  the  boat,  and  tried  toj 
persuade    his      co-laborers     not    to    go 
They    were    persistent,      however,    an 
made  the  attempt,  while  Joseph  F.  of 
fered    even    to    go    alone    for   a    bette 
boat.      When  they    were  determined  t 
go  he  persuaded   them   to   let  him   re 


72 


LATTER-DAY  SAINT 


main  on  the  anchored  ship  in  charge  ot 
their  satchels,  their  clothing  and  valu- 
able articles.       They  consented  to  this 
reluctantly,   and   as   they   moved  a\va> 
from    the    ship.    Joseph    F.    stood    upon 
the  latter,  gazing  at  his  brethren  with 
awful     anxiety.     api)arently     knowing 
their    fate.        His    fears    were    not    un- 
grounded, for  as  their  unwieldy  freight 
boat  struck   the  breakwater     a     heav> 
wave   dashed   against   it   and   instantly 
capsized  it.  emptying  its  human  cargo 
into  the  surging  billows.      A  boat  from 
the  shore   manned  by  natives  came   to 
the  rescue  and  recovered  all  but  Apost'e 
Snow,  when   they     started     for     shore. 
Brother   AVm.    W.    Cluff   demanded    th.r 
return  of  the  boat,  that  they  might  se 
cure    Brother    Snow,    which    was    done, 
and    when    he    was    recovered,      to     all 
appearances  he  was  dead.    Through  the 
mercies  of   the  Lord,  however,  he  was 
restored  to  life.      All  this  time  Brother 
Joseph   F.    stood   in  awful   suspense,   a 
helpless     spectator     upon     the  deck    of 
the  anchored     ship.       This     action     on 
the     part       of     Joseph     F.       on     that 
occasion    indicates    that    fearless    trait 
of     his       character      which     has     been 
manifest   throughout     his     life,     show- 
ing   that    he    has    the    courage    of  hi.s 
convictions,  and  is  most  vigorous  and 
earnest  in  expressing  them.     When  he 
returned    home    from    this    mission,    he 
was  employed  as   a  clerk  in  the     His- 
torian's   Office,    and    later    in    the    En- 
dowment   House,    frequently    perform- 
ing home  missionary  work  in  the  Ter- 
litory.    He  was  also  an  active  and  effi- 
cient   member    of    the    Salt    Lake    City 
municipal   council     for     several   terms, 
the  effects  of  his  influence  in  that  bod> 
are  today  monuments  of  worth  to  the 
city  of  Salt   Lake.       The  possession  of 
Liberty  Park  to-day  by  Salt  Lake  City 
is  due  to  his  influence  and  determined 
convictions,  more  than  to  the  labors  of 
any    other    man.    Pioneer    Square    was 
also  purchased     by     the  city  owing  to 
his  manly  and   persistent  efforts.     The 
mayoi-  and  manv  of  the  members  of  tht- 
council    were    strongly    opposed    to    the 
jiurchase.  as  they  considered  the  mone- 
tary outlay  connected  with  it  unneces- 
sary and  uncalled  for;   but  Joseph  F.'? 
arguments   prevailed    at   last,    and    thi 
square  became  city  property.     Also  as 
a  lawmaker  in  the  legislative  assembly 
of  the  Territory  of  Utah  did  Joseph  F. 
Smith  exhibit  unusual  ability  and  tact 
He  served  as  a   member  of  the   Terri- 


torial  House  of   Representatives  seven 
tonsecutive   terms,   namely   in   the  loth. 
(1863-66),  16th   (1S66-67),  ITth  (1S6S),  ISth 
(ISGH),   19th    (1870),   20th    (1872),   and   21st. 
(.1874)   sessions.       And  after  his  return 
from    his    last    mission    to    Europe    he 
served  two  terms  (ISSO  and  1882)  in  the 
council  branch  of  the  Utah  legislature; 
during  the  last  of  these  terms  he  acted 
as    president    of    the   council.     He    pre- 
sided  over   the  Constitutional  Conven- 
tion   held     in     1882.       His    labors   as   a. 
legislator      would      undoubtedly    have 
been  continued     much     longer,  had  he 
not  been  declared    disqualified  through 
the    passage    of      the      infamous      Ed- 
munds'      anti-polygamy     bill.      Joseph 
F.    was    ordained    an    Apostle     July    1. 
1S66,  by  President  Brigham  Young,  and 
at  the  October  conference,  1867,  he  was 
called  to  fill  a  vacancy  in  the  Council 
of  the  Twelve.      When  President  Young: 
chose  to  have  more  than  two  counselors 
Joseph  F.  was  one  of  the  number  select- 
ed.     In  186S,  in  connection  with  Apostle 
Wilford   Woodruff,    Elder   Abraham   A. 
Smoot  and  others,  he  was  called  to  go 
to  Provo  and  labor  for  the  upbuilding 
of    that    city    and    Utah    county.        He 
served    one    term    in    the      Provo     city 
council.        By     permision    of    President 
Young  he  in  1868-69  removed  his  family- 
back    to    Salt    Lake    City    and   resumed 
his    labors    in    the    Endowment    House 
and   Historian's   Office.       Feb.   28,    1874, 
Apostle   Joseiih   F.   started  on   his   sec- 
ond mission  to  Great  Britain,  this  time 
to  preside  over  the   European  mission. 
During  his  labors  in  Europe,  he  visited 
.Scandinavia,  Germany,  Switzerland  and 
France  as  well  as  the  several   confer- 
ences   of    the     British      Isles,      and    he 
proved   himself  to   be  one  of   the   very- 
choicest   presidents  that   has  ever  pre- 
sided over  any  mission,  not  only  for  his 
prompt  and  wise  methods  of  conducting 
affairs,    but    also     his     humbleness    in 
obeying  the  whisperings  of  the  Spirit, 
for  which  he  constantly  lives.  His  per- 
sonal  love  and  tenderhearted  kindness 
to  every  Elder  in  the  mission    has  en- 
deared  him  to  the   hearts  of  hundreds 
of   Elders   and   Saints    who   have   lived 
and  labored  directly  under  his  personal 
ministrations.      Soon  after  the  decease 
of  President  Geo.  A.  Smith,  in  the  fall 
of  1875,  Joseph  F.   was  released  to  re- 
turn  home;    and    upon   returning   from 
his   labor  of  love  he  was  appointed   to 
lireside  over  the  Saints  in  Davis  coun- 
ty, the  county  at  that  time  not     being 


BIOGRAPHICAL   ENCYCLOPEDIA. 


73 


organized  into  a  Stake  of  Zion.  He 
held  this  position  until  the  spring  of 
1S77,  when  he  was  called  on  his  third 
mission  to  Great  Britain.  Before  leav- 
ing he  witnessed  the  dedication  of  the 
St.  George  Temple,  the  first  Temple 
completed  in  the  Rocky  Mountain 
country.  During  his  labors  on  this 
mision  Elder  Orson  Pratt  came  to  Liv- 
erpool to  publish  new  editions  of  the 
Book  of  Mormon  and  Doctrine  and 
Covenants.  Later  they  appeared 
with  copious  marginal  references 
and  foot  notes  prepared  by  El- 
der Pratt.  Upon  receiving  the  sad 
news  of  the  death  of  President  Brig- 
ham  Young  thev  were  requested  by  the 
council  of  the  Apostles  to  immediate- 
ly return  home.  They  reached  Salt 
Lake  City  Sept.  27,  1S77,  and  the  fol- 
lowing year  Brother  Joseph  F.  and  Or- 
son Pratt  went  on  a  short  mission  to 
the  East.  They  visited  noted  places 
associated  with  Church  history,  in  Mis- 
souri, Illinois,  Ohio  and  New  York, 
and  called  upon  David  Whitmer,  one  of 
the  three  witnesses  to  the  Book  of  Mor- 
mon. When  the  Endowment  House 
was  re-opened  in  Salt  Lake  City,  sub- 
sequent to  the  death  of  President 
Young,  Joseph  F.  was  placed  in  charge. 
In  October,  1880,  when  the  presidency 
of  the  Church  was  organized,  with 
John  Taylor  at  the  head,  Joseph  F. 
Smith  was  chosen  to  be  his  second 
counselor.  He  was  chosen  to  the 
same  position  in  1889  under  President 
AVoodruff,  and  now  occupies  that  hon- 
ored station  under  the  presidency  of 
Lorenzo  Snow.  During  the  presidency 
of  John  Taylor,  and  under  the  trying 
scenes  of  the  anti-Mormon  crusade. 
Brother  Smith  performed  another  faith- 
ful mision  in  the  Sandwich  Islands,  by 
direction  of  President  Taylor.  While 
there  he  obtained  an  exact  copy  of  the 
old  Spaulding  storj',  and  by  evidence 
incontrovertible  showed  that  not  the 
slightest  resemblance  existed  between 
the  Book  of  Mormon  and  the  story 
named.  President  Smith  has  filled 
every  position  of  trust  assigned  him 
with  such  unblemished  honesty  and 
fidelity,  that  no  man  can  justly  say 
aught  against  him.  One  of  the  grand- 
est traits  of  his  character  is  impartial 
justice.  The  great  system  of  patri- 
archal marriage,  so  well  designed  to 
prove  the  hearts  of  men  and  women, 
and  to  develop  in  them  the  principles 
of   pure   love,   charity,  justice  and   im- 


partiality, has  no  better  examples 
among  God's  noblemen  than  Joseph  F. 
Smith.  Whatever  obligation  he  is  un- 
der to  that  sacred  principle  for  his  ex- 
istence, and  for  the  possession  of  his 
own  posterity,  he  is  meeting  that 
obligation  manfully,  with  the  record 
that  his  example  shall  exemplify  the 
truth  of  celestial  marriage  as  revealed 
to  the  Prophet  Joseph  Smith.  During 
his  counselorship  in  the  First  Presi- 
dency he  has  traveled  extensively  in 
the  Stakes  of  Zion,  in  Utah,  Arizona, 
Colorado,  Idaho,  Canada  and  Mexico, 
and  continues  active,' whether  at  home 
or  abroad.  The  following  pen  sketch 
of  President  Joseph  F.  Smith  is  written 
by  Elder  Edward  H.  Anderson:  "Presi- 
dent Smith  has  been  constantly  in  the 
service  of  the  public,  and  by  his 
straightforward  course  has  won  the 
love,  confidence  and  esteem  of  the 
whole  community.  He  is  a  friend  of 
the  people,  is  easily  approached,  a  wise 
counselor,  a  man  of  broad  views,  and, 
contrary  to  first  impressions,  is  a  man 
whose  sympathies  are  easily  aroused. 
He  is  a  reflex  of  the  best  character  of 
the  Mormon  people — inured  to  hard- 
ships, patient  in  trial.  God-fearing,  self- 
sacrificing,  full  of  love  for  the  human 
race,  powerful  in  moral,  mental  and 
physical  strength.  President  Smith  has 
an  imposing  physical  appearance.  He 
is  tall,  erect,  well-knit  and  symmetrical 
in  build.  He  has  a  prominent  nose 
and  features.  When  speaking,  he 
throws  his  full,  clear,  brown  eyes  wide 
open  on  the  listener,  who  may  readily 
perceive  from  their  penetrating  glimpse 
the  wonderful  mental  power  of  the  tall 
forehead  above.  His  large  head  is 
crowned  with  an  abundant  growth  of 
hair,  in  his  early  years  dark,  but  now, 
like  his  full  beard,  tinged  with  a  lib- 
eral sprinkling  of  gray.  In  conversa- 
tion, one  is  forcibly  impressed  with  the 
sudden  changes  in  appearance  of  his 
countenance,  under  the  different  influ- 
ences of  his  mind;  now  intensely  pleas- 
ant, with  an  enthusiastic  and  childlike 
interest  in  immediate  subjects  and  sur- 
roundings; now  absent,  the  mobility  of 
his  features  set  in  that  earnest,  almost 
stern,  majesty  of  expression  so  charac- 
teristic of  his  portraits — so  indicative  of 
the  severity  of  the  conditions  and  envi- 
lonments  of  his  early  life.  As  a  pub- 
lie  speaker,  his  leading  trait  is  an  in- 
tense earnestness.  He  impresses  the 
hearer  with  his  message  more  from  the 


74 


LATTER-DAY    SAINT 


sincerity  of  its  delivery,  and  the  honest 
earnestness  of  his  manner,  than  from 
any  learned  exhibition  of  oratory  or 
studied  display  of  logic.  He  touches 
the  hearts  of  the  people  with  the  simple 
eloquence  of  one  who  is  himself  con- 
vinced of  the  truths  presented.  He  is 
a  pillar  of  strength  in  the  Church, 
thoroughly  imbued  with  the  truths  of 
the  gospel  and  the  divine  origin  of  this 
work.  His  whole  life  and  testimony 
are  an  inspiration  to  the  young.  I  said 
to  him:  'You  knew  Joseph,  the  Prophet; 
you  are  old  in  the  work  of  the  Church: 
what  is  your  testimony  to  the  youth 
of  Zion  concerning  these  things?'  And 
he  replied  slowly  and  deliberately:  'I 
was  acquainted  with  the  Prophet  Jo- 
seph in  my  youth.  I  was  familiar  in 
his  home,  with  his  boys  and  with  his 
family.  I  have  sat  on  his  knee,  I  have 
heard  him  preach,  distinctly  remember 
being  present  in  the  council  with  my 
father  an-d  the  Prophet  Joseph  Smith 
and  others.  From  my  childhood  to 
youth  I  believed  him  to  be  a  Prophet 
of  God.  From  my  youth  until  the  pres- 
ent I  have  not  believed  that  he  was  a 
Prophet,  for  I  have  known,  that  he  was. 
In  other  words,  my  knowledge  has  su- 
perseded my  belief.  I  remember  seeing 
him  dressed  in  military  uniform  at  the 
head  of  the  Nauvoo  Legion.  I  saw  him 
when  he  crossed  the  river,  returning 
from  his  intended  western  trip  into  the 
P.ocky  Mountains  to  go  to  his  martyr- 
dom, and  I  saw  his  lifeless  body,  to- 
gether with  that  of  my  father,  after 
they  were  murdered  in  Carthage  jail; 
and  still  have  the  most  palpable  re- 
membrance of  the  gloom  and  sorrow 
of  those  dreadful  days.  I  believe  in  the 
divine  mision  of  the  Prophets  of  the 
nineteenth  century  with  all  my  heart, 
and  in  the  authenticity  of  the  Book  of 
Mormon  and  the  inspiration  of  the  Book 
of  Doctrine  and  Covenants,  and  hope  to 
be  faithful  to  God  and  man  and  not 
false  to  myself,  to  the  end  of  my 
days.'  "  (For  further  details,  see  "His- 
torical Record,"  by  Andrew  Jenson,  Vol. 
6,  p.  183;  sketch  by  Matthias  F.  Cowley 
in  "Southern  Star,"  Vol.  2,  p.  209: 
sketch  by  Edward  H.  Anderson  in  "Ju- 
venile Instructor,"  Vol.  35,  p.  65,  etc.) 

MARSH,  Thomas  B.,  a  member  of 
the  Council  of  Twelve  Apostles  from 
1835  to  1833,  and  the  first  president  of 
the  Tweiv-:,  ^\aF  born  Nov.  1,  1799,  in 
Acton,   Middlesex   county,     Mass.       He 


spent  his  early  boyhood  on  a  farm  at 
Westmoreland,  New  Hampshire,  and 
when  fourteen  years  of  age,  he  left 
home  and  went  to  Vermont.  After 
working  on  a  farm  in  that  State  three 
months,  he  went  to  Albany,  N.  Y.,  and 
engaged  in  a  public  house  as  a  waiter, 
where  he  remained  eighteen  months. 
After  this  he  spent  four  years  in  a 
New  lork  City  hotel,  and  then  .c- 
moved  to  Long  Island,  where  hi  'in- 
gaged  as  groom  to  Edward  Grlswald, 
in  whose  service  he  remained  one 
and  a  half  years,  during  which 
time  he  married  Elizabeth  Godkin, 
Nov.  1,  1820.  Immediately  after 
marrying,  he  commenced  a  groce- 
ry business  in  New  York,  in  which 
however,  he  did  not  succeed.  He 
was  then  employed  in  a  type  found- 
ry in  Boston  for  seven  years,  and  dur- 
ing this  peri'.ii  he  joined  the  Methodist 
Church;  but  he  did  not  succeed  in  be- 
coming a  genuine  Methodist,  as  he 
could  not  make  the  creed  of  that  de- 
rcmii'.ation  correspond  with  the  Bible. 
He  subsequently  withdrew  from  all 
sects,  but  by  the  spirit  of  propher-y, 
whioh  rested  upon  him  in  some  de- 
gree, he  was  led  to  anticipate  the  rife 
of  a  new  church,  which  would  have 
the  truth  in  its  purity.  Finally  he  was, 
as  he  believed,  led  by  the  f  pirit  of. 
God  to  make  a  journey  westward,  in 
company  with  Benjamin  Hall.  Hav- 
ing arrived  in  Lyonstown,  N.  Y.,  he 
heard  for  the  first  time  of  the  golden 
book,  that  had  been  found  by  a  youth 
named  Joseph  Smith.  He  immediately 
changed  the  course  of  his  journey  and 
went  to  Palmyra,  where  he  found  Mar- 
tin Harris  in  Egbert  B.  Grandin's 
printing  office.  The  first  sixteen  pages 
of  the  Book  of  MoVmon  had  just  been 
struck  off,  and  he  obtained  a  sheet  from 
the  printer  to  take  with  him.  As  soon 
as  Martin  Harris  found  out  his  inten- 
tions, he  took  him  to  the  house  of  Jo- 
seph Smith,  sen.,  where  he  found 
Oliver  Cowdery,  who  gave  him  all  the 
information  he  wanted  at  that  time. 
After  staying  there  two  days,  he  start- 
ed for  Charleston,  Mass.,  highly  pleased 
with  the  information  he  had  obtained. 
After  arriving  home,  and  showing  his 
wife  the  sixteen  pages  of  the  Book  of 
Mormon,  which  he  had  brought  with 
him,  she  also  believed  it  to  be  the 
work  of  God.  During  the  following 
year  Marsh  corresponded     with  Oliver 


BIOGRAPHICAL    ENCYCLOPEDIA. 


75 


Cowdery       and       Joseph     Smith        the 
Prophet,     and     made     preparations     to 
move   west.       Learning   by   letter  that 
the   Church   of   Jesus   Christ  had   been 
organized  on  April  6,  1830,  he  moved  to 
Palmyra,  Ontario  county,  N.  T.,  in  the 
following    September,      and     was    bap- 
tized  by   David    Whitmer,      in    Cayuga 
lake,  in  that  same  month.     A  few  days 
later  he  was  ordained  an      Elder,   and 
by  revelation  appointed  a  physician  to 
th'^  Church.      He  remained  in  th-3  Slate 
of  New  York  during  the  fall  and  win- 
ter,  and   in   the   spring  of  1831   he     ro- 
no-ed    with    the    main      body      of    the 
Church  to  Kirtland,  Ohio.      At  the  con- 
ference held  at  Kirtland,   June  6,  1831, 
be  was  ordained  a  High  Priest  by  Ly- 
man  Wight,   and  also  received   an  ap- 
pointment to  go  to  Missouri  and  preach 
on  the  way,  %xhich  he  did  in  company 
with  Selah  J.  G'-iffin.      In  the  beginning 
of   1S32,    Bishop   E.     Partridge     having 
furnished    him   with    an    Indian      pony, 
he   returned    to   Kirtland,    accompanied 
by  Cyius  Daniels.     After  laboring  and 
preaching   through  the  country  around 
Kirtland  until  the  summer  opened,  he, 
in    company   with    Ezra    Thayre,      per- 
formed a  mission  to  the  State  of  Ne^.v 
York,  returniig  home  early  in  the  fall, 
and  shortly  after  he  removed  to  Jack- 
son county,   Missouri,   as   leader     of     a 
small  company  of  Saints.       He  arrived 
in   Jackson   county  Nov.   10.    1832,     and 
located  with  the  brethren  from   Coles- 
ville,    N.    Y.,    receiving   his    inheritance 
—about  thirty  acres  of  land,  set  off  by 
Bishop    Partridge— on     the     Big     Blue 
ri^•el•.    where    he     during      the    winter, 
erected  a  comfortable  log  house,     into 
which    he   moved     his     family     in    the 
spring,    and    commenced    clearing   land 
to  rai?e   some   corn  and   potatoes.       In 
the  latter  part  of  that  year,  he,  in  con- 
nection with   the  rest  of  the  Saints  in 
Jackson    county,    was   driven   from    his 
home  by  the  mob.     While  the  majority 
of  the    exiles   found   temporary   shelter 
in  Clay  county,  he  and  others  wintered 
in    Liifayette  county,   where  he   taught 
school.    In    the    spring   of   1834,    having 
learned  that  Joseph  Smith  and  a  com- 
pany   of   men    were    coming    to    relieve 
the    Saints    in      Missouri,      Bro.    Marsh 
moved  to  Clay  county,   where  he  lived 
when    Zion's    Camp    arrived.       In     the 
course   of  the  summer  he  cultivated   a 
small    piece   of   land   and    succeeded    in 
raising  some  corn.     He  was  chosen  as 


a    member    of    the    High    Council.       In 
January,  1835,  in  company  with  Bishop 
Paitridge,  and  agreeable  to  revelation, 
he  letuvred  to  Kirtland,  where  he  was 
ordained    one    of    the    Twelve    Apostl'-.s 
under   the    hands    of     Oliver   Cowdeiy, 
David  Whitmer     and     Martin     Harris, 
April  26,  1835.      During  the  summer,  in 
connection  with  other  members  of  the 
quorum  of  the  Twelve,  he  performed  a 
mision  to  the  Eastern  States.       In  the 
winter    of    1S3-J-30    he    attended     school 
in  Kirtland,  and  studied  Hebrew  under 
Professor  Seixas,  a  Jew  by  birth.       In 
the  rr)ring  he  returned  to  his  place  on 
Fishing  ri\  er,    in     Clay     county,     Mo., 
where  he  ai rived  in  April.  When,  short- 
ly after,   difficulties  arose  between  tne 
Saints  and  the  citizens  of  Clay  county, 
Bro.  Marsh     was  appointed  a  delegate 
from   Fishing  river  for  the   purpose  of 
amicably  arranging  matters.       He  was 
also  elected  a  member  of  a  committee 
to   present     resolutions     in   a   meeting, 
held  in  Liberty.       On  that  occasion  he 
was    enabled    to    speak   so    feelingly    in 
relation   to   the  former  persecutions  of 
the  Saints,  that  Gen.  Atchison,  who  was 
present,    could   not   refrain   from   shed- 
ding tears.     This  meeting  passed  reso- 
lutions to  assist  the  Saints   in   seeking 
a  new  location,  and  appointed  commit- 
tees to  collect  means   to  aid   the  poor. 
The  Church  also  appointed  Bro.  Marsh 
and   Elisha     H.     Groves     to    visit    thp 
branches  in  Illinois,  Kentucky  and  Ten- 
nessee,    for    the    purpose  of  borrowing 
money  to  enter  lands  in  the  new  settle- 
ment,   at   the   land   office,    for   the   con- 
venience   of    the     immigrating    Saints. 
The   two   started     on     this     mission   in 
Jul^-    and   succeeded   in   borrowing  up- 
wards of  $1,400,     princiaplly     from    the 
brethren    in    Kentucky   and    Tennessee, 
at  10  per  cent,  interest.     Sept.  19,   1836. 
they  parted  with  Wilford  AVoodruff  and 
the    Saints    in    Kentucky,    and,    accom- 
panied   by    David    W.    Patten    and    his 
wife,  returned  to  Misouri.     Bro.  Marsh 
proceeded  immediately  to  the  new  city, 
which,    during   his    absence,    had    been 
laid  out  and  called  Far  West,  procured 
a  lot,  built  a  house  and  spent  the  fol- 
lowing winter  in  making  improvements 
and  preaching  to  the  Saints.     In  June, 
1837,   he   started   for   Kirtland,    in   com- 
pany with  David  W.   Patten  and  W^m. 
Smith,     and     there     tried    to   reconcile 
some  of  the  Twelve  and  others  of  high 
standing,  who  had  come  out  in  opposi- 


76 


LATTER-DAY    SAINT 


tion  to  the  Prophet.  In  July  and  Au- 
gust he  accompanied  Joseph  Smith  and 
Sidney  Rigdon  on  a  mission  to  Canada, 
aftei-  which  he  again  proceeded  to  Mis- 
souri, where  he  arrived  in  October.  El- 
der Marsh  and  David  "\V.  Patten  were 
appointed  presidents  pro  tern,  of  the 
Church  in  Missouri,  Feb.  10,  1838,  the 
former  presidency  having  been  reject- 
ed. After  the  arrival  of  Joseph  Smith, 
he  assisted  in  exploring  the  country 
northward  on  Grand  river,  where 
Adam-ondi-Ahman  was  located  at  that 
time.  About  the  time  when  the  per- 
secutions against  the  Saints  in  Caldwell 
county.  Mo.,  commenced,  in  August, 
1S3S,  Elder  Marsh  became  disaffected 
and  turned  a  traitor  against  his  breth- 
ren. Shortly  after  he  moved  away 
from  Far  West  and  located  in  Clay 
county.  Later  he  settled  in  Richmond, 
Ray  county.  He  was  finally  excom- 
municated from  the  Church  at  a  con- 
ference, held  at  Quincy,  111.,  March  17, 
1S39.  In  July,  1857,  Thos.  B.  Marsh 
was  rebaptized  in  Florence,  Nebraska, 
and  came  to  Utah  that  same  year.  A 
few  years  afterwards  he  died  at  Ogden 
as  a  pauper  and  invalid.  A  little  in- 
significant mound,  covered  with  rock, 
and  an  old  weather-beaten  board,  upon 
which  the  letters  T.  B.  M.  were  faintly 
seen,  was  all  that  marked  the  last 
lesting  place  on  the  Ogden  cemetery 
of  this  once  distinguished  Apostle  until 
quite  recently. 

PATTEN,  David  AVyinan,  a  mem- 
ber of  the  Council  of  Twelve  Apostles 
from  1835  to  1838,  and  one  of  the  early 
martyrs  of  the  Church,  was  the  son  of 
Berienio  Patten  and  Abigail  Cole,  and 
was  born  about  the  year  1800,  at  There- 
sa, near  Indian  River  Falls,  New  York. 
He  left  home  when  a  boy  and  went  to 
Michigan,  where  he  married  Phoebt 
Ann  Babcock  in  1828.  From  his  early 
youth  he  exhibited  religious  character- 
istics, and  when  twenty-one  years  old, 
the  Holy  Spirit  called  upon  him  to  re- 
pent of  his  sins,  which  he  did.  Dur- 
ing the  three  succeeding  years  many 
future  events  were  made  known  unto 
him,  by  dreams  and  visions  He  also 
looked  for  the  Church  of  Christ  to  arise 
in  its  purity  and  expected  to  live  to 
see  it.  In  the  year  1830  he  first  heard 
of  and  saw  the  Book  of  Mormon,  and 
from  that  time  he  began  to  cry  to  God 
for  more   faith.       In   May,   1832,   he   re- 


ceived a  letter  from  his  brother  in  In- 
diana, telling  him  of  the  rise  of  the 
t'hurch  of  Christ,  the  reception  of  the 
Holy  Ghost  and  its  gifts,  etc.  Soon 
after  he  was  convinced  that  the  work 
was  true  and  was  baptized  by  his 
brother  John  Patten,  in  Green  county, 
Indiana,  June  15,  1832.  He  was  or- 
dained an  Elder  on  the  17th  by  Elisha 
H.  Groxes  and  appointed  with  a  Bro. 
"Wood  to  preach  in  the  Territory  of 
Michigan.  ^During  this  his  first  mis- 
sion, many  remarkable  cases  of  healing 
occurred  under  his  administration.  In 
many  Instances  he  went  to  the  sick, 
who  said  they  had  faith  and  promised 
to  obey  the  gospel  when  they  got  bet- 
ter, and  commanded  them  in  the  name 
of  the  Lord  to  arise  and  be  made  whole, 
and  they  were  instantly  restored^)  Six- 
teen persons  were  baptized  by  him  and 
his  companion  near  the  Maumee  river.^ 
In  October  he  went  to  Kirtland,  Ohio, 
where  he  spent  two  or  three  weeks, 
after  which  he  started  out  onvhis  sec- 
ond mission,  this  time  going  east  into 
Pennsylvania.)  He  traveled  sometimes 
in  company  with  John  Murdock  and 
sometimes  with  Reynolds  Cahoon.  bap- 
tizing several  on  the  way.  When  he 
found  any  sick,  he  preached  to  them 
faith  in  the  ordinances  of  the  gospel, 
and  where  the  truth  found  a  place  in 
their  hearts,  he  commanded  them  in 
the  name  of  Jesus  Christ  to  arise  from 
their  beds  of  sickness  and  be  made 
whole.  In  many  instances  the  people 
came  to  him  from  afar  to  have  him 
lay  hands  on  their  sick,  because  of  this 
gift,  which  the  Lord  had  bestowed  upon 
him,  and  almost  daily  the  sick  wer,e 
healed  under  his  administration. 
Among  others  a  woman  who  had  suf- 
fered from  an  infirmity  for  nearly  twen- 
ty years  was  instantly  healed.  From 
this  mission  he  returned  to  Kirtland 
Feb.  25,  1833.  (in  the  following  March, 
the  Elders  •  were  sent  out  from  Kirt- 
land to  preach  the  gospel  and  counsel 
the  Saints  to  gather  to  Ohio.  Elder/ 
Patten  started  with  Reynolds  Cahoon 
east,  and  <^n  reaching  Avon  he  preached 
at  father  Bosley's,  where  a  man  was 
present  who  had  disturbed  several 
meetings  and  would  not  be  civil  or 
quiet.  He  had  defied  any  man  to  put 
him  out  of  the  house,  or  make  him  be 
still.  Bro.  Patten  felt  stirred  up 
spirit  and  told  the  man  to  be  quiet,  o 
he  certainly  would  put  him  out.      The! 


or\ 


BIOGRAPHICAL    ENCYCLOPEDIA. 


77 


fellow  said:  "Tou  can't  do  it."  Elder 
Patten  replied:  "In  thie  name  of  the 
Lord  I  will  do  it,"  after  wiiich  he 
walked  up  to  him,  and,  seizing  him 
with  both  hands,  carried  him  to  the 
door  and  threw  him  out  about  ten  feet 
on  to  a  pile  of  wood,  which  quieted 
him  for  the  time  being.  From  this 
circumstance  the  saying  went  out  that 
David  Patten  had  cast  out  one  devil, 
soul  and  body. )'  ( In  Orleans,  Jefferson 
county,  N.  Y.,  Elder  Patten  raised  up 
a  branch  of  eighteen  members,  through 
much  persecution  and  affliction  and  all 
manner  of  evil  spealiing.  Also  in  Hen- 
derson he  found  a  noble  people  who  re- 
ceived his  testimony,  and  he  baptized 
eight  persons.  '  When  hands  were  laid 
upon  them,  the  Holy  Ghost  fell  on 
them,  and  they  spake  with  tongues  and 
prophesied.  During  the  summer  El- 
der Patten  raised  up  several  other 
branches,  containing  in  all  eighty  mem- 
bers. He  writes:  "The  Lord  did  work 
with  me  wonderfully,  in  signs  and  won- 
ders following  them  that  believed  in 
the  fulness  of  the  gospel  of  Jesus 
Christ;  insomuch  that  the  deaf  were 
made  to  hear,  the  blind  to  see,  and  the 
lame  were  made  whole.  Fevers,  pal- 
sies, crooked  and  withered  limbs,  and 
in  fact  all  manner  of  diseases,  common 
to  tlie  country,  were  healed  by  the 
power  of  God,  that  was  manifested 
through  his  servants."  In  the  fall  of 
1833  Elder  Patten  returned  to  Kirtland, 
Ohio,  where  he  worked  on  the  House 
of  the  Lord  one  month.  He  then  made 
a  trip  to  Michigan  Territory  to  hi.s 
former  place  of  residence,  after  which 
he  moved  to  Florence,  Ohio.  After  re- 
maining there  about  seven  weeks,  be- 
ing sick  most  of  the  time,  he  com- 
manded himself  into  the  hands  of  God 
and  went  out  to  preach  again  until  the 
Spirit  of  the  Lord  came  upon  him,  say- 
ing: "Depart  from  your  field  of  labor 
and  go  unto  Kirtland,  for  behold  1 
will  send  thee  up  to  the  land  of  Zion, 
and  thou  shalt  serve  thy  brethren 
IheT-e."  He  obey<^d  the  word  of  the 
I-ord,  and  was  sent  in  company  with 
Wm.  D.  Pratt  to  bear  dispatches  to 
the  brethren  in  Missouri,  arriving  in 
Clay  county  March  4,  1834,  after  much 
suffering  from-  cold  and  fatigue.  Much 
good,  however,  was  accomplished  03- 
his  mission.  He  tarried  in  Missouri 
until  the  arrival  of  Zion's  Camp  in 
Jure,    1834,    when    the    people    of    Clay 


county  pleaded  with  the  Saints  not  to 
go  over  to  Jackson  county,  as  they 
would  use  their  utmost  endeavors  to 
give  them  their  rights,  according  to 
the  laws  of  the  land.  '  A  violent  per- 
secutor stepped  up  to  Elder  Patten 
and,  drawing  his  bowie  knife,  said, 
("You,  damned  Mormon,  I  will  cut  your 
damned  throat."  Bro. Patten  looked  him 
full  in  the  face,  at  tiie  same  time  put- 
ting his  hand  in  his  left  breast  pocket, 
and  said,  "My  friend,  do  nothing  rash- 
ly." "For  God's  sake,  don't  shoot," 
exclaimed  the  mobocrat,  and  put  up  his 
knife  and  left  Patten,  who,  by  the  waj-, 
was  unarmed.  In  company  with  War- 
ren Parish,  Elder  Patten  started  on 
another  preaching  mission  Sept.  12,1834. 
They  went  to  Paris,  Henry  county, 
Tenn., where  they  remained  about  three 
months,  preaching  the  gospel  in  that 
vicinity  and  the  regions  round  about. 
Twenty  were  baptized,  and  several  in- 
stances of  the  healing  power  of  God 
were  made  manifest.  Among  these 
the  wife  of  Mr.  Johnston  F.  Lane  de- 
serves special  mention.  She  had  been 
sick  for  eight  years,  and  for  the  last 
year  was  unable  to  walk.  Hearing 
of  the  Elders  and  the  faith  they 
preached,  she  prevailed  on  her  hus- 
band to  send  for  them.  Elder  Pat- 
ten went  with  him  immediately  and 
taught  him  the  gospel,  showing  what 
power  was  exercised  by  the  Lord  upon 
those  who  had  faith.  The  woman  be- 
lieved the  testimony  of  Bro.  Patten, 
who  laid  his  hands  upon  her,  saying. 
"In  the  name  of  Jesus  Christ  I  rebuke 
the  disorder,  and  command  it  to  de- 
part." He  then  took  her  by  the  hand 
and  commanded  her  to  arise  in  the 
name  of  Jesus  Christ,  and  be  made 
whole.  She  arose  and  was  perfectly 
healed.  He  then  commanded  her  to  go 
to  the  water  and  be  baptized,  which  she 
did  the  same  hour.  After  he  had 
baptized  and  confirmed  her,  he  told  her 
that  she  should  amend  and  gain 
strength,  and  in  less  than  one  year  she 
should  have  a  son.  Although  she  had 
been  married  some  twelve  years  and 
had  no  children,  this  prophecy  was 
fulfilled.  She  bore  a  child,  whom  the 
parents  called  David  Patten,  and  she 
afterwards  had  several  children.  Elder 
Patten  returned  from  Tennessee  to 
Kirtland  some  time/during  the  follow- 
ing winter,  and  on  t'eb.  15,  1835,  he  was 
ordained  one  of  the  Twelve  Apostles 
under    the    hands    of    Oliver    Cowdery\ 


78 


LATTER-DAY    SAINT 


David  Whitmer  and  Martin  Harris. 
Shortly  after,  -when  the  Twelve  left 
Kirtland  on  (their  first  mission,  he 
traveled  eastward,  through  New  York, 
Canada,  Vermont,  Maine  and  other 
States, )  holding  meetings,  attending 
conferences  and  setting  the  branches 
in  order,  returning  to  Kirtland  in  Sep- 
tember. (After  receiving  his  blessings 
and  endowments  in  the  Temple,  Elder 
Patten  took  his  wife  and  started  on 
another  mission  to  Tennessee  j  There  he 
met  Wilford  Woodruff  April  15,  1835,  in 
whose  company  he  then  traveled  and 
preached  for  some  time.  May  17,  1835, 
(Elders  Patten  and  Woodruff  laid 
hands  on  a  woman  by  the  name  of 
Margaret  Tittle,  who  was  laying  at  the 
point  of  death,  and  she  was  instantly 
healed  through  the  power  of  God.]  Bro. 
Patten  had  preached  faith,  repentance 
and  baptism  to  her,  and  she  covenanted 
to  be  baptized.  But  after  she  was 
healed,  she  refused  to  attend  to  that 
ordinance.  Elder  Patten  told  her  that 
she  was  acting  a  dangerous  part,  and 
she  would  aga^n  be  afflicted,  if  she  did 
not  repent.  (^  The  brethren  pursued 
their  journey,  and  on  their  return  found 
her  very  low  with  the  same  fever.  She 
begged  them  to  lay  hands  upon  her 
and  heal  her.  and  she  would  obey  the 
gospel.  They  complied  with  her  re- 
quest, and  she  was  healed,  after  which 
Wilford  Woodruff  baptized  her)  Elder 
Patten  preached  three  times  at  the 
house  of  father  Fry  in  Benton  county, 
Tenn.,  May  22,  1835.  Many  hardened 
their  hearts,  and  a  Mr.  Rose,  who  re- 
jected his  testimony,  asked  him  to 
raise  the  dead.  Bro.  Patten  rebuked 
him  for  his  wickedness,  when  he  and 
others  came  with  arms  and  threatened 
to  mob  the  brethren.  (At  the  close  of 
the  meeting  Elder  Patten  walked  out 
into  the  door  yard  and  told  the  mob 
to  shoot  him,  if  they  wished.  He  had 
nothing  but  a  walking  stick  in  his 
hand,  but  the  mob  fled  and  left  himj 
A  few  days  later  Warren  Parrish  ar- 
rived from  Kirtland  and  joined  Elders 
Patten  and  Woodruff.  These  three 
brethren  then  traveled  together  from 
town  to  town,  through  Kentucky  and 
Tennessee,  preaching  the  gospel,  and 
healing  the  sick.  The  Spirit  of  God 
was  with  them  and  attended  their  ad- 
ministrations. While  Elders  Patten 
and  Parrish  were  staying  at  Seth 
Utley's  house  in  Benton  county,  Tenn., 


on  June  19,  1835,  about  forty  men, 
armed  with  deadly  weapons,  led  by 
Sheriff  Robert  C.  Petty,  a  colonel,  a 
major  and  other  officers,  besides  a 
Methodist  priest  with  a  gun  on  -his 
shoulder,  surrounded  the  house.  lThe( 
sheriff  informed  the  brethren  that  he 
had  a  States'  warrant  for  David  W. 
Patten,  Warren  Parrish  and  Wilford 
Woodruff,  issued  on  complaint  of  Mat- 
thew Williams,  the  Methodist  priest, 
who  swore  that  those  brethren  had  put 
forth  the  following  false  and  pretended 
prophecy:  "That  Christ  would  come 
the  second  time,  before  this  generation 
passed  away,  and  that  four  individuals 
should  receive  the  Holy  Ghost  within 
twenty-four  hours."  After  examination 
Elders  Patten  and  Parrish  were  bound 
over  to  appear  on  June  22nd,  under 
$2,000  bonds.  "Early  on  the  22nd," 
writes  Wilford  Woodruff,  Patten  and 
Parrish  had  their  trial.  The  mob 
gathered  to  the  number  of  one  hun- 
dred, all  fully  armed.  They  took  from 
Elder  Patten  his  walking  stick  and  a 
penknife,  and  went  through  with  a 
mock  trial;  but  would  not  let  the  de- 
fendants produce  any  witnesses;  and 
without  suffering  them  to  say  a  word 
in  defense,  the  judge  pronounced  them 
guilty  of  the  charge  preferred.  Brother 
Patten,  being  filled  with  the  Holy 
Ghost,  arose  to  his  feet,  and  by  the 
power  of  God  bound  them  fast  to  their 
seats  while  he  addressed  them.  He 
rebuked  them  sharply  for  their  wicked 
and  unjust  proceedings.  Bro.  Parrish 
afterwards  said,  'My  hair  stood  up 
straight  on  my  head,  for  I  expected  to 
be  killed.'  When  Patten  closed,  the 
Judge  addressed  him, saying,  'You  must 
be  armed  with  concealed  weapons,  or 
you  would  not  treat  an  armed  court  els 
you  have  this.'  Patten  replied,  'I 
am  armed  with  weapons  you  know  not 
of,  and  my  weapons  are  the  Holy 
Priesthood  and  the  power  of  God.  God 
is  my  friend,  and  he  permits  you  to 
exercise  all  the  power  you  have,  and  he 
bestows  on  me  all  the  power  I  have.' 
The  court  finally  concluded  to  let  the 
brethren  go,  if  they  would  pay  the  coat 
of  court  and  leave  the  country  in  ten 
days.  The  sheriff  advised  the  breth- 
ren to  accept  these  propositions,  as  it 
was  the  only  means  of  escaping  the 
violence  of  the  mob.  The  Saints  in 
that  vicinity  paid  the  cost.  Elders 
Patten   and   Parrish   left   and   went   to- 


BIOGRAPHICAL    ENCYCLOPEDIA. 


79 


ro.  Seth  Utley's.j  They  had  not  been 
one  long  when  the  mob  began  to 
luarrel  among-  themselves  and  were 
nad  because  they  had  let  the  prisoners 
go.  They  soon  mounted  their  horses 
and  started  after  them  with  all  pos- 
sible speed.  The  news  of  this  move- 
ment reached  the  brethren  and  they 
immediately  mounted  their  mules  and 
went  into  the  woods.  By  a  circuitous 
route  they  reached  the  house  of  Albert 
Petty,  put  up  their  mules,  went  to  bed 
and  slept.  They  had  not  been  long 
asleep  when  some  heavenly  messenger 
came  to  Bro.  Patten  and  told  him  to 
arise  and  leave  that  place,  for  the  mob 
was  after  them  and  would  soon  be  at 
that  house.  Elder  Patten  awoke  Par- 
rish  and  told  him  to  arise  and  dress 
himself,  as  the  mob  would  soon  be  upon 
them.  They  arose,  saddled  their  ani- 
mals and  started  for  Henry  county  in 
the  night.  They  had  not  been  gone 
long  before  the  house  was  surrounded 
by  a  mob,  who  demanded  Patten  and 
I'arrish.  Bro.  Petty  informed  them 
that  they  were  not  there,  but  the  mob 
.searched  the  house  and  remained  till 
daybreak,  when  they  found  the  tracks 
of  the  brethren's  animals,  which  they 
followed  to  the  line  of  the  next  county, 
when  they  gave  up  the  chase."  After 
attending  a  conference  on  Damon's 
creek,  Calloway  county,  Kentucky, Sept. 
2,  1836,  Thos.  B.  Marsh  presiding,  Elder 
Patten  left  the  Saints  in  Kentucky  and 
Tennessee,  accompanied  by  his  wife, 
and  started  for  Far  West,  Mo.,  where 
they  arrived  in  peace  and  safety.  El- 
der Patten  remained  in  Missouri  until 
the  spring  of  1837,  when  he  performed 
a  mission  through  several  States, 
preaching  by  the  way  until  he  arrived 
in  Kirtland.  It  was  a  time  of  great 
apostasy  in  the  Church.  "Warren  Par- 
rish,  his  brother-in-law  and  fond  as- 
sociate, apostatized  and  labored  dili- 
gently to  draw  away  Elder  Patten 
from  the  Church.  Those  things  trou- 
bled Bro.  Patten  very  much  and  caused 
him  great  sorrow.  He  soon  after- 
wards returned  to  Missouri,  where  he 
(Feb.  10,  1838),  together  with  Thos.  B. 
Marsh,  was  appointed  to  take  the  presi- 
dency in  Far  West  until  Pres.  Joseph 
Smith  arrived.  Elder  Patten  wrote  an 
epistle  and  delivered  what  proved  to 
be  his  last  testimony  to  the  world  and 
Church,  which  was  published  in  the 
"Elders'  Journal,"  No.  3.    He  continued 


to  labor  in  the  Church  in  Missouri 
through  the  summer  of  1838,  and  when 
the  persecution  and  mobbing  com- 
menced, he  was  foremost  in  defending 
the  Saints.  News  came  to  Far  West 
Oct.  24,  1838.  that  Rev.  Samuel  Bogart, 
with  a  mob  of  seventy-five  men,  were 
committing  depredations  on  Log  creek, 
destroying  property  and  taking  pris- 
oners. Elder  Patten  with  about  seven- 
ty-five others  were  sent  out  to  meet 
the  mobbers,  with  whom  they  had  an 
encounter  early  the  next  morning  (Oct. 
25th),  when  Bro.  Patten  was  mortally 
wounded,  receiving  a  large  ball  in  th^ 
bowels.  When  the  battle  was  over,  the 
brethren  started  towards  Far  West 
with  their  dead  and  wounded.  After 
traveling  a  few  miles  in  a  wagon  the 
sufferings  of  Apostle  Patten  became  so 
great  that  he  begged  to  be  left.  He 
and  Bro.  Seeley,  another  of  the  wound- 
ed, were  then  placed  upon  litters 
and  carried  by  the  brethren.  When 
they  arrived  near  Log  creek,  they 
were  met  by  Joseph  Smith,  Hyrum 
Smith,  Heber  C.  Kimball  and  others. 
At  this  place  Bro.  Patten  became  so  ill 
that  he  could  not  stand  to  be  borne 
any  further.  He  was  therefore  con- 
veyed into  the  house  of  Bro.  Stephen 
Winchester,  about  three  miles  from 
Far  West.  During  his  removal  his 
sufferings  were  so  excruciating,  that 
he  frequently  asked  the  brethren  to  lay 
him  down  that  he  might  die.  He  lived 
about  an  hour  after  his  arrival  at  Win- 
chester's house  and  was  perfectly  sen- 
sible and  collected  until  he  breathed 
his  last  at  ten  o'clock  at  night.  Al- 
though he  had  medical  assistance,  his 
wound  was  such  that  there  was  no  hope 
entertained  of  his  recovery;  of  this  he 
was  fully  aware.  "In  this  situation," 
writes  Heber  C.  Kimball,  "when  the 
shades  of  time  were  lowering,  and  eter- 
nity with  all  its  realities  were  opening 
to  his  view,  he  bore  a  strong  testimony 
to  the  truth  of  the  work  of  the  Lord, 
and  the  religion  he  had  espoused.  The 
principles  of  the  gospel,  which  were 
so  precious  to  him  before,  were  honor- 
ably maintained  in  nature's  final  hour, 
and  afforded  him  that  support  and  con- 
solation at  the  time  of  his  departure, 
which  deprived  death  of  its  sting  and 
horror.  Speaking  of  those  who  had 
apostatized,  he  exclaimed,  'O,  that  they 
were  in  my  situation;  for  I  feel  I  have 
kept   the   faith,    I     have     finished   my 


80 


LATTER-DAY    SAINT 


course:  henceforth  there  is  laid  up  for 
me  a  crown,  which  the  Lord,  the  right- 
eous Judgre.  shall  give  to  me."  Speak- 
ing to  his  beloved  wife,  who  was  pres- 
ent and  who  attended  him  in  his  dying 
moments,  he  said,  'Whatever  you  do 
else,  do  not  deny  the  faith!'  "  The 
brethren,  who  felt  very  much  attached 
to  their  beloved  brother,  beseeched  the 
Lord  to  spare  his  life,  and  endeavored 
to  exercise  faith  for  his  recovery.  Be- 
ing aware  of  this  he  expressed  a  de- 
siie  that  they  should  let  him  go,  as  he 
wished  to  be  with  Christ,  which  was 
far  better.  A  few  minutes  before  he 
died,  he  prayed  as  follows:  "Father, 
I  ask  thee  in  the  name  of  Jesus  Christ 
that  thou  wouldst  release  my  spirit  and 
receive  it  unto  thyself."  He  then 
said  to  those  who  surrounded  his  dy- 
ing bed.  "Brethren,  you  have  held  me 
by  your  faith,  but  do  give  me  up  and 
let  me  go.  I  beseech  you."  The  breth- 
ren then  committed  him  to  God,  and 
he  soon  breathed  his  last  without  a 
groan.  Elder  Patten  was  buried  at 
Far  West  Saturday  Oct.  27,  1838.  In 
pointing  to  the  lifeless  body  the 
Prophet  Joseph  said.  "There  lies  a  man 
who  has  done  just  as  he  said  he  would: 
he  has  laid  down  his  life  for  his 
friends."  "Brother  David  W.  Patten," 
writes  Joseph  Smith,  "was  a  very 
worthy  man,  beloved  by  all  good  men 
who  knew  him.  He  ....  died  as  he 
had  lived,  a  man  of  God,  and  strong 
in  the  faith  of  a  glorious  resurrection, 
in  a  world  where  mobs  will  have  no 
power  or  place."  (For  further  details 
see  Life  of  David  W.  Patten,  by 
Lycurgus  A.  Wilson;  "Millennial  Star," 
^'ol.  26.  p.  406;  "Historical  Record,"  Vol. 
5.  p.  54.) 

HVDE,    Orson,    a     member     of    the 

Council  of  Twelve  Apostles  from  1835 
to  1878,  and  president  of  the  quorum 
from  1847  to  1875,  was  born  Jan.  8, 
1805,  in  Oxford,  New  Haven  county. 
Conn.  His  father,  who  was  an  ath- 
letic, witty  and  talented  man,  fought, 
and  was  several  limes  wounded  in  the 
T'.  S.  Army,  serving  in  Canada,  under 
Ck-n.  Brown,  and  on  the  frontier  in  the 
war  of  1812.  His  mother  having  died 
when  he  was  seven  years  old,  Orson 
:ind  his  eight  brothers  and  three  sis- 
t.-rs  were  scattered,  and  he  was  placed 
iMKh-r  the  care  of  a  gentleman  named 
Xaihan  Wheeler,  with  whom  he  stayed 


till  eighteen  years  of  age.  Mr.  Wheeler 
moving  from  Derby,  Conn.,  to  Kirtland, 
Ohio,  when  Orson  was  fourteen  years 
old,  the  boy  had  to  walk  the  whole 
distance,  six  hundred  miles,  carrying 
his  knapsack.  On  striking  out  into  the 
world  for  himself  he  worked  at  several 
occupations,  and  part  of  the  time 
served  as  clerk  in  the  store  of  Gilbert 
&  Whitney,  in  Kirtland.  In  1827  a  re- 
ligious revival  made  quite  a  stir  in  the 
neighborhood  of  Kirtland,  and  he  be- 
came converted  to  the  Methodist  faith, 
and  was  appointed  as  class  leader.  Sub- 
sequently, under  the  preaching  of  Sid- 
ney Rigdon,  he  embraced  the  doctrine 
of  the  Campbellites  and  was  baptized 
by  immersion.  He  then  took  up  his 
abode    in    the    town    of    Mentor,    Ohio, 


^^^ 

k 

/i^H 

^ 

l^>d 

m 

^^P 

■ 

<^^Pl<g 

^.•.  .vl 

m 

^E 

a,/ J 

f 

""'    - 

ilH^^ 

ORS(<N  HYDE   IN   1852. 

and  commenced  to  study  under  the  care 
of  Sidney  P.igdon  and  others,  becoming 
proficient  in  several  branches  of  educa- 
tion. He  then  began  to  preach,  as- 
sisting in  the  formation  of  several 
Campbell ite  branches  in  Lorain  and 
Huron  counties,  Ohio,  over  which  he 
was  appointed  pastor  in  1830.  In  the 
fall  of  the  year  several  "Mormons" 
visited  that  neighborhood,  bringing  the 
so-called  "golden  Bible,"  of  which  he 
read  a  portion,  and  by  request  he 
preached  against  it.  But  feeling  that 
he  had  done  wrong,  he  determined  to 
oppose  it  no  more  until  he  had  made 
further  investigation.  He  accordingly 
went  to  Kirtland  to  see  the  Prophet 
Joseph,  and  there  found  that  Sidney 
Rigdon  and  others  of  his  former 
friends  had  embraced  the  "new  gos- 
pel." After  diligent  inquiry  he  be- 
came   himself    convinced    of   its    truth. 


BIOGRAPHICAL.   ENCYCLOPEDIA. 


81 


and  was  baptized  by  Sidney  Rlgdon,  in 
the  fall  of  1831,  and  was  confirmed  on 
the  same  day  under  the  hands  of  Joseph 
Smith  the  Prophet.      He  soon  received 
the  witness  of  the  Spirit  in  a  powerful 
manner,  and  began  to  bear   testimon;* 
to  his  former  friends.  He  was  ordained 
a  Hig-h  Priest  by  Oliver  Cowdery,  Ocz. 
25,  1831,  at  a  conference  held  at  Orange, 
Cuyahoga  county,  Ohio,and  took  a  mis- 
sion with   Rider  Hyrum  Smith  amonitj 
the  Campbellites  of  Ohio,  when  several 
branches   were   organized     and     many 
sick  people  were  healed  by  the  layin.^c 
on  of  hands.      In  the  spring  of  1832,  in 
company  with  Elder  Samuel  H.Smith.he 
performed  an  arduous  mission  in  New 
York,  Massachusetts,  Maine  and  Rhode 
Island,  traveling  two  thousand     miles, 
on  foot,  without  purse  or  scrip.      Early 
in   1833,   with    Elder   Hyrum   Smith,    he 
took  a  mission  to     Pennsylvania     and 
Ohio,  baptizing  many  persons  into  the 
Church.       In  the  summer  of  this  year 
he  was     appointed,     with     Elder  John 
Gould,   to   carry     instructions     to     the 
Saints  in  Jackson  county,  Missouri,and 
went  on  foot  a  distance  of  a  thousand 
miles,  traveling  forty  miles  a  day  and 
swimming  the  rivers.      They  performed 
their  mission  and  returned  to  Kirtland 
in  November.       He    subsequently  per- 
formed another  mission  to  Pennsylva- 
nia,in  company  with  Elder  Orson  Pratt. 
In  May,  1834,  he  started  with  the  com- 
pany which  went  to  Missouri,     calling 
on  the  way,  with  Elder  Parley  P.  Pratt, 
to   see   Gov.   Daniel   Dunklin,   to   inter- 
cede  for   the  restoration     to   the   Mis- 
souri Saints  of  the  1-ands  from     which 
they  had  been  driven.  Their  labor  was 
in  vain.     Sept.  4,  1834,  he  married  Ma- 
rinda    N.    Johnson,    daughter    of    John 
and  Elsa  Johnson,  and  sister  to  Luke  S. 
and  Lyman  E.  Johnson.  In  the  follow- 
ing  winter   he   was   chosen   as    one   of 
the  Twelve  Apostles,  and  was  ordained 
to  that  high  anil  holy  calling  in  Kirt- 
land,   Ohio,    Feb.    15,      1835,    under    the 
hands  of  Oliver  Cowdery,  David  Whit- 
mer  and  Martin   Harris.       Soon  after- 
wards  he   traveled   with     his     quorum 
through  Vermont  and  New  Hampshire. 
In  1836  he  was  sent  to  the  State  of  New 
York.and  afterwards  to  Canada,  where, 
in  company  with  Elder  Parley  P.  Pratt, 
he  helped  to  raise  up  several  branches 
of  the  Church.       In  the  spring  of  1837 
he  went  with  others  to  England,  where 
about   fifteen     hundred     persons    were 

Vol.  1,  No.  6. 


baptized   by   their  united   labors.       He 
returned  to  Kirtland  May  22,  1838,  and 
in   the   summer   moved   to   Far     West, 
Missouri.      Upon  the  settlement  of  the 
Saints  in  Commerce,  afterwards  called 
Nauvoo,    he   moved    there,    and   at   the 
April  conference,  in  1840,  was  sent  on  a 
mission  to  Jerusalem.       Elder  John  E. 
Page  was  appointed  to  accompany  him, 
but  failed  to  fill  the  appointment,  and 
Elder  Hyde  proceeded  alone.  He  crossed 
the  ocean   to  England,   passed  over  to 
Germany,  staying  in  Bavaria  to  learn 
the  German  language,  went  to  Constan- 
tinople,  also  to  Cairo  and  Alexandria, 
and,    after    encountering    many   hard-- 
ships,  reached  the  Holy  City.      On  the 
morning   of    Sunday,    Oct.    24,    1841,    he 
went  up  on  the  Mount  of  Olives,   and 
dedicated  and  consecrated  the  land  for 
the    gathering     of     Judah's    scattered 
remnants.       He  also  erected   a  pile  of 
stones    there,    as   a   witness,    and     one 
upon  Mount  Zion,  according  to  a  vision 
given  to  him  previous  to  leaving  Nau- 
voo, and  the  predictions  of  the  Prophet 
Joseph  upon  his  head.       He     returned 
home  In  December,  1842.      Elder  Hyde 
accompanied   the   Saints   in   the  expul- 
sion from  Nauvoo,  and  in  1846,  was  ap- 
pointed,  with  Elders  John  Taylor  and 
Parley  P.  Pratt,  to  go  to  England  and 
set  in  order  the  Churches  there.      They 
left  their  families  on  the  frontier.  El- 
der Hyde  took  charge  of  the  "Millennial 
Star,"  while    Elders    Taylor  and  Pratt 
traveled  through  the  conferences.      He 
returned  in  1847,  and  when  the  pioneers 
left  for  the  mountains  he  remained  In 
charge  of  the  Saints  at  Winter  Quar- 
ters,   together   with    Apostles    Geo.    A. 
Smith  and   Ezra  T.   Benson,   until   the 
spring   of  1850.       At   Kanesville     (now 
Council    Bluffs),      Iowa,      he    published 
the  "Frontier  Guardian"   in  the  inter- 
est   of    the    Church,    the    first   number 
bearing   the   date   of  Feb.   7,   1849.       It 
was   the   only  newspaper   published   at 
that  time  within  a  radius  of  150  miles. 
In  1850  Elder  Hyde  made  his  first  visit 
to    Utah,    returning    to    Kanesville    in 
the  fall.       In  1851  he  made  his  second 
visit  to  Utah.  On  this  trip  he  and  com- 
pany were   attacked     by     about   three 
hundred  Pawnee  Indians  and  robbed  of 
considerable  property.       This  occurred 
on  a    route    never    traveled    until  that 
season.      The  change     of     travel     was 
due   to     unusual     heavy     rains.       The 
Elkhorn   river   being   four   miles    wide 

Feb.  9,  1901. 


LATTER-DAY  SAINT 


in  May.  wagons  were  unable  to  cross 
the  river  until  late  in  June.  Ear- 
ly emigration  came  by  this  new  route 
and  after  traveling  in  a  northwesterly 
direction  for  about  four  hundred 
miles,  came  to  the  old  traveled 
road  near  old  Fort  Kearney,  on  the 
north  side  of  the  Platte.  He  returned 
to  Kanesville  in  the  fall.  In  1852  he 
disposed  of  his  printing  establishment 
in  Kanesville,  and  removed  to  Utah 
with  his  family.  In  1853  he  was  called 
to  take  charge  of  a  company 
of  settlers  who  located  Fort  Supply 
in  the  Green  river  country.  In  1855  he 
went  in  charge  of  several  missionaries 
to  Carson  valley,  and  organized  the 
county,  which  was  then  in  Utah,  but 
subsequently  was  Included  in  Nevada. 
Elder  Hyde  was  afterwards  sent  to 
take  charge  of  affairs  in  Sanpete  coun- 
ty. He  took  up  his  residence  in 
Spring  City,  and  was  the  leading  spirit 
in  that  region  until  his  decease.  He 
was  for  many  years  an  active  member 
of  the  legislative  assembly.  At  the 
time  of  his  death,  which  occurred  at  his 


.-^«p^i^ 

'  ''"^^^I^^^^^^^H 

' 

A     Vi*ii      .j^^^^^^B 

^ 

iw 

WW^fc' 

1 

ss^       w      ^^^^ 

OKSON  HYDE   IN    1877. 

residence  in  Spring  City,  Sanpete  coun- 
ty, Utah,  Nov.  28.  1878,  he  was  a  mem- 
ber of  the  committee  for  the  construc- 
;ion  f)f  the  Manti  Temple.  Elder  Hydo 
was  a  man  of  great  natural  ability, and 
))y  indu.strious  application  had  acquired 
a  good  education,  which,  with  his  great 
and  varied  experience  and  extended 
travels,  rendered  him  a  powerful  instru- 
ment in  the  hands  of  God   for  the  de- 


fense and  dissemination  of  the  gospel 
and  the  building  up  of  the  Latter-day 
%Vork.      He  left  a  numerous  family  and  _ 

a  host  of  friends.     (For  a  more  detailed         I 
life   sketch,   see  "Millennial  Star,"  Vol.  * 

26,    p.    742.) 


McLKIililX,  AVilliaiii  K.,  a  membe 
of  the  Council  of  Twelve  Apostles  from 
1835  to  1838,  was  born  in  Tennessee, 
probably  in  the  year  1806.  He  heard 
the  gospel  preached  by  Elders  Samuel 
H.  Smith  and  Reynolds  Cahoon,  while 
they  were  on  their  mission  to  Jackson 
county,  Missouri,  in  the  summer  of 
1831;  he  wound  up  his  business  and  fol- 
lowed them  to  Jackson  county.  While 
on  the  way,  he  was  baptized,  and  or- 
dained an  Elder.  He  visited  Kirtland, 
Ohio,  in  the  fall.  At  his  request,  Jo- 
seph Smith  inquired  of  the  Lord  con- 
cerning him,  and  received  a  revelation. 
(See  Doc.  &  Cov.,  Sec.  66.)  Soon  after 
he  and  other  members  began  to  criti- 
cise the  language  used  in  some  of  the 
revelations,  "and  Wm.  E.  McLellin," 
writes  Joseph  Smith,  "as  the  wisest 
man  in  his  own  estimation,  having 
more  learning  than  sense,  endeavored 
to  write  a  commandment  like  unto  one 
of  the  least  of  the  Lord's,  but  failed: 
it  was  an  awful  responsibility  to  write 
in  the  name  of  the  Lord.  The  Elders 
and  all  present  that  witnessed  this 
vain  attempt  of  a  man  to  imitate  the 
language  of  Jesus  Christ,  renewed  their 
faith  in  the  fulness  of  the  gospel,  and 
in  the  truth  of  the  commandments  and 
revelations  which  the  Lord  had  given 
to  the  Church  through  my  instrumen- 
tality: and  the  Elders  signified  a  will- 
ingness to  bear  testimony  of  their 
truth  to  all  the  world."  In  the  winter 
of  1832-33,  Elder  McLellin  performed  a 
mission,  in  comiiany  with  Elder  Parley 
P.  Pratt,  through  Missouri  and  into 
Green  county.  Illinois,  where  they 
jiroached  with  much  success.  In  a 
re\elation  given  March  8,  1833,  the  Lord 
said,  "I  am  not  well  pleased  with  my 
servant  'William  E.  McLellin."  He  was 
one  of  the  corresponding  committee  in 
behalf  of  the  Saints,  to  confer  with  the 
Jackson  ami  Clay  county  committee,  in 
trying  to  settle  the  Missouri  difficulties. 
He  was  (;hosen  one  of  the  High  Coun- 
'il  in  Clay  county.  Mo.,  July  3,  1834. 
ami  on  the  !tth  started  in  company  with 
the  Prophet  Joseph  from  Missouri  to 
Kirtland,  Chio.       He  was  chosen  an  as- 


t- 


BIOGRGAPHICAL  ENCYCLOPEDIA. 


83 


distant  teachei-  in  the  school  of  the  El- 
ders  in  Kirtland  during  the  winter  of 
1834-35.        He    was    chosen    one    of    the 
Twelve  Apostles,  at  the  organization  of 
that    quorum,    and    ordained      Feb.    15, 
1835,      under      the      hands      of       Oliver 
Cowdery,    David   Whitmer  and   Martin 
Harris.  With  the  quorum  of  the  Twelve, 
in  the   spring   and   summer  of  1835.   he 
went  on  a  mission  to  the  East,  and  bap- 
tized  five.       While   upon   this   mission, 
he   wrote  a  letter  to  Kirtland,   casting 
censure  upon  the  presidency,  for  which 
he  was  suspended  from  fellowship,  but 
meeting  with   the  council  of   the  First 
Presidency  after  his  return  to  Kirtland, 
Sept.   25th,   he  confessed,   was  forgiven 
and  restored  to  fellowship.  He  attended 
the  Hebrew  school   in  Kirtland  during 
the  winter  of  1835-36,   and  officiated  as 
clerk  for  the  Twelve.      On  Friday,  May 
11,  1838,  he  came  before  a  Bishop's  court, 
in  Far  West,  Mo.,  where  he  said  he  had 
no  confidence  in  the  presidency  of  the 
Church;  consequently, he  had  quit  praj'^- 
ing  and  keeping  the  commandments  of 
the   Lord,   and  indulged  himself  in  his 
sinful  lusts.      It  was  from  what  he  had 
heard,   that  he  believed  the  presidency 
had  got  out  of  the  way,  and  not  from 
anything  that  he  had  seen  himself.    He 
was   cut  off   from   the   Church   for  un- 
belief  and     apostasy.       After     his   ex- 
communication he   tried  to  establish  a 
church   of  his   own,    that   he   might   be 
the  head  thereof,  but  without  success. 
He   took  an  active  part  with  the  mob 
in  Missouri,  in  robbing  and  driving  the 
Saints.      At  the  time  Joseph  Smith  was 
in    prison,    he    and    others    robbed     Jo- 
seph's house  and  stable  of  considerable 
property.      "While  Joseph  was  in  prison 
at   Richmond,   Mo.,   Mr.   McLellin,   who 
was  a  lg,rge  and  active  man,  went  to  the 
sheriff  and    asked  for  the  privilege   of 
flogging   the   Prophet:    permission    wa.s 
granted,      on     condition     that     Joseph 
would    fight.        The    sheriff    made    Mc- 
Lellin's  earnest   request   known    to   Jo- 
seph,   who   consented    to   fight,      if     his 
irons   were   taken   off.       McLellin   then 
refused   to  fight,   unless  he  could  have 
a    club,    to    which     Joseph     was     per- 
fectly   willing;    but    the    sheriff    would 
not  allow  them   to   fight'    on   such   un- 
equal   terms.       Bro.    McLellin     was     a 
man    of    superficial    education,    though 
he  had  a  good  flow  of  language.       He 
adopted  the  profession  of  medicine.  He 
finally    died    in    obscurity    at    Indepen- 


dence, Jackson  county.  Mo.,  April  24, 
1883.  (See  also  "Millennial  Star,"  Vol. 
26.   p.   807.) 

PRATT,  Parley  Parker,  a  mem- 
ber of  the  Council  of  Twelve  Apostles 
from  1835  to  1857,  was  born  April  12, 
1807,  in  Burlington,  Otsego  county.  New 
York.  He  was  the  ^third  son  of  Jared 
and  Charity  Pratt^Jared  was  the  son 
of  Obadiah  and  Jemima  Pratt,  Obadiah 
was  the  son  of  Christopher  and  Sarah 
Pratt;  Christopher  was  the  son  of  Wil- 
liam and  Hannah  ^ratt;  "William  was 
the  son  of  Joseph  Pratt;  Joseph  was 
the  son  of  Lieutenant  William  and 
Elizabeth  Pratt,  who  were  found 
among  the  first  settlers  of  Hartford, 
Conn.,  in  the  year  1639.  They  are  sup- 
posed to  have  accompanied  the  Rev. 
Thomas   Hooker  and  his  congregation, 


about  one  hundred  in  number,  from 
Newtown,  now  called  Cambridge, 
Mass.,  through  a  dense  wilderness,  in- 
habited only  by  savages  and  wild 
beasts,  and  became  the  first  founders 
of  the  colony  at  Hartford,  in  June. 
1636.  This  ancient  pilgrim,  William 
Pratt,  was  a  member  of  the  legislature 
for  some  twenty-five  or  thirty  sessions; 
and  the  general  court  gave  him  one 
hundred  acres  of  land  in  Saybrook, 
Conn.,  for  service  performed  as  lieuten- 
ant in  the  Pequot  war:  he  was  one  or 
the  judges  of  the  first  court  in  New 
London  county.  Parley  P.  Pratt  was 
a  lineal  descendant,  of  the  seventh  gen- 
eration, from  that  distinguished  pilgrim 
and  humble  pioneer  of  the  new  world. 
The  youthful  days  of  Parley  P.  Pratt 
were  characterized  by  the  soberness 
and  thoughtfulness  of  manhood. 
Though    from    adverse      circumstances 


84 


LATTER-DAY    SAINT 


his  education  was  extremely  limited, 
yet  he  displayed,  even  in  youth,  an 
originality  of  mind  seldom  exhibited. 
In  September,  1820,  he,  being  led  by  the 
Spirit  of  the  Lord  from  his  home  in 
the  State  of  Ohio,  came  several  hun- 
dred miles  eastward,  where  he  for- 
tunately obtained  a  copy  of  one  of  the 
most  remarkable  works  of  modern 
times— the  Book  of  Mormon.  He  read 
the  same,  was  convinced  of  its  divine 
authenticity,  and  traveled  in  search  of 
the  highly  favored  men  of  God  who 
had  seen  angels  and  heard  the  voice 
of  the  Almighty.  He  soon  succeeded 
in  finding  some  of  them,  from  whom 
he  learned  that  about  five  months  pre- 
vious the  Church  of  Jesus  Christ  of 
Latter-day  Saints  had  been  organized. 
He  requested  baptism,  and  was  im- 
mediately after  ordained  an  Elder.  The 
same  month  he  visited  Canaan,  Colum- 
bia county,  N.  Y.— the  county  where 
he  had  spent  many  of  his  youthful 
days— and  after  preaching  a  few  times 
in  different  neighborhoods,  and  baptiz- 
ing Orson  Pratt,  his  brother,  he  re- 
turned to  Seneca  county.  Receiving  a 
revelation  through  Joseph  the  Prophet, 
he,  in  company  with  three  or  four 
others,  performed  a  mission,  some 
fifteen  hundred  miles,  to  the  western 
boundaries  of  the  State  of  Missouri, 
and  was  among  the  first  of  the  Saints 
to  stand  upon  that  choice  land  where 
the  city  of  Zion  is  hereafter  to  be  built, 
preparatory  to  the  second  advent  of  our 
Savior.  In  the  spring  of  1831  he  re- 
turned to  the  northern  part  of  Ohio, 
where  he  met  Joseph  the  Prophet,  by 
whom  he  was  ordained  a  High  Priest 
June  6.  1831.  In  the  summer  he  again 
performed  a  mission  through  Ohio,  In- 
diana, Illinois  and  Missouri,  preaching, 
baptizing  and  building  up  the  Church. 
In  the  autumn  of  1833  he  and  about 
twelve  hundred  men,  women  and  child- 
ren were  driven  by  a  murderous, 
furious  mob  from  their  own  houses  and 
lands  in  Jackson  county,  Missouri.  Two 
hundred  houses  were  burned,  cattle 
shot,  hay  sfacks  and  grain  burned, 
many  whipped  until  their  bowels 
gushed  out;  others  killed,  and  the  af- 
flicted remnant  driven  across  the  river 
into  Clay  county.  Soon  after  this  El- 
der Pratt  performed  a  long  journey  of 
about  fifteen  hundred  miles  east, 
preaching  repentance  and  strengthen- 
ing the   Saints.       In   1834  he  again   re- 


turned to  Clay  county,  Missouri,  offi- 
ciating in  his  holy  calling  wherever  he 
went.  Having  returned  to  the  northern 
part  of  Ohio,  he  was  chosen  and  or- 
dained one  of  the  Twelve  Apostles  of 
this  last  dispensation,  Feb.  21,  1835,  by 
Joseph  Smith.  The  same  year  he  per- 
formed a  lengthy  missionary  journey 
through  Pennsylvania,  New  York,  and 
several  of  the  New  England  States,  and 
returned  again  to  Ohio.  In  1836  he 
visited  Canada,  and  established  a  large 
branch  of  the  Church  in  Toronto,  and 
other  branches  in  adjoining  towns.  In 
1837  he  visited  New  York  city,  where 
he  founded  a  large  branch  of  the 
Church.  In  1838  he  removed  to  Cald- 
well county — near  the  western  bound- 
aries of  Missouri,  and  in  the  same  year 
another  dreadful  persecution  com- 
menced against  the  Saints,  and  they 
were  again  driven  from  their  own 
houses  and  inheritances,  and  their 
property  to  the  amount  of  millions  was 
destroyed;  some  scores  of  defenseless 
men,  women  and  children  were  mur- 
dered; scores  of  others  incarcerated  in 
dungeons,  among  whom  was  Parley  P. 
Pratt;  the  balance,  about  fifteen  thou- 
sand, were  exterminated  from  the 
State,  and  found  refuge  in  Illinois.  El- 
der Pratt  was  kept  in  prison,  without 
trial,  about  eigh't  months,  when,  by  the 
kind  providence  of  God,  he  made  his 
escape  on  July  4,  1839.  Immediately 
after  gaining  his  liberty  he  published 
a  history  of  the  Missouri  persecutions, 
written  while  in  prison.  The  first  edi- 
tion appeared  in  Detroit  in  1839.  In 
company  with  others  of  the  Twelve  he 
went  to  England  in  1840,  and  in  the 
city  of  Manchester  commenced  the 
publication  of  a  periodical  entitled  the 
"Millennial  Star,"  which  has  continued 
until  the  present  time — the  current 
volume  bting,  the  sixty-third.  In  1841 
he  was  appointed  the  president  over 
all  the  British  conferences,  and  re- 
mained in  this  high  and  honorable  sta- 
tion until  the  autumn  of  1842,  during 
which  he  edited  the  "Millennial  Star," 
superintended  the  Saints'  emigration, 
and  published  several  small  but  in- 
teresting works.  The  following  winter 
he  returned  to  Illinois,  where  he  con- 
tinued laboring  in  the  ministry  for  one 
or  two  years.  About  the  beginning 
of  the  year  1845  he  was  appointed 
president  over  all  the  branches  in  the 
New  England  and   Middle  States,     his 


BIOGRGAPHICAL  ENCYCLOPEDIA. 


85 


headquarters  being  at  New  York  City, 
where  he  pubished  a  periodical  entitled 
"The  Prophet."      In  the  summer  he  re- 
turned to  Nauvoo.      In  February,  1846, 
he  was  again  driven  from  his  home  by 
a  ruthless  mob.      Some  fifteen  or  twen- 
ty   thousand    Saints    were    also    driven 
from  the  United  States  about  the  same 
time,  with  the  loss  of  houses  and  lands, 
and  an   immense   amount  of  property, 
which  the  mob  are  in  the  unmolested 
possession     of     until  the    present  day. 
After  wading'  through  unparalleled  suf- 
ferings with  his  family,  he  and  the  per- 
secuted  Saints  succeeded     in  reaching 
the  Indian   country   at  Council   Bluffs, 
and   being   called   by   the   Holy   Ghost, 
through   the  Prophet  Brigham  Young, 
to   go   to  England,   he   left   his   family 
UDon  the  broad  prairies,  without  house 
or  scarcely  any  food,   to  comply    with 
the  word  of  the  Lord.      He  arrived  in 
England,assisting  in  setting  the  Church 
in   order,   and     in     strengthening     the 
Saints  throughout  the  British  Isles.  In 
the  spring  of  1847  he   returned   to  his 
family  and  brethren;   and  in  the  sum- 
mer and  autumn  of  that  year  he     re- 
moved to  Great  Salt  Lake  valley,  and 
suffered  incredible  hardships  until  the 
harvest  of  1848.      He  assisted  in  form- 
ing a   constitution  for  the   provisional 
government  of  Deseret,  and  was  elected 
a  member  of  the  senate  in  the  general 
assembly;   and  was  afterwards  elected 
to  the  legislative  council  when  Utah  be- 
came a  Territory  of  the  United  States. 
In  1851  he  was  sent  on  a  mission  to  the 
Pacific  Islands  and  to  South  America. 
In  the  summer  of  1855  he  returned  over 
the    Sierra    Nevada   Mountains    to    his 
home,  and  occupied  a  part  of  his  time 
in  preaching  In  the  various  settlements 
of  Utah,   and   at  other  times  laboring 
with  his  own  hands  in  the  cultivation 
of  his  farm.      The  following  winter  he 
officiated  as  chaplain  in  the  legislative 
council  at  the  State  House  in  Fillmore 
City.      In  the  autumn  of  1856    he    ac- 
companied  about   twenty   missionaries 
ax:ross  the  plains  to  the  States.      Dur- 
ing the    winter    and  part  of  the  follow- 
ing spring    he  visited  the  Saints  at  St. 
Louis,    Philadelphia,     New    York     and 
other  places,   preaching,     writing    and 
publishing  the  glad  tidings  of  the  king- 
dom of  God.      And  finally,  on  the  13th 
of   May,   1857,    he   fell   a   noble   martyr 
for  the  cause  of  the   truth,  which  he 
had  advocated  with  such  untiring  per- 


severance for  nearly  twenty-severt 
years.  He  was  assassinated  near  the 
boundary  line  between  Arkansas  and 
Indian  Territory  while  on  a  mission  to 
the  States;  his  body  was  buried  near 
the  place  where  he  was  killed.  Among 
the  numerous  writings  of  this  martyred 
Apostle  may  be  mentioned  first,  the 
"Voice  of  Warning,"  printed  in  New 
York  in  1838,  and  which  has  since 
passed  through  many  editions,  and 
then  translated  into  several  foreign 
languages;  second,  his  "History  of  the 
Missouri  Persecutions;"  third,  his 
"Poems;"  fourth,  his  "Key  to  Theolo- 
gy," a  masterly  production.  The  his- 
tory of  his  life,  up  to  near  the  time  of 
his  martyrdom,  was  written  by  him- 
self, and  was  published  in  the  year 
1874  by  his  son,  the  late  Parley  P. 
Pratt.  To  this  work  the  "Autobiog- 
raphy of  Parley  Parker  Pratt,"  the 
reader  is  referred  for  a  full  history  of 
the  life  of  this  grreat  and  illustrious 
Apostle. 

JOHNSON,  Luke  S.,  a  member  of 
the  Council  of  Twelve  Apostles  from 
1835  to  1838,  was  the  son  of  John  John- 
son and  was  bom  Nov.  3,  1807,  in  Pom- 
fret,  Windsor  county,  Vermont.  In 
early  life  he  assisted  his  father  in 
farming,  and  remained  with  him  until 
he  received  the  gospel  and  was  bap- 
tized by  Joseph  Smith  May  10,  1831.  In 
the  meantime  the  family  had  removed 
from  Pomfret,  Vermont,  to  Hiram, 
Portage  county,  Ohio.  Soon  after  his 
baptism  Luke  S.  Johnson  was  ot"dained 
a  Priest  by  Christian  Whitmer  and 
performed  a  mission  to  southern  Ohio, 
in  company  with  Robert  Rathburn, 
where  they  baptized  several  and  or- 
ganized a  branch  in  Chippewa.  Short- 
ly after,  together  with  Sidney  Rigdon, 
he  baptized  fifty  or  sixty  in  New  Port- 
age, Ohio,  and  organized  a  branch. 
From  there  they  went  to  Pittsburg, 
Penn.,  where  Johnson  baptized  Rig- 
don's  mother  and  eldest  brother  and 
several  others;  they  also  organized  a 
branch.  At  a  conference  held  in  Orange, 
Cuyahoga  county,  Ohio,  Oct.  25,  1831, 
Bro.  Johnson  was  ordained  a  High 
Priest  by  Joseph  Smith,  and  in  1832-33, 
in  company  with  Seymour  Brunson  and 
Hazen  Aldrich,traveled  as  a  missionary 
through  Ohio,  Virginia  and  Kentucky. 
They  baptized  over  a  hundred  persons 
and  organized  branches  of  the  Church 


,/^ 


86 


LATTER-DAY    SAINT 


in  Lawrence  county.  Ohio,  and  Cabell 
county,  Virginia.  Nov.  1,  1833,  Elder 
Johnson  married  Susan  H.  Poteet,  in 
Cabell  county.  Virginia.  At  the  or- 
ganization of  the  first  High  Council 
of  the  Church.  Feb.  17,  1834.  he  was 
chosen  one  of  its  members.  In  the  fol- 
lowing summer  he  went  as  a  member  of 
Zion's  Camp  to  Missouri  and  back.  Feb. 
14.  1835,  he  was  chosen,  and  on  the  15th 
ordained  one  of  the  Twelve  Apostles 
under  the  hands  of  Oliver  Cowdery. 
Da\id  Whitmer  and  Martin  Harris,  at 
Kirtland.  Ohio:  and  during  the  summe*- 
of  1835  he  traveled  through  the  Eastern 
States,  holding  conferences,  preaching 
the  gospel  and  regulating  the  branches. 
He  returned  to  Kirtland  in  September. 
The  following  winter  he  attended  the 
Hebrew  school,  and  received  his  bless- 
ings in  the  House  of  the  Lord  in  the 
spring  of  1836,  after  which  he  per- 
formed a  mission  to  the  State  of  New 
York  and  Canada.  After  having  bap- 
tized quite  a  number  and  organized  a 
branch  in  Canada,  he  returned  to  Kirt- 
land in  the  fall,  where  he  upon  two 
different  occasions  rendered  the 
Prophet  Joseph  efficient  aid  in  protect- 
ing him  from  his  enemies.  On  another 
occasion  he  heard  that  a  vexatious  writ 
had  been  sworn  out  against  Joseph 
Smith,  sen.,  it  being  supposed  that  he 
was 'liable  to  a  prosecution  in  conse- 
quence of  his  manner  of  solemnizing 
marriages.  Bro.  Johnson  got  the  priv- 
ilege of  serving  the  writ,  and  after  ar- 
resting Smith,  he  took  him  to  the  mag- 
istrate's office.  The  court  not  being 
ready  to  attend  to  the  case,  Eldei 
Johnson  put  the  prisoner  in  a  small 
room  adjoining  the  entrance  from  the 
office  and  allowed  his  son  Hyrum  to 
accompany  him.  He  then  took  a  nail 
out  from  over  the  window-sash,  left 
the  room,  locked  the  door  and  com- 
menced telling  stories  in  the  court 
room,  to  raise  a  laugh.  When  finally 
the  court  called  for  the  prisoner.  Elder 
Johnson  walked  into  the  room  in  th^ 
dark,  put  the  nail  into  its  place  in  the 
window,  and  went  back  and  told  the 
court  that  the  prisoner  had  escaped. 
The  oflficers  rushed  to  the  door  and  ex- 
amined the  fastenings  which  they 
found  all  secure.  This  created  much 
surprise,  and  they  swore  that  it  was 
another  "Mormon"  miracle.  Elder 
Johnson  had  arranged  with  John  F. 
Boynton  to  help  Bro.  Smith  out  of  the 


window.  Having  partaken  of  the  spirit 
of  speculation,  which  at  that  time  was 
possessed  by  many  of  the  Elders  and 
Saints  in  Kirtland,  Elder  Johnsons 
mind  became  darkened,  and  he  neglect- 
ed his  duties  as  an  Apostle  and  Saint. 
At  a  conference  held  at  Kirtland,  Sept. 
S,  1837,  he  was  disfellowshlpped  together 
with  his  brother  Lyman  and  John  F. 
Boynton.  On  the  following  Sunday, 
however,  he  confessed  his  faults,  and 
was  received  back  into  fellowship,  but 
was  finally  cut  off  for  apostasy  in  Far 
West,  Mo.,  April  13,  1838.  After  this 
he  taught  school  in  Cabell  county,  Vir- 
ginia, for  about  a  year,  devoting  his 
leisure  time  in  studying  medicine.  He 
then  returned  to  Kirtland,  where  he 
practiced  as  a  physician  and  also  en- 
gaged in  various  other  occupations  in 
order  to  obtain  a  living.  He  continued 
friendly  to  the  Church  and  his  former 
associates  in  the  Priesthood,  and  in 
184fi  he  was  rebaptized  in  Nauvoo  and 
came  to  Great  Salt  Lake  valley 
in  1847  as  one  of  the  143  Pioneers. 
In  the  year  1858  he  settled  St.  John, 
Tooele  county,  Utah,  and  was  ap- 
pointed Bishop  when  that  Ward  was 
first  organized.  On  the  9th  of  Decem- 
ber. 1861,  he  died  in  the  house  of  his 
brother-in-law,  Orson  Hyde,  in  Salt 
Lake  City..  Since  his  return  to  the 
Church  he  lived  to  the  truth  to  the 
best  of  his  ability  and  died  in  the 
faith.  (See  also  "Millennial  Star," 
Vol.  26,  p.  834.) 

SMITH,  William,  a  member  of  the 
Council  of  Twelve  Apostles  from  1835  to 
1845,  was  the  fifth  son  of  Joseph  Smith, 
sen., and  Lucy  Mack;  born  in  Royalton, 
Windsor  county,  Vermont,  March  13, 
1811.  He  was  Ifaptized  at  an  early 
period,  and  was  a  Teacher  in  the 
Church  in  1831.  He  took  a  mission  to 
Erie  county,  Pennsylvania,  in  Decem- 
ber, 1832,  to  preach  the  gospel  and  call 
the  Elders  to  Kirtland  to  attend  a 
school  of  the  Prophets.  He  was  or- 
dained to  the  office  of  a  High  Priest, 
under  the  hands  of  Sidney  Rigdon, 
In  council,  on  the  21st  day  of  June,  1833. 
During  the  winter  of  1833  he  worked  on 
a  farm  and  chopped  cord  wood  near 
Kirtland.  He  was  married  to  Caroline 
Grant,  daughter  of  Joshua  and  Thalia 
Grant,  February  14,  1833,  by  whom  he 
had  two  daughters — Mary  Jane  and 
Caroline   L.       He  went   to    Missouri   In 


BIOGRGAPHICAL    ENCYCLOPEDIA. 


87 


Zion's  Camp  in  1834,  and  returned  to 
Kirtland  the  same  fall.  He  was  ap- 
pointed one  of  the  Twelve  Apostles  at 
the  organization  of  that  quorum,  at 
Kirtland,  Feb.  15,  1835,  under  the  hands 
of  Oliver  Cowdery,  David  Whit- 
mer  and  Martin  Harris.  He  ac- 
companied the  Twelve  on  their  first 
mission  through  the  Eastern  States  and 
returned  with  them  to  Kirtland  in  the 
fall.  While  Joseph  Smith  was  pre- 
siding in  a  High  Council,  William  re- 
belled against  him  in  a  very  headstrong 
manner.  At  a  debating  school  held  in 
the  house  of  Father  Joseph  Smith,  Dec. 
16.  1835,  the  Prophet  Joseph  told  the 
brethren  he  feared  it  would  not  result 
in  good,  whereupon  William,  in  a  rage, 
commanded  Joseph  to  leave  the  house, 
attempted  to  put  him  out  and  inflicted 
upon  him  personal  injury,  the  effects 
of  which  he  occasionally  felt  until  his 
death.  After  Hyrum  and  the  Twelve 
had  labored  with  William  for  several 
days,  he  made  confession  and  was  for- 
given. He  removed  to  Far  West  with 
his  faniily  in  the  spring  of  1838.  After 
Joseph  was  taken  prisoner  and  the 
mob  began  to  drive  out  the  Saints,  Wil- 
liam expressed  himself  in  such  a  vin- 
dictive manner  against  Joseph  that  the 
Church  suspended  him  from  fellowship. 
May  4,  1839,  at  a  general  conference 
near  Quincy.  He  went  to  Illinois  and 
settled  in  Plymouth,  Hancock  county, 
keeping  a  tavern.  William  was  restored 
to  the  fellowship  of  the  Church  through 
the  intercession  of  Joseph  and  Hyrum; 
but  when  the  Twelve  went  to  England, 
instead  of  accompanying  them,  accord- 
ing to  the  commandment  of  the  Lord, 
he  remained  on  his  farm  at  Plymouth. 
He  published  a  letter  in  the  "Times 
and  Seasons,"  Dec.  1,  1840,  making  an 
apology  for  neglecting  to  go  on  his 
mission  upon  the  ground  of  poverty, 
but  it  came  with  an  ill  grace  as  he 
was  better  situated  to  leave  his  family 
than  any  of  the  members  of  the  quorum 
who  went.  In  the  spring  of  1841  he 
visited  the  branches  of  the  Church  in 
Pennsylvania  and  New  Jersey  and  col- 
lected means  for  his  own  benefit,  re- 
turning to  Nauvoo  the  same  season.  He 
was  elected  a  member  of  the  House  of 
Representatives  of  the  Legislature  of 
Illinois  in  the  winter  session  of  1842- 
43.  His  acts  as  a  member  of  the  legis 
lature  were  highly  approved  by  the  peo- 
ple;   he    displayed    considerable   energy 


in  defending  the  Nauvoo  charter  and 
the  rights  of  his  constituents.  He 
took  a  journey  to  the  East  on  business 
in  the  spring  of  1843,  and  spent  his  time 
among  the  churches.  William  returned 
to  Nauvoo  April  22,  1844,  with  about 
forty  or  fifty  Saints  from  New  Jersey. 
After  staying  a  short  time  in  Nauvoo, 
he  had  his  last  interview  with  his 
brother  Joseph  under  the  following 
circumstances:  He  asked  Joseph  to 
give  him  a  city  lot  near  the  Temple. 
Joseph  told  him  that  he  would  do  so 
with  great  pleasure,  if  he  would  build 
a  house  and  live  upon  it;  but  he  would 
not  give  him  a  lot  to  sell.  William  re- 
plied he  wanted  it  to  build  and  live 
upon.  The  lot  was  well  worth  $1,000. 
In  a  few  hours  afterwards,  an  appli- 
cation was  made  by  Mr.  Ivins  to  the 
recorder  to  know  if  that  lot  was  clear 
and  belonged  to  Wm.  Smith,  for  Wil- 
liam had  sold  it  to  him  for  $500.  Jo- 
seph, hearing  of  this,  directed  the  clerk 
not  to  make  a  transfer;  at  which  Wil- 
liam was  so  offended  that  he  threat- 
ened Joseph,  who  deemed  it  prudent  to 
keep  out  of  the  way,  until  William  left 
on  a  steamboat  for  the  East  accom- 
panied by  his  family.  He  spent  his 
time  mostly  in  the  various  branches  of 
the  Church,  and  collected  a  good  deal 
of  money  for  the  Temple,  which  he  used 
for  his  own  accommodation.  In  all 
his  missions  the  course  of  conduct  he 
])ursued  towards  the  females  subjected 
him  to  much  criticism.  In  a  general 
conference  of  the  Church  held  in  Nau- 
voo Oct.  6,  1845,  Wm.  Smith  was 
dropped  as  one  of  the  Twelve  Apostles 
and  Patriarch  of  the  Church,  and  on 
the  following  Sunday  (Oct.  12th)  he 
was  excommunicated,  as  more  of  his 
inconsistent  acts  had  come  to  light. 
Some  time  after  he  associated  himself 
with  the  apostate  James  J.  Strang,  who 
tried  to  organize  a  church  of  his  own, 
but  failed.  Wm.  Smith  afterwards 
identified  himself  with  the  "Reorgan- 
ized Church,"  of  which  his  nephew  is 
president,  and  lived  for  a  number  of 
years  in  Elkader,  Clayton  county, 
Iowa.  He  died  Nov.  13,  1894,  at  Oster- 
dock,  Clayton  county,  Iowa,  as  the 
last  surviving  brother  of  Joseph  the 
Prophet.  (See  also  "Millennial  Star," 
Vol.   27,   p.   7.) 

PRATT,     Orson,  a    member    of    the 
Council  of  Twelve  Apostles  from  1835  to 


88 


LATTER-DAY    SAINT 


1881,  was  born  Sept.  19,  1811,  in  Hart- 
ford,Washing  ton  county.  New  York.  He^ 
was  the  son  of  Jared  Pratt  and  Chari- 
ty Dickinson  and  a  younger  brother  of 
Apostle  Parley  P.  Pratt.  His  parents 
were  hardworking-  and  poor  people,  and 
he  was  accustomed  to  labor  from  his 
boyhood,  during  which  time  the  fami- 
ly removed  to  New  Lebanon,  Columbia 
county,  where  he  attended  school  part 
of  the  time  each  year  until  1825,  ac- 
quiring a  common  school  education, and 
becoming  familiar  with  arithmetic  and 
bookkeeping.  He  also  studied  the 
Bible.  /  From  the  time  he  was  eleven 
years'  old,  he  worked  at  farming  in 
different  places,  attending  school  in  the 
winter,  g-oing-  to  Lorain  county,  Ohio, 
in   the   fall   of   1827,   and    in   the   fall  of 


ORSON  PRATT  IN   1852. 

1828  performed  a  journey  of  nearly 
seven  hundred  miles  to  Connecticut; 
went  thence  to  Long-  Island,  and  in  the 
winter  of  1829-30  studied  geography, 
grammar  and  surveying,  at  a  boarding 
academy.  He  was  a  prayerful  as  well 
as  studious  youth,  although  neither  he 
nor  his  parents  connected  themselves 
with  any  of  the  religious  denomina- 
tions. In  September,  1830,  his  brother 
Parley  P.  Pratt,  who  had  embraced  the 
gospel  as  taught  by  Joseph  Smith  the 
Prophet,  came  with  another  Elder  to 
Canaan,  Columbia  county,  N.  Y.,  where 
Orson  was  residing.  He  then  received 
their  testimony  and  was  baptized  Sept. 
19,  1830,  his  birthday,  being  then  nine- 
teen years  old.  In  the  following 
month  he  traveled  two  hundred  miles 
to  see  Joseph  Smith  In  Fayette,  Seneca 
county,   N.  Y.,   and  on  the  4th  of  No- 


vember received  through  the  Prophet 
the  revelation  found  in  the  Doctrine 
and  Covenants,  Section  34,  in  which  he 
was  called  of  God  to  preach  the  gospel, 
to  lift  up  his  voice  both  long  and  loud, 
to  cry  repentance,  and  prepare  the  way 
before  the  coming  of  the  Lord.  He 
was  confirmed  and  ordained  an  Elder 
Dec.  1,  1830,  by  Joseph  Smith,  and  went 
on  his  first  mission  to  Colesville, 
Broome  county,  N.  Y.,  and  in  the  early 
part  of  1831,  went  on  foot  to  Kirtland, 
Ohio,  where  the  Prophet  had  removed, 
a  distance  of  about  three  hundred  miles. 
He  then  performed  several  missions  in 
Ohio,  Illinois  and  Missouri,  baptizing 
many  converts.  At  a  conference  held 
at  Amherst,  Ohio,  June  25,  1832,  he  was 
set  apart  to  preside  over  the  Elders, 
and  was  sent  on  a  mission  to  the  East- 
ern States.  Feb.  2,  1832,  he  was  or- 
dained a  High  Priest  by  Sidney  Rig- 
don,  after  which  he  traveled  and 
preached  without  purse  or  scrip, 
through  Ohio,  Pennsylvania,  New  Jer- 
sey and  New  York  City  to  Long  Island, 
thence  northeast  through  part  of  Ver- 
mont into  New  Hampshire,  preaching 
and  baptizing  by  the  way  and  making 
many  converts  in  Bath,  N.  H.,  and 
Charleston,  Vt.  Next  he  proceeded  to 
the  southern  part  of  Connecticut,  and 
had  continued  success/  After  laboring 
in  these  parts  till  tfie  fall  of  1832,  he 
started  west,  traveling  some  three  or 
four  hundred  miles,  preaching,  baptiz- 
ing, ordaining  men  to  the  ministry,  and 
laboring  in  many  parts  of  New  York. 
He  returned  to  Kirtland,  Ohio,  Feb.  17, 
1833,  having  traveled  on  foot  about  four 
thousand  miles,  baptized  104  persons 
and  organized  several  new  branches.  In 
Kirtland  he  attended  the  School  of  the 
Prophets  during  the  winter,  boarding 
with  the  Prophet  Joseph,  and  in  the 
following  spring  he  again  went  East, 
^^rforming  another  successful  mission, 
traveling  2,000  miles  in  six  months,  and 
baptizing  over  fifty  persons.  After  this 
he  remained  in  Kirtland  about  two 
months,  laboring  on  the  House  of  the 
Lord,  and  on  Nov.  27th  started  on  an- 
other mission  to  the  eastern  branches. 
He  returned  to  Kirtland  Feb.  13,  1834, 
having  traveled  about  one  thousand 
miles.  Thirteen  days  later  he  was 
started  out  again,  with  Elder  Orson 
Hyde,  on  a  special  mission^  on  which 
he  was  absent  about  two  months,  trav- 
eling  800   miles.       He     next     traveled 


BIOGRGAPHICAL    ENCYCLOPEDIA. 


89 


with  Zion's  Camp  to  Missouri,  being 
captain  of  a  company.  July  7,  1834, 
he  was  ordained  one  of  the  standing 
Hig-h  Council  in  Missouri,  where  he 
also  visited  the  scattered  branches  in 
Clay  county,  and  in  August  was  sent 
eastward,  traveling  through  Illinois 
and  Indiana  to  Ohio,  suffering  severe- 
ly through  fatigue  and  ague,  /^riving 
in  Kirtland  April  26,  1835,  on  which  day 
he  was  ordained  one  of  the  Twelve 
Apostles,  under  the  hands  of  David 
Whitmer  and  Oliver  Cowdery.  May  4, 
1835,  he  went  on  another  mission  to  the 
Eastern  States,  and  was  absent  a  little 
over  six  months.  During  the  winter 
and  early  spring  he  taught  a  grammar 
school  in  Kirtland,  and  also  studied  He- 
brew, and  then  received  his  endow- 
ments in  the  Kirtland  Temple.  His  next 
mission  was  to  Canada  "West,  on  which 
he  left  April  6,  1836.  While  absent  he 
baptized  many  persons  and  raised  up 
several  branches  of  the  Church.  July 
4,  1836,  he  was  married  to  Sarah  M. 
Bates,  whom  he  had  baptized  in  Sack- 
ett's  Harbor,  June  18,  1835.  In  the 
fall,  having  returned  to  Kirtland,  he 
studied  algebra,  and  after  providing  a 
home  for  his  wife,  went  to  the  State 
of  New  York  and  labored  in  the  minis- 
try during  the  winter  of  1837-38.  In 
April,  1839,  the  Saints  having  been 
driven  from  Far  "West,  he  went  there 
to  fulfill  a  revelation,  and  with  several 
of  the  Twelve,  met  at  the  corner  stone 
of  the  Temple,  whence  they  parted  to 
preach  the  gospel  to  foreign  nations. 
He  was  the  means  of  delivering  his 
brother  Parley  from  prison  in  Co- 
lumbia, Mo.,  July  4,  1833.  In  the  fall  of 
1839  he  preached  through  the  eastern 
branches,  and  in  the  spring  of  1840 
embarked  for  England.  He  preached 
nine  months  in  Edinburgh,  Scotland, 
raised  up  a  branch  of  over  200  persons, 
and  in  the  spring  of  1841  returned  to 
America.  After  this  mission  he  took 
charge  of  a  mathematical  school  at 
Nauvoo,  then  took  a  mission  through 
the  Eastern  States  in  the  summer  of 
1843,  and  on  his  return  in  the  fall  was 
elected  a  member  of  the  city  council, 
helped  to  draw  up  a  memorial  to  Con- 
gress and  went  to  "Washington,  D.  C, 
to  present  it  in  the  spring  of  1844.  He 
labored  among  the  churches  east  till 
the  news  of  the  martyrdom  of  the 
Prophet  was  received,  when  he  re- 
turned  to   Nauvoo.       During  the  diffi- 


culties that  succeeded  the  death  of  the 
Prophet  and  Patriarch,  he  labored 
with  the  Twelve,  which  was  the  presid- 
ing quorum  of  the  Church,  In  the  man- 
agement of  its  affairs,  shared  in  the 
expulsion  from  Nauvoo,  crossed  the 
plains  with  the  Pioneers  in  1847,  and 
on  the  way,  when  weather  would  per- 
mit, took  astronomical  and  other  sci- 
entific observations,  determining,  by 
the  aid  of  the  sextant  and  circle  of  re- 
flection, the  latitude  and  longitude  of 
the  most  prominent  places,  the  changes 
of  elevation  above  sea  level,  etc.,  in 
anticipation  of  the  great  highway 
which  even  then  it  was  expected  by  the 
Saints  would  span  this  vast  continent. 
He  was  the  first  man  of  the  Pioneers 
to  enter  Salt  Lake  valley,  having  pre- 
ceded the  main  body  of  the  company 
three  days.  In  1848  he  was  appointed 
president  over  all  the  branches  of  the 
Church  in  England,  Scotland,  "Wales, 
Ireland  and  adjacent  countries,  start- 
ing from  "Winter  Quarters  on  the  11th 
of  May,  The  number  of  Church  mem- 
bers in  Great  Britain  then  were  about 
eighteen  thousand,  which  during  his 
presidency  of  two  years  were  increased 
to  about  thirty-one  thousand.  In  this 
short  period  he  chartered  and  fitted  out 
about  twenty  ships  loaded  with  Saints 
for  "Utah.  In  the  midst  of  this  press 
of  business,  he  wrote  some  fifteen 
pamphlets, and  published  and  circulated 
several  hundred  thousand  of  them  in 
different  languages.  At  the  same  time 
he  edited  the  "Millennial  Star,"  and 
increased  its  circulation  from  less  than 
four  thousand  to  nearly  twenty-three 
thousand.  He  lectured,  at  different 
times,  to  large  audiences  in  the  prin- 
cipal cities  of  England  and  Scotland. 
In  1851  he  returned  to  Great  Salt  Lake 
valley,  and  in  the  winter  of  1851-52  de- 
livered a  series  of  twelve  astronomical 
lectures  to  crowded  audiences  in  the 
old  Tabernacle,  which  were  published 
in  the  "Deseret  News."  He  was  elected 
a  member  of  the  legislative  assembly 
during  its  first  session,  and  at  each 
successive  session  when  he  was  in  the 
Territory,  and  seven  times  was  chosen 
speaker  of  the  House.  In  1852,  he 
was  appointed  on  a  mission  to  "Wash- 
ington, D.  C,  to  take  the  presidential 
charge  of  all  the  branches  in  the  United 
States  and  British  provinces  east  of 
the  Rocky  Mountains,  and  there  pub- 
lished "The   Seer."     In  the  spring  and 


90 


LATTER-DAY    SAINT 


summer  of  1853  he  again  went  on  a 
mission  to  Europe,  returning  the  fol- 
lowing year.  April  22,  1856,  he  again 
started  for  England  and  presided  over 
the  European  Mission,  publishing  more 
j>amphlets,and  returned  by  way  of  Cali- 
fornia, while  the  army  was  en  route  to 
I'tah,  arriving  home  in  January,  1858. 
Sept.  23,  1860,  he  was  called  on  another 
mission  to  the  United  States,  being 
gone  about  one  year.  April  24,  1864. 
he  was  set  apart  for  a  mission  to  Aus- 
tria. He  went  to  that  land  in  1865, 
accompanied  by  Elder  Wm.  W.  Riter; 
but  in  consequence  of  the  stringent 
laws  he  was  unable  to  open  the  gospel 
door  to  that  nation.  He  bore  his  testi- 
mony to  the  authorities  and  left,  go^ig 
over  to  Englanjir-^^^^^i^eX^  he  visited  the 
conferences  an^  labored^ssiduously, re- 
turning Aug.  4,  1867.  In  1869  he  went 
to  New  York  City  and  transcribed  and 
published  the  Book  of  Mormon  in 
phonetic  characters  called  the  Deseret 
Alphabet.  In  August,  1870,  he  held 
the  famous  three  days'  discussion  with 
Dr.  John  P.  Newman  on  the  subject  of 
polygamy,  totally  routing  that  debater, 
for  which  he  never  forgave  the  "Mor- 
mons." At  the  adjourned  general  con- 
ference in  1874,  he  was  appointed  and 
sustained  as  Historian  and  General 
Church  Recorder,  which  position  he  re- 
tained till  his  decease.  July  18,  1871, 
he  once  more  left  his  home  to  cross  the 
ocean,  this  time  to  transcribe  and  pub- 
lish an  edition  of  the  Book  of  Mormon 
in  the  Pitman  phonetic  characters.  He 
was,  however,  soon  called  home  and  re- 
turned Sept.  27th.  In  September,  1878, 
he  started  east  with  Apostle  Joseph  F. 
Smith,  visiting  the  Whitmers  in  Mis- 
souri, the  Hill  Cumorah  and  other 
places  figuring  in  the  history  of  the 
Church,  and  returned  in  October.  Dec. 
'.jrii,  of  the  same  year,  he  started  again 
for  England  to  stereotype  the  Book  of 
Mormon  and  Doctrine  and  Covenants, 
which  he  arranged  in  verses,  with  foot 
notes  and  references.  ^  From  this  im- 
portant and  laborious  mission  he  re- 
turned Sept.  2.  1879.  After  his  arrival 
home  he  attended  a  number  of  Stake 
conferences,  and  was  again  elected  a 
member  of  the  legislature,  acting  in 
his  usual  capacity  as  sneaker  of  the 
House.  After  this  his  health  was  poor, 
and  finally  he  finished  his  long  and 
useful  career,  Oct.  3,  1881,  when  he  died 
at  his  residence  in  Salt  Lake  City.  For 


a  little  over  a  year  he  had  suffered 
severely  from  diabetes,  and  was  much 
of  the  time  unable  to  leave  his  room. 
On  Sunday  Sept.  18,  1881,  he  delivered 
his  last  public  address  in  a  clear  and 
forcible  manner,  speaking  to  a  larg.3 
congregation  in  the  Tabernacle  about 
twenty  minutes.  Orson  Pratt  was  the 
last  of  the  original  Council  of  the 
Twelve  Apostles  of  the  Church.  He 
crossed  the  Atlantic  ocean  sixteen 
times  on  missions  of  salvation.  He 
found  time  to  study  the  higher  mathe- 
inatics,  and  in  addition  to  his  published 
scientific  books  left  an  elaborate  work 
in  manuscript  on  the  Differential  Cal- 
culus, containing  original  principles.  He 
was  the  father  of  forty-five  children,  of 


ORSON   PRATT   IN   1880. 

whom  sixteen  sons  and  sixteen  daugh- 
ters, and  forty-three  grandchildren 
were  alive  at  the  time  of  his 
death.  Following  is  a  list  of  some 
of  the  works  which  he  has  published: 
Divine  Authority;  Kingdom  of  God,  in 
four  parts;  Remarkable  Visions;  Di- 
vine Authenticity  of  the  Book  of  Mor- 
mon, in  six  parts;  Reply  to  "Remarks 
on  Mormonism;"  Great  First  Cause; 
New  Jerusalem;  Absurdities  of  Imma- 
teriaiism;  "The  Seer,"  in  eighteen 
numbers;  eight  Tracts  on  the  first  prin- 
ciples of  the  gospel;  Cubic  and  Bi- 
quadratic Equations;  Key  to  the  Uni- 
verse, or  a  New  Theory  of  its  Mechan- 
ism; etc.,  etc.  By  way  of  finishing  his 
obituary,  the  editor  of  the  "Deseret 
News"  wrote  at  the  time  of  his  death: 


BIOGRGAPHICAL    ENCYCLOPEDIA. 


91 


"Orson  Pratt  was  truly  an  Apostle  of 
the  Lord.  Full  of  integrity,  firm  as  a 
rock  to  his  convictions,  true  to  his 
brethren  and  to  his  God,  earnest  and 
zealous  in  defense  and  proclamation  of 
the  truth,  ever  ready  to  bear  testimony 
to  the  latter-day  work,  he  had  a  mind 
stored  with  scripture,  ancient  and 
modern,  was  an  eloquent  speaker,  a 
powerful  minister,  a  logical  and  con- 
vincing writer,  an  honest  man  and  a 
great  soul  who  reached  out  after  eter- 
nal things,  grasped  them  with  the  gift 
of  inspiration,  and  brought  them  down 
to  the  level  and  comprehension  af  the 
common  mind.  Thousands  hav-e  been 
brought  into  the  Church  through  his 
preaching  in  many  lands,  thousands 
more  by  his  writings.  He  set  but  little 
store  on  the  wealth  of  this  world,  but 
he  has  laid  up  treasures  in  heaven 
which  will  make  him  eternally  rich." 
(See  also  "Millennial  Star,"  Vol.  27,  p. 
23;   "Southern  Star,"  Vol.  2,  p.  297.) 

BOYNTON,  John  Farnham,  a  mem- 
ber of  the  Council  of  Twelve  Apostles 
from  1835  to  1837,  was  born  Sept.  20. 
1811,  in  Bradford,  Essex  county,  Mass., 
baptized  in  September,  1832,  by  Joseph 
Smith,  in  Kirtland,  Ohio,  and  ordained 
an  Elder  by  Sidney  Rigdon.  He  per- 
formed a  mission, together  with  Zebedet, 
Coltrin,  to  Pennsylvania  in  1832  and 
another  one  to  Maine  in  1833  and  1831. 
Feb.  15,  1835,  he  was  ordained  an  Apos- 
tle in  Kirtland,  Ohio,  under  the  hands 
of  Oliver  Cowdery,  David  Whitmer  and 
Martin  Harris,  after  which  he  accom- 
panied the  Twelve  on  their  mission  to 
the  Eastern  States  and  Canada.  He 
was  married— to  Susan  Lowell  by  Jo- 
seph Smith,  Jan.  20,  1836.  During  his 
last  mission  he  borrowed  all  the  money 
he  could  among  the  brethren,  with 
which  he  entered  into  the  mercantile 
business  with  Lyman  E.  Johnson,  and 
followed  it  until  he  apostatized  and  was 
disfellowshipped  from  the  quorum  of 
Apostles  Sept.  3,  1837,  in  Kirtland,  Ohio. 
On  the  following  Sunday  he  made  con- 
fessions and  was  forgiven,  but  as  he 
did  not  repent  of  his  evils,  he  was  fin- 
ally excommunicated  from  the  Church. 
About  Boynton's  subsequent  life  A.  H. 
Hale,  of  Grantsville,  w«rote  a  few 
years  ago:  "Since  the  days  of  Nauvoo 
Boynton  has  resided  in  Syracuse,  N.  Y., 
where  he  still  lives.  He  has  always 
been  considerate  to  his  former  friends 


and  co-laborers  in  the  ministry,  and 
never  said  or  done  anything  against  the 
Church.  When  he  visited  Utah  in  1872, 
he  called  on  Pres.  Brigham  Young 
twice,  in  my  company.  The  President 
was  then  a  prisoner  in  his  own  house, 
guarded  by  U.  S.  marshals,  and  Boyn- 
ton denounced  in  strong  terms  the  per- 
secutions then  being  carried  on  against 
the  Saints.  He  also  met  Erastus  Snow, 
who,  when  only  sixteen  years  of  age, 
was  ordained  a  Teacher  by  Bro.  Boyn- 
ton. Elder  Snow  told  him  that  he  had 
been  preaching  the  same  gospel  ever 
since.  Bro.  Boynton  remarked.  "Stick 
to  it,  for  it  is  good."  He  also  called 
on  Orson  Pratt  and  others,  with  whom 
he  was  very  friendly,  and  they  all 
called  him  Brother  John.  Since  leav- 
ing the  Church  Mr.  Boynton  has  never 
joined  himself  to  any  other  denomina- 
tion and  does  not  believe  in  any  reli- 
gion whatever.  He  says,  however,  that 
if  anything  is  right,  'Mormonism'  is. 
For  twenty  years  he  traveled  through- 
out the  United  States  lecturing  on 
natural  history,  geology  and  other 
sciences.  In  1853  or  1854  he  was  ap- 
pointed by  the  government  to  make  a 
trip  to  California  on  a  geological  sur- 
veying expedition,  and  during  the  war 
of  the  rebellion  he  was  employed  in  the 
invention  of  torpedoes  and  other  de- 
structive implements  of  war."  L"p  to 
1886  John  F.  Boynton  had  his  name  in 
the  national  patent  office  for  36  patents 
on  different  inventions.  He  spent  much 
of  the  latter  part  of  his  life  gathering 
genealogy  of  the  Boynton  family.  He 
was  married  three  times.  His  first 
wife  died,  the  second  left  him,  and  he 
was  living  with  his  third  wife  at  the 
time  of  his  death,  which  occurred  at 
Syracuse  N.  Y.,  Oct.  20,  1890.  (See  also 
"Millennial  Star,"  Vol.  27,  p.  102.) 

JOHNSON,  Lyman  Eugene,  a  mem- 
ber of  the  Council  of  Twelve  Apostles 
from  1835  to  1838,  was  the  son  of  John 
Johnson.  He  was  born  Oct.  24,  1811,  in 
Pomfret,  Windsor  county,  Vermont, and 
baptized  in  February,  1831,  by  Sidney 
Rigdon.  He  was  ordained  an  Elder 
Oct.  25,  1831,  by  Oliver  Cowdery,  and  a 
High  Priest  Nov.  1,  1831,  by  Sidney 
Rigdon,  called  to  the  ministry  in  Nov. 
1831,  by  revelation,  and  performed  mis- 
sionary labor  in  Ohio,  the  Eastern 
States  and  Nova  Scotia.  In  1834  he  went 
to   Missouri   as     a     member     of  Zion's 


^ 


92 


LATTER-DAY    SAINT 


Camp,  and  was  ordained  an  Apostle 
Feb.  14,  1835,  in  Kirtland,  Ohio,  under 
the  hands  of  Oliver  Cowdery,  David 
Whitmer  and  Martin  Harris.  Soon  af- 
terward he  performed  a  mission  to  the 
Eastern  States.  He  studied  the  He- 
brew lan&uag-e  In  the  winter  of  1835- 
36,  and  after  returning-  from  another 
mission  to  the  East  in  the  fall  of  1836 
he  entered  into  merchandising  and 
soon  after  apostatized.  At  a  confer- 
ence held  In  Kirtland  Sept.  3,  1837,  he 
was  disfellowshipped,  but  as  he  made 
confessions  he  was  restored  to  his 
former  standing-,  a  few  days  later.  His 
repentance,  however,  not  being  genuine, 
he  was  excommunicated  from  the 
Church  at  Far  West,  Mo.,  April  13, 
1838.  Until  his  death  he  remained 
friendly  to  his  former  associates,  mak- 
ing- frequent  visits  to  Nauvoo,  after 
the  Saints  had  located  there.  He  re- 
linquished his  business  of  merchandis- 
ing and  commenced  to  practice  law,  lo- 
cating himself  at  Davenport,  Iowa.  A 
few  years  later  he  removed  to  Keokuk, 
where  he  continued  his  practice,  and 
was  finally  drowned  in  the  Mississippi 
river  at  Prairie  du  Chien,  Wis.,  Dec. 
20.  1856.  (See  also  "Millennial  Star," 
Vol.  27,   p.  102.) 

/  PAGE,  John  E.,  a  member  of  the 
Council  of  Twelve  Apostles  from  1838  to 
1849, was  the  son  of  Ebenezer  and  Rachel 
Page,  and  was  born  Feb.  25,  1799,  In 
Trenton  Township,  Oneida  county,  New 
Tork.  He  was  baptized  by  Emer  Har- 
ris (brother  to  Martin  Harris)  Aug.  18, 
1833,  in  Ohio;  ordained  an  Elder  by 
Nelson  Higglns  In  Sept.,  1833,and  moved 
to  Kirtland  in  the  fall  of  1835.  In  May, 
1836,  he  was  called  to  go  on  a  mission 
to  Canada,  to  which  he  objected  for  the 
reason  that  he  was  destitute  of  cloth- 
ing. The  Prophet  Joseph  took  off  his 
coat  and  gave  It  to  him,  telling  him  to 
g-o,  and  the  Lord  would  bless  him.  He 
started  May  31,  1836,  for  Leeds  county, 
Canada  West,  and  returned  after  seven 
months  and  twenty  days'  absence.  Feb. 
16,  1837,  he  again  left  Kirtland,  taking 
with  him  his  family  consisting  of  wife 
and  two  children,  and  continued  his 
mission  In  Canada.  During  his  two 
years'  labor  there  he  baptized  upwards 
of  six  hundred  persons,  and  traveled 
more  than  five  thousand  miles,  prin- 
cipally on  foot.  In  May,  1838,  he  started 
for  Missouri  with  a  company  of  Saints. 


occupying  thirty  wagons. and  arrived  at 
De  Witt,  Carroll  county,  Mo.,  in  the 
beginning  of  October,  while  that  place 
was  being  attacked  by  a  ruthless  mob, 
which  a  few  days  later  succeeded  In 
driving  all  the  Saints  away.  The  exiles, 
including  Bro.  Page  and  his  company, 
sought  protection  in  Far  West,  Cald- 
well county,  where  they  shared  in  all 
the  grievous  persecutions  which  the 
Saints  there  had  to  endure.  Elder 
Page  buried  his  wife  and  two  children, 
who  died  as  martyrs  for  their  religion, 
through  extreme  suffering,  for  the  want 
of  the  common  comforts  of  life.  Hav- 
ing been  called  by  revelation  to  the 
Apostleship,  Elder  Page  was  ordained 
one  of  the  Twelve  Apostles  Dec.  19,1?38, 
at  Far  West,  under  the  hands  of  Brig- 
ham  Young  and  Heber  C.  Kimball.  He 
filled  the  vacancy  caused  by  the  apos- 
tasy of  Luke  S.  Johnson.  Early  in 
1839  he  started  with  his  family  for  Il- 
linois, but  on  the  way  he  met  Pres. 
Brigham  Young  and  others  of  the 
Twelve, who  persuaded  Bro.  Page  to  re 
turn  to  Far  West  to  attend  the  secret 
conference  held  In  the  morning  of 
April  26,  1839.  Soon  after  he  located 
below  Warsaw,  Hancock  county.  111., 
and  neglected  to  go  to  England  with 
his  brethren  of  the  Twelve,  according 
to  the  word  of  the  Lord.  In  April, 
1840,  he  was  appointed  by  a  general  con- 
ference at  Nauvoo  to  accompany  Orson 
Hyde  on  a  mission  to  Jerusalem,  and 
although  he  started  on  this  mission, 
he  never  left  the  shores  of  America. 
He  traveled  through  Indiana  and  Ohio, 
and  spent  the  winter  of  1840-41  preach- 
ing occasionally  in  Cincinnati  and  vi- 
cinity. In  June,  1841,  he  arrived  in 
Philadelphia,  where  Geo.  A.  Smith  on 
his  return  from  England  met  him,  and 
knowing  the  Saints  were  willing  to 
raise  ample  means  to  carry  Elder  Page 
on  his  Journey,  Elder  Smith  urged  him 
to  proceed  on.  his  mission  tor  Jerusalem, 
but  he  did  not  go.  Soon  after  he  be- 
came involved  in  difficulty  with  the 
branch  in  Philadelphia,  and  In  the  fall 
Pres.  Hyrum  Smith  wrote  to  him  to 
come  home.  He  did  not  return  to  Nau- 
voo until  the  spring  of  1842;  on  his  way 
he  delivered  several  discourses  at  Pitts- 
burg, and  formulated  a  petition  which 
was  sigrned  by  the  Saints  and  others, 
to  Pres.  Joseph  Smith,  praying  that  he 
might  be  sent  to  Pittsburg.  At  th-? 
conference    held   at   Nauvoo    In    April. 


BIOGRGAPHICAL    ENCYCLOPEDIA. 


93 


1843,  he  was  sent  to  Pittsburg,  where 
he  organized  a  branch  of  the  Church 
composed  of  those  baptized  by  himself 
and  other  Elders,  and  some  who  emi- 
grated thither.  In  organizing  this 
branch  he  drew  up  a  constitution,  re- 
quiring their  president  to  be  elected 
every  four  months.  At  the  first  elec- 
tion he  was  chosen  president;  at  the 
second  election  Elder  Small  was  chosen 
president,  having  received  the  most 
votes.  Elder  Page  moved  his  family 
to  Pittsburg,  where  he  continued  to 
preach.  During  the  summer  of  1843, 
the  quorum  of  the  Twelve  went  east- 
ward from  Nauvoo  on  a  mission.  Elders 
Heber  C.  Kimball,  Orson  Pratt  and 
John  E.  Page  met  at  Cincinnati  and 
there  reorganized  the  branch.  Elders 
Kimball  and  Pratt  proceeded  on  their 
mission,  and  as  soon  as  they  were  gone. 
Elder  Page  called  the  members  of  the 
branch  together  and  annulled  the  or- 
ganization, re-establishing  the  old  one. 
A  few  days  later  Brigham  Young,  Wil- 
ford  Woodruff  and  Geo.  A.  Smith  vis- 
ited Cincinnati,  and  disapproved  of 
Elder  Page's  proceedings,  for  the  rea- 
son that  it  was  not  right  for  one  of 
the  Twelve  to  undo  what  three  had 
done.  Elder  Page,  in  company  with 
his  brethren  of  the  Twelve,  went  to 
Philadelphia,  New  Jersey,  New  York 
and  Boston;  in  the  latter  city  he  re- 
mained for  some  time.  Pres.  Joseph 
Smith,  disapproving  of  his  course  in 
Boston,  directed  him  to  proceed  to 
Washington  and  build  up  a  branch 
there.  He  went  to  Washington,  re- 
mained a  short  time,  and  baptized  sev- 
eral, then  returned  to  Pittsburg.  Soon 
after  Pres.  Smith's  death,  an  advertise- 
ment appeared  in  the  Beaver  (Penn.) 
"Argus,"  that  Elder  John  E.  Page  was 
out  of  employment  and  would  preach 
for  anybody  that  would  sustain  hib 
family.  In  a  council  of  the  Twelve 
held  at  Nauvoo  Feb.  9,  1846,  Elder  Page 
was  disfellowshipped  from  that  quo- 
rum, after  which  he  became  very  bitter 
against  his  former  associates  and  ad- 
vised the  Saints  to  accept  the  apos- 
tate James  J.  Strang  as  their  leader. 
He  soon  afterwards  left  Nauvoo,  and 
after  traveling  about  one  hundred  and 
twenty  miles  he  met  a  company  of 
Saints  coming  from  Canada.  He  told 
them  that  he  was  one  of  the  Twelve 
sent  by  council  to  inform  them  that 
they  must  turn  about  and  go  to  Woree, 


Wisconsin,  Mr.  Strang's  place  of  gath- 
ering. He  deceived  some,  but  most  of 
the  Saints  would  not  believe  him  and 
sent  a  messenger  to  Nauvoo  to  find 
out  the  truth  of  the  matter.  Elder 
Page  was  excommunicated  from  the 
Church,  June  26,  1846.  Soon  after- 
wards he  dwindled  into  obscurity  and 
died  near  Sycamore,  De  Kalb  county, 
111.,  in  the  fall  of  1867.  (See  also  "Mil- 
lennial Star,"  Vol.  27,   p.  103.) 

WIGHT.  lij-man,  a  member  of  the 
Council  of  Twelve  Apostles  from  1841 
to  1849,  was  the  son  of  Levi  Wight  and 
Sarah  Corbon  and  was  born  May  9, 
1796,  in  the  township  of  Fairfield,  Her- 
kimer county.  New  York.  He  served 
the  Republic  in  the  war  of  1812-15  with 
Great  Britain.  He  united  with  Isaac 
Morley  and  others  in  forming  a  so- 
ciety in  Kirtland,  Ohio,  conducted  on 
the  common  stock  principle,  being  one 
phase  in  the  rise  and  progress  of  the 
Campbellite  Church.  He  was  baptized 
into  the  Church  of  Jesus  Christ  of  Lat- 
ter-day Saints  by  Oliver  Cowdery  in 
1830,  and  was  soon  afterwards  ordained 
to  the  office  of  an  Elder.  He  was  or- 
dained to  the  oflfice  of  a  High  Priest  by 
Joseph  Smith,  at  a  conference  held  at 
Kirtland,  in  June,  1831.  While  at  that 
conference  he  testified  he  had  a  vision 
and  saw  the  Savior.  He  went  to 
Missouri  in  1831,  by  revelation,  and 
soon  after  went  to  Cincinnati  on  a 
mission  to  preach  the  gospel.  On  ar- 
riving in  that  city  he  called  at  a  hotel 
and  engaged  his  board  for  several 
weeks.  The  landlord  asked  him  what 
his  business  was.  He  replied  he  was 
a  preacher  of  the  gospel  after  the  or- 
der of  Melchisedek.  He  created  so 
much  curiosity  that  they  wished  to 
hear  him  preach.  He  told  them  that 
was  his  business,  and  if  they  would 
open  the  court  house  he  would  do  so 
willingly.  They  obtained  the  house, 
and  he  deliveerd  a  series  of  lectures 
and  built  up  a  branch  of  the  Church, 
and  baptized  upwards  of  one  hundred. 
The  family  of  Higbees  were  among  the 
first  baptized;  they  were  fishermen,and 
Wight  would  fish  with  them  through 
the  day  and  preach  at  night.  One  even- 
ing he  went  from  the  fish  net  to  the 
court  house,  and  stood  on  the  top  of 
a  stove  barefooted  with  his  trousert. 
rolled  up  to  his  knees,  and  his  shirt 
sleeves    up  to  his  elbows,  and  preached 


94 

two  hours. 


LATTER-DAY    SAINT 


Some  of  the  people  re- 
marked, "He  preaches  the  truth, 
though  he  does  not  look  much  like  a 
preacher."  Many  that  he  baptized  went 
♦o  Jackson  county,  Missouri,  and  were 
with  him  through  the  persecutions  of 
1833.       During  that  persecution  he  was 


ond  officer.  He  walked  the  whole 
journey  from  Michigan  to  Clay  county 
without  stockings  on  his  feet.  By  the 
appointment  of  Joseph  Smith  he  gave 
a  written  discharge  to  each  member  of 
the  camp  when  they  were  dismissed. 
July  3,  1834,  he  was  ordained  one  of  the 


a  dread  to  his  enemies  and  a  terror  to  High  Council  of  Missouri.  He  was  one 
evil  doers,  and  his  life  was  often  sought  of  the  signers  of  an  appeal  to  the  world, 
after. 


He  commanded  the  brethren  in 
Jackson  county  In  their  defense  against 
the  mob.  In  one  instance  he  was 
chased  by  seven  men  about  six  miles; 
they  were  fully  armed  and  came  upon 
him  so  suddenly  that  he  had  to  mount 
his  horse  with  a  blind  bridle,  without 
any  saddle  or  arms,  except  a  pocket 
knife.  His  horse  being  fleet,  he  es- 
caped by  out-running  them  and  leaping 
a  deep  wide  ditch,  where  none  of  his 
pursuers  dared  to  follow.  July  23,  1833, 
he  signed  an  agreement  with  others 
that  the  Saints  would  leave  Jackson 
county  before  the  first  day  of  January, 
1834:  but  before  that  time  they  were 
all  driven  out.  After  the  Saints  were 
driven  out  of  Jackson  county  into  Clay 
county,  volunteers  were  called  for  to 
go  and  visit  the  Prophet  at  Kirtland. 
Several  of  the  Elders  were  asked  by 
Bishop  Partridge  if  they  could  go;  but 
they  made  excuses.  Lyman  Wight 
then  stepped  forward,  and  said  he  could 
go  as  well  as  not.  The  Bishop  asked 
him  what  situation  his  family  was  in. 
He  replied,  his  wife  lay  by  the  side  ol" 
a  log  in  the  woods,  with  a  child  three 
days  old.  and  he  had  three  days'  pro- 
vision on  hand;  so  he  thought  he  could 
go  very  well.  Parley  P.  Pratt  next 
volunteered,  and  they  went  together  to 
Kirtland  in  February,  1834.  On  their 
arrival  at  Kirtland,  the  Prophet  ob- 
tained the  word  of  the  Lord  and  they 
were  commanded  to  gather  up  the 
strength  of  the  Lord's  house  to  go  up 
to  Zion,  and  it  was  the  will  of  the  Lord 
that  there  should  be  five  hundred  men, 
but  not  to  go  up  short  of  one  himdred. 
In  fulfilment  of  this  commandment, 
Lyman  Wight  went  through  Pennsyl- 
vania, and  he  attended  a  conference  at 
Avon,  New  York,  March  15,  1834;  he 
also  went  through  Michigan,  northern 
Indiana  and  Illinois,  and  assisted  Hy- 
rum  Smith  in  gathering  up  a  company 
of  eighteen,  who  joined  Zion's  Camp 
at  Salt  river.  Missouri.  June  8,  1834, 
where  the  camp  was  re-organized,  and 
Lyman  Wight   was  appointed   the  sec- 


making  a  proclamation  of  peace  in 
Missouri,  in  July,  1834.  and  spent  the 
summer  of  1834  in  Clay  county,  Mis- 
souri. He  took  a  job  of  making  100.- 
000  bricks,  and  building  a  large  brick- 
house  for  Col.  Michael  Arthur  in  Clay 
county;  Wilford  W^oodruff,  Milton 
Holmes,  Heman  T.  Hyde  and  Stephen 
and  Benjamin  Winchester  labored  for 
him  through  the  season.  Being  coun- 
seled to  go  to  Kirtland  and  get  his 
endowment.  Elder  Wight  started  in  the 
fall  of  1835,  and  preached  his  way 
through  to  Kirtland,  baptizing  such  as 
would  receive  his  testimony.  While  on 
the  journey  he  called  at  the  city  of 
Richmond.  Indiana,  and  gave  out  an 
appointment  to  preach  in  the  court 
house.  He  walked  through  the  city, 
and,  being  a  stranger,  was  unknown: 
but  wherever  he  went  the  people  were 
blackguarding  the  "Mormons,"  and 
many  declared  they  would  tar  and 
feather  the  preacher  when  he  came  to 
meeting  that  night.  At  the  time  of 
appointment  Elder  Wight  was  at  hi? 
post.  There  being  no  light  provided, 
he  went  and  bought  candles  and  lighted 
ihe  room.  The  house  was  soon  filled 
with  men  who  brought  tar  and  feathei's 
for  the  "Mormon"  Elder.  He  preached 
about  two  hours,  reproving  them  most 
severely  for  their  meanness,  wickedness 
snd  mobocratic  spirit.  At  the  close  of 
the  meeting  he  said,  "If  there  is  a 
gentleman  in  this  congregation,  I  wish 
he  would  invite  me  to  stay  with  him 
over  night,"  whereupon  a  gentleman 
stepped  forward  and  tendered  him  an 
invitation,  which  he  willingly  accepted. 
His  host  said,  "Mr.  Wight,  it  is  as- 
tonishing how  you  have  become  so  well 
acquainted  with  the  people  here,  for 
you  have  described  them  very  correct- 
ly." He  was  kindly  entertained  and 
furnished  with  money  in  the  morning 
to  aid  him  on  his  journey.  He  spent 
the  winter  of  1835-36  in  Kirtland.  and 
j-eceived  his  endowment.  He  returned 
to  Missouri  in  1836.  David  W.  Patten 
having  preferred  a  charge  against  El- 


BIOGRGAPHICAL  ENCYCLOPEDIA. 


95 


der  Wight  for  teaching  false  doctrine, 
he  was  tried  before  the  High  Council 
at  Far  West,  April  24,  1837.  It  was 
decided  that  he  did  teach  false  doctrine. 
He  made  the  required  acknowledge- 
ments. He  opposed  the  selling  of  land 
in  Jackson  county.  Mo.,  and  considered 
Wm.  W.  Phelps  and  John  Whitmer  in 
transgression  for  selling  theirs.  June 
28,  1838,  he  was  chosen  and  ordained 
second  counselor  to  John  Smith,  presi- 
dent of  the  Stake  at  Adam-ondi-Ah- 
man,  by  Joseph  Smith.  Sheriff  Mor- 
gan, of  Daviess  county,  had  agitated 
the  people  of  the  surrounding  counties, 
by  asserting  that  he  had  writs  against 
Joseph  Smith  and  Lyman  Wight,  which 
he  could  not  serve  without  endanger- 
ing his  life.  He  invited  the  people  to 
assemble  together  in  Daviess  county, 
with  their  arms,  so  that  he  could  sum- 
mon them  as  a  posse  comitatus  to 
make  the  arrest.  The  real  design  was 
to  murder  Joseph  Smith  and  Lyman 
Wight,  as  they  had  not  offered  any  re- 
sistance; neither  had  the  sheriff  made 
any  attempt  to  arrest  them.  They  went 
before  Justice  Austin  A.  King,  at 
P.agland's  farm,  to  allay  this  excite- 
ment, and  gave  bonds  in  the  sum  of  $250 
for  their  appearance  in  court.  Elder 
Wight  subsequently  went  before  three 
mobocratic  magistrates,  under  the  pro- 
tection of  General  Atchison's  militia, 
and  gave  bonds  for  his  appearance  in 
court,  in  the  sum  of  $1,000,  on  a  charge 
of  misdemeanor.  This  examination  was 
had  in  Atchison's  camp  at  Netherton 
Spring,  Daviess  county,  surrounded  by 
several  hundreds  of  the  mob,  and  about 
one  hundred  militia.  His  life  was  re- 
peatedly threatened,  and  it  required  the 
energy  of  Generals  Atchison  and  Doni- 
phan to  prevent  his  murder.  At  the 
close  of  this  examination,  he  asked  for 
thirty  writs  against  members  of  the 
mob,  but  was  refused.  He  was  com- 
missioned a  colonel  in  the  militia  of 
Caldwell  county,  previous  to  his  re- 
moval to  Daviess  county,  and  in  that 
county  he  commanded  his  brethren 
while  defending  themselves  against  the 
mob.  In  October,  1838,  after  learning 
that  Far  West  was  surrounded  by  a 
mob.  he  raised  fifty-three  volunteers 
in  Adam-ondi-Ahman,  (25  miles  dis- 
tant), and  repaired  immediately  to  Far 
West  to  aid  in  its  defense,  where,  with 
Joseph  and  Hyrum  Smith  and  others, 
he  was  betrayed  into  the  hands  of  his 


enemies,  by  Col.  Geo.  M.  Hinkle,  on 
the  31st;  and  was  sentenced  by  a  court- 
martial  to  be  shot  next  morning  (Nov. 
1st)  at  8  o'clock.  During  the  evening. 
Gen.  Moses  Wilson  took  him  out  by 
himself,  and  tried  to  induce  him  to  be- 
tray Joseph  Smith,  and  swear  falsely 
against  him;  at  which  time  the  fol- 
lowing conversation  took  place:  Gen- 
eral Wilson  said,  "Col.  Wight,  we 
have  nothing  against  you,  only  that  you 
are  associated  with  Joe  Smith.  He  is 
our  enemy  and  a  damned  rascal,  and 
would  take  any  plait  he  could  to  kill 
us.  You  are  a  damned  fine  fellow; 
and  if  you  will  come  out  and  swear 
against  him,  we  will  spare  your  life, 
and  give  you  any  office  you  want;  and 
if  you  don't  do  it,  you  will  be  shot  to- 
morrow at  8  o'clock."  Col.  Wight  re- 
plied, "Gen.  Wilson,  you  are  entirely 
mistaken  in  your  man.  both  in  regard 
to  myself  and  Joseph  Smith.  Joseph 
Smith  is  not  an  enemy  to  mankind, 
he  is  not  your  enemy,  and  is  as  good  a 
friend  as  you  have  got.  Had  it  not 
been  for  him,  you  would  have  been  in 
hell  long  ago,  for  I  should  have  sent 
you  there,  by  cutting  your  throat,  and 
no  other  man  but  Joseph  Smith  could 
have  prevented  me,  and  you  may  thank 
him  for  your  life.  And  now,  if  you 
will  give  me  the  boys  I  brought  from 
Diahman  yesterday.  I  will  whip  your 
whole  army."  Wilson  said,  "Wight, 
you  are  a  strange  man;  but  if  you  will 
not  accept  my  proposal,  you  will  be 
shot  tomorrow  morning  at  8."  Col. 
Wight  replied,  "Shoot  and  he  damned." 
This  was  the  true  character  of  Lyman 
Wight;  he  was  true  as  the  sun  to  Jo- 
seph Smith,  and  would  die  for  his 
friends.  He  was  taken  to  Jackson 
county,  with  Joseph,  Hyrum  and  other 
prisoners.  They  were  chained  together 
and  fed  on  human  flesh  in  prison  by 
their  Christian  guards,  and  he  contin- 
ued to  suffer  with  his  brethren  until 
April  15,  1839,  when  he  started  with  Jo- 
seph and  Hyrum  Smith,  Alex.  McRae 
and  Caleb  Baldwin  and  guard,  to  go  to 
jail  in  Columbia,  Boone  county,  but  on 
the  night  of  the  16th,  the  sheriff  fell 
asleep,  the  guard  got  drunk,  and  the 
prisoners  left  them,  and  went  to  their 
families  and  friends  in  Illinois.  Oct. 
20,  1839,  Lyman  Wight  and  Reynolds 
Cahoon  were  appointed  counselors  to 
John  Smith,  president  of  the  Saints  in 
Iowa  Territory.       In  January,  1841,  El- 


96 


LATTER-DAY    SAINT 


der  Wight  was  called  by  revelation  to 
be  one  of  the  Nauvoo  House  Associa- 
tion. At  the  April  conference  follow- 
ing he  was  called  and  appointed  to  be 
one  of  the  Twelve  Apostles,  to  fill  the 
vacancy  caused  by  the  death  of  David 
W.  Patten.  He  was  chosen  and 
sustained  in  that  position  on  April 
8,  1841.  He  was  also  commissioned 
a  brevet  major-general  of  the  Illinois 
militia,  by  Gov.  Carlin.  In  1842  he  went 
to  Kirtland,  and  rebaptized  about  two 
hundred  of  the  cold,  dead  members  of 
the  Church,  and  brought  many  of  them 
to  Nauvoo.  July  1,  1843,  he  was  ex- 
amined as  a  witness  before  the  munici- 
pal court  of  Nauvoo,  and  gave  a  plain, 
unvarnished  account  of  the  persecution 
against  the  Saints  in  Missouri,  and  of 
the  sufferings  of  Joseph  Smith  and  his 
fellow  prisoners.  During  the  winter  of 
1843-44,  he  was  employed  in  the  Pine 
country,  at  Black  river,  Wisconsin 
Territory,  superintending  the  procuring 
of  lumber  for  the  Temple  and  Nauvoo 
House.  In  a  letter  directed  to  the  Pres- 
idency and  Twelve,  dated  Black  River 
Falls,  Feb.  15,  1844,  he  wrote  his  views 
about  preaching  to  the  Indians  and  go- 
ing to  Texas.  In  the  spring  of  1844, 
he  started  on  a  mission  through  the 
Eastern  States,  and  was  appointed  one 
of  the  delegates  of  the  Baltimore  Con- 
vention. He  delivered  a  speech  on 
Bunker  Hill,  on  Gen.  Joseph  Smith's 
claims  to  the  presidency  of  the  United 
States;  and  on  hearing  of  the  death  of 
Joseph,  he  returned  to  Nauvoo  with  the 
Twelve.  After  his  return  to  Nauvoo, 
he  said,  "I  would  not  turn  my  hand 
over  to  be  one  of  the  Twelve;  the  day 
was  when  there  was  somebody  to  con- 
trol me,  but  that  day  is  past."  When 
the  Church  removed  to  the  Rocky 
Mountains,  Lyman  Wight  and  Geo. 
Miller,  who  both  rebelled  against  the 
authority  of  Pres.  Brigham  Young, 
went  to  Texas  with  a  small  company 
of  Sants,  and  settled  a  short  distance 
south  of  the  present  site  of  Austin. 
Wight  and  Miller  subsequently  dis- 
solved partnership,  and  Miller  returned 
130  miles  aorth  with  a  part  of  the  com- 
pany. At  a  meeting  held  in  the  Great 
Salt  Lake  City  fort,  Dec.  3,  1848,  fellow- 
ship was  withdrawn  from  both  Wight 
and  Miller.  Mr.  Wight  remained  in 
Texas  until  his  death,  which  occurred 
March  31,  18.S8,  in  Mountain  Valley.  He 
died  very  suddenly  of  epileptic  fits,  hav- 


ing been  sick  only  five  hours.  The 
company  of  Saints  who  went  with  him 
and  Miller  to  Texas  had  been  scattered 
to  the  four  winds.  Some  of  them,  how- 
ever, were  subsequently  received  back 
into  the  Church  by  rebaptism.  (See 
also  "Millennial  Star,"  Vol.  27,  p.  455.) 

LYMAN,  Amasa  Mason,  a  member 
of  the  Council  of  Twelve  Apostles  from 
1842  to  1867,  was  the  third  son  of  Bos- 
well  Lyman  and  Martha  Mason,  and 
was  born  March  30,  1813,  in  Lyman 
township,  Grafton  county.  New  Hamp- 
shire. When  about  two  years  old,  his 
father  left  home  for  the  western  coun- 
try, from  which  he  never  returned,  as 
he  is  supposed  to  have  died  some  six 
years  afterwards  in  New  Orleans. 
Amasa,  with  his  younger  brother  Ellas 
and  his  sister  Ruth,  remained  with 
their  mother  until  her  second  marriage, 
after  which  Amasa  lived  with  his 
grandfather  until  he  was  eleven  years 
old,  and  with  Parley  Mason,  a  relative, 
seven  years  longer.  During  the  year 
1831  he  became  somewhat  thoughtful 
on  the  subject  of  religion,  but  did  not 
unite  himself  with  any  of  the  religious 
denominations  until  the  spring  of  1832, 
when  the  neighborhood  in  which  he  re- 
sided was  visited  by  Elders  Lyman  E. 
Johnson  and  Orson  Pratt.  Amasa  be- 
lieved the  gospel  when  he  first  heard  it 
preached  by  those  Elders,  and  was  bap- 
tized by  Lyman  E.  Johnson  April  27, 
1832.  The  following  day  he  was  con- 
firmed by  Orson  Pratt.  On  account  of 
ill  feelings  that  arose  In  his  uncle's 
family  because  of  his  baptism.  Bra. 
Lyman  resolved  to  go  west,  and  accord- 
ingly started  on  a  journey  of  some 
seven  hundred  miles  May  7,  1832.  His 
earthly  wealth  at  that  time  consisted 
of  some  sixteen  pounds  of  half-worn 
clothing  and  $11.35  In  money.  The  weari- 
ness consequent  upon  the  first  day's 
walking  admonished  him  to  travel  by 
stage  and  canal  to  Lyons,  Wayne  coun- 
ty, N.  Y.  Arriving  there,  his  funds 
were  all  gone,  and  he  hired  out  to  Mr. 
Thomas  Lacky,  the  man  who  bought 
Martin  Harris'  farm  when  he  sold  it 
to  raise  money  for  printing  the  Book 
of  Mormon.  Bro.  Lyman  worked  for 
this  man  two  weeks  and  earned  money 
to  take  him  to  Buffalo,  whence  he 
took  steamer  to  Cleveland,  Ohio,  and 
from  there  he  walked  45  miles  to  the 
residence  of  John  Johnson,   at  Hiram, 


BIOGRAPHICAL    ENCYCLOPEDIA. 


97 


Portage  county,  Ohio.  This  was  the 
place  where  Joseph  Smith  had  been 
tarred  and  feathered  a  short  time  pre- 
vious. Father  Johnson  and  family 
received  young-  Lyman  kindly,  and  he 
remained  with  them  until  the  follow- 
ing July,  when  the  Prophet  returned 
from  Missouri.  "This,"  writes  Elder 
Lyman,  "afforded  me  an  opportunity 
to  see  the  man  of  God.  Of  the  im- 
pressions produced  I  will  here  say,  al- 
though there  wag  nothing  strange  or 
•different  from  other  men  in  his  personal 
appearance,  yet,  when  he  grasped  my 
hand  in  that  cordial  way  (known  to 
those  who  have  met  him  in  the  honest 
simplicity  of  truth),  I  felt  as  one  of  old 
in  the  presence  of  the  Lord;  my 
strength  seemed  to  be  gone,  so  that  it 
required  an  effort  on  my  part  to  stand 


on  my  feet;  but  in  all  this  there  was 
no  fear,  but  the  serenity  and  peace  of 
heaven  pervaded  my  soul,  and  the  still 
small  voice  of  the  spirit  whispered  its 
living  testimony  in  the  depths  of  my 
soul,  where  it  has  ever  remained,  that 
he  was  the  Man  of  God."  Bro.  Lyman 
continued  laboring  for  Father  Johnson 
until  some  time  in  the  month  of  August, 
when  one  Sabbath  evening,  after  a  so- 
cial prayer  meeting  with  the  few  mem- 
bers in  Hiram,  the  Prophet,  in  his  own 
familiar  way,  said  to  him:  "Brother 
Amasa,  the  Lord  requires  your  labors 
in  the  vineyard."  Without  thought 
Bro.  Lyman  replied,  "I  will  go,"  and 
on  August  23,  1832,  he  and  Zerubbabel 
Snow  were  ordained  to  the  office  of  El- 
ders in  the  Church,  under  the  hands  of 
Joseph  Smith  and  Frederick  G.  Wil- 
liams. On  the  following  day  they 
started    on    their   first   mission    to   pro- 

Vol.  1,  No.  7. 


claim  the  gospel  of  salvation.       About 
the  time  of   their  starting  an  applica- 
tion came  to  Pres.  Smith  to  visit  an  old 
gentleman  by  the  name  of  Harrington, 
who  was  affiicted  with  a  severe  pain  in 
his   head.       From  a   press  of  business, 
Joseph    could    not    go,    but    instructed 
Bros.  Lyman  and  Snow  to  call  upon  the 
old  man,  which  they  did,  and  as  they 
came  near  the  house,   before  they  en- 
tered,   they   heard   his  groans   extorted 
from  him  by  pain,  which  seemed  intol- 
erable.      The  missionaries  entered  and 
introduced  themselves,  being  strangers. 
They   then   prayed   fo,r  and   laid  hands 
upon  him,  in  the  name  of  Jesus,  and  re- 
buked   his    pain,    which    was    instantly 
removed,  and  the  sufferer  rejoiced  and 
praised     God,       who     had     so  signally 
blessed  him.      From  this  place  the  mis- 
sionaries continued  their  journey,  and 
the  following  Sabbath  evening  they  met 
in   prayer   meeting  with   a   few   Saints 
in   Chippewa   township.       A     few  non- 
members  also   attended,   among  whom 
was  a  Miss   Smith,  who  reclined  on  ai 
bed   in  the   corner  of  the   room.       The: 
brethren  sang  a  hymn  and  prayed,  and 
Elder    Snow   proceeded   to   make   som^ 
remarks,   when,   in  an  instant,     a     cry 
of  alarm  from  the  bed  attracted  the  at  • 
tention  of  all.      On  stepping  to  the  bed 
side    the    Elders    discovered    that    Miss 
Smith's  face  and  her  entire  form  wer ; 
distorted    in    the    most    shocking   man 
ner,   her  eyes  were  glaring  wildly,   bui 
apparently   sightless,     her     respiratior 
was  very  difficult  and  her  limbs  were 
rigid    as    iron.       The   common    restora- 
tives were     used  without  effect        The 
Elders   laid   their  hands   upOn   her  and 
rebuked    the    devil,    when    she   was    in- 
stantly relieved,  but  in  another  moment 
she    was   bound    as    before;      they   now 
kneeled  down   by  her  bed  and  prayed, 
when    she    was    again      released,      an-^ 
asked  for  baptism,  stating  that  she  had 
been  acting  against  her  convictions  of 
right    in    some    conversations    the    mis- 
sionaries had  held  with  her  during  the 
day.       They  repaired  to  the  water  and 
there    under    the    mantle    of    night    in- 
troduced the  first  soul  into  the  Church 
as  the  fruits  of  their  labors.       During 
the  following  winter  Elders  Lyman  and 
Snow  labored  in  southern  Ohio  and  Ca- 
bell county,  Virginia.      Some  forty  souls 
were  added  to  the  Church  by  their  ad- 
ministrations.   Early  in  the  spring  they 
returned  to  Kirtland.       March  21,  1833, 

Feb.   16,  1901. 


98 


LATTER-DAT    SAINT 


with  Wm.  F.  Cahoon  as  companion,  El- 
der Lyman  started  on  his  second  mis- 
sion. He  continued  his  labors  for 
eight  months,  during  which  time  he 
traveled  as  far  east  as  Chautauqua 
and  Cattaraugus  counties.  N.  Y.  He 
held  150  meetings  and  saw  about  one 
hundred  souls  added  to  the  Church.  In 
December  following  he  attended  a  con- 
ference in  Erie  county,  Penn.,  where 
he  was  ordained  to  the  High  Priest- 
hood under  the  hands  of  Lyman  E. 
.fohnson  and  Orson  Pratt.  In  the  win- 
ter he  continued  his  missionary  labors 
in  the  States  of  New  York  and  New 
Hampshire.  While  in  the  latter  State 
the  call  to  go  to  Missouri  reached  him 
through  Elder  Lyman  E.  Johnson.  Re- 
sponding to  this  call,  he  changed  his 
plan  of  operations  and  went  direct  to 
Kirtland,  Ohio,  taking  in  charge  as  a 
contribution  some  money  and  teams, 
and  two  sons  of  John  Tanner  (John  J. 
and  Nathan).  They  arrived  at  Kirt- 
land May  1.  1834,  and  a  few  days  later 
Elder  Lyman  joined  Zion's  camp  at 
New  Portage  and  traveled  with  this 
organization  to  Missouri.  After  wait- 
ing upon  his  brethren  who  were  at- 
tacked by  the  cholera,  he  suffered  con- 
siderably with  the  ague  and  fever.  Hav- 
ing been  discharged  from  his  duties  in 
the  camp,  he  returned  to  Kirtland, 
preaching  by  the  way.  Soon  after  his 
return  he  married  Miss  Louisa  Tanner, 
daughter  of  Elder  John  Tanner.  On 
a  subse(|uent  six  months'  mission  to  the 
State  of  New  York,  his  labors  were  re- 
warded by  liberal  additions  to  th<i 
Church.  He  traveled  over  two  thou- 
sand miles  and  preached  nearly  two 
hundred  sermons.  In  the  spring  of 
1J:36  he  attended  the  dedicatory  ser- 
vices of  the  Kirtland  Temple,  after 
which  he.  in  company  with  Elder 
Nathan  Tanner,  filled  another  mission 
to  the  State  of  New  York.  In  1837  he 
removed  to  Missouri,  where  he  became 
subject  to  the  persecutions  which  be- 
fell the  Saints  there,  and  took  also  an 
active  part  in  their  defense  until  he,  to- 
gether with  Joseph  Smith  and  others, 
was  betrayed  by  Col.  Geo.  M.  Hinkle 
into  the  hands  of  the  mob  militia.  Es- 
ca|)ing  the  execution  which  the  court 
martial  had  contemplated.  Elder  Ly- 
man shared  the  fate  of  his  fellow  pris- 
oners until  Nov.  24,  1838,  when  he  was 
discharged  at  the  mock  trial  held  at 
Richmond,   Ray   county.       He  immedi- 


ately returned  to  Far  West,  where  he 
was  elected  justice  of  the  peace.  Whil^ 
suffering  under  a  severe  attack  of  sick- 
ness, his  family  was  enabled  to  remove 
to  Illinois,  through  the  kindness  of 
friends;  and  after  aiding  the  brethren 
in  the  matter  of  disposing  of  their 
land  in  Missouri,  Elder  Lyman  joined 
his  family  in  Quincy,  111.,  in  March, 
1839.  During  that  year  he  made  two 
dangerous  trips  back  to  Missouri  for 
the  purpose  of  assisting  Elder  Parley 
P.  Pratt  and  fellow  prisoners  and  to 
attend  to  unsettled  business.  Early  in 
the  spring  of  1840,  he  went  to  Iowa,  on 
the  half-breed  tract,  in  Lee  county, 
where  he  built  a  cabin,  to  which  he 
moved  his  family.  A  portion  of  this 
summer  he  spent  on  the  Mississippi 
river,  boating  wood  to  St.  Louis.  From 
this  work  he  returned  in  the  fall,  sick. 
In  the  spring  of  1841  he  moved  his  fami- 
ly to  Nauvoo,  and  occupied  part  of  a 
house  belonging  to  Brother  Osmyn  M. 
Duel,  and  worked  with  Brother  Theo- 
dore Turley  in  his  shop  at  repairing 
guns,  and  other  work.  He  had  been 
thus  engaged  a  short  time,  when 
Brother  Charles  Shumway,  from  north- 
ern Illinois,  called  on  Brother  Joseph 
for  Elders  to  go  home  with  him  to 
preach  in  that  country.  The  Prophet 
sent  him  to  Elder  Lyman,  with  direc- 
tions that  he  should  go.  The  steamer 
on  which  they  were  to  go  up  the  river 
was  in  sight  when  he  received  the  word 
in  the  shop.  He  went  to  his  home, 
one  mile  distant,  took  leave  of  his 
family,  and  was  at  the  landing  as  the 
boat  rounded  to.  He  preached  in  the 
region  of  Galena,  and  in  Wisconsin, 
until  October,  when  he  returned  to 
Nauvoo,  where  he  arrived  on  the  last 
day  of  the  conference,  in  the  after- 
noon. During  the  conference  he  was 
appointed  a  mission  to  the  city  of  New 
York.  This  was  countermanded  by  the 
Prophet;  and  during  the  winter  he 
went,  in  company  with  Peter  Haws,  on 
a  mission  to  secure  means  to  build  the 
Temple  and  Nauvoo  House.  They  went 
as  far  east  as  Indiana.  In  the  spring 
of  1842,  Elder  Lyman  went  on  a  mis- 
sion to  the  State  of  Tennessee,  accom- 
panied by  Horace  K.  Whitney  and 
-Adam  Lightner  and  also  Williani 
Camp,  from  whom  they  had  the  promise 
of  some  help  on  the  public  buildings. 
In  this  they  were  disappointed.  Elder 
Lyman   was  joined   in   this   mission   by 


BIOGRAPHICAL    ENCYCLOPEDIA. 


9d 


Elder  Lyman  Wig-ht,  one  of  the  Twelve. 
After  their  failure  to  accomplish  what 
they  expected  to  with  Brother  Camp, 
they  returned  to  Nauvoo.  While  on 
this  mission  Elder  Lyman  held  one  pub- 
lic discussion  with  Thomas  Smith,  a 
Methodist  presiding  elder,  and  baptized 
some  of  his  church.  Subsequent  to 
his  return  to  Nauvoo,  Elder  Lyman  was 
ordained  to  the  Apostleship  Aug.  20, 
1842,  and  on  September  10th  he  started 
on  a  mission  to  southern  Illinois,  in 
company  with  George  A.  Smith.  Some 
portion  of  their  time,  on  this  mission, 
they  were  in  the  company  of  Brigham 
Young  and  Heber  C.  Kimball.  From 
this  mission  Elder  Lyman  returned  Oct. 
4th.  The  following  winter  he  w'as 
engaged  by  the  Prophet  to  move  his 
family  to  Shockoquon,  in  Henderson 
county,  where  he  had  bought  some 
property.  Bro.  Lyman  repaired  to  the 
place  where  he  superintended  the  sur- 
veying of  the  town  site  and  commenced 
building.  He  remained  here  until  the 
following  summer  (1843).  "When  the 
Prophet  was  kidnapped,  he  participated 
in  the  efforts  that  resulted  in  his  res- 
cue. On  his  return  from  this  expedi- 
tion Elder  Lyman  was  taken  ill  and 
became  helpless,  in  which  condition  he 
was  taken  to  Nauvoo,  from  where 
(when  he  had  partially  recovered  from 
his  sickness)  he  was  sent  on  a  mis- 
sion to  the  State  of  Indiana,  taking 
with  him  his  family.  He  w^ent  to  the 
small  inland  town  of  Alquina,  Fayette 
county,  where  his  family  resided,  while 
he  traveled  through  the  surrounding 
counties,  preaching  as  opportunity  of- 
fered. In  this  manner  he  passed  the 
time  until  the  spring  of  1844,  w^hen  he 
repaired  to  Nauvoo  to  attend  the  April 
conference,  at  which  it  was  determined 
that  he  should  go  to  the  city  of  Boston. 
A  few  days  after  the  conference,  he  had 
an  interview  with  the  Prophet,  in  which 
he  taught  him  some  principles  on 
celestial  marriage.  Elder  Lyman  re- 
turned to  Alquina,  and  prosecuted  his 
labor  of  preaching  in  the  country,  until 
the  1st  of  June,  when  he  repaired  to 
Cincinnati,  where  he  remained  until 
July,  when  he  received  the  news  of  the 
murder  of  the  Prophet  and  Patriarch, 
Joseph  and  Hyrum  Smith.  A  few  days 
later  Brother  Adams  arrived,  and  con- 
firmed the  news  of  the  murder.  He 
was  also  the  bearer  of  a  call  to  Elder 
Lyman,  to  return  immediately  to  Nau- 


voo, and  in  response, /o  this  call  h£  ^e-. 
paired  to  Nauvco,  ,whe.-e  ne,  arrived 
July  31,  1844.  Having  attended  the 
special  meeting  at  Nauvoo,  Aug.  8,  1844, 
in  which  the  Twelve  Apostles  were  ac- 
knowledged as  the  presiding  quorum 
of  the  Church,  Apostle  Lyman,  as  a 
member  of  that  quorum,  continued  to 
take  an  active  part  in  all  the  affairs 
of  the  Church.  He  rendered  efficient 
aid  during  the  exodus  of  the  Saints 
from  Illinois  in  1846  and  was  one  of  the 
Pioneers  of  1847,  returning  to  Winter 
Quarters  in  the  fall  of  the  same  year. 
The  following  year  he  led  a  large  com- 
pany of  emigrants  to  Great  Salt  Lake 
valley.  After  this  he  was  appointed 
on  a  mission  to  California,  from  which 
he  returned  Sept.  30,  1850.  In  1851  he 
and  Apostle  Charles  C.  Rich  were 
called  to  lead  a  company  of  settlers 
to  California,  which  started  from  Pay- 
son,  Utah  county,  March  24,  1851,  and 
arrived  at  San  Bernardino,  Cal.,  in  the 
following  June.  A  few  months  later 
(September)  the  rancho  of  San  Bernar- 
dino was  purchased,  and  a  settlement 
located,  which  w^as  continued  until  1857, 
when,  on  account  of  the  hostilities  be- 
tw^een  Utah  and  the  United  States,  it 
was  broken  up;  the  inhabitants  re- 
moved to  Utah.  In  1860  Elder  Lyman 
was  sent  on  a  mission  to  Great  Britain, 
arriving  in  Liverpool,  England,  July 
27th.  In  connection  with  Apostle  Charles 
C.  Rich  he  presided  over  the  European 
Mission  until  May  14,  1862,  when  he  em- 
barked to  return  home.  While  on  this 
mission  he  delivered  a  remarkable  ser- 
mon at  Dundee,  Scotland,  March  16. 
1862,  in  which  he  denied  the  atonement 
of  the  Savior.  Some  years  later  he 
was  summoned  to  meet  before  the  First 
Presidency  of  the  Church  to  answer  to 
the  charge  of  having  preached  false 
doctrines.  He  acknowledged  his  error 
and  signed  a  document,  dated  Jan.  2?,, 
1867,  In  which  he  also  asked  the  for- 
giveness of  the  Saints.  But  soon  af- 
terwards he  again  preached  in  the  same 
strain,  and  was  finally  excommunicated 
from  the  Church,  May  12,  1870.  He 
died  at  Fillmore,  Millard  county,  Utah, 
Feb.  4,  1877.  (For  further  details  see 
"Millennial  Star,"  Vol.  27,  p.  472;  "His- 
torical  Record,"   Vol.   6,    p.    122.) 

BENSON,  Ezra  Taft,  a  member  of 
the  Council  of  Twelve  Apostles  from 
1846  to  1869,   was  the  first  son  of  John 


100 


LATTER-DAY    SAINT 


arid  Ohloe  Henson-..  ana  was  born  Feb. 
22.  1S11,  in  "Mond'on,'  Worcester  county, 
Mass.  His  father  was  a  farmer  and  a 
very  intlustrious  man— a  quality  which 
his  son  inherited— and  Ezra  T.  lived 
with  him,  helping  him  on  the  farm 
until  he  was  sixteen  years  old.  He 
then  went  to  live  with  his  sister  and 
her  husband,  who  were  keeping  a  hotel 
In  the  center  of  the  town  of  Uxbrldge. 
With  them  he  remained  three  years. 
His  grandfather  Benson  was  also  a 
farmer,  and  while  engaged  at  work  in 
the  field  he  fell  and  suddenly  died.  At 
the  death  of  his  grandfather,  by  the 
lequest  of  his  grandmother,  young 
Ezra  T.  took  charge  of  the  farm,  and 
when  twenty  years  old  he  married  Pa- 
melia,  the  daughter  of  Jonathan  H. 
and  Lucina  Andrus,  of  Northbridge, 
\Vorcester  county,  Mass.  In  1832  he 
moved  ficm  the  farm  and  bought  out 
his  brother-in-law,  the  hotel-keeper, and 
kept   the   house   about   two  years.       In 


this  business  he  made  considerable 
money,  which  he  invested  in  hiring  a 
cotton-mill  and  commencing,  with  his 
wife's  brother,  the  manufacture  of  cot- 
ton in  the  town  of  Holland,  Mass. 
Through  a  combination  of  causes,  over 
which  he  had  no  control,  he  lost  money 
in  this  business,  and  retiring  from  it 
took  a  hotel  in  the  same  town.  He 
was  a'.so  appointed  postmaster.  Though 
he  made  money  in  this  business  he 
could  not  be  content;  he  had  a  desire 
to  visit  the  West.  In  the  spring  of 
1837  he  had  his  family  started.  While 
in  Philadelphia  he  made  the  acquaint- 
ance of  a  gentleman  who  spoke  dis- 
couragingly  about  the  West,  and  per- 
suaded him  to  go  to  the  town  of  Salem, 


and   he   would     assist     him   to   go   Into 
business.     He  remained     in   this  place 
one  year,  and  though  his  neighbors  of- 
fered to  render  him  any  assistance  he 
might  need  to  establish  himself  in  busi- 
ness,   he    still    yearned    for    the    West, 
and  he  started   in   that  direction.       He 
touched  at  St.  Louis,  obtained  a  small 
stock  of  goods,   and  then  went  up  the 
Illinois    river,    not    knowing    where    he 
should  land.       But  while  on  the  river 
he   made    the   acquaintance   of  a   man, 
who  proved  to  be  his   father's   cousin. 
He  was  living  at  Griggsville,  111.,  and 
at  that  town  he  concluded  to  stop.  But 
he   did    not   remain    long     there.       He 
moved  to  Lexington,  in  the  same  State, 
and    afterwards    to    the    mouth    of    the 
Little  Blue,  where  he  and  a  man  by  the 
name  of  Isaac  Hill  laid      out      a  town 
and   called   it     Pike.       Here    he    built 
himself  a    dwelling-house  and  a  ware- 
house.    But  the  place  was  sickly,   and 
he   was   restless.     In   relation   to   these 
days,   he   afterwards  said   that  he  felt 
the   Lord   was   preparing   him    for   the 
future  which  awaited  him,  and  later  he 
could  understand  why  he  could  not  feel 
contented  in  the  various  places  where 
he  visited,  and  where,  so  far  as  worldly 
prospects  were  concerned,  he  had  every 
opportunity   of   doing   well.       Early   in 
1839   he    heard    of   Quincy,    111.,    and   he 
was  led  to  go  there  in  search  of  a  home. 
There    he    met     with    the    Latter-day 
Saints,   who  had  just  been   driven  out 
of  Missouri  by  mob  violence.    He  heard 
they  were  a  very  peculiar  people;  yet. 
in    listening  to   the   preaching   of   their 
Elders,  and  in  conversation  with  them- 
selves,  he  found  them  very  agreeable. 
He  boarded,  during  the  winter,  with  a 
family     of      Latter-day       Saints,     and 
formed  a  high  opinion  of  them.     In  the 
spring  of  1840  he  secured  two  acres  of 
land  in  the  town,  fenced  it  in,  and  built 
a  house  upon  it.      During  this  time  he 
still    associated     with      the    Latter-day 
Saints,  and  his  sympathies  were  much 
moved  towards  them,  and  he  held  con- 
versations with  them  about  their  prin- 
ciples.      A  debate  was  held  in  Quincy 
between  the  Latter-day  Saints  and  Dr. 
Nelson,   who  was  opposed   to  them,  at 
which  the  Prophet  Joseph  was  present. 
From  this  debate  he  became  convinced 
that  the  Latter-day  Saints  were  believ- 
ers in  and  observers   of  the  truths  of 
the    Bible.       Though   pleased   that   the 
Saints  had  come  off  victorious,  he  had 


BIOGRAPHICAL    ENCYCLOPEDIA. 


101 


no    idea      at   that   time   that   he    would 
ever   become     one     himself,     yet   their 
principles  were  the  chief  topic  of  con- 
versation with  himself  and  family  and 
neighbors,  and  he  and  his  wife  attend- 
ed their  meetings.       His  wife  was  the 
first  to  avow  her  belief  in  the  doctrines, 
and  when  the  word  went  out  that  they 
were    believers    in      w?\at     was     called 
"Mormonism"  a  strong  effort  was  made 
to  get  him  to  join  a  sectarian  church. 
Elders  Orson  Hyde  and  John  E.   Page 
visited  Quincy  about  this  time,  having 
started  on  their  mission  to  Jerusalem, 
to    which    they     had      been    appointed. 
Their  preaching  seemed  to  have  the  ef- 
fect to  remove  whatever  doubts  there 
were    remaining,    and   he   and   his   wife 
were  baptized    by    the    president  of  the 
Quincy  branch,   July  19,   1840.       In   the 
fall  he  went  to  the  conference  of  Nau- 
voo,  and  was  ordained  an  Elder.  After 
his  return  to  Quincy,  he  was  visited  by 
President  Hyrum  Smith,  who  ordained 
him  a  High  Priest,  Oct.  25,  1840,  and  ap- 
pointed him  to  be  second  counselor  to 
the    president    of   the    Stake,    which   he 
had  organized   there.       About  the  first 
of   April,    1841,    he    moved    to     Nauvoo. 
He  bought  a  lot,  fenced  and  improved 
it,  and  built  a  log  house  upon  it.  June 
1,  1842,  he  started  on  a  mission  to  the 
Eastern  States,  where  he  remained  un- 
til the  fall  of  1843.       He  returned     and 
remained    until    May,    1844,      when      he 
again    started    east    in    company    with 
Elder  John  Pack.       When  the  news  of 
the    death    of     Joseph,      the      Prophet, 
reached    them,    they    returned.       That 
fall  he  was  called  to  be  a  member  of 
the    High    Council    in    Nauvoo,    and    in 
December  of  that  year  was  again  sent 
east  on  a  mission.       He  presided  over 
the    Boston    conference    until      the    be- 
ginning  of   May,    1S45,      when     he    was 
counseled   to   gather   up   all   the   Saints 
who  could  go  and  move  them     out     to 
Nauvoo.      The  remainder  of  that  sum- 
mer and   fall   he   worked   on   the    Tem- 
ple, and  at  night  frequently  stood  guard 
to  keep  off  the  mob.    He  moved  out  of 
Nauvoo    with    his    family     in    the    first 
company  in  1846.      At  Mount  Pisgah  he 
was    appointed    a    counselor    to    Father 
William    Huntington.        While    at    this 
place  he  received  a -letter  from  Presi- 
dent Young  informing  him   of  his  ap- 
pointment to  the  Quorum  of  the  Twelve, 
instead  of  John   E.   Page.       He   moved 
up  to  the  main  camp  at  Council  Bluffs, 


where  he  was  ordained  to  the  Apostle- 
ship,  July  16,  1S46,  by  Brigham  Young. 
Shortly   afterwards    he   was    sent   east 
on  a  mission,   from  which  he  returned 
Nov.  27,  1846.       The  next  spring  he  ac- 
companied President  Young  as  one  of 
the   Pioneers  to   Great   Salt   Lake   val- 
ley,   and   after    their   arrival   there     he 
was  sent  back  to  meet  the   companies 
which  were  coming  on,  to  inform  them 
that   a    place   of   settlement   had   been 
found.       After    he    met    the    companies 
he  returned    to    the    valley,    and  then 
started  back  to   Winter  Quarters  with 
the    Pioneers.        Another    mission    east 
had  to  be   performed,   and  he  left  the 
camp  about   the   last   day  of  1847,   and 
was  absent  several  months.      Upon  his 
return  he  was  appointed  to  preside  in 
Pottawattamie  county,  Iowa,  being  as- 
sociated   with    President     Orson    Hyde 
and  George  A.  Smith.      In  1849,  in  com- 
pany with  Geo.  A.  Smith,  he  moved  to 
the  valley.       He  was  dangerously  sick 
on  the  road,  and  was  not  expected  to 
live;   but  the  camp   fasted  and  prayed 
for   him,    and    he    recovered.        In    1851 
he  left  the  valley  on  a  mission  to  Pot- 
tawattamie   county,    to   gather   up    the 
Saints,    and   returned   in   August,    1852. 
In  1856  he  was  appointed  a  mission  to 
Europe,    and,   with   Elder   Orson   Pratt, 
presided  over  the  British  mission  until 
the  fall  of  1857,  when  he  returned  home. 
In  1860  he  was  appointed  to  preside  in 
Cache  valley,   at  which   point   he   con- 
tinued to  reside  until  his  death.     With 
Apostle  Lorenzo  Snow, and  accompanied 
by   Elders   Joseph   F.    Smith,    Wm.    W. 
Cluff  and  Alma  L.   Smith,   he  went  on 
a    mision    to    the    Sandwich    Islands    in 
1864,   and  the  boat  in  which  they  were 
landing  on  one  of  the  islands  capsized. 
Brothers    Benson    and    Snow    were    al- 
most  miraculously  saved  from   drown- 
ing.       Having    successfully    performed 
their   mission,    they   returned    to   Utah, 
this  being  the  last  time  Ezra  T.   Ben- 
son   left    L^tah.        Besides      performing 
these   missions.     Elder     Benson     filled 
many  important  missions  at  home.    He 
was  also  a  member  of  the  Provisional 
State    of   Deseret,    previous    to    the    or- 
ganization   of    the    Territory;      was     a 
member  of  the  Territorial  house  of  rep- 
resentatives  for   several   sessions,     and 
during    the    last    ten    years    of    his    life 
he  was  elected  to  the  Territorial  coun- 
cil every  term.       In  1869  he  associated 
himself  with  Brothers  Lorin  Farr  and 


102 


LATTER-DAY    SAINT 


Chauncey  W.  West  in  taking  a  large 
grading  contract  on  the  Central  Paci- 
fic Railway.  The  fact  that  he  was  not 
able  to  obtain  a  settlement  with  the 
railway  company  caused  him  consider- 
able anxiety.  On  Sept.  3,  1869,  just  as 
he  had  arrived  at  Ogden  from  his  home 
in  Logan,  he  died  suddenly  while  doc- 
toring a  sick  horse.  His  body  was 
conveyed  to  Logan,  where  the  funeral 
took  place  the  following  Sunday  (Sept. 
5th). 

-/  RICH,  Charles  Coulson,  a  mem- 
ber of  the  Council  of  Twelve  Apostles 
from  1849  to  1883,  was  the  son  of  Jo- 
seph Rich  and  Nancy  O.  Neal,  and  was 
born  Aug.  21,  1809,  in  Campbell  county, 
Kentucky.  He  was  baptized  by  Ira. 
M.  Hinkley  in  Tazewell  county,  111., 
April  1,  1832,  and  ordained  an  Elder  in 
Fountain  county,  Indiana,  by  Zebedee 
Coltrin,  while  en  route  to  Kirtland  to 
see  the  Prophet  Joseph.  He  received 
his  endowments  in  the  Kirtland  Tem- 
ple, and  was  ordained  a  High  Priest 
under  the  hands  of  Patriarch  Hyrum 
Smith,  at  Kirtland.  He  moved,  with 
his  father,  to  Far  West,  Mo.,  in  1836, 
and  was  married  to  Sarah  D.  Pea,  Feb. 
11,  1837,  near  Caldwell  county,  Mis- 
souri, by  George  M.  Hinkle.  Brother 
Rich  took  a  prominent  part  with  the 
Saints  in  all  the  persecutions  in  Mis- 
souri. While  carrying  a  flag  of  truce 
between  the  camp  of  the  Saints  and 
mobocrats,  at  Far  West,  he  was  shot 
at,  about  ten  yards  distant,  by  Samuel 
Bogart,  a  Methodist  preacher  and  a 
mob  officer.  At  the  battle  of  Crooked 
*j  river,  when  David  W.  Patten  fell  mor- 
J  tally  wounded,  and  while  bullets  were 
I  flying  thick  and  fast,  he  laid  down  his 
y  sword  in  the  heat  of  the  battle  and  ad- 
ministered the  ordinance  of  laying  on 
hands  to  the  dying  hero;  after  which 
he  resumed  the  sword,  assumed  com- 
mand, and  the  battle  of  Crooked  river 
was  won  by  the  Saints.  Because  of 
the  prominent  part  he  took  in  the  Mis- 
souri troubles,  he  was  forced  to  flee  for 
his  life  through  the  wilderness  into  Il- 
linois. He  was  ordained  a  membei 
of  the  High  Council  in  Nauvoo,  and 
was  also  a  member  of  the  city  council. 
He  left  Nauvoo  Feb.  13,  1846,  and  pre- 
sided over  Mount  Pisgah  branch  the 
following  winter;  left  Pisgah  March 
20,  1847.  for  Winter  Quarters,  starting 
for   Great   Salt   Lake  valley   June     14, 


1847,  in  charge  of  a  company  of  moving 
Saints.  He  arrived  in  Great  Salt  Lake 
valley  Oct.  3,  1847.  During  the  ab- 
sence of  the  Twelve,  on  their  return  to 
Winter  Quarters,  he  acted  in  the  val- 
ley as  counselor  to  Father  John  Smith, 
who  was  left  to  preside  over  the  colony. 
Elder  Rich  was  ordained  a  member  of 
the  Quorum  of  the  Twelve  Apostles  by 
Brigham  Young,  Feb.  12,  1849,  and 
started  on  a  mission  to  California  on 
the  9th  of  the  following  October,return- 
ing  home  Nov.  4,  1850.  He  again  start- 
ed for  Califorina,  March  6,  1851,  with 
a  portion  of  his  family  and  a  company 
of  Saints  by  the  southern  route,  to  pur- 
chase a  place  for  the  location  of  the 
Saints  that  might  be  gathered  from  the 
islands  of  the  Pacific.  With  Elder 
Amasa  M.  Lyman,  in  September,  1851, 
he  purchased  the  rancho  of  San 
Bernardino,  containing  about  one  hun- 
dred thousand  acres  of  land,  for  the 
sum  of  $77,500,  to  which  place  the  com- 


pany removed  and  began  the  foundation 
and  settlement  of  what  is  now  one  of 
the  richest  and  finest  countries  in 
southern  California.  When  the  Bu- 
chanan war  broke  out,  the  rancho  of 
San  Bernardino  was  sold,  and  the 
Saints  returned  to  Utah.  Brother  Rich 
leaving  there  April  16,  1857,  arrived  in 
Salt  Lake  City  in  June  of  the  same 
year.  He  accompanied  Gen.  Daniel 
H.  Wells  to  Echo  canyon  and  Fort 
Bridger  during  the  Buchanan  war,  ren- 
dering valuable  counsel  and  aid.  In 
1860  he  was  called  on  a  mission  to  Eng- 
land.and  for  a  time  was  associated  with 
Elder  Amasa  M.  Lyman  in  the  presi- 
dency of  the  European  Mission.  He 
returned  home  in  1862.     In  the  autumn 


BIOGRAPHICAL.   ENCYCLOPEDIA. 


103 


of  1S63  he  explored  Bear  Lake     valley 
and  moved  his  family  there  the  follow- 
ing spring.     He  was  a  natural  pioneer 
and  was  the  leader  of  the  original  set- 
tlers  of  that  valley,   where   he   resided 
until    his   death,    continuing    to    be    the 
main   director   in   the   establishment  of 
towns  and  settlements  in  that     region. 
Rich    county,     the     extreme     northern 
county  of  Utah,  was  named  in  honor  of 
him.       During   the   early   years   of   the 
Bear  Lake  settlements,  the  only  means 
by  which  the  residents  could  get  their 
mails  from,  or  have  any  communication 
with    the    valleys    farther   south,    when 
the  snow  was  deep  in     the  mountains, 
was  by  crossing  on  snow-shoes.    "WTien 
others  would  shrink  from  the  danger- 
ous   undertaking     of      traversing     the 
mountains  at  such  seasons,  when  ter- 
rific   storms     prevailed,     Brother    Rich 
would  set  out.      His  wonderful  strength 
and   great   powers     of     endurance,     of 
which    he    never    seemed    to    know    the 
limit,   and  his   almost  intuitive  knowl- 
edge   of    the    country,    always    enabled 
him  to  go  through,  though  in  doing  so 
he    sometimes    bore    fatigue    enough    to 
kill  an  ordinary  man.     He  made  many 
of   these   hazardous   journeys   over   the 
mountains;    indeed      for    a    number    of 
years  that  was  his  usual  mode  of  trav- 
eling when  going  to  Salt  Lake  City  to 
attend  the  session  of  the  legislature,  or 
returning  from  the  same.      In  the  ear- 
ly days  of  the  Church  Elder  Rich  fig- 
ured  conspicuously   as  a  military  man 
and  was  distinguished  for  his  coolness 
and    bravery.        He    held    the    office    of 
major-general    in    the    Nauvoo    Legion, 
and    was     by     many   familiarly   called 
General    Rich     up     to     the   day  of  his 
death.       When    an   attempt   was   made 
to  kidnap  the  Prophet  Joseph  Smith  in 
1843  and  take  him  to  Missouri,  Brother 
Rich,  at  the  head  of  twenty-five  men, 
started  out  from  Nauvoo  to  render  him 
assistance,    and   returned   after   having 
traveled    about   five    hundred    miles    on 
horseback  in  seven  days.       In  the  po- 
litical affairs  of  Utah  he  served  several 
terms  as  a  member  of  the  council  and 
house    in      the     Territorial    legislature. 
Throughout    his    lifetime    he    was    less 
noted  for  his  brilliant  talents  than  for 
his  real  goodness.       He  was  a  man  of 
generous  impulses,  and   seemed  to  live 
for  the  happiness  of  others  rather  than 
his  own.      Cheerful,  honest,  industrious, 
benevolent,  extending  substantial  sym- 


pathy to  those  in  need,  and  giving 
fatherly  counsel  to  and  setting  a 
worthy  example  before  all  around  him, 
he  moved  on  through  life,  honored  and 
beloved  by  all  who  knew  him.  He  was 
stricken  with  paralysis  Oct.  24,  1880, 
and  died  at  his  home  in  Paris,  Bear 
Lake  county,  Idaho,  Nov.  17,  1883.  Dur- 
ing all  these  three  years  of  affliction  he 
was  never  heard  to  complain  or  in  any 
manner  evince  anything  but  a  spirit  of 
the  utmost  contentment  and  resigna- 
tion. (See  also  "Southern  Star,"  "Vol. 
2,  p.  385.) 

SXOW,    Erastus,     a  member  of  the 
Council   of   Twelve   Apostles   from   1843 
to  1888,  was  the  son  of  Levi  and  Lucina 
Snow,  and  was  born  at  St.  Johnsbury, 
Caledonia  county,  Vermont,  Nov.  9,1818. 
His   father's    family     was     among   the 
early    settlers      of      the    Massachusetts 
colony.     At  an  early  age  Erastus  Snow 
was  much  impressed  with  religion,  his 
mother  being  a  member  of  the  Wesley- 
an-Methodist  church.      In  the  spring  of 
1832    Elders    Orson    Pratt   and   Luke    S. 
Johnson   visited     Vermont     and     com- 
menced   to    preach    the    fulness    of    the 
gospel.      William  and  Zerubbabel,  two 
elder  brothers  of  Erastus,  were  the  first 
of  the  Snow  family  who  were  baptized. 
All  the  family  (there  being  seven  sons 
and  two  daughters)  subsequently  came 
into  the  Church,  excepting  two  of  the 
pons    and    the    father.       Erastus,     who 
was    only    fourteen    years    of    age,    be- 
lieved the  testimony  of  the  Elders  when 
he  first  heard  it,  and  was  baptized  by 
his  elder  brother,  William,  Feb.  3,  1833. 
Immediately     after     his     baptism,     he  - 
commenced    to    search      the    scriptures 
diligently  and     soon     became  very  de- 
sirous to  preach.    Consequently,  he  was 
ordained  to  the  office  of  a  teacher,  June 
28,   1834,  by  Elder  John  F.  Boynton.  At 
that    time    he    worked    on    his    father's 
farm  at  St.  Johnsbury,  where  a  branch 
of    the    Church    had      been     organized. 
Erastus  met  regularly  with  the  Saints 
on   Sundays  and  visited   them  in  their 
houses.       He    also   made   several   short 
missionary     trips     to    the    neighboring 
villages,    in   company    with     his   cousin 
Gardner  Snow  and  others.      He  was  or- 
dained by   his  brother  William   to   the 
office  of  a  Priest,   Nov.  13,   1834,     after 
which   he   extended   his   missionary   la- 
bors into  the  States  of  New  York  and 
New  Hampshire,  holding  meetings  and 


104 


LATTER-DAY    SAINT 


baptizing  quite  a  number.  After  being 
ordained  an  Elder  by  Elder  Luke  S. 
Johnson,  Aug.  16,  1835,  he  continued  his 
mission  with  increased  zeal  in  New 
Hampshire  and  Vermont,  in  company 
with  Wm.  E.  McLellin,  his  brother  Wil- 
lard  and  others.  Nov.  8,  1835,  he  left 
St.  Johnsburv  together  with  Elder  Ha- 
zen  Aldrich  and  traveled  to  Kirtland. 
Ohio,  a  distance  of  some  seven  hundre.l 
miles  eastward.  After  a  hard  journey, 
during  which  they  came  near  being 
shipwrecked  on  Lake  Erie,  they  reached 
their  destination  Dec.  3rd.  In  Kirtland 
Elder  Snow  met  the  Prophet  Joseph 
Smith  for  the  first  time  and  lived  with 
him  several  weeks.  During  the  winter 
he  attended  the  Elders'  School,  and  the 
following  spring  received  his  endow- 
ments in  the  Temple,  together  with 
some  three  hundred  other  Elders.  Ht- 
was  anointed  by  Pres.  Alvah  Beman, 
whose  daughter  he  subsequently  mar- 
ried. Thus  in  his  early  youth  he  par- 
ticipated    in     the     glorious     blessings 


which  at  that  time  were  poured  out 
upon  the  members  of  the  Church,  and 
especially  upon  those  bearing  the  holy 
Priesthood.  About  the  same  time  he 
was  ordained  into  the  second  quorum  of 
Seventy,  and  received  his  patriarchal 
blesings  under  the  hands  of  Joseph 
Smith,  sen.  After  the  endowments  in 
Kirtland,  the  Elders  went  out  preaching 
with  greater  diligence  than  ever,  and 
Elder  Snow  started  on  a  mission  to 
Pennsylvania  April  16,  1S36.  He  was 
absent  over  eight  months,  during  which 
time  he  traveled  1,600  miles,  preached 
220  sermons,  baptized  50  persons,  or- 
ganized several  branches  of  the  Church 
in  western  Pennsylvania,  and  returned 


to  Kirtland,  Dec.  29th.  On  this  trip 
he  encountered  much  opposition  from 
the  clergy  and  endured  considerable 
persecution.  On  one  occasion  (Aug. 
22nd),  when  an  armed  mob  had  col- 
lected at  Cherry  Run,  Armstrong  coun- 
ty, for  the  purpose  of  driving  him  out 
of  the  county,  he  had  a  narrow  escape 
from  having  personal  violence  inflicted 
upon  him.  Arriving  at  Kirtland,  he 
met  a  number  of  his  friends  from  the 
East.  In  the  beginning  of  1837  Elder 
Snow,  together  with  Luke  S.  Johnson, 
made  a  missionary  trip  to  Portage, for- 
ty miles  south  of  Kirtland,  and  later, 
in  company  with  Elder  Wm.  B.  Bosley, 
he  visited  the  Saints  in  Pennsylvania. 
After  his  return  he  frequented  the  high 
school  at  Kirtland.  Continuing  with 
Elder  Bosley  as  a  missionary  com- 
panion, he  started  on  another  mission 
to  the  East,  May  9,  1837.  In  Andover, 
Ohio,  he  held  a  discussion  on  the  divini- 
ty of  the  Book  of  Mormon,  with  a 
Campbellite  preacher  by  the  name  of 
Roberts.  The  meeting  lasted  until 
midnight  and  resulted  in  victory  to 
Elder  Snow.  In  Bridgeport,  Franklin 
county,  Penn.,  two  sisters,  who  were 
lying  at  the  point  of  death,  w^ere 
miraculously  healed  under  his  admin- 
istration. Many  other  cases  of  healing 
occurred  on  this  and  his  former  mis- 
sionary trips.  One  one  occasion,  while 
holding  a  meeting  at  Bridgeport,  he 
was  disturbed  by  a  mob,  which  drove 
him  from  the  place  and  pelted  him  with 
rotten  eggs.  At  Leitersburgh,  Mary- 
land, he  was  accosted  in  public  by  a 
Campbellite  preacher,  with  whom  he 
discussed  for  twelve  hours.  After  seven 
months'  absence,  he  returned  to  Kirt- 
land, Dec.  5,  1837,  having  labored  faith- 
fully in  Ohio,  Pennsylvania  and  Mary- 
land, preached  147  sermons  and  bap- 
tized about  forty  people.  Jan.  2,  1838, 
he  started  from  Kirtland  on  another 
missionary  tour.  A  couple  of  days 
later  he  attended  a  conference  of  El- 
ders at  Milton,  fifty  miles  south.  There 
he  was  challenged  for  a  debate  by  a 
Mr.  Hubbard,  a  Campbellite  preacher, 
who  denounced  the  Book  of  Mormon  as 
false.  Elder  Snow  suggested  to  the 
congregation  that  he  would  produce 
as  much  proof  for  the  divinity  of  the 
Book  of  Mormon  as  his  opponent  could 
for  the  Bible.  "With  this  the  people 
seemed  to  be  entirely  satisfied,  and  a 
meeting  was  appointed  for  the  follow- 


BIOGRAPHICAL.   ENCYCLOPEDIA. 


105 


ing  day.  But  when  the  hour  of  meet- 
ing arrived,  none  of  the  six  Campbell- 
ite  preachers,  who  were  present,  would 
abide  by  Elder  Snow's  proposition.  Be- 
ing anxious  to  use  every  opportunity 
that  presented  itself  to  lay  the  truth 
before  the  people,  Elder  Snow  finally 
consented  to  other  arrangements,  and 
the  debate  was  continued  until  11 
o'clock  at  night.  As  usual,  the  truth 
was  triumphant,  although  Elder  Snow 
was  abused  in  various  ways.  After 
this  he  visited  a  number  of  branches 
in  Ohio,  Pennsylvania  and  Maryland, 
held  many  meetings  and  baptized  quite 
a  number.  He  also  crossed  the  Poto- 
mac and  held  meetings  in  Virginia. 
Finally,  he  was  forced  into  discussion 
with  another  Campbellite  preacher  in 
Cookstown,  Penn.,  which  was  con- 
tinued for  two  nights,  and  ended  with 
complete  victory  to  Elder  Snow,  al- 
though his  opponent  was  the  Rev.  Mr. 
Young,  considered  to  be  one  of  the 
ablest  men  in  the  State.  The  people 
were  almost  thunderstruck  at  the  re- 
sult of  the  discussion,  and  Elder  Snow, 
in  compliance  with  their  earnest  solici- 
tations, remained  in  the  neighborhood 
several  days  longer  and  preached  to 
them.  In  the  latter  part  of  May  he 
received  a  message  from  Kirtland,  noti- 
fying him  to  return  to  Ohio,  for  the 
purpose  of  going  to  Missouri.  With 
joy  he  complied  with  this  call  and  ar- 
rived in  Kirtland  June  3,  1838,  after 
five  months'  absence.  In  Kirtland  he 
met  Elders  Heber  C.  Kimball  and  Or- 
son Hyde,  who  had  just  returned  from 
their  missions  to  England,  and  were 
now  preparing  for  a  journey  to  Mis- 
souri. Most  of  the  Kirtland  Saints 
were  also  preparing  to  remove  to  Mis- 
souri because  of  apostasy  and  persecu- 
tions in  Ohio.  Together  with  fort> 
or  fifty  others.  Elder  Snow  started  from 
Kirtland  June  25th  and  traveled  by 
land  to  Wellsville,  on  the  Ohio  river, 
thence  with  steamboats  down  that 
river,  950  miles,  and  up  the  Mississippi 
and  Missouri  rivers,  550  miles  further, 
to  the  Richmond  landing  in  Missouri. 
From  this  place  the  company  traveled 
forty  miles  northward  to  Far  West,  in 
Caldwell  county,  where  they  arrived 
July  18th.  Here  Elder  Snow  met  his 
parents  and  other  relatives  who  had 
removed  thither  from  Vermont.  Some 
of  them  were  suffering  with  the  fevei 
and  ague.  Elder  Snow  now  commenced 


manual  labor,  but  when  the  persecution 
shortly  afterwards  broke  loose  against 
the  Saints,  he  was  forced  to  take  up 
arms,  like  his  brethren,  in  defence 
of  the  people  against  mob  violence. 
After  participating  in  the  defence  in 
Daviess  county,  he  was  seized  with  the 
fever  and  ague,  and  when  Far  West 
sub.sequently  was  besieged  by  the  mob 
militia,  his  physical  weakness  had  be- 
come so  great  that  he  could  hardly 
walk  half  a  mile.  Yet  he  remained 
bravely  at  his  post,  in  the  ranks  of  the 
defenders  of  Far  West,  until  the  town 
capitulated.  He  vi^as  also  present  at 
the  remarkable  mock  trial  before  Judge 
Austin  A.  King,  at  Richmond,  Ray 
county.  Elder  Snow  married  Arteme- 
sia  Beman  Dec.  3,  1838,  and  taught 
school  the  following  winter  in  Far 
West.  In  the  following  February  (1839), 
together  with  other  brethren,  he  was 
sent  by  the  Church  at  Far  West  as  a 
messenger  to  Liberty,  Clay  county,\ 
where  Joseph,  the  Prophet,  and  fellow- 
prisoners  at  that  time  were  incarcerat- 
ed. When  the  jailor  on  the  evening 
of  Feb.  8th  brought  supper  to  the  pris- 
oners, the  visiting  brethren  were  per- 
mitted to  enter  the  cell.  That  same 
evening  the  prisoners,  agreeable  to  an 
arrangement  made  the  day  previous, 
made  an  attempt  to  escape,  but  failed. 
When  the  jailor  went  out,  Hyrum 
Smith  took  hold  of  the  door,  and  the 
others  followed;  but  before  they  could 
render  the  assistance  needed,  the  jailor 
and  guard  succeeded  in  closing  the 
door,  shutting  in  the  visiting  brethren 
as  well  as  the  prisoners.  The  jailor 
immediately  gave  the  alarm,  and  the 
greatest  excitement  followed.  Not  only 
the  citizens  of  the  town,  but  a  great 
number  from  the  surrounding  country, 
gathered  around  the  jail.  Every  mode 
of  torture  and  death  that  their  imag- 
ination could  fancy,  was  proposed  for 
the  prisoners,  such  as  blowing  up  the 
jail,  taking  the  prisoners  out  and  whip- 
ping them  to  death,  shooting  them  and 
burning  them  to  death,  tearing  them  to 
pieces  with  horses,  etc.  The  brethren 
inside  listened  to  all  these  threats,  but 
believing  that  the  Lord  would  deliver 
them,  laid  down  to  rest  for  the  night. 
The  mob  finally  became  so  divided 
among  themselves  that  they  were  un- 
able to  carry  out  any  of  their  numerous 
plans.  That  night,  while  some  of  the 
visiting  brethren  spoke  about  their  be- 


106 


LATTER-DAY    SAINT 


tng-  in  great  danger,  the  Prophet  Jo-  in  the  matter.  After  much  exertion 
eph  told  them  "not  to  fear,  that  not  a  and  pleading  Elder  Snow,  finally, 
lair  of  their  heads  should  be  hurt,  and     through    the    assistance    of  the  Secre- 


Ithat  they  should  not  lose  any  of  their 
things,   even    to   a   bridle,     saddle,     or 
blanket;   that  everything  should  be  re- 
stored to  them;   they  had  offered  their 
lives  for  their  friends  and  the  gospel; 
that     it    was     necessary     the     Church 
should    offer   a   sacrifice   and    the   Lord 
accepted   the  offering."       The  brethren 
had  next  to  undergo  a  trial,     but     the 
excitement  was  so  great,  that  the  guard 
I  dared  not  take  them  out  until  it  abated 
\a  little.      While  they  were  waiting  for 
their  trial,   some  of  the  brethren     em- 
ployed lawyers  to  defend  them.     Elder 
Snow  asked  Brother  Joseph  whether  he 
had  better  employ  a  lawyer  or  not.  The 
Prophet  told  him  to  plead  his  own  case. 
"But,"    said    Brother    Snow,    "I   do    not 
understand   the   law."     Brother  Joseph 
asked  him  if     he     did   not  understand 
justice;    he   thought   he     did.       "Well," 
said  Brother  Joseph,  "go  and  plead  for 
\    justice  as  hard  as  you  can,  and  quote 
\  Blackstone  and  other  authors  now  and 
then,  and  they  will  take  it  all  for  law." 
He  did  as  he  was  told,  and  the  result 
was   as   Joseph   had   said   it   would   be; 
for  when  he  got  through  his  plea,   the 
lawyers  flocked  around  him,  and  asked 
him    where    he    had    studied    law,    and 
'.said  they  had  never  heard  a  better  plea. 
When  the  trial  was  over,  Brother  Snow 
was  discharged,   and  all  the  rest  were 
held  to  bail,  and  were  allowed  to  bail 
each  other,  by  Brother  Snow  going  bail 
with   them.     They  also  got  everything 
that  was  taken  from  them,  and  nothing 
was  lost,  although  no  two  articles  were 
found  in  one  place.      Before  Elder  Snow 
and  his  companions  left  Liberty,  some 
of    the    lawyers,    merchants    and    other 
leading  citizens     promised     them   that 
they  would  set  the  prisoners  at  liberty 
for  a  compensation  of  $10,000  worth  of 
real  estate,  but  when  the  brethren,  af- 
ter their  return  to  Far  West,  had  raised 
that   amount,   the   parties   neglected    to 
fulfil  their  promise.       In  the  meantime 
the    Saints     commenced     to     leave  the 
State,  but  Elder  Snow  and  others  con- 
cluded not  to  go  away  until  the  Prophet 
and  his  fellow-prisoners  were  set  free. 
Elder    Snow      therefore     proceeded     to 
Jefferson    City    and    tried    to    get    their 
case  before  the  judges  of  the  supreme 
court  of  Missouri.       These  dignitaries, 
however,  utterly  refused  to  take  action 


tary  of  State,     managed   to  get  an  or- 
der issued  for  a  change  of  venue,  on  th»; 
strength   of   which   the   prisoners    were 
started  from  Daviess  to  Boone  county. 
On  this  journey,  as  is  well  known,  they 
escaped  from  their  guards.  Elder  Snow 
started  with  his  family  for  Quincy,  111., 
April  15,  1839,  and  arrived  there  on  the 
27th.     The  prisoners  had  arrived  a  few 
days  before.      In  the  beginning  of  May, 
Elder  Snow  visited  Commerce,  in  Han- 
cock county,   which   had  been   selected 
as   a   gathering    place    for    the    Saints. 
Here  he  commenced  a  new  home,  and 
in    the    following     June     removed    his 
family  to  Montrose,     on     the     opposite 
side  of  the  river,     where     he     had  se- 
cured  a  small  hut     for     a     temporary 
dwelling.       July   4,   1839,   he   started   on 
a  mission,  to  which  he  had  been  called 
at   the  conference   held   in  Quincy   two 
months  previous.      He  traveled  through 
several    counties    in    Illinois,      held      a 
number   of  meetings  and  administered 
to   the   sick,   until  it  was  revealed     to 
him   in   a   dream   that   his   family  was 
sick  and  needed  his  presence.      He  re- 
turned   home   July   31st   and   found   hlss 
wife  and  a  number  of  his  relatives  in 
bed   with   the   fever  and   ague.       They 
had   already   suffered   a   great   deal,   as 
there    were    none    to    render    them   as- 
sistance,   most    of    the    Saints    on    both 
sides   of    the    river   being   sick   at   that 
time.       Elder   Snow,    in   company   with 
other  Elders,  went  from  house  to  house 
administering  to  the  sufferers  until  he 
also   was   taken   sick.       In     August  he 
was  somewhat  better  and  undertook  a 
journey  to  Quincy  with  a  team.       On 
the   return   trip   the   horses   ran   away, 
tipping   the   wagon   in  a   river.       Elder 
Snow    was    thrown   into   the   middle   of 
the  stream,  right  under  the  horses,  and 
was  unable  to  extricate  himself.     Only 
through    the  marvelous  preservation  ot 
a   kind  Providence  was  he  saved  from 
drowning.        This     accident,      however, 
caused  a  fresh  attack  of  the  fever,  and 
he  was  confined  to  his  bed  for  several 
weeks     afterwards.       At     the   October 
conference  (1839)  held  at  Commerce,  El- 
der Snow  was  appointed  a  member  of 
the  High  Council,  at  Montrose,     and  in 
November    following    he    attempted    to 
go   out   and   preach,    but   after   having 
held   a   few   meetings,     he     was   again 


BIOGRAPHICAL    ENCYCLOPEDIA. 


107 


prosti-ated  by  sickness  and  laid  up  for 
some  time  in  the  house  of  Brother  Haws 
in  Knox  county,  about  seventy  miles 
from  Commerce.  While  remaining  there 
in  a  helpless  condition, he  received  word 
from  home  that  his  wife  lay  at  the 
point  of  death  at  Commerce.  All  he 
could  do,  however,  was  to  pray  for  her, 
as  he  was  not  able  to  return  home  un- 
til the  20th  of  December  following. 
Then  she  was  much  better.  When 
President  Joseph  Smith  returned  from 
Washington  in  March,  1840,  he  told 
Elder  Snow  that  his  labors  were  much 
needed  in  Pennsylvania.  Wishing  to 
act  upon  this  suggestion,  he  at  once 
prepared  for  a  mission  to  that  State. 
But  as  the  protracted  illness  to  which 
he  and  his  family  had  been  subjected 
had  reduced  him  to  the  depths  of  pov- 
erty, he  had  no  means  wherewith  to 
defray  traveling  expenses,  and  he  was 
too  weak  to  undertake  the  journey  on 
foot.  After  preaching  several  times  in 
Quincy  and  attending  the  April  con- 
ference at  Commerce,  where  he  received 
some  means  from  kindhearted  Saints, 
he  finally  took  leave  of  his  family  April 
28,  1840,  and  started  on  his  mission  with 
Elder  S.  James  as  a  companion.  They 
traveled  down  the  Mississippi  and  up 
the  Ohio  rivers,  a  distance  of  about 
fourteen  hundred  miles,  to  "W^ellsburgh, 
in  Virginia,  where  they  landed  May 
7th  and  commenced  their  missionary  la- 
bors. After  having  held  a  two  days' 
discussion  with  a  Campbellite  preacher 
(Matthew  Clapp), Elder  Snow  continued 
to  Philadelphia  and  afterwards  visited 
New  York  and  Brooklyn.  In  these 
cities  he  preached  several  times,  and 
in  August  visited  Rhode  Island,  where 
one  of  his  brothers  resided.  After  this 
he  held  meetings  for  five  successive 
days  in  a  New  Jersey  forest,  where 
two  thousand  people  were  present  on 
one  occasion,  and  seven  were  baptized. 
He  continued  to  preach  and  baptize  in 
Philadelphia  and  vicinity,  and  also  in 
New  Jersey,  until  towards  the  close  of 
September,  when  he  received  a  letter 
from  Nauvoo  to  the  effect  that  his 
mother-in-law,  with  whom  his  wife  re- 
sided, was  dead.  Concluding  under 
these  circumstances  to  bring  his  wife 
to  Pennsylvania,  he  left  Philadelphia 
Sept.  30th  and  arrived  at  Nauvoo  Oct. 
21st.  having  been  absent  about  six 
months  and  traveled  5,650  miles.  After 
a    stay    of   seventeen   days   in   Nauvoo, 


he  started  for  Pennsylvania  Nov.  7. 
1840,  taking  his  wife  with  him.  After 
his  arrival  in  Philadelphia,  he  pub- 
lished a  small  pamphlet,  which  he  had 
written  in  answer  to  a  publication  is- 
sued against  the  Saints  by  a  Methodist 
preacher.  His  wife,  who  had  been  pro- 
vided with  a  home  at  the  house  of 
Brother  Wm.  Gheen,  in  Chester  county, 
bore  a  daughter.  Elder  Snow's  first- 
born, Jan.  21,  1841.  With  unabating 
zeal  Elder  Snow  continued  his  mis- 
sionary labors,  principally  in  Philadel- 
phia and  surrounding  counties  and  New 
Egypt  (New  Jersey)  and  neighborhood, 
preaching,  baptizing,  visiting  the  Saints 
and  administering  to  the  sick.  Finally 
he  happened  to  meet  Elder  Geo.  A. 
Smith,  who  was  returning  from  his 
mission  to  England,  and  also  Elders 
John  E.  Page,  Dr.  Galland,  Wm.  Smith, 
Hyrum  Smith,  Wm.  Law  and  others 
from  Nauvoo.  The  two  last  named 
brethren  had  visited  the  New  England 
States, and  meeting  Elder  Snow  on  their 
return  they  desired  that  he  should  go  to 
Salem,  in  Massachusetts,  to  open  the 
gospel  door.  In  a  revelation  given  in 
1836  the  Lord  had  said  that  He  had 
much  people  in  that  city.  Although 
Elder  Snow  had  expected  to  return  to 
Nauvoo  in  the  fall,  and  he  also  knew 
that  his  long  absence  would  affect  his 
temporal  affairs  considerably,  he  made 
up  his  mind  to  go  to  Salem,  after  mak- 
ing the  subject  a  matter  of  sincere 
prayer.  Consequently,  he  left  his 
former  field  of  labor,  where  he  had 
gained  many  warm-hearted  friends, who 
would  administer  to  the  wants  of  him- 
self and  family,  and  on  Aug.  16,  1841,  he 
started  for  a  far  and  to  him  unknown 
country,  where  not  a  single  member  of 
the  Church  could  be  found.  He  took 
his  wife  and  infant  child,  which  was 
sick,  to  Woonsocket,  near  Providence, 
Rhode  Island,  and  left  them  there  with 
his  brother,  while  he  continued  to  Bos- 
ton. There  he  held  several  meetings 
and  met  Elder  Benjamin  Winchester, 
who  had  been  appointed  his  missionary 
companion.  They  had  previously  la- 
bored together  in  Pennsylvania.  They 
proceeded  to  Salem,  a  city  which  at 
that  time  had  about  fifteen  thousand 
inhabitants,  situated  fourteen  miles 
northeast  of  Boston.  They  put  up  at 
one  of  the  cheapest  hotels  in  the  city 
and  prayed  earnestly  to  the  Lord  to 
open  the  way  for  the     introduction  of 


108 


LATTER-DAY    SAINT 


the  gospel  to  its  inhabitants.  The  fol- 
lowing day  they  secured  the  Masonic 
Hall  to  preach  in  and  held  their  first 
meeting  there  in  the  evening  of  the  6th. 
Their  next  move  was  to  print  2,500 
copies  of  a  somewhat  lengthy  circular 
addressed  to  the  inhabitants  of  the  city, 
in  which  the  principles  of  the  gospel 
were  set  forth  in  great  plainness.  Elder 
Winchester  then  went  to  Philadelphia, 
while  Elder  Snow  continued  to 
pieach  four  times  a  week  in  the  Ma- 
sonic Hall.  By  contributions  from 
the  congregation  he  succeeded  also  in 
raising  means  to  pay  for  the  use  of  the 
hall.  He  now  received  numerous  in- 
vitations to  visit  people  in  their  houses, 
and  while  improving  every  opportunity 
that  presented  itself  to  deliver  his  mes- 
sage of  peace  and  salvation,  he  at 
length  found  himself  surrounded  with 
friends,  and  able  to  leave  the  hotel. 
Next  he  asked  the  Lord  to  open  tht- 
heart  of  some  one  to  receive  his  fami- 
ly. His  prayer  was  answered.  A  Mr. 
Alley,  who  resided  in  Lynn,  some  five 
miles  from  Salem,  and  who  was  deep- 
ly interested  in  the  work,  kindly  offered 
Elder  Snow's  family  the  hospitality  of 
his  home.  Brother  Snow  consequently 
went  to  Woonsocket  in  the  beginning 
of  October  and  brought  his  family  to 
Lynn,  where  they  remained  four  weeks, 
while  Elder  Snow  continued  his  labors 
in  Salem  and  Marblehead.  Afterwards 
they  removed  to  Salem.  Besides  speak- 
ing three  times  every  Sunday  in  the 
Masonic  Hall,  he  also  held  meetings  in 
private  houses.  Among  his  opponents 
and  the  enemies  of  truth  was  a  priest 
by  the  name  of  A.  G.  Comings,  the  edi- 
tor of  a  religious  periodical.  This  man 
published  in  his  paper  a  number  of 
wicked  falsehoods  against  the  Saints, 
but  refused  to  insert  Elder  Snow's  refu- 
tation of  them.  This  led  to  a  public 
debate  in  the  Mechanic's  Hall,  wher-e 
about  five  hundred  people  were  present. 
The  discussion  was  continued  for  six 
successive  nights,  and  as  the  interest 
gradually  increased  with  the  listeners, 
the  popular  feeling  turned  against  Mr. 
Comings,  whose  arguments  consisted 
chiefly  of  slander  and  abuse.  The  re- 
sult of  it  all  was,  that  many  more  be- 
gan to  investigate  the  fulness  of  the 
gospel  than  formerly,  and  from  that 
time  Elder  Snow's  meetings  were  so 
well  attended  that  the  Masonic  Hall 
could   not  hold   all   who  came   to  hear. 


C'onsefiuently.  three  leading  men  of  the 
town  took  it  into  their  heads  to  rent  a 
more  commodious  hall,  in  which  Elder 
Snow  preached  to  full  houses  for  six 
Sabbaths.  He  reaped  the  first  fruits 
of  his  work  in  Salem  Nov.  8,  1841,  by 
initiating  the  first  five  persons  into  the 
Church  by  baptism,  and  before  the 
close  of  February,  1842,  the  number  of 
baptized  had  increased  to  35.  March  5, 
1842,  he  held  a  conference  meeting  in 
the  Masonic  Hall,  and  organized  a 
branch  of  the  Church,  consisting  of  53 
members.  He  also  ordained  an  Elder 
and  a  Priest.  Subsequently  he  extended 
his  field  of  labor  to  Boston,  where  he 
assisted  Elder  Nickerson  in  organizing 
a  branch  of  the  Church,  and  to  Mar- 
blehead, Bradford,  Lynn,  Petersboro  (in 
New  Hampshire)  and  other  places.  Iri 
April,  1842,  he  visited  Philadelphia, 
Penn.,  where  he  attended  a  five  days' 
conference.  After  his  return  to  Salem, 
his  first  son  Avas  born,  May  1,  1842.  An- 
other conference  was  held  in  Salem  on 
May  28,  1842,  on  which  occasion  seven- 
ty-nine members  were  represented,  and 
the  number  had  increased  to  ninety  the 
following  June,  when  some  of  the 
Saints  commenced  emigrating  to  Nau- 
voo,  111.  Elder  Snow  continued  hi.s 
labors  in  Salem  and  surrounding  coun- 
try until  the  spring  of  1843.  Besides 
the  numerous  meetings  he  held,  he  had 
several  discussions  with  preachers  of 
various  denominations,  which  always 
resulted  in  victory  for  the  side  of  truth. 
Among  others,  the  apostate,  John  C. 
Bennett,  put  in  an  appearance  at  Salem, 
and  commenced  to  lecture  against  tho 
Saints  in  Nauvoo  and  Joseph  Smith, 
but  Elder  Snow  confronted  him  so  ably 
and  energetically  that  Mr.  Bennett  soon 
found  it  advisable  to  leave  the  town. 
Under  Elder  Snow's  administrations  a 
number  of  sick  were  also  healed. 
Among  such  could  be  mentioned  a  Mr. 
Baston,  in  Boston,  who,  even  before 
he  had  been  baptized,  was  healed  from 
a  deadly  fever,  and  a  Sister  Spooner  in 
Chelsea,  who  was  healed  by  the  laying 
on  of  hands,  after  being  declared  by  a 
council  of  physicians  to  be  incurable. 
She  had  for  seven  months  suffered  with 
dropsy  of  the  worst  kind.  Having  set 
the  branch  in  order  and  appointed  a 
brother  to  preside,  Elder  Snow  left 
Salem  March  9,  1843,  leaving  his  family 
behind,  and  arrived  in  Nauvoo  April 
lllh.       He    had    this    time    been    away 


BIOGRAPHICAL   ENCYCLOPEDIA. 


109 


about  two  years  and  a  half,  and     was 
agreeably     surprised     to     witness     the 
many  changes  and  extensive  improve- 
ments which   had    taken   place     during 
his  absence.      He  now  spent  one  month 
among  his  brethren  and  the  Saints  at 
headquarters,  and  received  much  valu- 
able instruction.      Among  other  things 
the    Prophet    Joseph    Smith    personally 
taught    him    the   principle     of  celestial 
and    plural    marriage.         May    11,    1843, 
Elder  Snow  once  more  turned  his  face 
eastward  and  returned  to  his  family  in 
Salem,  but  after  laboring  a  few  months 
he  took  his  wife  and  children  and  re- 
turned   to    Nauvoo,    where    he    arrived 
Nov.  5th.      The  following  winter  Elder 
Snow  remained  in  Nauvoo,   and  in  or- 
der to  support  his  family  and  also  com- 
plete a  house, which  he  had  commenced, 
he   entered   into  a   mercantile   business 
together  with  Parley  P.  Pratt,  in  which 
he   was   somewhat     successful.       Alto- 
gether he  spent  a  very  pleasant  winter 
in  the  society  of  the  Prophet  and  other 
leading  men  of  the  Church,  with  whom 
he   frequently     met     in     council,     and 
learned  many  things,   to  which  he  for- 
merly had  been  a  stranger.       Early  in 
the  winter  he  became  a  member  of  the 
masonic  lodge  at  Nauvoo,  and  advanced 
quickly  through  the  various  degrees  to 
that    of   a    grand    master.       When    the 
Masonic  Temple  in  Nauvoo  was   dedi- 
cated, April  5,   1844,   Elder  Snow  deliv- 
ered   the    dedicatory    speech.       At    the 
general   conference  held  at  Nauvoo  in 
April,  1844,  Elder  Snow  was  again  called 
to  go  on     a     mission     to     the  Eastern 
States.  Consequently,  about  three  weeks 
later  (April  30th),  he  took  a  memorable 
leave   of   his   family   and    the    Prophet, 
whom  he  never  saw  again  in  this  life, 
and    commenced    his    journey.        After 
having  visited  the  branches  in  Massa- 
chusetts, New  Hampshire  and  Vermont, 
he,     in     company     with     four     of     the 
Twelve,     held     a    conference  in  Salem, 
Mass.,    in   July.       About   this   time   the 
sad  news  of  the  martyrdom  of  Joseph 
and  Hyrum  Smith  reached  him,  and  he 
concluded   to   return  home.       When  he 
arrived  at  Nauvoo  July  25th  he  found 
the  Saints  bowed  down  with  grief  over 
the  loss  of  their  beloved     leaders.     El- 
der Snow  attended  the  special  meetings 
on  Aug.  8th,  at  which  the  Twelve  Apos- 
tles, with  Brigham  Young  as  president, 
were  acknowledged  as  the  highest  au- 
thority in  the  Church,  notwithstanding 


Sidney  Rigdon's  claim  to  the  leadership. 
Elder   Snow  spent   the  winter  in   Nau- 
voo, and  although  his  health  was  poor, 
he  performed  considerable  public  work 
besides   taking  care  of  his  family.     In 
February,    1845,    he     was    appointed    to 
make   a   missionary   trip   to   Wisconsin 
Territory    and    northern    Illinois.        He 
started    almost     immediately,     but   his 
horse  took  sick,  and  he  was  obliged  to 
return   to   Nauvoo,    where   he   then   at- 
tended  the   April     conference,     and   a 
few  weeks     later     witnessed  the  mock 
trial  of  the     murderers    of  Joseph  and 
Hyrum    Smith,    at    Carthage.       During 
the  summer  and  following  fall  consid- 
erable sickness  prevailed  in  Nauvoo  arid 
vicinity,   and   Elder     Snow   and   family 
were  among  the  sufferers.      In  Septem- 
ber  the   mob   commenced    to    persecute 
the  Saints  in  Hancock  county  and  burn 
their  houses.     Elder  Snow  was  present 
in   the  general   council  of  the  Church, 
held  in  Nauvoo  the  following  October, 
where    General    Warren,    Judge    Doug- 
las and  other  State  dignitaries,  sent  by 
Governor     Ford,     were     present,     and 
where  the    Saints    agreed  to  leave  the 
State  early  the  following  spring.    From 
that   time  the  Saints  doubled  their  ef- 
forts in  completing  the  Temple,  in  or- 
der  to   receive   their     blessings    before 
leaving  for  the  wilderness.      In  the  be- 
ginning  of  December     the   attic   story 
was  dedicated  for  giving  endowments, 
Elder  Snow  and  his  wife  received  their 
anointings    Dec.    12th,    after    which    he 
was  called  to  administer  in  the  Temple, 
and  he  remained   there  night  and  day 
for  six  weeks,  together  with  the  Twelve 
and  others  who  were  called  to  officiate 
in  a  similar  manner.      Jan.  23,  1846,  El- 
der Snow  yielded  obedience  to  the  prin- 
ciple of  plural  marriage,  by  having  not 
only  his  wife  Artimesia,  but  also  a  sec- 
ond  wife,    Minerva,    sealed    to   him   for 
time  and  all   eternity.       They  also  re- 
ceived  their  second   anointings.       Dur- 
ing the  winter  the  difficulties  with  the 
mob  continued  to  loom  up,  and  when  it 
was    decided    in    council    to    commence 
the  emigration  westward  in  February, 
Elder  Snow  was  sent  to  Quincy  to  lay 
in    supplies    for    the    pioneer   company. 
After  his  return  Pres.  Young  counseled 
him  to  make  preparations  for  the  jour- 
ney of  himself  and  family.      He  sold  as 
many   of  his   loose  effects  as   he   could 
at  a  very  low  price,    equipped   himself 
with  such  teams  and  provisions  as  his 


110 


LATTER-DAY  SAINT 


limited  means  would  allow,  and  left 
Nauvoo  with  his  family  Feb.  16,  1846. 
Through  the  carelessness  of  the  man- 
agers, the  boat,  which  brought  his  ef- 
fects across  the  river,  capsized,  where 
by  some  of  his  goods  were  destroyed 
and  his  oldest  child  had  a  narrow  es- 
cape from  drowning.  He  left  buildings 
and  real  estate  in  Nauvoo  to  the  value 
of  12,000.  Most  of  the  other  exiles  made 
similar  sacrifices,  and  this  property  was 
left  in  the  hands  of  a  committee,  who 
was  authorized  to  sell  it  and  use  the 
means  thus  received  for  the  removal 
of  the  poor.  Elder  Snow  and  family 
traveled  in  the  advance  companies  un- 
til Grand  river  was  reached  and  the 
temporary  settlement  of  Garden  Grove 
was  located.  He  then,  having  lost  a 
number  of  animals  and  being  short  of 
provisions,  concluded  to  return  to  Nau- 
voo to  sell  his  property  and  thus  get 
means  wherewith  to  continue  the  jour- 
ney. Giving  his  family  instructions  to 
press  on  to  Mount  Pisgah,  he  com- 
menced his  backward  trip  on  May  14th, 
together  with  Brother  Edmund  Ells- 
worth, and  reached  Nauvoo  in  safety. 
He,  however,  found  it  no  easy  task  to 
dispose  of  his  property,  and  it  was  not 
until  in  the  beginning  of  July  that  he 
succeeded  in  trading  it  for  about  one- 
fourth  of  its  real  value.  With  the  ready 
means  thus  gained  he  paid  his  debt, 
bought  two  other  teams  and  some  pro- 
visions, took  his  mother  and  another 
widow  by  the  name  of  Aldrich  and  her 
family  with  him,  and  again  took  up  the 
line  of  march  westward  July  5,  1846,  ac- 
companied by  his  brothers,  William  and 
Willard,  their  families  and  others  from 
Nauvoo.  Towards  the  latter  end  of 
the  month  the  little  company  arrived 
at  Mount  Pisgah,  where  Elder  Snow 
found  his  family  anxiously  awaiting  hi& 
return.  The  Twelve  Apostles  and  the 
main  camp  of  the  Saints  had  already 
reached  Council  Bluffs,  138  miles  fur- 
ther west,  and,  after  tarrying  a  few 
days  at  Mount  Pisgah,  Elder  Snow  and 
family  continued  the  journey  to  the 
Missouri  river.  There  the  Saints  were 
scattered  in  small  camps,  and  were 
busy  building  huts  and  preparing  for 
winter.  The  Twelve  had  made  their 
temporary  headquarters  at  a  point 
which  they  had  named  Cutler's  Park, 
about  three  miles  west  of  the  river  on 
the  land  of  the  Omaha  Indians.  Elder 
Snow  crossed  the  river  and  joined  the 


main  camp  at  this  place  Sept.  1st.  Af- 
ter his  arrival  at  Cutler's  Park,  he  and 
other  members  of  the  family  took  sick, 
and  his  youngest  child  died  Sept.  9th. 
In  the  beginning  of  December,  however, 
he  had  so  far  recovered  that  he.  during 
the  lemainder  of  the  winter,  was  en- 
abled to  make  several  trips  to  St.  Jo- 
seph and  other  places  in  Missouri,  to 
lay  in  supplies  for  himself  and  others. 
Some  time  before  this  the  main  camp 
of  the  Saints  had  removed  from  Cutler's 
Park  to  the  Missouri  river,  where  they 
built  Winter  Quarters.  In  January, 
1847.  a  revelation  was  given  through 
Pres.  Young,  showing  the  mind  and  will 
of  the  Lord  concerning  the  organization 
of  the  "Camps  of  Israel"  for  further 
movements.  In  this  revelation  Orson 
Pratt,  Wilford  Woodruff,  Amasa  M. 
Lyman,  George  A.  Smith,  Ezra  T.  Ben- 
son and  Erastus  Snow  were  selected  to 
organize  the  Saints  into  companies  and 
appoint  captains  of  tens,  fifties  and 
hundreds,  with  a  president  and  two 
counselors  over  each  company,  etc.  In 
order  to  comply  with  this  revelation 
vEzra  T.  Benson  and  Erastus  Snow 
visited  the  Saints,  who  were  tempo- 
rarily located  on  Running  Water,  about 
one  hundred  and  seventy  miles  north 
of  Winter  Quarters.  They  were  re- 
ceived with  much  joy  by  the  Saints,  to 
whom  they  administered  advice  and 
comfort.  A  special  conference  was  held 
at  Winter  Quarters  April  6,  1846,  and 
the  following  day  Pres.  Young  and 
others  of  the  Pioneers  broke  up  for  the 
^Vest.  Elder  Snow,  having  been  select- 
ed as  one  of  the  Pioneers,  called  his 
family  together  (April  8th),  laid  his 
hands  on  his  wives  and  children  and 
blessed  them,  and  after  giving  them 
the  necessary  instructions,  and  arrang- 
ing for  their  comfort  as  best  he  could, 
he  joined  the  Pioneer  Camp  w-hich  was 
located  on  the  prairie,  some  seven 
miles  distant.  A  few  days  later  the 
actual  journey  of  over  one  thousand 
miles  was  begun.  Elder  Snow  writes: 
"Many  interesting  episodes  occurred  on 
the  journey,  but  among  trying  and  af- 
fecting ones  was  the  appearance  of  the 
mountain  fever  among  us.  This  afflic- 
tion detained  us  so  that,  with  the  labor 
on  the  roads  through  the  Wasatch 
Mountains,  we  were  unable  to  reach 
Great  Salt  Lake  valley  until  the  21st 
of  July,  when  Orson  Pratt  and  myself, 
of  the  working  parties,   who  were  ex- 


BIOGRAPHICAL    ENCYCLOPEDIA. 


Ill 


ploring-,  first  emerged  into  the  valley 
and  visited  the  site  of  the  future  Salt 
Lake  City,  and  when  we  ascended  Red 
Butte,  near  the  mouth  of  Emigration 
canyon,  which  gave  us  the  first  glimpse 
of  the  blue  waters  of  the  Great  Salt 
Lake,  we  simultaneously  swung  our 
hats  and  shouted,  Hosannah!  for  the 
Spirit  told  us  that  here  the  Saints 
should  find  rest.  After  about  six 
weeks'  labor  here,  laying  out  the  City 
and  Fort,  plowing-  and  planting  fields, 
and  building  cabins  around  the  Fort 
block,  I  started  with  the  rear  camp  of 
the  Pioneers  on  the  return  trip,  on  Aug. 
26th,  and  on  the  last  day  of  October 
reached  Winter  Quarters  on  the  Mis- 
souri river,  where  I  had  left  my  family, 
having  been  about  six  weeks  without 
tasting  bread.  The  sweet  joy  of  this 
meeting  was  mingled  with  deep  grief 
at  the  loss  of  a  dear  little  daughter, 
Mary  Minerva,  who  had  died  during 
my  absence.  Many  of  our  people  re- 
maining at  Winter  Quarters  were  be- 
coming comparatively  destitute  of 
clothing,  and  other  necessaries  to  fit 
them  for  a  march  into  the  desert;  ana 
it  was  determined,  in  the  councils  of 
the  Church,  to  send  a  few  Elders  into 
the  Eastern  and  Southern  States  to 
solicit  contributions  (from  the  benev- 
olent) of  money  or  clothing  in  aid  of 
our  poor,  most  of  whom  had  received 
little  or  nothing  for  their  farms,  homes 
and  worldly  possessions  which  they 
had  left  behind  them  in  Illinois.  It 
fell  to  my  lot  to  accompany  Ezra  T. 
Benson,  one  of  the  Twelve,  into  the  East- 
ern States,  to  New  York,  Boston,  and 
many  other  Eastern  towns  and  cities, 
soliciting  aid.  Some  received  us  kindlj' 
and  contributed  money  and  clothing; 
but  by  far  the  greater  proportion  of  the 
people  turned  a  cold  shoulder  to  us. 
We  left  Winter  Quarters,  January,  184b, 
returned  April  2flth.  Sometimes  we  wert 
together,  at  other  times  we  were  separ- 
ated, operating  in  different  places.  On 
my  return  trip  I  passed  through  Ohio 
and  visited  the  Kirtland  Temple,  and 
at  St.  I.,ouis  fell  in  company  with  sev- 
eral returning  Elders  and  a  company 
of  Saints,  with  whom  I  ascended  the 
Missouri  river.  After  our  return  to  Win- 
ter Quarters  there  was  a  general  stir  an  i 
bustle  of  getting  ready  for  starting 
with  our  families  to  Great  Salt  Lak« 
valley,  and  gathering  our  year's  sup 
plies  of  seeds  and  provisions.      Most  of 


my  oxen  had  perished  during  the  win- 
ter, or  had  been  eaten  up  by  the  In- 
dians, and  I  was  under  the  necessity 
of  yoking  up  my  cows  and  all  my 
young  stock  to  work  with  the  few  oxen 
I  had  left,  to  haul  the  wagons  for  the 
journey.  I  traveled  in  company  with 
Prests.  Young  and  Kimball  and  had  a 
very  pleasant  and  agreeable  journey, 
my  teams  holding  out  well  and  my 
family  enjoying  good  health.  We 
reached  our  destination  with  much  joy 
on  the  20th  of  September.  Soon  after 
our  arrival  in  the  valley,  I  was  ap- 
pointed one  of  the  presidency  of  the 
Stake,  and  during  the  following  winter 
(Feb.  12,  1849),  I  was  called  and  or- 
dained into  the  quorum  of  the  Twelve 
Apostles,  together  with  Charles  C. 
Rich,  Lorenzo  Snow  and  Franklin  D. 
Richards.  In  my  ordination,  President 
Brigham  Young  acted  as  spokesman. 
I  continued  to  labor  in  the  ministry, 
in  common  with  my  brethren,  though 
all  were  obliged  to  labor  with  their 
hands  during  the  week,  in  opening  up 
farms  and  building  houses  for  our  fam- 
ilies. We  all  wintered  in  the  Old  Fort, 
which  had  been  commenced  and  partly 
built  by  the  Pioneers,  using  our  wagon 
beds  chiefly  for  our  sleeping  rooms. 
During  the  spring  of  1849,  we  began  to 
move  out  on  our  lots,  divided  the  city 
into  Wards,  and  began  to  f?nce  by 
Wards.  During  the  summer,  I  built 
chiefly  with  my  own  hands,  two  rooms 
on  my  lot,  one  of  adobe,  the  other  of 
logs,  separated  from  each  other  for  a 
shed  between,  and  got  my  family 
moved  into  them,  with  some  wagon 
beds  by  the  side  of  them  for  sleeping 
apartments.  This  year  the  Perpetual 
Emigrating  Fund  Company  was  organ- 
ized, and  the  system  of  emigration 
inaugurated,  which  has  so  largely  con- 
tributed to  the  gathering  of  our  people 
and  the  building  up  of  Utah  Territory. 
I  was  appointed  one  of  the  committee 
of  three  in  gathering  funds  to  put  into 
the  hands  of  Bishop  Hunter  to  send 
back  to  our  poor  brethren  left  on  the 
Missouri  river.  At  that  time  our  set- 
tlements extended  only  to  Provo  on  the 
south  and  to  Ogden  on  the  north.  We 
gathered  about  $2,000.  About  this  time, 
also,  I  participated  in  the  organizing  of 
the  provisional  government  of  the  State 
of  Deseret.  At  the  semi-annual  con- 
ference held  in  October,  1849,  I  was  ap- 
pointed  on    a   mission    to   Denmark,    to 


112 


LATTER-DAY     SAINT 


open  the  door  of  the  gospel  to  the 
Scandinavian  people.  At  the  same 
time,  Elder  John  Taylor  was  appointed 
to  France,  Lozenzo  Snow  to  Italy,  Frank- 
lin D.  Richards  to  England,  with  sev- 
eral Elders  accompanying  each  of  us. 
We  took  our  departure  from  Salt  Lake 
City  on  the  19th  of  October.  Our  lit- 
tle company  consisted  of  12  wagons,  42 
horses  and  mules,  1  carriage  and  35 
men.  This  included  a  couple  of  our 
merchants,  going  to  St.  Louis  after 
goods,  and  a  number  of  brethren  who 
went  east  on  business.  Shadrach 
Rouiidy  was  appointed  captain,  and 
Jedediah  M.  Grant  captain  of  the 
guard.  Bishop  Edward  Hunter  was 
also  one  of  the  company.  The  chief  in- 
cident of  the  journey  was  a  charge 
made  upon  our  party  by  about  two 
hundred  Cheyenne  warriors  during  our 
noon  halt  on  the  Platte,  forty  miles 
above  Laramie,  on  the  12th  of  Novem- 
ber. They  were  on  the  lookout  for 
a  war  party  of  Crows  and  thought  to 
gobble  up  our  little  party  for  pastime, 
but  we  did  not  quite  relish  the  sport, 
and  having  about  one  hundred  and 
thirty  shots  with  us,  in  about  one  min- 
ute's time  we  formed  a  line  of  battle, 
under  the  direction  of  our  gallant  cap- 
tain, Jedediah  M.  Grant,  in  front  of  our 
wagons,  with  our  animals  behind  them 
on  the  river's  bank,  and  when  every 
man's  finger  was  upon  his  piece  ready 
to  fire,  the  savage  horsemen  were 
brought  to  a  sudden  standstill.  A  par- 
ley commenced,  which  resulted  in  their 
giving  us  the  road,  and  they  withdraw- 
ing to  their  camps,  while  we  made  a 
good  afternoon's  march.  During  the 
night  following,  a  party  of  Crows  suc- 
ceeded in  making  a  descent  upon  their 
camp  and  running  off  a  number  of  their 
horses.  We  went  down  on  the  south 
side  of  the  Platte,  and  reached  the  Mis- 
souri river,  at  a  point  where  now  stands 
Nebraska  City,  on  the  7th  of  Decem- 
ber, in  a  blinding  snow  storm  which 
had  lasted  about  fourteen  hours.  The 
snow  was  about  three  feet  deep  when 
wo  reached  the  old  barracks  (Old  Fort 
Kearney)  on  the  west  side  of  the  river. 
And  how  joyful  we  were  at  finding 
there  cabins  to  shelter  ourselves  and 
shelter  for  our  animals.  We  held  a 
meeting  that  evening  an,5  gave  God 
thanks  for  our  successful  journey  and 
our  safe  arrival  over  the  bleak  and 
dreary  plains.     The  Missouri  river  was 


full  of  mush  ice,  and  we  saw  no  means 
of  ciossing  it.  We  all  joined  in  prayer 
that  night  that  the  Lord  would  cause 
the  ice  to  congeal,  and  make  a  bridge 
for  us  to  cross  over.  When  we  woke 
up  the  next  morning,  the  river  was 
gorged  with  ice  a  little  below  us,  and 
was  piling  up  with  floating  ice.  The 
second  day  we  all  passed  safely  over 
with  our  horses  and  wagons,  and  the 
day  after  the  ice  broke  up  again  and 
there  was  no  more  crossing  the  river 
for  three  weeks  after.  After  a  visit 
to  Kanesville,  about  fifty  miles  up  the 
river,  where  the  Saints  received  us 
with  much  joy,  most  of  the  missionaries 
journeyed  together  till  we  reached  St. 
Louis,  whence  we  expected  to  take  dif- 
ferent directions  through  the  States  to 
visit  the  remnants  of  the  Saints,  re- 
maining in  the  States  and  gathering 
means  for  crossing  the  water.  Dur- 
ing the  week  we  stopped  in  St.  Louis, 
I  had  varioloid  (mild  smallpox),  and 
was  very  sick  for  a  few  days.  I  sup- 
pose I  must  have  contracted  the  dis- 
ease on  my  overland  journey  through 
Missouri.  Sister  Streeper,  my  kind- 
hearted  hostess,  who  cared  for  me  like 
a  faithful  mother,  had  a  large  family 
of  children,  including  a  young  babe, 
who  was  frequently  laid  in  the  bed  with 
me.  and  when  the  pits  began  to  ap- 
pear on  me,  and  the  character  of  my 
disease  became  known,  she,  in  her  anx- 
iety exclaimed,  "Oh!  my  poor  babe, 
and  my  poor  children,  none  of  whom 
have  been  vaccinated."  At  first,  for  a 
moment,  a  feeling  of  grief  came  over 
me,  that  I  should  be  the  cause  of  this 
agony;  but  straightway  the  Spirit  came 
upon  me,  and  I  said  to  her:  "Be  of  good 
rheer;  because  of  what  you  have  done 
to  me  God  will  shield  you  and  your 
house,  and  none  of  you  shall  suffer  on 
my  account.'  She  believed  my  words 
and  was  comforted;  and,  so  far  as  I 
know,  no  soul  took  the  disease  from  me, 
except  Sister  Felt,  who  had  a  few  mo- 
ments' conversation  with  me  while  the 
fever  was  on  me,  and  her  little  infant 
daughter,  who  well-nigh  perished  with 
the  smallpox.  I  sailed  from  Boston  on 
the  3rd  of  April  on  a  Cunard  steamer, 
for  Liverpool,  where  I  landed  on  the 
16th.  We  visited  many  of  the 
churches  in  England,  Scotland  and 
Wales.  During  the  next  four  weeks  I 
received  many  contributions  in  aid  of 
our  missions.      I  landed  in  Copenhagen, 


BIOGRAPHICAL,    ENCYCLOPEDIA. 


113 


the  capital  of  Denmark,   June  14,   1850, 
in    company     with     Elders     George   P. 
Dykes  and  John  E.  Forsgren — the  for- 
mer an  American  and  the  latter  a  na- 
tive of  Sweden.      "VV''e  were  met  at  the 
wharf    by    Elder    Peter    O.    Hansen,    a 
native  of  that  city,  who  had  embraced 
the    gospel    in    America,    and    had    left 
Salt  Lake  City  with  us,  but  had  made 
his  way  in  advance  of  us  to  his  native 
land.     Brother    Peter    O.    Hansen    con- 
ducted Elders  Snow,   Dykes  and  Fors- 
gren  to  a  hotel,     where,     after     being 
shown  an  upper  room  they  all  kneeled 
together   and    offered    up    thanksgiving 
to   God,   dedicating   themselves   to   His 
service.      Finding  the  hotel  noisy,  they 
moved  to  a  private  house  (L.  B.  Mail- 
ing's) the    next    day,    where  they  were 
Itindly   received    and    well    entertained. 
On    the    following    Sunday    (June    16th) 
they  attended  a  meeting,  conducted  by 
Mr.    Peter    C.    Monster,    a    Baptist    re- 
former,   who    had    been      subjected    to 
much   persecution   because   of  his    reli- 
gious belief.      He  was  an  educated  man 
and  commenced  to  investigate  the  prin- 
ciples   taught   by   the    "American   mis- 
sionaries" in  real  earnest,   and   at  one 
time  it  seemed  as  if  he  would  embrace 
the  fulness  of  the  gospel,  together  with 
his  whole   congregation,  but  finally  he 
liardened    his    heart    and    rejected    the 
truth.       The  principal  and  best  part  of 
liis    followers,    however,    were      subse- 
quently baptized  into  the  true  Church 
■of  Christ,  and  as  was  the  case  with  the 
Campbellites  in   Kirtland,   Ohio,   in  the 
early  days  of  the  Church,  so  also  did  a 
■congregation  of  reformed  Baptists  fur- 
nish the  first  fruits  of  the  preaching  of 
the  gospel   in   its  fulness   in   Denmark. 
Apostle   Snow   baptized   fifteen   persons 
in    the    clear    waters    of    the    beautiful 
Oresund,     near     Copenhagen,    Aug.    12, 
1850.       Ole  U.  C.   Monster  was  the  first 
man  and  Anna  Beckstrom  the  first  wo- 
man  baptized.       These   had     all     been 
members  of  Mr.  Peter  C.  Monster's  re- 
formed Baptist  Church.   August  14,  1850, 
the    first    confirmation      took     place    in 
Denmark,   and   on  the   25th   the   Sacra- 
ment  was    administered    there    for    the 
first   time   by   divine   authority   in    this 
dispensation.         On      the     latt?r     date 
the  first    ordination    to    the  Priesthooa 
also     took     place.     Brother     Knud     H. 
Bruun   being   ordained  to   the   office   of 
a      Priest.      After    the    first    baptisms, 
many   others     came     forward   and   fol- 
lowed the  example,  and  on  Sept.  15,  1850, 

Vol.  1,  No.  8, 


the  first  branch  of  the  Church  in  Scan- 
dinavia was  organized  in   Copenhagen, 
with  fifty  members.      The  young  Saints 
rejoiced  exceedingly  under  the  influence 
of  the  Spirit  of  God,  which  was  abun- 
dantly poured  out  upon  them.    The  man- 
ifestations of  the  power  of  God  in  the 
healing  of  the  sick  also  gladdened  their 
hearts,  and  before  the  end  of  the  year 
the  work  had  taken  deep  root,  not  only 
in  Copenhagen,  but  in   the  province  of 
Jutland,   wnere  another   branch   of  the 
Church  had  been  organized  in  Aalborg 
by  Elder  Geo.  P.   Dykes,  Nov.   25,  1850. 
In  the  meantime.  Elder  John  E.  Fors- 
gren had  gone  to  Sweden,  where  he  suc- 
ceeded in  baptizing  a  few,  after  which 
he   was   arrested,    guarded   and   finally 
banished   from     the     country.    Apostle 
Snow,  assisted  by  Elder  Peter  O.  Han- 
sen and  others,   set  diligently  to  work 
translating   the    Book   of   Mormon   into 
the   Danish   language.       The  book  was 
published  in  the  beginning  of  1851,  and 
was  the  first  edition  of  that  divine  re- 
cord  published   in  a  foreign   language. 
In  order  to  get  means  for  its  publica- 
tion Elder  Snow  had  to  make  a  trip  to 
England,  where  he  raised  the  necessary 
amount  among  the  British  Saints.  After 
its   completion   he   made   a    second   trip 
to  England.      Shortly  before  his  return 
home,    in    1852,    he    also    published    the 
Doctrine  and  Covenants  in  the  Danish 
language.     In   September,   1850,   Apostle 
Snow    wrote    an    interesting    pamphlet 
entitled  "En  Sandheds  Rost"   (A  "Voice 
of  Truth),  explaining  the  first  principles 
of  the  gospel  in  a  very  plain  and  forc- 
ible   manner.        Over    200,000    copies    of 
that  little  work  have   since  been   pub- 
lished in  the  Danish  and  Swedish  lan- 
guages.     "Remarkable  Visions"  by  Or- 
son  Pratt     and     a     number     of     other 
pamphlets     were     subsequently   trans- 
lated   and    published    in    Danish.        By 
diligent    application    and    close    study, 
Elder   Snow    also   acquired   a   sufficient 
knowledge   of   the   Danish   language   to 
enable  him  to  converse  freely  with  the 
people,  and  thus  he  became  mode  inti- 
mately acquainted  with  their  character- 
istics, manners  and  habits.      By  an  ex- 
emplary  and   consistent    life   and   kind 
ways,  he  soon  gained  the  love  and  con- 
fidence of  a  race  whose  devotion  to  the 
cause  of  truth  and  high  regard  for  i^' 
advocates   has   been   subjects   of  mucE* 
comment  in  later  years.      Apostle  Snow 
soon    learned    to    appreciate   the    warm 
feelings,       fuU-heartedness     and     true 

Feb.  23,  1901 


114 


LATTER-DAT    SAINT 


friendship  of  the  Scandinavian  Saints. 
and  in  his  later  years  better  than  ever, 
no  doubt,  he  realized  the  fact  that 
among  his  best  and  truest  friends  were 
some  of  those  who  embraced  the  fulness 
of  the  gospel  under  his  administrations 
in  the  country  of  the  north.  It  is  here 
also  worth  recording  that  none  ot  tne 
missions  established  by  the  Elders  in 
this  last  dispensation,  save  the  British, 
has  been  so  fruitful  as  the  one  founded 
by  Apostle  Snow  in  Scandinavia.  In 
1851  a  Danish  hymn  book  was  prepared 
and  printed, and  a  monthly  (soon  chang 
ed  to  a  semi-monthly)  periodical  called 
"Skandinaviens  Stjerne"  commenced 
This  paper  is  still  the  Church  organ  in 
Scandinavia,  and  is  now  running  on  its 
50th  volume.  As  in  all  other  countries, 
where  the  fulness  of  the  gospel  has 
come  in  contact  with  the  erroneous  tra- 
ditions and  creeds  of  men,  persecu- 
tions on  the  part  of  the  clergy  and  the 
ignorant  soon  began  to  show  its  face  in 
Denmark,  and  in  various  places  the 
Elders  and  Saints  were  subjected  to 
cruel  treatment  by  mobs.  Religious 
liberty  had  been  granted  the  year  be- 
fore the  mission  arrived,  but  the  peo- 
ple generally  did  not  seem  to  under- 
.=!tand  the  change  proposed  by  this  action 
of  the  government,  and  the  authorities 
also  were  slow  in  rendering  protection 
to  such  as  were  openly  denounced  by 
the  clergy  and  others  as  false  prophets. 
But  the  more  severe  the  persecutions, 
the  better  the  work  flourished.  New 
branches  sprang  into  existence  in  near- 
ly all  parts  of  Denmark,  and  in  the 
latter  part  of  1851,  the  gospel  was  also 
successfully  introduced  into  Norway. 
Elder  Snow  soon  found  himself  sur- 
rounded by  a  host  of  intelligent  native 
Elders,  who  labored  with  a  zeal  perhaps 
up  to  that  time  unequaled  in  the  his- 
tory of  the  Church.  Returning  from 
England  in  August,  1851,  he  held  the 
first  general  conference  of  the  Church 
in  Scandinavia.  The  second  one  was 
held  in  the  following  November,  on 
which  occasion  three  conferences  (Co- 
r)enhagen,Fredericia  and  Aalborg)  were 
organized.  In  the  beginning  of  1852, 
having  laid  a  good  and  firm  foundation 
for  the  work  of  God  in  Denmark, 
Apostle  Snow  began  to  make  prepara- 
tions for  returning  home.  In  February 
the  third  general  conference  was  held 
in  the  city  of  Copenhagen,  on  "which 
occasion  nearly  six  hundred  members 
were   represented   in   Denmark,  besides 


a  few  in  Norway  and  Sweden.  A  fare- 
well feast  was  arranged  for  Brother 
Snow  in  a  large  hotel  parlor,  February 
24,  1852.  About  three  hundred  persons 
were  present  on  that  occasion,  and  a 
time,  such  as  had  never  been  had  be- 
fore in  that  land,  was  enjoyed  by  the 
young  and  confiding  Saints.  All  vied 
with  each  other  in  showing  their  appre- 
ciation of  and  good  feelings  toward-j 
the  man  who  had  brought  them  the  true 
religion  of  Christ.  Apostle  Sno\v, 
taking  an  affectionate  leave  of  his 
flock,  sailed  from  Copenhagen  March  4, 
1852,  accompanied  by  nineteen  emigrat- 
ing Saints.  These,  together  W'ith  nine 
others,  who  had  embarked  a  few  weeks 
previous,  were  the  first  direct  fruits  of 
the  gospel  from  the  Scandinavian  coun- 
tries. They  have  been  followed  by 
more  than  twenty-five  thousand  others. 
After  spending  a  few  weeks  in  England, 
attending  to  the  organization  of  the 
Deseret  Iron  Company  and  other  mat- 
ters, Apostle  Snow  embarked  from  Liv- 
erpool May  8,  1852,  in  company  with 
Franklin  D.  Richards,  and  arrived  safe- 
ly in  Salt  Lake  City  Aug.  20th,  fol- 
lowing, having  been  absent  from  his 
mountain  home  nearly  three  years.  At 
the  October  conference,  1853,  he  was 
called,  in  connection  with  Geo.  A. 
Smith,  to  gather  fifty  families  to 
strengthen  the  settlements  in  Iron 
county;  and  the  following  year  he  was 
sent  east  to  take  charge  of  the  Church 
in  St.  Louis  and  the  Western  States. 
Accompanied  by  other  Elders,  he  left 
Salt  Lake  City  July  8,  1854.  and  on  tht 
4th  of  November  following  he  organ- 
ized a  stake  of  Zion  at  St.  Louis,  Mo. 
Nov.  22,  1854.  he  commenced  the 
publication  of  the  St.  Louis  "Luminary." 
and  he  also  superintended  the  emigra- 
tion crossing  the  plains.  In  1855  over 
two  thousand  Saints  commenced  the 
journey  to  the  valleys  from  Mormon 
Grove,  a  place  near  Atchison  City,  Kan- 
sas, which  had  been  selected  by  Elder 
Snow  as  the  starting  point  for  the  over- 
land journey.  From  this  mission  he 
returned  to  Salt  Lake  City  Sept.  1,  1855. 
Elder  Snow  left  his  mountain  home 
April  22.  1856,- on  another  mission  to  the 
States,  from  which  he  returned  in  Au- 
gust the  following  year.  Having  re- 
turned from  still  another  mission  to  the 
East,  he  was  called,  in  connection  with 
Geo.  A.  Smith  and  other  Elders,  on  a 
mission  to  southern  Utah,  with  a  view 
to   locating   settlements   in   the   valleys 


BIOGRAPHICAL    ENCYCLOPEDIA. 


115 


of  the  Rio  Virgen  and  Santa  Clara  foi 
the  purpose  of  raising  cotton.  This 
mission  started  from  Salt  Lake  City 
Nov.  29,  1861.  St.  George  and  other 
settlements  were  located  the  same  year; 
and  from  that  time  until  his  death 
Apostle  Snow  devoted  a  great  deal  of 
his  time  to  the  interest  of  southern 
Utah,  over  which  he  presided  spiritually 
for  many  years  and  also  represented 
the  southern  counties  in  the  council 
branch  of  the  Utah  legislature,  until 
disfranchised  by  the  Edmunds  law.  In 
1873  he  performed  a  short  mission  to 
Europe,  on  which  he  again  visited 
Scandinavia,  after  which  he  was  prin- 
cipally engaged  in  traveling  among  the 
Saints  in  Utah,  Arizona,  New  Mexico 
and  Colorado,  aiding  in  locating  new 
settlements,  organizing  new  Wards  and 
Stakes  of  Zion,  as  well  as  strengthen- 
ing and  building  up  the  older  ones. 
Perhaps  no  other  man  in  the  Church 
performed  more  pioneer  labor  than 
Apostle  Snow.  His  diligence,  untiring 
zeal  and  energy  was  ically  remarkable. 
When  the  anti-polygamy  crusade  com- 
menced. Elder  Snow,  like  many  of  his 
brethren,  became  an  "exile  for  con- 
science sake,"  and  the  hardships  he  was 
forced  to  endure  as  such  undoubtedly 
shortened  his  days.  After  a  most  re- 
markable and  useful  life,  fraught  with 
great  events  and  crowned  with  many 
blessings,  he  departed  this  life  at  his 
home  in  Salt  Lake  City,  May  27,  188s, 
a  little  under  the  age  of  three  score 
and  ten.  Apostle  Erastus  Snow  was 
kindhearted  and  benevolent,  a  man  of 
fine  appearance  and  strongly  built. 
Like  all  great  men  he  had  his  pecu- 
liarities. He  was  a  deep  thinker,  and 
at  times,  so  swallowed  up  in  profound 
thought,  that  he  took  but  little  notice 
of  things  around  him.  Sometimes, 
when  asked  a  question,  he  would  not 
answer  it  until  the  next  day,  or  per- 
haps still  later.  Frequently,  some 
would  think  that  he  did  not  hear  their 
question,  but  he  seldom  failed  to  an- 
swer it  at  some  future  time.  He  was 
an  honest  man,  a  true  husband  and  a 
kind  father,  a  wise  counselor,  an  effi- 
cient pioneer  and  colonizer,  a  great 
statesman  and,  in  every  sense  of  the 
word,  truly  an  Apostle  of  the  Lord  Je- 
sus Christ.  His  name  and  his  works 
will  live  forever  in  the  generations  of 
the  Saints  who  loved  and  respected  him 
as  their  friend  and  counselor."  (See 
also  "Historical  Record,"  vol.  6, 
p.  145;  "Southern  Star,"  vol.  2,  p.  361.) 


RICHARDS.     Franklin     Dewey,     a 

member  of  the  Council  of  Twelve  Apos- 
tles from  1849  to  1898,  was  the  son  of 
Phineas  Richards  and  Wealthy  Dewey, 
and  was  born  in  Richmond,  Berkshire 
county,  Mass.,  April  2,  1821.  He  was 
the  fourth  of  his  father's  nine  chil- 
dren. Being  raised  on  a  farm,  he  be- 
came at  an  early  age  accustomed  to 
heavy  labor,  but  used  all  the  spare  time 
he  had  for  getting  an  education  and 
laying  up  treasures  of  knowledge.  Be- 
fore he  was  ten  years  old,  he  had  read 
every  book  in  the  Sunday  school,  com- 
prising some  scores  of  volumes,  and 
when  thirteen  years  old  spent  a  winter 
at  Lenox  Academy.  His  parents,  be- 
ing devout  and  respected  Congrega- 
tionalists,  trained  their  children  in  the 
pious  way,  and  Franklin  was  early  in 


life  impressed  with  solemn  views  on  re- 
ligion. His  ideas  in  regard  to  many 
scriptural  points  was,  however,  very 
different  from  those  entertained  by  mosi 
other  people,  with  whom  he  associated, 
and  this  caused  him  to  decline  a  special 
offer  made  to  him,  to  be  educated  for 
the  ministry  in  a  leading  New  England 
college.  In  the  summer  of  1836,  Elders 
Joseph  and  Brigham  Young  came  from 
Ohio  to  Richmond  as  messengers  of  the 
true  gospel  of  Jesus  Christ.  They  left 
a  copy  of  the  Book  of  Mormon  with  the 
Richards  family  and  it  \vas  carefully 
and  intelligently  perused.  Franklin 
brought  all  the  ardor  of  his  studious 
mind  to  bear  upon  it,  and  after  having 
studied  it  carefully,  accei)ted  it  as  the 
truth  and  believed.  In  the  autumn  of 
that  year  (1836)  Willard  and  Levi  Rich 
ards  went  to  Kirtland,  Ohio,  as  dele- 
gates and  leaders  of  the  family  to  the 
truth.       They  accepted  the  gospel  and 


116 


LATTER-DAY    SAINT 


remained.  In  tne  succeeding  April, 
Phineas,  with  Franlclin's  younger 
brother,  George  Spencer — aged  fourteen 
years — also  journeyed  to  Kirtland. 
They  in  turn  received  and  acknowledg- 
ed the  truth.  In  the  autumn  of  1837, 
Phineas  returned  to  Richmond.  Ht 
found  Franklin  awaiting  baptism;  and 
on  the  3rd  day  of  June,  1838,  Phineas 
had  the  pleasure  of  immersing  his  son 
within  the  waters  of  Mill  creek  in  Rich- 
mond, his  native  town.  Franklin 
abandoned  his  employment,  and  left 
Richmond  for  Far  West,  Missouri, 
October  22,  1838.  It  was  a  lonely,  toll- 
some  journey.  On  the  30th  of  October 
he  crossed  the  Alleghanies;  and  almost 
at  the  same  hour,  his  beloved  brother, 
George  Spencer  Richards,  was  slain  by 
an  assassin  mob  at  Haun's  Mill.  But 
the  news  of  his  brother's  tragic  death, 
and  the  hideous  stories  of  the  "Mor- 
mon War,"  were  alike  powerless  to  res 
train  his  purpose  and  he  journeyed  on 
eventfully.  After  visiting  Far  West 
and  gaining  confirmation  of  his  faith, 
he  found  employment  along  the  Missis- 
sippi river.  In  May,  1839,  he  first  met 
the  Prophet  Joseph,  and  the  following 
spring,  April  9,  1840,  he  was  ordained 
to  the  calling  of  a  Seventy  by  Joseph 
Toung,  and  was  appointed  to  a  mission 
in  northern  Indiana.  He  journeyed 
and  preached  with  great  success;  estab- 
lished, by  his  own  personal  efforts,  a 
branch  of  the  Church  in  Porter  county; 
and  before  he  was  twenty  years  of  age 
delivered,  at  Plymouth,  a  series  of  pub- 
lic lectures  which  attracted  much  at- 
tention. The  April  conference  for  the 
year  1841  saw  him  at  Nauvoo  an  ador- 
ing witness  to  the  laying  of  the  corner 
stone  of  the  Temple;  and  at  this  event- 
ful gathering  he  was  called  to  renew 
his  labors  in  the  region  of  northern  In- 
diana. In  the  summer  of  that  year 
he  was  at  La  Porte,  Indiana,  sick  nigh 
unto  death,  and  yet  determined  to  pro- 
gress with  his  mission.  He  found  con- 
soling care  in  the  kindly  home  of  Isaac 
Snyder,  and  through  several  weeks  he 
was  nursed  as  a  beloved  son  of  the 
house.  When  the  family  of  Father 
Snyder  took  un  its  march  for  Nauvoo, 
Franklin  was  carried  back  by  them  to 
the  beautiful  city,  but  soon  after  the 
succeeding  October  conference  he  was 
once  more  moving  In  the  missionary 
field — this  time  being  the  companion  of 
Phineas   H.   Young,   in   Cincinnati   and 


its  vicinity.  He  fortunately  visited 
Father  Snyder's  family  again  in  the 
summer  of  1842,  just  as  he  was  conval- 
escing from  an  almost  fatal  attack  of 
typhoid  fever;  and  in  December  of  that 
year  he  was  wedded  to  the  youngest 
daughter  of  the  house— Jane  Snyder, 
who  is  yet  alive.  He  remained  with 
the  Saints  at  Nauvoo  until  the  latter 
part  of  May,  1844.  Having  been  or- 
dained a  High  Priest  by  Brigham  Young 
May  17,  1844,  at  Nauvoo,  he  was  called 
to  depart  upon  a  mission  to  England. 
Accompanied  by  Apostle  Brigham 
Young  and  others,  he  traveled  to  the 
Atlantic  States,  but  before  setting  sail 
for  Europe,  he  heard  the  dreadful 
news  of  the  Carthage  tragedy,  and  was* 
called  back  to  Nauvoo.  The  opening 
months  of  the  next  year,  1845,  were 
spent  by  him  In  traveling  more  than  a 
thousand  miles  among  the  branches  of 
the  Church  in  Michigan  and  elsewhere, 
to  gather  donations  for  the  Temple. 
He  returned  to  Nauvoo  with  nearly  tive 
hundred  dollars  for  this  sacred  purpose, 
and  then  was  chosen  by  his  Uncle  Wil- 
lard  to  be  a  scribe  in  the  ofiice  of  the 
Church  Historian.  He  also  labored 
through  the  spring  of  1846  as  carpenter 
and  joiner  in  the  lower  main  court  of 
the  Temple,  until  the  structure  was 
completed  and  dedicated— having  pre- 
viously received  his  endowments  and 
participated  in  the  administration  of 
the  sacred  ordinances  therein.  When 
these  duties  were  concluded  and  the 
time  for  the  exodus  had  come,  he  sac- 
rificed the  pleasant  little  home,  built 
by  his  own  toil,  and  with  the  meagrt 
proceeds  he  purchased  a  wagon  and 
cart  and  such  few  necessaries  as  he 
could  compass  for  the  use  of  his  family 
—an  invalid  nvife  and  baby  girl.  With 
the  heroism  of  the  martyrs,  he  saw  his 
loved  ones  starting  on  that  melancholy 
journey  into  the  western  wilderness. 
He  committed  them  to  the  great  Crea- 
tor's care,  and  then  he  turned  his  face 
resolutely  towards  the  East  to  fill  his 
mission  to  England— without  money  or 
suflicient,  to  make  his  way  by  faith 
alone,  across  continent  and  ocean  into 
a  strange  land.  His  younger  brother 
Samuel  was  called  to  accompany  him, 
and  the  two  missionaries  crossed  the 
river  to  Nauvoo  and  slept  the  first 
night  of  their  arduous  journey  In  a 
deserted  building  there.  The  God 
whom  they  so  unselfishly  served,  open- 
ed their  way;  they  pursued  their  jour- 


BIOGRAPHICAL    ENCYCLOPEDIA. 


117 


ney  via  the  Mississippi  and  Ohio  rivers 
to  Pittsburg  and  across  the  mountains 
to  the  coast;  and  on  September  22,  1846, 
they  sailed  from  New  York  in  company 
with  Apostle  Parley  P.  Pratt  and  oth- 
ers. The  last  words  which  Franklin 
received  from  the  Camp  of  Israel,  be- 
fore the  ship  put  to  sea,  was  that  his 
wife  Jane,  amidst  all  the  privations  of 
the  exodus,  was  lying  at  the  point  of 
death— that  a  little  son  had  been  born 
to  her,  but  the  child  had  quietly  ex- 
pired upon  its  mother's  devoted  bosom. 
He  landed  in  Liverpool  October  14,  1846. 
A  few  days  later  he  was  appointed  to 
preside  over  the  mission  in  Scotland, 
with  his  brother  Samuel  as  his  assist- 
ant. Apostle  Orson  Hyde  was  at  this 
epoch  the  president  of  the  British  mis- 
sion and  editor  of  the  "'Millennial  Star," 
though  he  was  soon  to  depart  for 
America  and  was  to  be  succeeded  by  El- 
der Orson  Spencer.  But  at  the  hour  when 
the  change  was  expected  to  be  made, 
a  false  report  of  Elder  Spencer's  death 
reached  Liverpool.  The  rumor  was  be- 
lieved and  Apostle  Hyde  appointed 
Franklin,  then  only  twenty-one  years 
old,  to  both  of  the  positions  which  he, 
himself,  was  vacating,  but  just  as  he 
was  entering  upon  his  high  trust  Elder 
Spencer  arrived  in  England.  Franklin 
was  then  chosen  to  be  one  of  his  coun- 
selors: and  during  the  subsequent  se 
rious  illness  of  the  president,  Franklin 
was  obliged  to  sustain  the  responsibili- 
ties and  perform  the  duties  of  that 
calling.  He  labored  there  until  Feb. 
20,  1848,  when  he  was  appointed  to  take 
charge  of  a  large  company  of  Saints 
who  were  emigrating  to  the  Rocky 
Mountains,  crossing  the  Atlantic  in  the 
ship  "Carnatic."  During  the  time  of 
Franklin's  stay  in  the  British  Isles,  the 
Saints  there  had  been  relieved  of  the 
treacherous  "Joint  Stock  Company." 
The  dishonest  projectors  of  the  despic- 
able scheme  had  fled  to  other  regions; 
and  hope  and  confidence  again  held 
sway.  But  while  all  in  the  mission 
was  prosperous,  and  the  young  Elder 
could  justly  feel  proud  and  happy  in 
the  great  work  of  proselyting,  melan- 
choly news  came  to  him  from  the  wil- 
derness. His  brother  Joseph  "William 
Richards,  a  member  of  the  Mormon 
Battalion,  had  succumbed  to  the  rigors 
of  the  march  and  his  wearied  form  had 
been  laid  in  a  lonely  grave  by  the  bankb 
of  the  Arkansas  river.      Franklin's  lit- 


tle daughter  Wealthy  had  also  died, and 
left  his  wife  heartbroken,  childless  and 
alone.  The  homeward  journey  via  New 
Orleans  and  St.  Louis  to  Winter  Quar- 
ters  was   completed   by   the    middle   of 
May,  1848,  and  there  Franklin  found  his 
wife  and  such  of  their  relatives  as  had 
survived    the   perils   and   privations   of 
the    times.       In     June     he     was    seni 
through   western   Iowa   negotiating   foi 
cattle  with  which  to  move  the  company 
of  Willard  Richards  across   the   plains 
to  the  Salt  Lake  basin.      His  effort  was 
completely   successful,   and   on   the   5th 
of  July  the  train  started,   with  Frank- 
lin acting  as  captain  over  fifty  wagons. 
The  journey  was  a  most  distressful  ont: 
to    his   wife.       Much     of     the   time   it 
seemed   as  though   each   day  would  b« 
her   last.       But    they   found   kind    and 
helpful  friends  who  ministered  to  theii 
wants;  and  on  the  19th  of  October  they 
entered  the  valley  through  Emigration 
canyon  and  camped   in  the  fort,   mort 
grateful    to    God    than    words    can    ex- 
press, to  find  a  resting  place  for  wear 
ied  frames  worn  with  toil  and  sickness. 
Franklin  sold  his  cloak  and  every  other 
article    of    clothing      which      he    could 
spare,  and  with  the  proceeds  purchased 
building  material.      Before  the  violence 
of  the  winter  was  felt  he  was  able  to 
construct  a  small  room  of  adobies  with- 
out roof  and  without  floor.      From  this 
rude    mansion    on    the    succeeding   12th 
day  of  February,  he  was  called  to  re- 
ceive his  ordination  to  the  Apostleship. 
Heber   C.    Kimball   was   spokesman   ii. 
his    ordination.        The      young    Apostle 
became   immediately     associated     with 
the   other    leading   minds   of    the    com- 
munity  in   the  provisional   government 
of  Deseret   in  general   legislative     ana 
ecclesiastical   work,    and   the   labors   oi 
creating  a  Perpetual  Emigration  Fund. 
In   October,    1849,    he     was   once     more 
called   to   leave   home,   with   its   tender 
ties  and  its  responsiblities  of  love,  and 
renew  his  great  missionary  labor  in  the 
British  Isles.      He  traveled  in  company 
with  Apostles  John  Taylor, Lorenzo  and 
Erastus    Snow   and   others,    and   had   a 
most  eventful  journey.  Hostile  Indians, 
inclement    weather    and  turbulent,  ic> 
streams,  combined  to  delay  and  imperii 
their    progress.        But      the      hand      of 
Providence     protected     them,     and  the 
opening  month  of  the  year  1850    founa 
them  at  St.   Louis,  visiting     with  dear 
old   friends    and    brethren.        This    waf> 


118 


LATTER-DAY    SAINT 


among  the  grandest  missionary  move- 
ments   in    the    history    of    the    Church. 
Elder  Taylor  was  on  his  way  to  France, 
Lorenzo   and    Erastus   Snow  were   des- 
tined  for.  Italy   and   Scandinavia,     ana 
Franklin  was  to  officiate  once  more  in 
the  British  Mission.      Orson  Pratt  had 
been    presiding   and    editing    at    Liver- 
pool; but  when  Franklin  arrived  there, 
March  29.  1850.  he  found  that  the  eldei 
Apostle   had    been   called   on   a  hurried 
trip  to  Council   Bluffs,   and  the   "Star" 
contained  a  notification  that  during  his 
absence  Apostle   Franklin  D.   Richards 
would   preside   over  the  Church  affairs 
in  Great  Britain.      The  young  president 
immediately  began  the  establishment  of 
the   Perpetual    Emigration   Fund,     and 
founded  it  upon  a  basis  which  has  en- 
abled  its   beneficient   power   to   endure 
until    the   present    day.       Later   in   the 
season    Orson    Pratt   returned    to   Eng- 
land,  and     Franklin     relinquished     his 
place    as    chief,    and      became    Apostle 
Pratt's  associate  for  a  few  months;  but 
with  the  opening  of  the  next  year,  1851, 
Orson   was   called     to    the   Valley,    and 
Apostle  Richards  was  instated    as    tht- 
president.      Within  twelve  months  fol- 
lowing, his  energy  and  zeal,  with  that 
of  his  brethren,    had   spread  the  truth 
with    irresistible    sway    throughout   the 
isles   of   Britain:    while   Franklin,   with 
tireless    hand    and    brain,    doubled    tho 
business  at  the  Liverpool  office;  revised 
and    enlarged    the      Hymn      Book    and 
printed  an  edition  of  25.000  copies;  pre 
pared  his  pamphlet,  the  Peaii  of  Great 
Price;  stereotyped  the  Book  of  Mormoi. 
and  arranged  for  stereotyping  the  Doc- 
trine and  Covenants;  issued  a  new  edi- 
tion  of   Parley     P.     Pratt's     Voice     ot 
"Warning:    and    devised    a   plan     which 
made  the  "Star"  a  weekly  instead  of  a. 
semi-monthly  periodical   and  increased 
the  number  of  its  issue      He  had  also 
paid    an    interesting     visit     to   Apostlo 
Taylor  at  Paris,   had   sent  to  Zion   the 
first  company  of  Saints  whose  passage 
came    through    the     Emigration    Fund, 
and    with    Apostle    Erastus    Snow    had 
made   arrangements  for   the   organlza 
tion  of  a  company   to  engage     in     tho 
manufacture  of  iron  in  Utah      In  Janu 
nry,  1852,  pursuant  to  advice  from  the 
First   Presidency   of   the   Church,    who 
contemplated  a  visit  from  him  to  Great 
Salt    Lake    valley,    he    installed    In    tht 
Liverpool  office  his  brother  Samuel, who 
had    been    formerly    his   associate    dur- 
ing his  ardent  and  successful   Scottish 


ministry,   in   order   to   fit   the     youngei 
liichards    to    maintain      the    increasing 
work  in  Franklin's  temporary  absence. 
The    baptisms    in    the    British    Mission 
during   these    two   years   of   Franklin's, 
stupendous    labor,    extending   from    the 
summer  of  1850  to  the  close  of  spring  in 
1852,   aggregated     about     sixteen  thou 
sand;   while  the  perfected  organization 
of  conferences,     branches,     pastorates, 
etc.,  was  commensurate  with  this  mar- 
velous increase.      After  exhaustive  in- 
vestigation Franklin  rejected  the  theory 
of    emigrating    the    Saints    by    way    oi 
Panama  to  the  California  coast;     and 
instead  adoj)ted  the  project  of  sending 
one   ship   to   each   of   the     three   ports, 
Boston,    Philadelphia    and    New    York. 
The  last    received    the    decided  prefer- 
ence,   after   the   experiment;      and    the 
plan  of  voyage  between  Liverpool  ani 
Castle  Garden,     instituted     by  Apostlt, 
Franklin  D.  Richards  for  the  European 
Saints,    a   half   of   a   century   since,    is 
still  the  universally  favored  route.     He 
sailed    from    Liverpool    for    New    York 
May     8,     1852,     and     arrived   safely   in 
Salt  Lake  City  Aug.  20th.      A  few  days 
later  (Aug.  29th)  he  was  attending  the 
special  conference     held     in  Salt  Lake 
City,  at  which  was  promulgated  to  tht: 
world    the     famous     revelation,    which 
Franklin  had  long  before  heard  and  re- 
ceived, upon  the  subject  of  the  eterni- 
ty and  plurality  of  the  marriage  cove- 
nant     in  the  Territorial  legislative  As- 
sembly he  renewed  his  labors  as  a  law- 
maker Dec.  13,  1852.      In  the  opening  of 
the    year    1853,    he    participated    in    the 
dedication  of   the  Temple   grounds     at 
Salt  Lake  City  and  also  in  laying  its 
corner  stones.  In  the  succeeding  month 
of  July  he  journeyed  with  his  wife  Jan« 
and  their  two  children  to  Iron  county 
to  proceed  with  the  establishing  of  the 
iron    works,    and    on    the    trip    encoun- 
tered, but  without  any  immediate  dis- 
aster, several  parties  of  hostile  Indians. 
At  Cedar  City  military  orders  were  re- 
ceived    from     Governor       Young     and 
Lieut.-General     Wells,  in     view  of  In- 
dian   disturbances,     and  Franklin  con- 
tinued   assiduously     in     the     work    of 
bringing  in  the  outposts,  changing  tht? 
site  of  Cedar  City,  and  fitting  the  peo- 
ple  for   the    resistance    of   savage   ag- 
gressions.      He   returned    to    his   home 
in    Salt   Lake     City,     just    in    time    to 
soothe  the  closing  hours  of  his   moth 
er's  life;    but  was  again  on  the  march 
for  the  iron  region  on  the  22nd  of  Oc- 


BIOGRAPHICAL    ENCYCLOPEDIA. 


119 


tober.  His  mission  there  accomplished, 
he    came     to     Salt     Lake    City  to  take 
part  through  the  winter  in  the  legisla- 
tive councils,   and  while   thus   engaged 
he   was    requested    by    Pres.    Young    to 
prepare  for  another  mission  to  Europe. 
Just  before  departing  for  England,   he 
held   a   family   gathering,   at   which   ht 
set  the  example  of  dedicating  his  home 
and   all   he  possessed   to   the   Lord.   Hb 
reached  Liverpool  in  safety  June  4,  1854. 
His    letter    of     appointment    from    the 
First  Presidency,  published  in  the  "Mil- 
lennial  Star,"  authorized  him  "to  pre- 
side   over   all    the    conferences    and   all 
the  affairs  of  the  Church  in  the  British 
Islands  and  adjacent  countries."      Thib 
was  the  signal  for  the  closer  amalgam- 
ation  of     all     the   European     missions 
under  one  head.       He  traveled  on   the 
Continent  promoting  peace  and  harmo- 
ny as  well  as  increase  to  the  branches 
there.     Emigration  facilities  were  per 
fected  and  enlarged.       In  1S55     he     en- 
gaged for  the  better  accommodation  ot 
the  growing  business  in  Liverpool,     tht 
convenient   premises  known  now  as  42 
Islington,  which  have  been  occupied  as 
the  chief  offices  of  the  Church   in  Eu 
lope   from   that   day   until    the   present 
time.        In    October    of    this    year,    tht 
German  Mission  was  originally  estab 
lished    in    Dresden   under   his    personal 
direction — a  mission  which  has  yielded 
intelligence  and  numerical  strength  to 
the  cause.       His  travels  were  constant 
and   extended   to   nearly   every  part   ot 
western  Europe — until  he  was  probabb 
better   informed   than   any   other     man 
regarding    the    work   in    foreign    lands. 
He    gathered    around    him   a    most    de- 
voted   band    of    American    and    foreign 
Elders;  and  the  cause  progressed  amaz 
ingly.      It  was  also  within  his  province 
to   direct   the   branches   of   the   Church 
in   the   East   Indies,    Africa,    Australia, 
New  Zealand  and  other  parts — making 
altogether  a  sphere  which  no  man  could 
fill  unless  every  ambition  were  centered 
in  the  cause.      July  26,  1856,  Pres.  Rich- 
ards, accompanied  by  Elder  Cyrus     H. 
Wheelock,  sailed  from  Liverpool,  home- 
ward   bound,    on    the    steamer    "Asia." 
At  a  meeting  of  the  presidents  of  con- 
ferences, held  in  London  previous  to  his 
departure,  an  affectionate  and  glowing 
tribute   of     esteem     was     unanimously 
dedicated  to  him.       Oct.  4,  1856,  he  ar- 
rived once  more  in  his  mountain  home, 
and     in     December     became     again     a 
member  of  the  Utah  legislature.      Jan. 


5,   1857,   he  was  again  elected  a  regent 
of  the  University  of  Deseret.  On  Mon- 
day, April  20,  1857,  he  was  elected  and 
commissioned   brigadier-general   of   the 
second  brigade  of  infantry  of  the  Nau- 
voo  Legion.     Soon   afterwards  he  paid 
a  visit  of  observation,  with  other  dig- 
nitaries, to  Fort  Limhi  (now  in  Idaho). 
When   the   coming  of  Johnston's  arm> 
was  announced, Brigadier-General  Rich- 
ards was  called  into  council  upon  meas- 
ures for  public  safety  and  defense;  and 
later,  was  engaged  with  a  detachment 
of  men  from  his  brigade  in  giving  sup- 
port   to    Lieut. -General   Wells   in    Echo 
canyon.       He,  with  other  devoted  citi- 
zens,  left  his  valuable   property   under 
the  charge  of  a  trusty  friend,  who  was 
to  apply  the   torch  and  offer   it  all   as 
a  burning  sacrifice  before  it  should  be 
seized  or  desecrated  by  the  boastful  in- 
vaders.     And,  after  the  tragic  folly  of 
the  invasion  was  brought  to  its  proper 
close,  he,  with  others,  received  a  some- 
what unnecessary  pardon   from  James 
Buchanan,     President     of     the   United 
States.       July  21.  1859,   he  began  a  po- 
litical tour  through  southern  Utah,    to 
advise  and  arrange  for  the  election  of 
delegate  to  Congress;  and  immediatel> 
upon     his     return  to     Salt     Lake    City 
he  departed  with  Elder  John  Taylor,  to 
meet    two    companies     of     emigrants — 
many  of  whom  were  endeared  by  old 
and     affectionate       associations     with 
Apostles  Taylor  and  Richards.     During 
the    years    1859-1866,     his    labors    wero 
multifarious;  he  was  engaged  in  eccle- 
siastical,  political,   legislative,   military 
and  educational  works— besides  having 
a  large  family  responsibility  and  such 
growing   private     interests   of   agricul- 
ture and  mill  building  as  his  public  du 
ties   would   permit   him   to   inaugurate. 
He  was  upon  three  occasions  very  ill, 
but  each   time  he  recuperated  and  re 
newed  his  labor  with  increased  energy. 
July  29,  1866,  he  was  once  more  appoint- 
ed to  England,  and  in  a  fortnight  wab 
on  his  journey.      Arriving  in  Liverpool 
on  the  11th  of  September  following,  he 
began  the  welcome  and  grateful  labor 
of  visiting  the  principal  conferences  ot 
the   European   Mission;    including     the 
Scandinavian     and     other   Continental 
conferences.       In     July,     1867,    he   wa& 
again  instated  as  president  of  the  Eu* 
ropean  Mission.  Once  more  he  gatherea 
a   staff   of   enthusiastic     Elders    to   his 
support,   and  in  the  year  following,   in 
Great   Britain   alone,    3,457    souls     were 


120 


LATTER-DAY  SAINT 


baptized,    and    in    the    same    length     of 
time,  from  the  same  country, there  were 
emigrated    to    Utah    more    than    three 
thousand   two  hundred   Saints.   Alwaya 
l)rojeoting  his  thoughts  into  the  future 
to  find  means  for  advancing  the  work 
of   God.    he    at    this    time   decided    that 
emigration   by   sailing   vessels   was   in- 
adequate for  the  needs  of  the  renewed 
proselyting  work  in  Europe.    He,  there 
fore,    made   the   necessary   changes — ai 
that  early  day  not  inconsiderable— and 
two    large     companies   of    Saints    were 
sent  out  from  Liverpool  by  the  steam- 
ships    "Minnesota"       and     "Colorado" 
bound  for  New  York.  This  change  from 
sailing  vessels  to  steamships  has  con- 
tinued till  the  present  time.      This  was 
the    last    foreign     mission     of    Apostle 
Richards,   and   his  active   work   in   the 
field   had  a  fitting  close.       Eight  times 
he    had    crossed    the    mighty    deep   and 
four  eventful   periods  he  had   spent   in 
the   ministry   abroad.       His   last   effort 
had  demonstrated  that  the  soil  of  hu- 
manity in   Europe   would   still   produce 
rich  fruits.       Although   his  ardor  as  a 
missionary  had  not  waned,  his  value  as 
a    home    counselor   had    increased,    and 
with  the  opening  of  the  following  year 
a  new  epoch  was   commenced     in     his 
career.      He  was  elected  probate  judge 
of    Weber    county    Feb.    19,    1869,      and 
from     that     event     Ogden     and  Weber 
county  may  date  no  small  share  of  the 
worthy  progress  which  has  made  them 
respectively,  in  importance,  the  second 
city    and    county    of    Utah.       In     May, 
1869,   Franklin  D.   Richards  established 
his  residence  in  Ogden.      In  all  the  in- 
tervening years   he  has   been   the   pre- 
siding  ecclesiastical   authority   of     the 
AVeber   Stake   of     Zion.       Many  of  his 
assistant  laborers  possessed  a  measure; 
of  his  own  paramount  quality  of  gen 
erous   loyalty   to   the  cause,   and   these 
men  came  readily  to  his  support  in  the 
revival    work   of     the     home    ministry. 
"When  he  reached  Ogden  to  attend  his 
first   term   of  court,    the   town   had   n«.. 
newspaper;    before  a  year  had  passed, 
he   established,   and   for  a  time  edited, 
the   Ogden    "Junction,"   over   which    he 
exercised     a    guardian     care     for    sev- 
eral years.  Schools  had  been  all  that  the 
people  felt  they  could  support,  but  they 
were  still  not  up    to    a    high  grade;  he 
wrote,  preached  and  labored  personal- 
Iv    and   with   his  accustomed     success, 
to  advance  the  educational  interests  of 
the    people.       The      young     people,    in 


many  cases,  lacked  cultured  associa- 
tions and  ambition  for  education  and 
refinement:  he  organized  societies  which 
were  the  heralds,  if  not  the  direct  pro 
genitors.  of  the  later  Mutual  Improve 
ment  Association  which  permeate  the 
young  and  growing  State  of  Utah,  and 
he  originated  a  plan  by  which  thi 
youth  of  Weber  county  might 
hear,  without  cost,  lectures  by  the  best 
scientists  and  most  talented  orators  ot 
Utah.  With  the  advent  of  the  railway 
came  an  influx  of  worldly  persons  and 
sentiment;  he  taught  the  Saints  how 
to  preserve,  from  this  rude  aggression, 
their  political  and  moral  integrity,  and 
he  showed  them  by  precept  and  exam- 
ple how  to  make  home  beautiful  and 
home  pleasures  attractive  for  the 
youth.  He  was  probate  and  county 
judge  of  Weber  county  continuously 
from  March  1,  1869,  until  Sept.  25,  1883. 
During  this  period  of  more  than  four- 
teen years,  hundreds  of  suits  for  di- 
vorce and  cases  of  estates  for  settle- 
ment were  brought  before  him.  Ii. 
no  single  instance  was  his  decision  in 
these  matters  reversed  by  a  higher 
tribunal.  He  adjudicated  all  the  land 
titles  in  the  important  city  of  Ogden 
and  the  populous  towns  of  Huntsville, 
North  Ogden  and  Plain  City.  No  ont; 
of  these  adjudications  has  ever  beei. 
set  aside  by  any  court.  For  the  first 
five  years,  following  his  induction  into 
office,  his  court  had  original  and  ap- 
pellate jurisdiction  in  all  common  law 
and  chancery  cases;  before  him  W'ere 
tried  numerous  civil  suits,  habeas  cor- 
pus cases  and  trials  of  offenders 
charged  with  all  crimes  from  misde- 
meanor to  murder.  Not  one  single 
judgment  or  decree  rendered  by  him  in 
all  this  lengthy  general  judicial  servict^ 
was  reversed  on  appeal.  His  justice 
and  humanity,  united  with  keen  legal 
sense,  made  his'  name  proverbial.  In 
his  administration  of  county  financial 
affairs  he  was  no  less  successful,  aided 
by  associates  of  shrewdness  and  integ- 
rity. During  his  regime  the  finest  court 
house  in  Utah  was  erected  in  Ogden, 
roads  and  bridges  innumerable  were 
built;  the  only  toll  road  in  the  county 
— extending  through  the  magnificent 
Ogden  canyon — was  purchased  and 
made  free;  taxes  were  kept  low,  but 
were  collected  promptly;  the  county  was 
maintained  clear  of  debt.  His  posi- 
tion carried  with  it  no  salary.  Al- 
though Apostle  Richards  always  had  a 


BIOGRAPHICAL    ENCYCLOPEDIA. 


121 


mass  of  business  at  home,  he  founa 
time  to  travel  and  observe  throughout 
the  Territory.  He  continued,  as  he 
had  previously  been,  when  in  Utah, 
a  member  of  the  successive  legislative 
assemblies  and  constitutional  conven- 
tions— in  which  his  scholarship,  legal 
lore,  and  patriotism  made  him  con- 
spicuous. In  1877  he  traveled  with  Pret>. 
Young  to  organize  nearly  all  the  Stakes 
of  Zion;  and  attended  the  dedication  oi 
Temple  sites  and  Temple  buildings.  Af- 
ter the  death  of  Pres.  Young,  and  es- 
pecially since  his  own  retirement  from 
political  life,  Franklin  was  entirely  im 
mersed  in  the  councils  and  labors  ot 
the  Church.  Towards  the  close  of  his 
official  career  Judge  Richards  became 
a  party  of  one  of  the  most  important 
law  suits,  so  far  as  the  public  is  con- 
cerned, that  was  ever  instituted  in  the 
Territory.  In  the  summer  of  1882  Con- 
gress passed  what  is  known  as  the. 
"Hoar  Amendment/'  which  authorized 
the  governor  of  the  Teriltory  to  fill 
vacancies  caused  by  the  failure  to  elect 
officers  at  the  August  election,  1882.  Un- 
der claim  of  authority  from  this  act 
Governor  Murray  appointed  some 
scores  of  persons  to  fill  offices  through- 
out the  Territory,  and  among  therri 
James  N.  Kimball  was  appointed  to  be 
probate  judge  of  Weber  county.  After 
demanding  the  office  from  Franklin  D. 
Richards,  he  commenced  a  mandamus 
suit  to  compel  the  relinquishment  of 
the  office  and  records  to  him.  Frankliii 
denied  that  there  was  any  vacancy  in 
the  office  because  of  the  failure  to  hold 
the  election,  and  insisted  that  he  had 
the  right,  under  his  commission,  to  hold 
the  office  "until  his  successor  was  elect 
ed  and  qualified."-  The  district  court 
decided  in  favor  of  Mr.  Kimball,  but 
an  appeal  was  taken  to  the  supremt 
court  of  the  Territory,  where  the  deci- 
sion of  the  lower  court  was  affirmed. 
The  case  was  then  taken  to  the  su 
preme  court  of  the  United  States,  where 
it  rested  until  the  term  expired  foi 
which  Mr.  Kimball  was  appointed,  and 
until  Judge  Richards'  successor  was 
elected  and  qualified.  This  was  a  test 
case,  and  if  it  had  not  been  contested 
with  the  determination  and  skill  which 
characterized  the  defense,  the  result 
would  have  been  the  displacement  of  all 
the  officers  of  the  Territory  by  the  gov- 
ernor's appointees,  and  the  "Liberal 
Party"  would  have  gained  the  political 
control    of    the     Territory.       This     de 


termined  legal  contest  was  a  fitting 
close  to  the  successful  official  career 
of  Judge  Richards  and  saved  the  Terri- 
tory from  political  bondage.  At  the 
general  conference  of  the  Church  held 
in  April,  1889,  Elder  Richards  was. 
sustained  as  Church  Historian  and  gen- 
eral Church  Recorder,  having  previous 
ly  acted  as  assistant  historian  foi 
many  years.  This  position  he  filled 
with  much  devotion  and  faithfulness 
until  his  demise.  In  1898,  when  Lo- 
renzo Snow  became  President  of  the 
Church,  Bro.  Richards  succeeded  to  the 
presidency  of  the  Twelve  Apostles  and 
occupied  that  position  until  his  death. 
He  was  endeared  to  his  associates  in 
the  Priesthood  and  the  Saints  generall> 
because  of  his  kind,  affable  manner. 
During  the  latter  years  of  his  life  his 
time  was  chiefly  occupied  with  histor- 
ical and  genealogical  labors,  but  he 
visited  many  of  the  Stakes  of  Zion  and 
remained  zealous  and  industrious  to  the 
last.  In  the  fall  of  1899  he  became  ^en- 
feebled, through  strokes  of  paralysis, 
and  after  an  illness  of  several  weeks, 
accompanied  by  brief  spells  of  appar 
ent  improvement,  he  passed  quietly 
away  at  his  home  in  Ogden,  Utah,  Dec. 
9,  1899.  Pres.  Richards  was  noted  for 
the  kindness  of  his  heart,  the  gentle- 
ness of  his  manners  and  his  constant, 
unceasing  devotion  to  the  work  of  God. 
Among  the  glowing  tributes  of  respect 
to  his  character  and  'faith  made  at  the 
time  of  his  funeral,  were  the  remarks 
by  Pres.  Joseph  F.  Smith,  who  said  that 
he  had  seen  Pres.  Richards  under  such 
trying  ordeals  that  few  could  andurt , 
but  under  which  Bro.  RicTiards  haci 
shown  the  patient  submission, faith  ana 
devotion  of  Job,  when  he  exclaimed, 
"Though  He  slay  me,  yet  will  I  trusv 
in  Him.'  (See  also  "Historical  Record," 
Vol.  6,  p.  165;  "Southern  Star,"  Vol.  2, 
p.  377;  Tullidge's  Quarterly  Magazine, 
Vol.  2,  p.  577;  "Juvenile  Instructor," 
Vol.  35,  p.  97.) 


YOUNG,  Brighain,  Junior,  a  mem- 
ber of  the  Council  of  Twelve  Apostles 
^ since  1868  and  president  of  the  Twelve 
since  1890,  is  the  son  of  President  Brig 
ham  Young  and  Mary  Ann  Angell,  and 
was  born  Dec.  18,  1836,  at  Kirtland,  Geu- 
aga  (now  Lake)  county,  Ohio.  His 
father  was  a  widower,  with  two  little 
girls,  Elizabeth  and  Vilate,  in  the  year 
1833.  It  happened  that  a  fast  and  testi- 
mony meeting     was  held   in    Kirtland, 


122 


LATTER-DAY    SAINT 


and  among  those  present  were  Elder 
Young  and  Sister  Mary  Ann  Angell. 
The  gift  of  tongues  rested  down  upoii 
Elder  Young  and  the  interpretation 
thereof  was  given  by  some  one  present. 
The  Spirit  bore  record  through  that 
tongue  that  these  two  faithful  souls 
were  designed  by  God  for  each  other. 
They  were  united  in  marriage,  and  Sis- 
ter Mary  Ann  assumed  the  care  of  the 
motherless  children.  Brigham,  tho 
third  child  of  this  marriage,  was  born 
timid  all  the  untoward  circumstances  of 
the  early  days  in  the  Church.  He  waS 
a.  twin;  his  sister,  Mary,  was  a  gentle, 
sweet  little  creature  whose  life  was 
brief  yet  none  the  less  beautiful.  She 
Avas  brought  to  death's  door  in  infan 


Hb 


cy  through  an  accident  which  was  the 
direct  result  of  the  mobbings  and  driv- 
ings of  the  Saints.  When  the  cruel  ex- 
terminating order  came  for  the  "Mor- 
mons" to  vacate  Far  West.Mo.,  in  three 
days.  Sister  Young  procured  a  wagor., 
and  put  what  few  movables  she  could 
crowd  therein,  and  persuaded  an  El- 
der to  help  her  to  get  away.  She 
climbed  in  with  the  children  and  the 
brother  started  the  team.  Sister  Young 
sat  on  top  of  the  load  on  her  baggage 
and  bedding  with  a  baby  on  each  arm 
and  three  little  children  clinging  to  her 
skirts.  Just  as  they  started  out,  the 
wagon  ran  into  a  huge  rut,  and  tht 
baby  girl  was  thrown  out  under  the 
wheel.  With  a  groan  of  dismay  the 
driver  picked  up  the  bleeding  baby  and 
laid  it  on  the  trembling  mother's  lap, 
with  the  remark  that  "the  poor  little 
thing  could  not  live;"  for  the  head  was 
mashed  almost  flat,  and  the  blood  was 
pouring  from  mouth  and  nose.     "Don't 


prophesy  evil,   brother;   take  the  other 
baby!"  With  skilful  hands  the  mother 
squeezed    and    pressed    the    head    back 
into  shape,  praying    mightily    all     the 
while.       The   child   lived   and   grew   to 
be  the  finest  child  of  the  family.     But 
at  seven  years  she  passed  out  of  hei 
sweet  existence  to  the  realms  of  peace 
and  rest  beyond.       After  the  accident 
which  occurred  to  the  little  Mary,  Sis 
ter  Young  traveled  on  for  two  days  ii. 
her   sorry   plight;    at   the   end   of   thai 
time  they  were    met  by  Elder  Young, 
who  had   come     back     for     them  in   a. 
wagon   with   two  yoke  of  cattle.       Hw 
immediately     loaded     them     into     hib 
wagon.      Herein  he  also  loaded    Eldei 
Orson   Pratt  and     his     family.       They 
traveled   thus   for   two   days,    reaching 
a  small  village.      Elder  Young  endeav- 
ored in  vain  to  secure  a  house  in  which 
to   leave    them.       None    could   be   pro- 
cured, but  he  found  a  stable,  which  hn 
at  once  cleaned  out  and  whitewashed, 
laying  some   boards   on   the   floor,   and 
making    things    as    comfortable    as    he 
could.       Into  this  stable  he  moved  his 
own  and  Elder  Pratt's  family,  leaving 
them   there  while   he   went  back   after 
more  of  the  Saints.      He  brought  two 
families   up   to    the   little    stable-house, 
and    leaving    them    there,-  he    took    hib 
own    and    Elder    Pratt's    family    on    a, 
two  days'  journey  farther.      Again  he 
located    them,    and     returned     for    tht. 
other  families  he  had  left  at  the  stable 
In  the  village.      In  this  way  he  moved 
four  families  from  Far  West    to  Quin- 
cy.      The  boy  Brigham  was  a  merry  lit- 
tle chap,  full  of  fun  and  pranks.     His 
first  distinct  remembrance  is  a  scene  or 
the  painful  movings  and  mobbings  en- 
tailed upon  his  people.    After  his  fath- 
er's    departure,  to     the   English     mis- 
sion, his  mother  moved  from  Commerct 
to      Montrose.      The      ferryboat      had 
brought    the   family   and    their    slender 
effects  across;     among  their  most  pre- 
cious possessions  was  a  cow  which  fur- 
nished  them   a  good   share   of   the  liv- 
ing.      In    1839     the     family    moved    U 
Montrose,    which  was  across  the  rivet 
from  Nauvoo;  and  in  1840  they  moved 
to   Nauvoo,   where   Brigham   was   bap- 
tized by  his  father  in   the   Mississippi 
river   in    1845.       "As     a    boy,"     writes 
Sister   Susa     Young     Gates,    "Brigham 
possessed  an  indomitable  spirit,  a  mer- 
riment which  was  as  infectious  as  June 
sunshine,    a   love   of   sport   and   adven- 
ture and  a  courage  which  nothing  could 


BIOGRAPHICAL    ENCYCLOPEDIA. 


123 


daunt.  He  was  devoted  to  the  mag- 
netic  man  known  as  the  Prophet  Jo- 
seph as  was  his  father.  Young  as  the 
boy  was,  the  black  gloom  which  feK 
over  Nauvoo  at  the  martyrdom  fillea 
his  own  soul  with  despair.  The  laugh 
was  stilled  upon  his  lips,  and  the  mer- 
ry jest  was  turned  to  weeping  in  tht 
sympathetic  young  heart.  When  the 
Saints  were  driven  out  of  Nauvoo  af- 
ter the  awful  struggles  and  throes  ot 
anguish  which  accompanied  and  fol- 
lowed the  assassination  of  the  Prophet 
and  Patriarch,  Pres.  Brigham  Young 
led  the  crowd  of  stricken  Saints,  that 
terrible  day  in  February,  across  rhe 
river  to  a  place  of  greater  safety,  yet 
of  such  barren  distress  as  surely  has 
been  rarely  witnessed  on  this  earth. 
The  boy  Brigham  was  off  at  play  in 
Knight's  mill  with  two  companion;* 
when  his  mother  and  the  rest  of  th-r: 
children  were  taken  across  the  ferry. 
Returning  in  the  afternoon,  he  found 
the  house  open,  furniture  left  standing, 
yet  over  the  whole  brooded  the  solemn 
silence  of  desertion.  With  the  swiftness 
of  despair  he  flew  down  to  the  river;  a 
boat,  the  last  one  for  the  night,  was 
just  pulling  away  from  the  shore.  It 
was  loaded  to  the  guards  with  wretched 
men,  women  and  children.  The  boy 
saw  a  barrel  in  the  bow  of  the  boat 
which  would  serve  him  as  a  seat;  with- 
out an  instant's  hesitation  he  jumpea 
into  the  boat  and  sprang  upon  the  bar- 
rel. Arrived  on  the  opposite  shore, 
such  a  scene  of  misery  and  desolatioii 
met  his  gaze  as  will  never  be  forgotten, 
dogs,  chickens,  cows  and  pigs  ran  bel- 
lowing and  grunting  in  every  direction, 
men,  women  and  children  by  the  thou- 
sands ran  hither  and  thither  in  the  ut- 
most confusion,  wagons  were  scattered 
about,  here  was  one  hitched  up,  the 
driver  cracking  his  whip  and  pushing 
recklessly  through  the  crowd;  babies 
screaming  for  their  mothers,  and  moth- 
ers calling  piteously  for  lost  babies  and 
children.  Weeping  and  groaning  sick 
ones  lay  here  and  there,  while  anxiety 
was  in  every  heart.  The  boy  hunted 
vainly  and  long  for  his  lost  family.  No 
one  had  time  or  heart  to  devote  to  th*; 
little  waif,  there  were  too  many  of  th«. 
same  kind  everywhere.  A  yoke  o) 
oxen  had  been  drowned  in  the  river: 
one  was  recovered,  and  some  men  tort,' 
off  the  hide  and  told  the  people  that 
any  one  who  lacked  provision  was  wel- 
come   to   use   the    meat    thus   obtained. 


The  lonely,  hungry  boy  with  others 
seized  this  chance  as  a  special  provi- 
dence to  themselves,  and  for  three  days 
they  lived  on  this  uninviting  food  At 
last  Brigham  heard  of  his  father  and 
mother  at  Sugar  Creek,  ten  miles  far- 
ther west;  and  so  he  tramped  the  dis 
tance,  and  at  last  he  found  and  was 
found  by  parents  and  friends.  Yet 
conditions  were  not  much  better  for 
the  boy  than  they  had  been  at  the  river. 
His  mother's  wagon  was  as  full  as  it 
was  possible  to  crowd  it;  and  there  waa 
no  bedding  to  spare  to  the  ten-year-old 
boy  who  had  just  arrived,  and  indeed 
there  was  none  for  any  of  the  boys  ii. 
the  camp  All  were  exposed  to  the 
storms.  To  add  to  the  misery  of  all,  a 
cold,  biting  storm  of  sleet  and  wind  be- 
gan to  rage.  Brigham  had  tried  to  build 
up  a  barricade  of  cooking  utensils  ana 
saddles  against  one  side  of  his  moth- 
er's wagon  so  as  to  shield  him  some- 
what from  the  driving  winds;  but  it 
was  worse  than  useless.  When  tht 
storm  settled  down  upon  them,  Brig- 
ham secured  the  help  of  his  compan 
ions,  and  they  cut  up  enough  brush  to 
make  themselves  a  tiny  wickiup,  into 
which  they  crawled  and  huddled  thus 
together  for  warmth.  *  •  »  rj-j^g 
traveling  through  the  swamps  and  bogss 
of  Iowa  was  slow  and  painful  in  the 
extreme  For  miles  and  miles  the 
wagons  labored  heavily  over  a  cordu- 
roy road,  or  rather  bridge,  made  of 
logs  withed  together  with  tough  wil- 
lows This  terrible  swamp  was  full 
of  danger  and  difficulty.  Here  ancfther^ 
were  swales,  with  a  little  sod  over  the 
seas  of  water  and  mud  below  If  one 
wagon  got  across  the  swale  in  safety, 
no  other  would  dare  to  follow  in  its 
tracks,  for  they  would  have  sunk  out 
of  sight.  Each  wagon  straddled  thb 
tracks  of  the  last,  and  even  then  the 
wheels  would  sink  through  the  twelve- 
inch  sod  into  the  muddy  lake  below, 
and  sometimes  hours  would  be  con- 
sum'^d  in  traversing  a  quarter  of  a 
mile.  In  one  such  swale,  Brigham  se- 
cured a  stick  twelve  feet  long,  and 
thrusting  it  down  through  a  wagon 
track,  it  went  entirely  out  of  sight  in 
the  muddy  sea  below.  At  last  tht- 
company  were  located  at  Winter  Quar- 
ters (now  Florence,  in  Nebraska), 
and  the  strong,  willing  hands  of  bus 
bands  and  oons  built  rude  but  com 
fortable  cabins  for  the  shelter  of  wo- 
men and  children.       The  pioneers  took 


124 


LATTER-DAY    SAINT 


their  dangerous  and  lonely  way  across 
the  Plains  the  following  year,  but  the 
boy  Hrigham  remained  with  his  mother 
in  Winter  Quarters.  In  April  the  first 
company  in  the  spring  of  1848  left 
Winter  Quarters,  led  by  Pres.  Brigham 
Young,  who  had  returned  to  bring  the 
rest  of  his  own  family  back  to  the  re 
treat  in  the  Valley.  Brigham,  who 
was  then  a  boy  of  twelve,  was  made 
driver  of  two  yoke  of  oxen.  He  wa!» 
quite  equal  to  the  oxen  and  to  the  oc- 
casion. He  was  faithful  to  his  trust. 
One  of  his  father's  wives  sat  on  th-^ 
seat,  while  the  boy  trudged  by  his  oxen, 
cracking  his  whip  and  piping  a  song 
to  beguile  the  weariness  of  the  way. 
When  the  company  halted  at  Sweetwa 
ter,  women  were  tired,  men  were  dis- 
couraged. Day  after  day  passed,  and 
the  discontent  of  the  party  grew  with 
every  passing  hour.  Among  any  othei 
people,  there  would  have  been  mutiny 
and  sharp  turr.  backward  to  the  sheltei 
of  civilization.  Always  alert  to  th-: 
pressure  of  influences  about  him, Presi- 
dent Young  felt  the  resistance  that 
manifested  itself  in  silence  rather  than 
in  words.  One  afternoon  at  three  o'clock 
he  hitched  up  his  coach  and  with  the 
terse  statement  that  he  was  'going  to 
the  Valley;  if  anybody  wants  to  follow, 
the  road  is  open,'  the  President  put 
the  whip  to  his  horses  and  gave  not  a 
glance  behind  Like  a  flash,  the  boy 
flung  the  yoke  upon  his  oxen,  hitched 
them  to  his  wagon,  picked  up  his  whip 
and  drove  as  rapidly  as  he  could  aftei 
the  coach  rolling  away  to  the  west.  Thii. 
instance  illustrates,  as  perhaps  no  othei 
could,  the  keynote  of  this  boy's  aftei 
life.  The  determination  which  flllea 
his  whole  soul  and  which  stiffened  the 
youthful  lips  into  the  iron  line  across 
his  face  so  much  like  his  father's,  was. 
expressed  in  the  words  which  he  ut 
tered  to  his  father's  wife  who  hastily 
took  her  seat  in  the  wagon:  'Father's 
started;  I'm  not  going  to  lose  sight  of 
his  wagon  wheels  while  daylight  lasts.' 
Fun  may  bubble,  play  may  be  fascinat- 
ing, but  when  'father  starts  or  leads 
the  way,'  there  will  his  son  Brighani 
follow — even  to  the  very  courts  of 
heaven.  Away  flew  the  coach  and  ono 
carriage  and  away  clumsily  foUowea 
the  double  yoke  of  oxen  not  too  far  be 
hind.  The  storm  whistled  and  raged, 
and  the  stiff  fingers  of  the  boy  could 
scarcely  hold  the  whip.  But  on  he  ran 
beside   his  oxen,   urging  them   on  with 


word  and  lash.  Evening  came  early, 
and  aided  by  the  gloomy  clouds  over- 
head, the  whole  country  was  enveloped, 
in  pitchy  darkness.  The  road  would 
loom  up  in  the  gloom  as  if  the  littk- 
swale  ahead  were  a  precipice  hundreds 
of  feet  to  the  bottom.  Even  that  much 
light  was  soon  absorbed  in  night  and 
ihe  storm,  and  the  whip  was  lost  froni 
the  half-frozen  hands  of  the  little  dri- 
ver as  he  stumbled  over  a  stump.  His 
body  was  thinly  clad;  he  wore  only  a 
pair  of  jeans  pants,  no  shoes  or  stock- 
ings, a  thin,  calico  shirt,  with  a  bit  of 
a  cape  made  by  his  mother  from  a  coat 
tail,  and  the  cape  was  worse  than  use- 
less as  it  was  blown  constantly  about 
his  ears  and  head.  Clinging  to  the 
bow,  the  boy  ran  beside  the  clumsy 
beasts,  knowing  not  where  he  was  go- 
ing or  what  would  be  the  end.  But 
'father  was  ahead,"  and  the  boy's  heart 
leaned  upon  'father'  and  upon  the  God 
of  his  father!  The  hours  came  and 
went  in  that  fearful  drive.  Upon  thn- 
seat  in  mute  despair  sat  Eliza  B., tossed 
from  side  to  side  with  the  dreadful 
jolts  and  lurches  of  the  wagon.  She 
knew  that  speech  or  cry  were  useless 
and  only  God  could  protect  them  or 
bring  them  into  safety.  A  light!  'Tis 
a  camp  fire!  And  the  faithful  oxeii 
moved  heavily  into  camp.  They  had 
traveled  about  eighteen  miles  since 
three  o'clock  and  now  it  was  just  mid- 
night! Such  were  the  struggles  and 
trials  that  marked  those  pioneer  jour- 
neys across  the  trackless  prairies.  Ninc; 
hundred  miles  had  the  boy  driven,  from 
the  Missouri  river  to  Fort  Bridger.  Ar- 
rived there,  they  were  met  by  men 
and  teams  from  the  Valley.  No  heart 
was  lighter,  when  the  tiny  spot  of  green 
in  the  center  of  the  dreary  Great  Salt 
Lake  valley  was  revealed  to  the  travel- 
ers at  the  ton  of  the  Big  Mountain, 
then  later  at  the  mouth  of  Emigration 
Canyon,  than  was  that  of  the  twelve- 
year-old  Brigham.  The  removal  of  thb 
clouds  of  danger  which  had  so  long 
filled  the  skies  of  their  every  retreat 
gave  more  than  one  heart  such  relief 
that  the  opposite  extreme  was  reached 
and  gaiety  became  abandon,  while- 
peace  was  the  vehicle  in  which  rodw 
thoughtless,  careless  sport."  Brigham's 
early  years  in  Great  Salt  Lake  valley 
were  spent  in  herding  stock,  going  into 
canyons  and  performing  considerable 
hard  manual  labor.  He  was  also  onn 
of  the  "minute  men"  who  spent  much. 


BIOGRAPHICAL   ENCYCLOPEDIA. 


125 


cf  his  time  on  guard,  watching  and 
fighting  hostile  Indians,  and  participat- 
■ed  in  several  dangerous  expeditions  to 
the  mountains.  Nov.  15,  1855,  he  mar- 
ried Catherine  Curtis  Spencer,  a  daugh- 
ter of  the  late  Orson  Spencer,  and  about 
sixteen  months  later  (early  in  1857) 
he  yielded  obedience  to  the  principle 
of  plural  marriage  by  marrying  Jane 
Carrington,  a  daughter  of  Albert  Car- 
rington.  During  the  Echo  canyon  wax 
lie  did  excellent  service  as  a  scout,  and 
when  out  reconnoitering  in  the  moun- 
tains he  often  suffered  untold  hard- 
ships. He  was  also  one  of  a  relief 
party  sent  back  to  meet  a  hand-cart 
company  of  emigrants,  on  which  trip 
he  was  attacked  by  inflammatory  rheu- 
matism, which  came  near  killing 
him,  and  from  the  effects  of  which  he 
suffered  for  many  years  afterwards. 
At  the  April  conference,  1861,  he  was 
called  to  act  as  a  member  of  the  High 
Council  of  the  Salt  Lake  Stake  of 
Zion,  and  in  the  spring  of  1862  he  ac 
companied  Delegate  Bernhisel  to  the 
States.  Having  arrived  in  New  York, 
he  received  a  letter  from  his  father, 
who  wished  him  to  go  on  a  mission  to 
Europe.  He  complied  with  this  call, 
sailed  for  Eng  and  and  arrived  in  Liver- 
pool July  26,  1862.  He  labored  prin- 
cipally in  London,  in  connection  with 
Elder  Wm.  C.  Staines,  and  visited 
Scandinavia  and  other  part"*  of  Europe; 
he  returned  home  in  1863.  sailing  from 
Liverpool  Sept.  1st  of  that  year.  Feb. 
4,  1864.  he  was  ordained  an  Apostle  by 
his  father,  Brigham  Young,  but  he  did 
not  become  a  member  of  the  Council  of 
Twelve  Apostles  till  October,  1868,  when 
he  was  chosen  to  fill  the  vacancy 
caused  by  Geo.  A.  Smith  being  selected 
as  a  counselor  in  the  First  Presidency. 
In  1864,  Elder  Young  was  called  on  an- 
other mission  to  Europe  for  the  purpose 
of  assisting  Pres.  Daniel  H.  Wells  iii 
the  presidency  of  the  European  Mis- 
sion. Accompanied  by  his  wife 
Catherine,  he  left  his  mountain  home 
in  April  of  that  year  and  arrived  in 
Liverpool,  England,  July  25th.  He 
located  at  42  Islington,  and  in  August, 
1865,  succeeded  Daniel  H.  Wells  in  the 
presidency  of  the  mission.  While  act- 
ing in  that  capacity,  he  traveled  ex- 
tensively in  the  British  Isles,  and  also 
made  several  trips  to  the  Continent, 
visiting  France,  Switzerland,  Germany, 
Denmark,  Sweden,  Norway,  Russia  and 
other  countries.       Agreeable  to  the  re- 


quest of  his  father  to  return  to  Utah 
on  a  visit,  he  sailed  from  Liverpool 
Sept.  19,  1865,  leaving  Apostle  Orson 
Pratt  in  charge  of  the  mission.  In 
crossing  the  Atlantic  a  fearful  storm 
came  up.  Part  of  the  ship's  rigging 
was  blown  away,  one  man  was  washed 
overboard,  and  the  vessel  came  near 
going  to  the  bottom.  Elder  Young  and 
a  sister  who  emigrated  to  Utah  were 
the  only  Latter-day  Saints  on  board. 
While  the  storm  was  raging,a  big  burly 
Irishman,  a  sort  of  a  religious  crank, 
ascribed  the  cause  of  the  storm  to  the 
fact  that  there  was  a  Jonah  on  board 
in  the  shape  of  a  "Mormon"  Elder.  He 
made  a  terrible  fuss  and  insisted  that 
Elder  Young  should  be  thrown  over- 
board, in  order  to  save  the  ship  from 
destruction.  At  last  the  captain  had 
to  interfere  and  compel  the  Irishman 
to  hold  his  peace.  After  a  hazardous 
journey  Elder  Young  arrived  in  Salt 
Lake  City  Oct.  25th.  The  following 
spring  he  returned  to  England  to  bring 
his  family  home.  He  arrived  in  Liver- 
pool March  20,  1867,  resumed  the  presi- 
dency of  the  mission,  visited  the 
world's  exhibition,  at  Paris,  France, 
and  finally,  leaving  the  affairs  of  tht 
mission  in  charge  of  Apostle  Franklin 
D.  Richards,  embarked  with  his  family, 
on  board  the  Cunard  steamer  "Scotia" 
and  sailed  from  Liverpool  June  29,  1867; 
they  arrived  safely  home  in  the  fall.  On 
this  mission  of  Elder  Young  and  wife 
to  Europe,  two  children  (Mabel  A.  and 
Joseph  A.)  were  born  to  them.  In  1868, 
when  Pres.  Brigham  Young  took  the 
big  grading  contract  from  the  Union 
Pacific  Railway  Company,  Elder  Younfe 
and  his  brother  JohnW.  acted  as  agents 
for  their  father  in  letting  out  jobs  to 
sub-contractors.  Until  the  disorganiza- 
tion of  the  Nauvoo  Legion,  in  1870, 
Elder  Young  also  held  prominent  po- 
sitions as  a  military  man,  and  did  valu- 
able service  at  the  annual  drills  of  the 
Territorial  militia.  From  the  time  of 
his  ordination  to  the  Apostleship  until 
the  present  he  has  been  chiefly  engaged 
in  labors  pertaining  to  that  high  and 
holy  calling.  After  the  death  of  Apos- 
tle Ezra  T.  Benson,  he  was  called,  by 
his  father  to  take  charge  of  the  affairs 
of  the  Church  in  Cache  valley,  for 
which  purpose  he  located  at  Logan.  He 
presided  there  until  1877,  when  the 
Cache  Stake  of  Zion  was  organized.  At 
the  general  conference  held  in  Salt  Lake 
City   in   April,    1873,   he   was   chosen   as 


126 


LATTER-DAY    SAINT 


one  of  the  assistant  five  counselors  to 
Pres.  Brlgham  Young,  and  acted  in 
that  capacity  until  his  fathers  death, 
necessarily  spending  considerable  of  his 
time  in  St.  George,  or  southern  Utah. 
After  the  death  of  Pres.  Young  he  was 
appointed  one  of  the  administrators  of 
the  estate,  in  the  settlement  of  which 
he  showed  a  just  and  amicable  dispo- 
sition, for  which  he  won  the  respect 
and  confidence  of  the  Saints  generally. 
On  July  12,  1879,  for  refusing  to  delivei 
certain  Church  property  into  the  hands 
of  Receiver  W.  S.  McCornick,  he  was 
adjudged  guilty  of  contempt  of  court, 
by  Judge  Boreman,  in  the  Third 
District  Court.  and  arrested,  in 
connection  with  John  Taylor.  Geo. 
Q.  Cannon  and  Albert  Carrington. 
On  the  following  Aug.  4th  he. 
together  with  Elders  Cannon  and  Car- 
rington, was  confined  in  the  Utah  Peni- 
tentiary for  not  complying  with  the 
court's  order  of  exorbitant  bail.  After 
more  than  three  weeks'  confinement, 
the  order  of  Judge  Boreman  was  re- 
versed by  the  Utah  Supreme  Court,  and 
the  prisoners  were  released  Aug.  28, 
1879.  In  1881  Elder  Young  went  on  a 
visit  to  Arizona,  taking  his  wife 
Catherine  along.  They  remained  one 
year  and  returned  to  Utah  in  time  for 
Elder  Young  to  wait  upon  his  sick 
mother  during  her  last  moments.  Shi 
died  in  Salt  Lake  City  June  27,  1882. 
Elder  Young  has  served  several  terms 
in  the  Utah  legislature,  made  several 
trips  to  the  East  in  the  interest  of  the 
Church,  and  occupied  numerous  othei 
positions  of  honor  and  trust.  Of  late 
years  he  has  traveled  extensively  in 
Utah.  Arizona,  New  Mexico,  Colorado. 
Old  Mexico,  etc.,  visiting  the  various 
Stakes  of  Zion  and  assisting  his  breth- 
ren of  the  Twelve  in  the  many  duties 
and  responsibilities  resting  upon  that 
quorum.  While  visiting  the  Yaqui  In- 
dians, in  Mexico,  in  1882,  he  was  at- 
tacked with  yellow  fever. which  brought 
him  near  the  point  of  death,  but  he 
was  healed  by  the  power  of  God.  In 
1890  he  was  again  called  to  take  charge 
of  the  European  Mission;  he  presided 
in  that  capacity  until  1893.  w'hen  he  re- 
turned home.  Since  that  time  he  has 
spent  most  of  his  time  in  traveling  and 
visiting  the  several  Stakes  of  Zion. 
Today,  Apostle  Young  has  the  same 
genial  tone  of  voice,  the  same  youth- 
ful spirit,  and  the  same  Cjuiet  wisdom, 
that  have  been  so  prominent  in  his  char- 


acter from  boyhood.  His  sister.  Susa 
Young  Gates,  describes  him  as  "a 
noble  representative  of  his  father's 
family.  His  gentle  wisdom,  his  merry 
heart,  and  his  integrity  and  truth  are 
known  to  all  the  Saints.  No  matter 
what  may  be  his  trouble,  or  troubles, 
he  does  not  impose  them  upon  his 
friends.  He  has  naught  but  contempt 
for  all  forms  of  hypocrisy  or  deceit. 
His  own  life  and  soul  is  a  clear  open 
book,  and  he  would  not  gain  the  whole 
world  were  it  to  be  secured  through 
policy  or  subterfuge.  He  can  keep 
still,  but  must  not  deceive."  (See  also 
"Southern  Star,  Vol.  2,  p.  409;  "Juve- 
nile Instructor,"  Vol.  35,  p.  257.) 

CARRINGTON,  Albert,  a  member 
of  the  Council  of  Twelve  Apostles  from 
1870  to  1885,  was  born  Jan.  8,  1813,  in 
P-oyalton,  Windsor  county.  Vermont. 
He  graduated  at  Dartmouth  College  in 
the  class  of  1833,  and  for  two  or  three 


years  subsequently  taught  school  anci 
studied  law  in  Pennsylvania.  From 
that  State  he  removed  to  Wisconsin, 
where  he  engaged  in  lead  mining  until 
1844.  In  July,  1841.  he  joined  the  Church 
of  Jesus  Christ  of  Latter-day  Saints, 
in  Wiota,  Wis.,  being  baptized  by  Wm. 
O.  Clark,  and  on  the  abandonment  ot 
his  business  in  1844  gathered  to  Nau- 
voo.  This  was  at  the  very  crisis  of  the 
troubles  then  occurring  there,  and  just 
previous  to  the  martyrdom  of  the 
Prophet.  He  was  with  the  Saints  in 
their  exodus,  crossing  the  Mississippi 
river  with  his  family,  Feb.  9,  1846,  thut. 
being  one  of  the  first   to  start   for  the 


BIOGRAPHICAL    ENCYCLOPEDIA. 


127 


Rocky  Mountains.  From  the  camp 
on  Sugar  creek  he  went  to  Council 
Bluffs  and  was  the  following-  year  a 
member  of  the  Pioneers,  who  went  to 
Great  Salt  Lake  valley.  At  the  organ- 
ization of  the  Wards  of  Salt  Lake  City, 
in  February,  1849,  Elder  Carington  was 
chosen  as  second  counselor  to  Bishop 
Heywood  of  Ward  No.  17,  which  posi- 
tion he  held  for  about  six  years.  When 
the  provisional  State  of  Deseret  was 
organized,  he  was  elected  assessor  and 
collector.  He  also  acted  as  the  first 
clerk  of  the  High  Council  in  the  Salt 
Lake  Stake  of  Zion.  He  served  as  a 
member  of  Capt.  Stansbury's  party 
which  surveyed  Great  Salt  Lake,  and 
was  editor  of  the  "Deseret  News"  froni 
1854  to  1859  and  from  1863  to  1867.  Af. 
ter  the  organization  of  Utah  Ter- 
ritory he  was  repeatedly  elected 
a  member  of  the  legislative  coun 
cil  until  1868,  when  he  was  sent 
to  England  to  preside  over  the  Eu- 
ropean Mission.  After  his  returii 
to  Utah  in  1870  he  was  (July  3,  1S70; 
ordained  one  of  the  Twelve  Apostles, 
to  fill  the  vacancy  caused  by  the  death 
of  Ezra  T.  Benson.  Later  he  presided 
three  times  over  the  European  Mission, 
namely  1871-73,  1875-77  and  1880-82. 
From  April,  1873,  until  Pres.  Young's 
death  he  acted  as  assistant  counselor 
to  the  President  of  the  Church,  and 
for  more  than  twenty  years  he  was 
Pres.  Brigham  Young's  secretary,  and 
having  been  appointed  one  of  the  ad- 
ministrators of  Pres.  Young's  estate, 
he  labored  in  that  capacity,  after  the 
President's  death,  until  all  the  business 
connected  with  the  estate  was  settled 
and  the  many  difficulties  adjusted.  For 
refusing  to  comply  with  Judge  Bore- 
man's  unjust  demands,  he  was  im- 
prisoned in  the  Utah  Penitentiary  from 
the  4th  to  the  28th  of  August,  1879,  to- 
gether with  Geo.  Q.  Cannon  and  Brig- 
ham  Young,  jun.  Some  years  before 
his  death  he  fell  into  transgression, 
which,  when  it  came  to  light,  resulted 
in  his  excommunication  from  the 
Church  November  7,  1885.  This  action 
was  taken  by  the  quorum  of  the  Apos- 
tles, after  a  thorough  examination  of 
his  case.  Albert  Carrington  died  in 
Salt  Lalie  City,  Utah,  Sept.  19,  1889. 
Some  time  previous  to  his  demise  he 
was  permitted  to  renew  his  covenant 
bv  baptism;  and  thus  he  died  as  a 
member  of  the  Church.  (See  also  "His- 
torical Record,"  Vol.  7,  p.  243.) 


THATCHER,  Moses,  a  member  of 
the  Council  of  Twelve  Apostles  from 
1879  to  1896,  is  the  sixth  of  the  eight 
sons  of  Hezekiah  Thatcher  and  Alley 
Kitchen  and  was  born  in  Sangamon 
county,  111.,  Feb.  2.  1842.  Pending  the 
final  expulsion  of  the  Saints  from  Nau- 
voo,  and  while  his  father  was  constant- 
ly engaged  in  defending  his  leading 
brethren  from  the  encroachments  of 
persecuting  and  despoiling  bands  of 
unscrupulous  men,  the  earliest  refiec- 
tions  of  the  boy  were  rudely  awakened 
by  mobs  repeatedly  threatening  to  burn 
the  house  from  over  the  head  of 
his  defenseless  mother,  who,  with  hei- 
children,  was  kept  in  constant  dread, 
during  those  troublous  times  when 
many  fled  by  the  light  of  their  burn- 
ing dwellings.  But  relief  was  found, 
even  at  the  tender  age  of  foui 
years,  in  contemplating  the  good- 
ness of  God,  as  in  contrast  with 
the  wickedness  of  man.  Thus,  early 
religious  impressions  were  made  in  the 
heart  of  the  child,  who  from  a  dis- 
tance watched  the  sunlight  play  on  the 
spire  of  the  Nauvoo  Temple  and 
thought  the  brightness  emanated  from 
God's  holy  angels.  His  memory  faint- 
ly grasps  the  misery,  sickness  ana 
death  that  hung  like  a  cloud  over  tht 
wandering  camps  of  an  expelled  people. 
But  the  hot  sands  that  blistered  his 
feet  when  walking  the  sun-scorchea 
plains,  while  lolling  cattle  hauled  their 
heavy  loads  towards  the  setting  sun, 
as  they  wearily  followed  the  trail  of  the 
pioneers,  are  still  remembered.  Thc 
snows  and  frosts  of  the  winter  of  1847- 
48  and  the  hunger  that  knawed  for  a. 
whole  year  as  he  herded  sheep  and 
digged  roots,  are  not  forgotten;  nor  are 
other  early  valley  scenes,  wherein  In- 
dians caught  the  bleating  lambs  of  his 
flock  with  their  rawhide  ropes  and  en 
forced  an  exchange  of  their  cricket-pies 
for  the  boy's  corn-cakes.  The  first 
feast  held  in  the  "Old  Fort"  was  not 
only  deeply  impressed  upon  his  mind 
by  the  thought  that  all,  for  at  least  one 
meal,  would  have  enough  to  eat,  but 
vividly  so  by  the  death  of  a  playmate 
who  was  crushed  that  day  by  a  log 
rolling  down  the  sheds  of  a  saw  pit.  Dur- 
ing that  season,  "roasting-ears"  wep; 
by  the  boys  esteemed  a  luxury,  whose 
quantity  seemed  never  to  equal  th-; 
quality.  With  other  members  of  his 
father's  family,  Moses  was  taken  to 
California  in  the  spring  of  1849,  reach- 


128 


LATTER-DAY    SAINT 


ing  what  is  now  Sacramento  city  in 
June  of  that  year.  It  was  then  only  a 
village  of  rude  huts  and  tents.  Going 
to  the  mining  regions  near  Auburn,  he 
became  quite  a  capitalist,  frequently 
receiving  from  travelers  from  one  to 
five  dollars  for  riding  a  horse  to  wa- 
ter. His  father  kept  an  eating  house 
on  the  Auburn  road,  and  silver  dollars 
sewn  up  in  gunny  sacks  and  thrust  un- 
der beds,  unprotected  from  thieves, sav«4 
by  the  walls  of  a  canvas  house,  were 
common  sights  to  him  in  those  times, 
when  "Judge  Lynch"  tried,  convicted 
and  hanged  the  robber,  all  in  one  day. 
No  safes,  vaults  and  iron  boxes  wert 
needed  when  pork  and  beans  wert 
Worth  a  dollar  a  pound  and  the  for- 
feiture of  life  was  the  price  for  steal- 


ing. Having  followed  close  on  the 
heels  of  the  pioneers,  he  attended  his 
first  school  when  eleven  years  of  age. 
Being  large  for  his  years  and  awk- 
ward, his  bashfulness  and  the  knowl- 
edge that  boys  much  younger  than  he 
were  educationally  far  in  advance  of 
him,  became  sources  of  daily  annoy- 
ance and  humiliation,  but  did  not  dis- 
courage him.  Seeking  learning  ear- 
nestly he  made  rapid  advancement  and 
quickly  laid  a  foundation  for  a  good 
common  school  education.  When  not  at 
school  his  experience  as  a  practical 
miner  consisted  chiefly  in  extracting 
moss  and  gold  from  the  crevices  of 
rocks  along  the  banks  of  the  American 
river,   into   which   the  floods  had   made 


deposits.  His  implements  consisted  of 
a  butcher-knife  and  a  milk  pan.  With 
the  former  he  extracted  the  moss-bound 
gold  and  with  the  latter  he  washed 
away  foreign  substances,while  the  cows 
in  his  charge  grazed  near  by.  The  re- 
ward frequently  amounted,  to  several 
dollars  per  day.  During  evenings  he 
had  often  listened  with  rapt  attention 
to  religious  discussions  between  travel- 
ing ministers  of  various  sects  and  his 
mother.  His  father  being  a  man  of 
few  words,  seldom  engaged  in  extended 
conversations  on  religious  or  other  sub- 
jects; but  the  boy  used  to  marvel  at 
the  ease  with  which  his  mother  con- 
fused and  silenced  professed  teachers, 
who  frequently  demonstrated  their  ut- 
ter ignorance  of  the  holy  Scriptures, 
with  which  his  mother  was  so  familiar. 
The  Elders  on  their  way  to  missions 
often  called  upon  and  received  aid  fron» 
the  father  of  Moses,  who,  when  the* 
held  meetings,  attended  with  delight; 
for  the  principles  of  the  gospel  soundea 
like  sweet  music  to  him,  and  often, 
when  they  portrayed  the  truth  by  the 
power  of  God,  the  spirit  bore  testimony, 
and  he  felt  that  he  had  known  that 
before.  Thus,  the  divine  gospel  mes- 
sage falling  on  his  ears  sunk  into  his 
heart,  not  as  something  new,  but  as 
something  beautiful,  priceless,  eternal 
and  known  before.  When,  therefore, 
Elders  Henry  G.  Boyle,  David  M.  Stew- 
art and  William  H.  Shearman  camt 
with  authority  to  baptize  as  well  as 
preach,  he  embraced  the  truth,  being 
baptized  In  the  Rio  Puta.  Yolo  county, 
Cal..  Dec.  29,  1856,  by  Elder  Boyle,  whi. 
also  confirmed  him  the  evening  of  tht- 
same  day,  and  on  March  23rd  following 
ordained  him  an  Elder.  One  month 
later  he  was  called  to  fill  a  mission  and 
became  the  companion  of  Elder  Boyle. 
He  was  then  fifteen  years  of  age — a 
beardless  boy.  To  undertake  to  preach 
to  many  who  knew'  him  as  a  rider  of 
wild  horses  and  the  lassooer  of  wilder 
calves,  was  a  task  for  which  he  felt 
himself  wholly  unqualified, and  the  very 
thought  of  attempting  it  made  him  III 
In  a  small  meeting  of  Saints  he  had 
tried,  by  request,  to  express  gratltud»» 
for  the  restoration  of  the  gospel;  and 
while  he  felt  that  If  he  did  not  praise 
God,  the  very  stones  must,  yet  when 
he  attempted  to  speak,  not  a  word  could 
he  utter.  His  two  elder  brothers  hav- 
ing been  assigrned  to  missions  In  an 
other  part  of  the  State,  and  his  father. 


BIOGRAPHICAL   ENCYCLOPEDIA, 


129 


mother  and  other  brothers  and  sisters 
having  arranged  to  gather  to  Zion,  his 
feelings  were  indescribable.  A  sense 
of  loneliness  and  of  dread  seemed  to 
unnerve  and  utterly  prostrate  him.  It 
was  to  the  boy  an  hour  of  supreme- 
trial,  one  in  which  it  seemed  to  hin^ 
his  heart  would  fail,  and  yet,  in  that 
hour  of  weakness,  he  was  taught  reli- 
ance on  the  Lord,  who  was  able  to 
make  the  weak  strong  for  His  glory 
and  for  the  salvation  of  men.  Moses 
had  plead  with  Elder  Boyle  not  to  call 
him  to  preach  or  pray  in  public,  say- 
ing that  if  he  could  be  excused  from 
that,  he  would  be  Brother  Boyle's  obe- 
dient and  willing  servant,  blacking  his 
boots,  waiting  on  him,  caring  for  his 
horse  and  in  every  possible  manner  ren- 
dering himself  useful  to  his  friend.  For 
several  weeks  his  appeals  were  regard- 
ed mercifully,  when,  having  attended 
a  Methodist  meeting,  the  Saints  and 
especially  the  characters  of  the 
Prophets,  Joseph  Smith  and  Brigham 
Young,  were  cruelly  and  unmercifully 
vilified  by  the  minister,  one  Reverend 
Blythe.  Being  the  only  one  of  the  faith 
present,  Moses  was  profoundly  moved 
and  in  humble,  earnest  inward  prayer 
besought  the  Lord  to  manifest  to  him 
his  duty  and  give  him  strength  to  per- 
form it.  In  answer  he  was  impressed 
to  reply.  Securing  permission  to  speak, 
the  spirit  of  God  came  upon  hirri 
powerfully,  and,  without  the  least  hesi- 
tation or  manifestation  of  timidity,  he 
disproved  many  of  the  assertions  of  the 
"reverend"  vilifier  and  confounded  and 
put  him  to  shame;  so  much  so,  that 
swelling  with  wrath  and  high  sound- 
ing words,  Blythe  exclaimed,  with  a 
sneer,  that  he  was  grieved  and  aston- 
ished that  one  so  young  and  apparent- 
ly good,  should  admit  himself  to  be  a 
"Mormon."  Whereupon  Moses  replied: 
"I  am  not  ashamed  of  the  gospel  of 
Christ,  for  it  is  the  power  of  God  unto 
salvation  to  all  who  believe."  And 
further  said  he,  "Christ  declared  that 
those  who  believed  on  Him  should  do 
the  works  He  did  and  greater  works, 
because  He  went  to  the  Father.  Now 
our  Reverend  friend  has  declared  that 
such  works  are  done  away,  being  no 
longer  necessary,  and  that  all  who 
claim  to  do  them  or  any  part  of  theni 
are  impostors;  does  it  not  follow, there- 
fore, that  he  is  no  believer  in  Christ. 
Judge   ye     between   the   Lord   and   this> 

Vol.  1,  No.  9. 


Reverend  gentleman  claiming  In  His 
name  to  be  a  teacher.  The  sheep  know- 
ing the  voice  of  their  shepherd  will  not 
follow  strangers  seeking  to  lead  theiji 
astray."  Thus  did  the  Almighty  with 
the  weak  confound  the  mighty,  vindi- 
cate truth  and  unmistakably  demon- 
strate that,  however  inadequate  the  in- 
strument, He  was  able  to  make  truth 
triumph  over  error.  Thereafter  Moses 
made  the  Lord  the  "rock  of  his  refuge," 
and,  as  the  boy-missionary,  preached 
as  earnestly,  as  fearlessly  and  as  ef- 
fectively as  at  any  time  since.  Wrapt 
in  the  spirit  he  sometimes  spoke  foi 
an  hour,  often  correctly  quoting  Scrip- 
ture he  had  never  read,  the  words  and 
sentences,  as  he  declared,  appearing 
before  his  sniritual  eyes,  were  read,  as 
from  an  open  book.  The  first  mission 
was  terminated  by  the  "call  home" 
pending  the  approach  to  Utah  of  the 
U.  S.  army.  John  B.,  Aaron  D.  and 
Moses  Thatcher,  using  means  left  by 
their  father,  fitted  up  teams  and 
wagons,  provided  themselves  with  arms 
and  ammunition,  and  started  from  Yolo- 
county  Oct.  14,  1857,  for  Salt  Lake  City, 
via  the  coast  route  to  San  Bernardino, 
thence  across  the  deserts;  the  season, 
being  too  far  advanced  to  undertake 
the  journey  via  the  Carson  and  Hum- 
boldt routes.  The  party  reached  Salt 
Lake  City,  Jan.  1,  1858.  Joseph  W. 
Thatcher,  the  eldest  orother  of  Moses, 
had  been  sent  on  a  mission  to  aid  in 
establishing  a  settlement  on  Salmon 
river.  John  B.,  Aaron  D.  and  Geo.  W. 
Thatcher  joined  the  Utah  militia  'and 
served  in  Echo  and  other  parts  of  th« 
Territory,  while  Moses,  not  yet  sixteeu 
years  of  age,  went  to  school,  and,  aftei 
the  establishment  of  Camp  Floyd,  be- 
came a  member  of  the  special  police 
force  of  Salt  Lake  City  and  did  ser 
vice  as  night  street  guard.  He  went 
south  in  the  move  as  far  as  Payson, 
accompanied  his  father  and  others  to 
Cache  valley  in  the  winter  of  1860  and 
assisted  in  locating  canal  and  mill  sites 
and  labored  during  the  spring  and  sum- 
mer of  that  year  in  getting  out  timber 
for  the  Union  Mills.  During  the  win- 
ter of  1860-61  he  attended  the  University 
of  Deseret,  Prof.  Orson  Pratt,  jun. 
and  James  Cobb,  being  his  instructors. 
In  April,  1861,  he  was  married  to  Miss 
Lettie  Farr  by  her  uncle  Lorin  Fan 
and  was  sealed  to  her  by  Pres.  Brig- 
ham  Young,  in  the  autumn  of  the  same 

March   2,    1901. 


130 


L.ATTER-DAY    SAINT 


year.        He    had    been    previously      or- 
dained  a   Seventy     by     Pres.   Brigham 
Young   and    was   attached    to   the    Sec- 
ond quorum.      He  located  in  Cache  val- 
ley   shortly    after    his    marriage,    built 
the  first  frame  house  in  Logan  and  was 
given    a      mission      by      Bishop     Peter 
Maughan  to  herd  cattle  on  the  Prom 
ontory   during   the     winter     of   1861-62. 
He  was  one  of  the  "minute  men"  under 
Captain  Thos.  E.  Ricks,  and  for  several 
years  held  himself  ready  day  and  night 
to    protect    the    lives    and    property    oi 
citizens.      In  the  discharge  of  that  duty 
he  frequently  guarded  horses  all  night, 
and  assisted  in  apprehending  some  In 
dians  who  had  killed  several  brethrei. 
at  Smithfield.       When  the  county  was 
organized  into  Cache  Military  District 
he  was  elected  captain  of  fifty  cavalry 
men,    was   promoted   subsequently   and 
served   on    the    staff   of     Col.    Thos.    E. 
Ricks,  and  later  on  that  of  Gen.  Hydt. 
He   became     second     salesman   in   the 
firm  of  N.   S.  Ransohoff  &  Co.,  at  Sail 
Lake  City.  Having  made  himself  famil- 
iar with  the  details  of  a  general  mer- 
cantile business,   he  returned  to  Logan 
and  engaged  in  that  line  with  his  fa- 
ther.       During    the      winter    of    1865-66 
Bishop   Peter   Maughan   called   him   on 
a  mission  to  Salt  Lake  City  to  acquire 
the     art     of     telegraphy;      but     in   the 
spring  of  the  latter  year  Pres.   Young 
notified  him  of  his  wish,  that  he  should 
fill  a  mission  to  Europe.      For  that  mis- 
sion Pres.  Young  personally  blessed  and 
set  him  apart.       He  left  home  in  April, 
1866,   and   returned   August,    1868.     Dur- 
ing his  absence  on  that  mission  he  pre- 
sided   first    over   the   Cheltenham,    then 
over  the  Birmingham  conference.     Ow- 
ing to  exposure     his     health     was  con- 
siderably  impaired;    but  his   work  was 
successful.       On     his    return   he   again 
entered  the  mercantile  field,  his  father 
and  he  forming  the  firm  of  "Thatcher 
&    Son."       Their     business,     with     the 
counsel  of  Apostle  Ezra  T.  Benson  and 
Bishop     Maughan,       was     consolidated 
with  that  of  Wm.  H.  Shearman,  and  the 
ijOgan  Co-operative  Institution  was  in- 
corporated,    he     becoming    its    general 
manager.      Later  the  Logan  Institution 
became   a   branch   of   the   parent   Z.    C. 
M.  I.  of  Salt  Lake  City,  and  he  was  its 
superintendent  until  1879.    Upon  the  or- 
ganization of  the  Utah  Northern  Rail- 
road Company,  in  August,  1870,  he  was 
chosen   a  director     and     secretary  and 
subseriuently  became  superintendent  a] 


well.       Immediately  on  his  return  from 
his  British  mission  he  was  elected  su 
perintendent  of  the  Cache  Valley  Sun- 
day Schools,  continuing  in  that  calling 
until  April,  1877.     He  served  Cache  and 
Rich   counties   ten   years   in   the   Terri- 
torial   legislative    council    and    was    an 
active   member     of     the   Constitutional 
convention  of  1872,  and  became  one  of 
the  delegates  authorized  to  present  the 
State   Constitution    to   Congress,    pray- 
ing that  honorable  body  to  pass  an  en- 
abling  act   admitting   the   Territory   of 
Utah  into  the  Union  as  a  State.     When 
Pres.  Young  organized  the  Cache  Val- 
ley   Stake    of    Zion,    May    21,    1877,      he 
nominated    Elder      Thatcher     for      tht; 
presidency.        Being   unanimously    sus- 
tained, Pres.  Young  set  him  apart  and 
blessed  him  for  that  calling  and  office. 
He  held  that  position  until  April,  1879, 
when  he  was  called  to  fill  the  vacancy 
in  the  Quorum  of  Twelve  Apostles,  oc- 
casioned by   the  death   of  Elder  Orson 
Hyde.       He  was  ordained  to  the  Apos- 
tleship   April    9,   1879,     by     Pres.     John 
Taylor.  During  his  business  experience 
he   organized   the   Cache   Valley    Board 
of  Trade  and  successfully  protected  the 
interests  of  the  people,  directed  the  ex 
tension  of  the  Utah  and  Northern  Rail- 
way, northward  from  Franklin,  Idaho, 
under  its  just  and  equitable  co-opera- 
tive provisions  and  was  largely  instru- 
mental in  forming  Zion's  Central  Board 
of  Trade,   of  which  Elder  John   Taylor 
was  president.      The  latter  was  organ 
ized  with  the  view  of  harmonizing  the 
business   interests  of  the  Territory, ad- 
vancing the  manufacturing,  mercantile 
and  agrcultural  pursuits  of  the  citizens 
and  enhancing  their  general  prosperity 
b^'  placing  as  far  as  possible,   without 
the  intervention  of  "middle  men,"    the 
products   of   the   country   in   the  hands 
of  consumers,     and     by     securing     for 
home  consumption   imported  goods  di- 
rect  trom    the   manufacturers.       Zion's 
Central   Board   of  Trade   was   designed 
to   be    the   hub   and    the    Stake    Boards 
the  spokes    of    a    wheel,     that    in  the 
future  must  become  a  positive  protec- 
tive necessity.     During    the  latter    part 
of    1878    and      the     beginning     of     1879 
Pres.  John  Taylor  called  and  authorized 
Moses    Thatcher      to      organize      Staki; 
Boards  of  Trade  in  the  southern  coun- 
ties of  the  Territory  and  to  explain  to 
the    officers    and    members    thereof    the 
objects   had   in   view.       The   work   wa;s 
promptly  and  thoroughly  accomplished. 


BIOORAPHICAL    ENCYCLOPEDIA. 


131 


Letters  having  been  received  by  Prea. 
Taylor    from    a    Dr.    Rhodacanaty,    re- 
siding in  the  City  of  Mexico,  enquiring 
about  the  principles  of  the  gospel.some 
of   the   Church   publications   were    sent 
him    as   early   as    the    autumn    of   1878, 
and  through  these  some  fifteen  or  twen- 
ty Mexican  citizens  had  come  to  believe 
the  truths  of  the  gospel,  as  far  as  they 
were  informed,   respecting  them.    Con 
sidering   this   matter     the     Council    of 
Apostles  called  Elder  Thatcher  to  pro- 
ceed to   Mexico   and   open   the   door   of 
salvation  to  that  nation.       In  company 
with    Elder   James     Z.     Stewart,     who 
joined   him  at  Chicago,   and   Milton  G. 
Trejo,  who  joined  him  at  New  Orleans, 
he    proceeded    to    the    national    capital, 
leaving  Utah  Oct.  26,  1879,  and,  taking 
steamer   at   New    Orleans,    crossed    the 
Gulf  of  Mexico  and  reached  Vera  Cru2< 
(City  of  the  True  Cross)  Nov.  14th    oi: 
the  same  year.      The  party  reached  the 
City  of  Mexico  on  the  evening  of  Sat- 
urday,   Nov.    16tTi,      and,    being    entire 
strangers,  put  up  at  the  principal  hotel, 
"The   Iturbide."       They   spent  the   fol- 
lowing  Sunday    in    viewing   the   cathe- 
dral, rebuilt  by  Cortez  on  the  ruins  ol 
the  great  Aztec  temple,  and  afterwards 
remodeled  and  finished  A.  D.  1631.  They 
also  spent  a  few  hours  at  the  "Zocolo," 
a  beautiful  public  garden  fronting  the 
cathedral,     and     enjoyed       the     sweet 
strains   of   an   excellent   military   brass 
band.       The  day  was  as  pleasant  and 
mild  as  any  May   day  in  Utah.     Dur- 
ing the  afternoon  Dr.  Platino  C.  Rhoda- 
canaty, a  Greek  on  the  side  of  his  fa- 
ther, but  of  Mexican  descent  from  his 
mother,  called  and  greeted  them  warm- 
ly.      He   was    found    to   be    a   cultured 
and  well  educated  gentleman.     During 
the  past  few  months  he  had  published 
a    monthly    periodical    called    "Voz    del 
Desierto,"   advocating  the  principles  of 
the  gospel.      On  the  evening  of  Tuesday 
following,  Elder  Thatcher,  on  the  invi- 
tation of  Mrs.   Foster,  attended  Minis- 
ter Foster's  reception,  in  company  with 
Mr.    Amos   W.    Butler,     a   young   orni- 
thologist from  Evansville,  Indiana,  and 
met  there  Minister  Foster,  Major  Clark, 
editor  of  the  "Two  Republics,"  Messrs. 
Holden    and    McClay    from    New   York, 
the  secretary  of  the  Minister  from  Get 
many,   and  a  number  of  others— ladies 
and  gentlemen.      On  invitation  of  Mrs. 
Foster    he    visited,    the    next    day,    the 
private  department  of  the  national  mu- 
seum,   and    in    company      with    herself 


and  guests  examined  with  much  inter- 
est a  fine  twenty-fold  maguey  map,  the- 
most  valuable  of  any  of  the  kind  ex- 
tant. It  exhibits  the  migrations  of 
the  Aztecs  from  the  regions  of  tht 
north  to  Mexico.  Some  of  its  hiero- 
glyphic writings  resemble  those  found 
in  the  Pearl  of  Great  Price.  Othei 
maps  showing  the  City  of  Mexico  be 
fore  the  conquest  A.  D.  1520,  and  pic- 
tures exhibiting  the  landing  of  tht- 
Spaniards  at  Vera  Cruz  in  1519.  as  ex- 
ecuted by  native  artists  at  the  time, 
were  found  of  historical  interest, as  they 
had  been  spread  before  Montezum*L 
previous  to  the  fall  of  his  empire.  In 
the  art  gallery  a  scene  of  the  valley  of 
Mexico,  with  Popocatepetl  in  the  dis- 
tance, attracted  attention  as  a  gem  of 
art,  costing  the  government  of  Mex- 
ico two  thousand  dollars.  Elders 
Stewart  and  Trejo  having  visited  and 
preached  to  a  number  of  people,  some 
believed.  In  the  baths  of  the  garden 
of  Olives,  located  near  the  fatal  cause- 
way "Noche  Treste"  (Melanchol> 
night),  so  called  because  of  the  dis- 
aster to  Cortez  and  his  army  on  Jul> 
1,  1520,  Elder  Thatcher  baptized  Platino 
C.  Rhodacanaty  and  Silviano  Artiago, 
the  latter  a  pure  Aztec  and,  therefore, 
a  descendant  of  Joseph.  Six  other  male 
members  were  added  to  the  Church  by 
baptism  two  days  later.  At  the  meet- 
ing for  confirmation,  the  objects  of  the 
Mexican  mission  were  fully  explained 
by  him.  At  that  meeting  Elder  Thatch 
er  earnestly  invoked  blessings  upon 
Porferio  Diaz,  President  of  the  Mex- 
ican Republic,  upon  all  constituting  thv 
legislative  and  judicial  and  adminis- 
trative departments  of  the  government 
and  upon  all  the  inhabitants  of  tht 
land,  to  the  end  that  the  honest  ana 
good  throughout  Mexico,  Central  and 
South  America,  might  hear  the  gospei 
of  Christ  and  receive  the  tidings  ot 
great  joy.  Three  Elders  were  ordained 
and  a  branch  organized  at  that  meet- 
ing. Elder  Rhodacanaty  was  author- 
ized to  preside  over  it.  By  the  clost 
of  the  year  sixteen  persons  had  been 
baptized,  the  Voice  of  Warning  haa 
been  partially  translated  into  the  Span- 
ish language,  and  several  articles  writ- 
ten and  published  in  the  newspapers  of 
the  capital,  defending  the  faith  and 
practices  of  the  Saints.  During  Jan 
uary  the  Spanish  translation  of  the 
"Voice  of  Warning"  was  completed  and 
the  manuscripts  placed  in  the  hands  of 


132 


LATTER-DAY  SAINT 


the  printer.  On  the  3rd  of  tliut  month, 
while  enjoying  the  grateful  shades  of 
the  cypress  groves  of  Chapultepec,  El- 
der Thatcher  wrote  his  "Tribute  to  tht- 
Memory  of  Montezuma."  as  published 
in  Vol.  I,  p.  145,  of  the  "Contributor," 
and  which  was  subsequently  dedicated 
to  his  friend,  the  honorable  and  learned 
Ygnacio  M.  Altamirano  of  pure  Azteo 
blood,  and  then  one  of  the  judges  ot 
the  supreme  court  of  the  Republic,  an 
author  of  eminence,  one  of  the  great- 
est orators  of  the  age,  and  in  many 
respects  a  remarkable  man.  The  New 
York  "Sun"  having  published  an  article 
respecting  Elder  Thatcher's  mission  to 
Mexico,  numerous  papers  of  the  capital 
made  extracts  therefrom  and  comments 
thereon,  mostly  favorable.  But  tha 
"Two  Republics"  under  the  headings, 
"Yankee  Diplomacy,"  "Filibusterism," 
and  "The  Spread  of  Mormorusm,"  at- 
tacked violently  the  "Mormon"  people 
generally.  Through  "El  Tribuna"  El- 
der Thatcher  replied  refuting  the  slan- 
derous stricture  of  the  "Two  Repub- 
lics." Thereafter  that  paper  handled 
the  "Mormon"  question  more  carefully. 
In  the  Sunday  issue  of  Jan.  11th  "El 
Monitor  Republican,"  one  of  the  most 
powerful  and  influential  journals  pub- 
lished in  Mexico,  appeared  a  ridiculous- 
ly, scurrilous  editorial  article  about  the 
Saints.  It  greatly  incensed  Elder  Tre- 
jo,  who  had  imagined  that  those  speak- 
ing his  native  tongue  would  never  stoop 
to  vilify  the  "Mormons,"  as  others  had 
done  in  the  United  States  and  Europe. 
His  hopeful  dream  having  been  dis- 
pelled, he  was  exceedingly  anxious  to 
hunt  up  and  punish  the  "Juvenal"  edi- 
torial author  of  the  defamatory  article, 
but  was  restrained  by  counsel  given  in 
the  interest  of  patience  and  modera 
tion.  The  publication  led  William 
Pritchard,  an  intelligent  and  educated 
English  gentleman,  a  newspaper  cor- 
respondent and  magazine  author  of 
merit,  to  seek  the  acquaintance  of  the 
missionaries  from  Utah.  And  through 
his  aid.  Elders  Thatcher  and  Trejo  be- 
came acquainted  with  the  wealthy  pro- 
prietor of  "1  Monitor  Republicano," 
Signor  Vicente  Garcia  Torres,  who 
wrote  for  his  paper  over  the  nom  de 
plume  "Fancrido,"  while  his  son  used 
that  of  "Alcestes,"  and  "Juvenal," 
proved  to  be  one  Senor  Eurigre  Cha- 
vara,  who,  after  a  long  interview  with 
the  Elders,  published  in  the  following 
Sunday's  issue  an  article  retracting    the 


scurrilous  assertions  of  the  former  one 
and  giving  an  excellent  account  of  the 
sobriety,  honesty,  industry  and  morali- 
ty of  the  "Mormons"  generally;  and 
Elder  Trejo  admitted  that  the  result 
would  be  more  favorable  to  the  cause 
than  any  physical  chastisement  given 
by  him  to  the  writer  could  possibly 
have  produced.  Through  favorable 
and  unfavorable  newspaper  comments 
and  strictures,  the  replies  and  retrac- 
tions, the  interests  of  the  "Mormon" 
mission  were  greatly  forwarded,  and 
the  Elders  made  numerous  acquaint- 
ances and  friends  of  eminent  men, 
through  whom  they  extended  their  in 
fluence  to  government  officials.  Gen- 
eral Alan  G.  Greenwood  of  Roanoke, 
Virginia,  w'ho  fought  in  the  war  of  the 
rebellion  on  the  side  of  the  South,  se- 
cured interviews  for  Elder  Thatcher 
with  Senor  Sarate,  minister  of  foreign 
affairs,  M.  Fernandez  Leal,  minister  ol 
Fomento  (public  works  and  of  coloniza- 
tion), and  Senor  Don  Carlos  Pacheco, 
minister  of  war.  They  found  Minister 
Sarate,  a  gentleman  of  about  forty 
years  of  age,  affable,  polite  and  ex- 
ceedingly graceful,  a  fine  conversation- 
alist, speaking  with  a  slight  French  in- 
tonation, well  informed  on  general 
topics  as  upon  national  governmental 
affairs.  In  sympathy  with  the  ex- 
pressed views  of  Elder  Thatcher,  re- 
specting the  Mexicans  and  their  an- 
cestors, he  spoke  feelingly  about  the 
high  degree  of  civilization  among  the 
Indians  of  Mexico  previous  to  the  Span- 
ish conquest.  In  Minister  Leal  the 
Elders  met  a  man  of  some  fifty  years, 
of  commanding  presence,  strong  char- 
acter, marked  features  with  large  Ro- 
man nose,  grey  eyes  and  bald  head, 
manners  cordial,  conversation  frank. 
He  had  visited  Utah  and  greatly  ad- 
mired the  pluck  of  her  enterprising  and 
prosperous  communities,  regarded  the 
"Mormons"  as  the  most  successful  co- 
lonizers in  the  world;  and  as  such 
said  that  Mexico  would  gladly  welcome 
any  of  them  choosing  to  make  homes 
in  the  Republic.  Minister  Don  Carlos 
Pacheco,  the  hero  of  Pueblo,  lost  a  leg 
and  arm  while  assaulting  that  city, 
during  the  French  Intervention.  He 
is  a  man  of  indomitable  courage,  hard 
to  read,  nervous  temperament  and  ab- 
rupt manners,  his  half  closed  eyes  seem 
to  see  everything.  Direct  and  pointed 
himself,  he  requires  only  the  "key 
words,"  brooking  no    detailed  explana- 


BIOGRAPHICAL    ENCYCLOPEDIA. 


133 


tions;  familiar  with  the  history  of  oth- 
ers, he  knows  the  needs  of  his  own 
country.  War  has  made  of  him  a 
physical  wreck,  yet  he  is  a  power  in 
the  land,  and  next  to  Diaz  is  the  lead- 
ing government  official.  He  was  frank 
and  cordial  to  Elder  Thatcher,  to  whom 
he  granted  the  interview,  while  scoresi 
of  army  officers  were  waiting,  and  con- 
ferred upon  him  distinguished  honor  by 
freely  and  voluntarily  tendering  him  let- 
ters of  introduction  and  recommenda- 
tion to  the  Executives  of  the  various 
States  of  the  Union,  in  the  event  of  his 
desire  to  visit  them.  Later  Elder 
Thatcher  had  an  extended  interview 
with  Senor  Ignacio  Mariscal,  minister 
of  justice,  many  years  the  accredited 
representative  of  the  Mexican  govern- 
ment at  "Washington,  D.  C,  and  at  the 
Court  of  St.  James,  now  Mexican  min- 
ister of  foreign  affairs.  He  is  tht 
ablest  statesman  and  diplomat  of  the 
nation  without  doubt.  A  brainy  man 
of  brilliant  attainments  and  a  perfect 
gentleman,  the  master  of  several  lan- 
guages. He  is  familiar  with  the  his- 
tory of  the  Saints  from  the  beginning. 
The  organ  of  the  government  officially 
noticed  all  these  interviews.  Through 
Mr.  Pritchard  Elder  Thatcher  became 
acquainted  with  Emelio  Biebuyck,  a 
Belgian  gentleman  of  influence  in  Mex- 
ico and  familiar  with  Utah  affairs,hav- 
ing  been  thrice  in  the  Territory — the 
first  time  when  Col.  Steptoe  was  at  Salt 
Lake  City.  He  was  personally  ac- 
quainted with  Pres.  Young,  having  en- 
joyed several  pleasant  interviews  with 
him.  His  influence  (which  was  con- 
siderable) over  the  Mexican  press  was 
largely  due  to  the  connection  of  his 
father  with  the  Press  Association  of 
Europe.  He  was  a  warm  advocate  of 
"Mormon"  colonization  in  Mexico,  and 
having  a  colonization  contract  with  the 
Mexican  government,  conceding  fret 
public  lands  in  any  State  of  the  Union, 
eighty  dollars  subsidy  for  adults,  and 
forty  dollars  each  for  children,  twenty 
years'  exemption  from  military  duty 
and  from  taxation;  free  entry  from 
tariff  duty  on  teams,  wagons,  agricul- 
tural implements,  building  materials 
and  provisions,  pending  the  establish- 
ment of  the  colony  and  numerous  other 
subventive  privileges;  he  was  desirous 
to  endorse  the  contract  to  the  "Mor- 
mon" people  with  the  approval  of  the 
government  officials.      "With  the  'Mor- 


mons' in  Mexico,"  said  Mr.  Biebuyck, 
"will  come  stable  government  and  con- 
sequent peace  and  prosperity  and, 
therefore,  success  to  my  business,  and 
that  is  all  I  ask."  Having  thoroughly 
reflected  upon  and  prayed  about  this 
matter,  and  feeling  strongly  impressed 
that  the  success  of  the  mission  must 
ultimately  largely  depend  on  "Mormon" 
colonization  in  Mexico  and  the  careful, 
judicious  gathering  thereto  of  native 
Saints  for  care  and  instruction,  it  wa* 
finally  determined  that  Elder  Thatcher 
should  return  and,  meeting  Mr.  Bie- 
buyck on  a  given  date,  lay  the  whole 
matter,  with  all  its  bearings,  before 
Pres.  Taylor  and  the  Council  of  Apos- 
tles and  abide  their  decision.  Having 
arranged  payment  for  publishing  the 
Voice  of  Warning,  he  joined  with  El- 
ders Stewart  and  Trejo  in  dedicating 
the  land  of  Mexico  to  the  end  that  the 
gospel  might  be  spread  among  her  peo- 
ple. They  besought  the  Lord  to  rid 
the  nation  of  revolutionary  elements 
and  the  disposition  to  shed  blood,  to 
break  the  shackles  from  the  bodies  and 
minds  of  the  poor  Lamanites,  that  they 
might  be  free  in  the  law  of  Christ. 
And  that,  as  the  coming  of  the  Spanish 
conqueror  foreshadowed  their  bondage, 
so  might  the  gospel  forshadow  their 
deliverance;  that  as  the  first  overcame 
them  with  the  sword,  so  might  the 
proclamation  of  divine  truth  subdue 
and  soften  their  hearts.  To  this  end 
blessings  upon  the  state  and  govern- 
mental officials  and  people  were  be- 
sought, that  intrigues,  plottings  and  re- 
bellions might  cease,  and  peace  and 
prosperity  reign  instead  thereof.  This 
accomplished.  Elder  Thatcher,  receiv- 
ing many  expressions  of  friendship 
and  confidence,  leading  men  assuring 
him  that  "Mormon"  colonists  would  be 
welcome  in  the  Republic,  left  for  Utah 
Feb.  4,  1880,  leaving  Elder  Stewart  in 
charge  of  the  mission.  Reaching  Salt 
Lake  City  on  the  22nd  of  the  same 
month,  he  reported  to  Pres.  Taylor,  and 
having  on  the  same  day  fully  explained 
the  causes  leading  to  his  return,  hia 
action  was  endorsed  by  unanimous 
vote  of  the  Quorum  of  Apostles.  Ten 
days  later  Mr.  Biebuyck  arrived  and 
explained  in  detail  the  nature  and  ad- 
vantage of  his  valuable  concessions  as 
embodied  in  his  contract  with  the  Mex- 
ican government.  These  being  discussed 
and  carefully  considered  and  taken  un- 
der   advisement,      the      Council    finally 


134 


LATTER-DAY    SAINT 


reached  the  ronclusion  that  the  coloni- 
zation of  Latter-day  Saints  in  Mexico 
at  that  time,  even  under  the  generous 
concessions  of  the  contract  mentioned, 
would  be  premature.  Mr.  Biebuyck's 
offer  was  therefore  rejected.  He  was 
disappointed  and  a  few  days  later  de- 
parted for  San  Francisco,  thence  to 
Xew  York  and  Europe.  During  his 
stay  in  Salt  Lake  City,  he  was  a  part 
of  the  time  the  guest  of  Pres.  Taylor, 
who  was  much  pleased  with  his  frank 
manners,  unassuming  deportment  and 
general  understanding  of  men  and 
ihings.  During  the  summer  of  1?80 
Elder  Thatcher  visited  Chicago  and 
New  York  on  important  business  mat- 
ters involving  intf>rests  of  the  Church, 
of  the  people  of  Cache  valley  and  ot 
himself.  During  that  trip  he  went  to 
Virginia  and  visited  relatives  there. 
Returning  to  Utah  he  w-ent  in  companv 
with  Apostle  Charles  C.  Rich,  Wm.  B. 
Preston.  Lorin  Farr,  his  Brother  Jo- 
seph W.  Thatcher  and  others,  to  Salt 
River  valley,  in  Wyoming,  where  a  few 
families  of  the  Saints  had  settled.  The 
supervision  of  settlement  in  that  county 
having  by  vote  of  the  Apostles  been 
placed  in  the  care  of  Elders  Rich  and 
Thatcher,  the  object  of  their  trip  was 
to  organize  those  already  settled  in  thfa 
valley.  That  was  accomplished  and 
the  name  of  the  valley  was  changed  by- 
vote  from  Salt  River  to  Star  Valley.  It 
had  been  blessed  and  dedicated  to  the 
Lord  for  the  Saints  on  August  29,  187S, 
by  Apostle  Brigham  Young,  Mose?; 
Thatcher  and  William  B.  Preston,  El- 
der Young  offering  the  prayer.  It  ib 
one  of  the  linest  and  most  beautiful 
valleys  in  the  mountains,  and  is  now 
rapidly  filling  up  with  Saints.  Having 
assisted  in  the  organization  of  the  Quo- 
rum of  the  First  Presidency  of  the 
Church  in  October,  1880,  Elder 
Thatcher,  accompanied  by  Elder  Fera- 
morz  L.  Young,  who  had  been  called 
on  a  mision  to  Mexico,  again  left  Utah, 
Nov.  17th,  and  reached  the  Mexican 
capital  on  the  evening  of  Dec.  5,  1880. 
On  the  10th  of  the  same  nionth  he  pre- 
sented to  the  Mexican  Geographical 
Society,  for  its  library,  the  following 
Church  works  in  full  gilt  morocco: 
Book  of  Mormon,  Doctrine  and  Cove 
nants.  Pearl  of  Great  Price,  Key  to 
Theology,  Voice  of  Warning,  Spencer's 
Letters.  Hymn  Book,  Bound  Book  of 
Pamphlets,  My  First  Mission,  Cate- 
chism  and    String   of   Pearls.       On    the 


18th  he  presented  a  similar  set  to  the 
National  Museum  Library  and  received 
handsome  acknowledgments  from  the 
officials  of  those  library  organizations. 
The  Voice  of  Waning  in  Spanish  had 
been  extensively  circulated,  and  4,000 
copies  of  Elder  John  Nicholson's 
"Means  of  Escape"  had  been  trans- 
lated, published  and  mostly  distributed. 
During  February.  1881,  "El  Abogado 
Christiano,"  the  monthly  illustrated  or- 
gan of  the  Mehodists  north,  and  "Evan- 
gelista  Mexicano,"  organ  of  the  same 
sect  south,  published  articles  against 
the  Saints.  They  were  promptly  re- 
plied to  through  the  daily  papers.  Dur- 
ing February  and  January  Elder 
Thatcher  also  wrote  a  32-page  pam 
phlet  entitled  "Divine  Origin  of  tho: 
Book  of  Mormon,"  which  was  translat- 
ed into  the  Spanish  and  published.  He 
also  wrote  a  series  on  the  same  subject 
for  publication  in  the  "Contributor," 
drawing  evidence  principally  from  his- 
torical works— mainly  from  the  early 
Spanish  historians  and  from  Lord 
Kingsburne's  "Mexican  Antiquities.' 
During  March,  Elder  Thatcher  wrote 
"Mormon  Polygamy  and  Christian 
Monogamy  Compared;"  treating  the 
subject  from  a  biblical,  hygienic, 
physiological  and  moral  standpoint.  It 
was  published  in  the  Spanish  language 
and  subsequently  appeared  in  serial 
form  in  the  "Contributor."  Quite  a 
number  had  been  added  to  the  Church 
since  the  new  year,  and  a  branch  was 
organized  at  Ozumba,  at  the  base  ot 
Popocatepetl,  40  miles  from  the  capital. 
On  April  6,  1881,  conference— the  first 
Latter-day  Saint  gathering  of  the  kind, 
in  Mexico— was  held  on  that  mountain 
about  seventeen  thousand  feet  above 
sea  level.  It  required  a  day  and  a. 
half  of  great  exertion  to  reach  the 
point,  but  all  were  richly  repaid.  "The 
rich  may  find  the  Lord  in  temples,  buv 
the  poor  can  find  Him  on  the  moun- 
tains." Elder  Thatcher  also  published 
several  thousand  copies  of  Elder  Stew- 
art's "Coming  of  the  Messiah"  and  wide- 
ly distributed  them.  During  the  sum- 
mer the  Elders  continued  to  add  new 
members  to  the  Church;  on  one  occa- 
sion Elder  Thatcher  baptized  eight  per- 
sons. Success  created  some  animosity 
and  jealousy,  and  as  a  result  a  plot 
was  formed  to  test  the  divinity  of  the 
Elders'  calling  and  discipleship  by 
means  of  poison.  One  party  agreed  to 
furnish    the    poison,    the    other    was    to 


BIOGRAPHICAL    ENCYCLOPEDIA. 


135 


place  it  in  the  water  from  which  th* 
Elders  drank.  The  heart  of  the  latter 
failing  him,  he  came  to  Elder  Thatchei 
and  confessed  the  whole  thing.  Elder 
Thatcher  was  released  from  this  mis- 
sion in  August,  notice  being  received 
by  telegraphic  message  on  the  6th  of 
that  month.  Sixty-one  persons  had 
been  baptized.  Accompanied  by  Elder 
Feramorz  L.  Young,  he  left  the  (Jity 
of  Mexico  for  home,  via  Vera  Cruz, 
Havana  and  New  York.  Elder  Young 
was  ill,  it  was  thought  with  malarial 
fever  but  the  disease  developing  into 
typhoid  pneumonia,  he  died  on  the 
night  of  Sept.  27th,  between  Havana 
and  the  coast  of  Florida.  There  being 
insufficient  ice  on  board  the  steamer  to 
preserve  the  body,  the  weather  being 
extremely  oppressive,  and  no  means  of 
embalming,  necessity  compelled  his 
burial  at  sea,  which  was  done  on  the 
following  day  at  1  p.  m.,  within  about 
twenty  miles  of  the  coast  of  Florida, 
in  Lat.  27,  Long.  29.  The  care  and  sub- 
sequent death  of  his  young  missionary 
companion,  and  his  burial  at  sea  fai 
from  his  mother,  relatives  and  friends, 
was  a  trial  under  which  Elder 
Thatcher's  physical  and  mental  powers 
encountered  a  test  that  greatly  im- 
paired his  health  and  depressed  his 
spirits.  He  reached  home  Oct.  8th, 
bringing  with  him  Fernanda  Lara,  a 
young  Mexican  convert.  While  in  the 
council  of  the  legislative  assembly  and 
pending  the  passage  of  the  Edmunds 
bill,  Elder  Thatcher  was  called  to  Chi- 
cago, New  York  and  Washington,  D.  C, 
being  accompanied  by  Elder  John  Hen- 
ry Smith.  They  carried  with  them 
numerously  signed  petitions  asking 
Congress  to  pass  no  further  prescrip- 
tive laws  against  Utah's  people  before 
sending  a  commission  of  investigation. 
They  reached  "Washington  Feb.  23,  1882; 
returned  and  attended  the  April  con- 
ference of  the  Church.  At  the  follow- 
ing October  Conference  Elder  Thatcher 
was  called,  in  connection  with  Elder 
Erastus  Snow,  to  explore  in  Mexico 
with  the  view  of  finding  and  purchas- 
ing some  place  suitable  for  a  settle- 
ment of  our  people  in  that  republic. 
They  explored  the  head-waters  of  the 
Rio  San  Pedro  and  examined  the  San 
Bernidun  Ranch  and  one  of  the  tributa- 
ries of  the  Bivispa  and  Yagine  rivers 
in  Sonora.  Elder  Snow,  owing  to  ill- 
ness, having  returned  home  early  tn 
January,   Elder  Thatcher  took  a  small 


company  and  a  guide  and  explored  the 
Santa  Cruz,  Cocosperu  and  Magdalina 
valleys.  He  expected  to  cross  Into 
Mexico  at  La  Noria,  near  San  Raphial, 
but  finding  no  Mexican  custom-house 
there,  he  had  to  go  out  of  the  way, 
nearly  one  hundred  miles,  to  Nogales. 
The  guide  was  greatly  annoyed  by  rea- 
son thereof  and  desired  the  company 
to  go  in  without  the  necessary  official 
permit,  but  his  wishes  were  not  com- 
plied with.  Later,  the  party  learned 
that  fifteen  Mexican  citizens  had  been 
killed  by  Apaches  on  the  road,  as  near 
as  could  be  calculated,  at  the  point 
where  the  company  would  have  been 
about  the  hour  of  the  same  day  when 
the  killing  was  done.  Elder  Thatcher 
returned  to  Utah  in  February,  1883, 
and  in  July  following  went  on  a  mis- 
sion to  the  northern  Indians,  having 
for  missionary  companions  Elders  Wm. 
B.  Preston  and  others.  They  traveled 
via  Beaver  canyon,  the  Yellowstone 
National  Park,  down  the  Yellowstone 
river  and  across  the  Stillwater  and 
Rosebud  rivers,  visiting  the  Crow  In- 
dians of  the  latter  place,  delivering  to 
some  of  the  chiefs  the  message  of 
peace  and  advising  obedience  and  in- 
dustry. They  crossed  the  country 
mainly  on  an  Indian  trail  to  the  Wind 
river,  Washakie  Agency,  where  coun- 
cil was  held  and  similar  advice  given 
to  the  leading  men.  The  party  re- 
turned in  September,  having  traveled 
some  twelve  hundred  and  fifty  miles. 
In  December,  1883,  Elder  Thatcher  was 
called  to  assist  Delegate  Caine  at 
Washington,  D.  C,  by  soliciting  the  in- 
fluence of  personal  friends  and  through 
them  that  of  influential  parties.  He 
left  home  Jan.  4th,  and  returned  early 
in  April,  1884.  In  October  of  the  same 
year  he  filled  another  mission  to  the 
Shoshones,  who  were  disposed  to  bt 
turbulent,  sent  presents  and  word, 
urging  Washakie  and  his  people  to  be 
at  peace  and  not  war.  The  advice 
was  observed.  In  January,  1885,  he 
accompanied  Pres.  Taylor  and  party 
to  Arizona  and  Mexico,  and  again  ex- 
plored on  the  Magdalena  river  in  So- 
nora. He  was  appointed  chairman  of 
an  exploring  and  purchasing  committer 
of  lands  in  Mexico,  Pres.  A.  F.  Mac- 
Donald,  Christopher  Layton,  Jesse  N. 
Smith  and  Lot  Smith  being  the  other 
members  of  the  committee.  He  reached 
home  Jan.  27th,  assisted  in  gathering 
funds,    and    ten      days      later,    started 


136 


LATTER-DAY    SAINT 


again   for   Mexico,    going   into   Chihua- 
hua,   reached   Ascension,     on     the   Rio 
Casas  Grandes  Feb.  20th,  found  several 
families  of  Saints  there  from  Arizona, 
who,    having   received     the   impression 
that  a  purchase  had  been  made  in  Chi- 
liuahua,   came   there  by  reason   of   the 
violent    persecutions     of     courts,    then 
prevailing    in    Arizona.       He    went      to 
San  Jose  on  the  Mexican  Central  Rail- 
way,   thence    to    El    Paso,    Texas.        In 
company  with  Elder  McDonald,  Anton 
Andersen,    and    Mr.    Glenn    (surveyor), 
explored  the  upper  Rio  Janas,    in    the 
Sierra  Madres,  and  visited  the    strong- 
holds of  the  Apache  chiefs,  "Victoria" 
and    "Ju"    and    saw   their   fortifications 
and  caves,  in  which  they  felt  and  wen 
secure.      They  ascended  "Cook's  Peak" 
and    saw    the    Rio    Virdie   valleys    and 
Corales  Basin,  since  purchased.     Elder 
Thatcher     made     himself  familiar  with 
Mexican     land       matters     and     gained 
knowledge  respecting  property  for  sale; 
located  Saints  and  leased  lands  and  re- 
turned.     Under  the  influence  of  Ameri- 
cans at  the  City  of  Chihuahua  the  gov- 
ernor of  the  State  issued,  in  April,  an 
order   of  expulsion   against   the   Saints 
on   the  Rio   Casas   Grandes.       Through 
the  efforts  of  Elders  Teasdale  and  Mac- 
Donald  the  executive  was  appealed  to 
and  finally  consented  to  have  the  mat- 
ter referred  to  the  national  officials  at 
the    capital.        Elders    Brigham    Young 
and    Thatcher    being    called    to    confer 
with    those     officials     on     the    subject, 
reached   the   national     capital   May   11, 
1885.       They  had  interviews  with  Min- 
ister Mariscal  of  foreign  affairs,  Carlos 
Pacheco    of    Forento,    minister    of    the 
interior    and      colonization,      and    with 
Pres.  Proferio  Diaz.      The  order  of  the 
governor   of    Chihuahua    was    revoked. 
When   under   pressure   of     enemies   he 
subsequently  reaffirmed  it,    he    was  re- 
moved.     Elder  Thatcher  reached  home 
in  June,   and   in   July,   1886,   was  ag'ain 
called  into  Mexico  to  assit  Elder  Eras- 
•tus  Snow,   who  had  been  given  charge 
of  the  settlement  of  our  colony  there, 
and  to  help  in  adjusting  titles  of  pur- 
chases  already   made  and   to   purchase 
other  lands.      This  work  was  promptly 
seen  to,  Elder  Thatcher  again  visiting 
the    national    capital    in    October,    and 
while   there,   in     company     with   Elder 
Snow,    arrangements    were    made    that 
resulted    in    the    purchase    of   Corrales 
Basin,    including    Hop   and   Strawberry 
valleys,   comprising   nearly  75,000  acres 


of    timber,      grazing     and    agricultural 
lands.      The  young  colony  needing  ma- 
chinery, Elder  Thatcher  visited  St.  Da- 
vid and  the  Gila  settlements  in  Janu- 
ary, 1887,  and  securing  some  assistance 
went  to  St.  Louis  and  purchased  a  25- 
horse-power   engine,      boiler     and    saw 
mill,  shingle  mill,  sash  mill  and  a  com- 
bined planer  and  moulder,  all  of  which 
were  put  in  operation  and  which,  with 
cattle    and    necessary     wagons,     tools, 
etc.,  cost  some  $6,000.       Elder  Thatcher 
dedicated  the  Juarez  townsite    on    the 
request  of  Apostle   Snow,   Jan.   1,   1887. 
Later  he  explored  somewhat  extensive- 
ly in  the  Sierra  Madre  Mountains.  For 
a   number  of  years   he   acted  as   Pres. 
Wilford   Woodruff's   assistant     in     the 
puperintendency    of    the    Young    Men's 
Mutual  Improvement  Associations,  and 
was  also     an     earnest     writer     for  the 
"Contributor."     Not  being  in  harmony 
with  his  brethren  of  the  Twelve  Apos- 
tles, Elder  Thatcher  was  not  sustained 
in  his  position  as  one  of  the  Twelve  at 
the   general    conference   of   the   Church 
held  in  April,  1896.  The  vacancy  caused 
thereby  in  the   Council  of  the  Twelve 
Apostles   was   filled     in     October,   1898. 
Though  deprived  of  his  position  in  the 
Priesthood,  Bro.  Thatcher  remains  true 
to  the  gospel  of  Jesus  Christ  and  fre- 
quently bears  strong  and  faithful  tes- 
timonies  to   the   divinity   of   the   great 
Latter-day  Work. 

LYMAN,  Francis  Marion,  a  mem- 
ber of  the  Council  of  Twelve  Apostles 
since  ISSO,  is  the  eldest  son  of  Amasa 
M.  Lyman  and  Louisa  Maria  Tanner, 
and  was  born  Jan.  12,  1840,  in  the  town 
of  Goodhope,  McDonough  county,  Illi- 
nois. In  the  spring,  following,  the 
family  removed  into  Iowa;  thence  to 
Nauvoo,  111.,  in  the  spring  of  1841,  and 
later,  in  1843,  to  Alquina,  Fayette 
county,  Indiana,  returning  to  Nauvoo 
after  the  martyrdom  of  the  Prophet 
and  Patriarch,  in  1844.  His  father  had 
gone  west  with  the  first  companies  of 
exiles  from  Nauvoo,  and  it  was  not  un- 
til June,  1846,  that  he,  with  his  mother 
and  thre'e  other  children,  all  in  care 
of  his  grandfather,  John  Tanner,  left 
for  the  rendezvous  of  the  Saints  at 
Winter  Quarters  on  the  Missouri  river. 
On  the  first  day  of  July,  1848,  he  was 
baptized  in  the  Elkhorn  river  by  hla 
father,  who  also  confirmed  him.  He 
was  only  a  lad  of  eight  years,  but  on 
the  journey  to  the  mountains  that  sum- 


BIOGRAPHICAL    ENCYCLOPEDIA. 


137 


mer,  he  drove  a  yoke  of  cattle  and  a 
■\vagon,  arriving  in  Great  Salt  Lake  val- 
ley Oct.  19,  1848.  Here  he  spent  the 
next  three  years  in  such  vocations  and 
sports  as  were  the  lot  of  the  children 
of  the  pioneers.  He  was  given  what 
opportunities  there  were  for  education 
dui-ing  this  time,  which  added  slightly 
to  the  store  of  meagre  information  al- 
ready obtained  in  Winter  Quarters. 
His  father,  with  Elder  Charles  C.  Rich, 
purchased  a  ranch  in  San  Bernardino, 
Cal.,  which  was  intended  as  a  tempora- 
ry home  as  well  as  an  outfitting  point 
for  the  gathering  Saints;  and  so,  in 
1851,  with  the  family,  he  migrated 
thither,  doing  a  man's  duty  in  driving 
loose  stock  the  whole  distance  from 
Utah.  From  this  time  on,  for  several 
years,  he  was  employed  principally  in 
handling  animals  and  in  freighting  be- 


tween Utah  and  Calif ornia.making  dur- 
ing these  years  sixteen  trips  over  the 
deserts  between  the  two  places.  He 
attended  school  in  San  Bernardino  dur- 
ing the  winter  months,  and  also  found 
time  to  work  some  eighteen  months  at 
the  joiner's  trade  with  Thomas  W. 
AVhitaker.  He  witnesed  the  laying  of 
the  corner  stone  of  the  Salt  Lake  Tem- 
ple, in  April,  1853.  It  was  decided  in 
the  spring  of  1857  that  he  should  go 
on  a  mission  to  Great  Britain,  but  the 
Buchanan  war  prevented;  he  reached 
Salt  Lake  on  his  way,  but  was  then 
delegated  to  return  to  the  coast  and 
move  his  father's  family  to  the  Valley, 
all  the  misisonaries  as  well  as  the  colo- 
ny in  California  being  called  to  Utah. 
The  mission,  however,  was  filled  three 
years  later,  at  which  date,  1860,  his 
active  public  life  may  be  said  to  have 


hid  its  beginning,  although  previous 
to  this  time  he  had  been  ordained  an 
Elder  by  his  father  in  California  (1856); 
had  accompanied  his  father's  exploring 
party  to  Colorado  (1858);  had  been  or- 
dained a  Seventy  by  John  S.  Gleason 
(Jan.  7,  1860),  in  Farmington,  whither 
he  removed  to  till  his  father's  farm  in 
1859;  and  was  president  of  the  Young 
Men's  Literary  Association  of  Farming- 
ton,  in  the  first  winter  months  of  1860. 
Previous  to  his  departure  for  England, 
he  built  a  log  room  in  Beaver,  whither 
he  removed  his  wife,  Rhoda  Ann  Tay- 
lor, to  whom  he  was  married  November 
18,  1857,  and  his  one  child.  On  his  way 
east  he  visited  Kirtland,  Ohio,  and 
was  shown  through  the  Temple  by  Mar- 
tin Harris.  He  left  New  York  on  the 
steamer  "Edinburgh"  and  landed  in 
Liverpool  July  27,  1860.  His  record  up 
to  that  time  was  truly  astonishing.  He 
was  frontiersman  at  birth  and  baby- 
hood; pioneer,  teamster,  and  bull- 
whacker  at  eight;  herdsman  and  cow- 
boy at  eleven;  learning  a  trade  at  thir- 
teen; plowing  the  trackless  deserts  as 
a  leader  and  captain  at  sixteen;  mar- 
ried at  seventeen;  exploring  the  wilds 
of  Colorado  at  eighteen;  a  Seventy  and 
a  missionary  at  twenty;  with  farming, 
attending  school,  presiding  over  im- 
provement associations,  building  the  log 
cabin  of  the  pioneer, as  incidents  thrown 
here  and  there  in  between.  His  mis- 
sionary labors  in  Europe  were  prose- 
cuted with  vigor.  In  the  course  of 
a  couple  of  years  he  was  released,  and, 
with  a  company  of  more  than  eight 
hundred  emigrants,  he  sailed  for  Amer- 
ica in  the  ship  "Wm.  Tapscott,"  ar- 
riving in  New  York  June  25,  1862,  after 
forty-two  tedious  days  on  the  ocean. 
He  was  appointed  second  counselor  in 
the  presidency  of  the  company,  but 
two  weeks  out,  he  was  compelled  to 
take  entire  charge.  He  was  put  in 
charge  of  the  company  in  New  York, 
and  took  them  safely  to  Florence, 
where  they  arrived  early  in  July.  Two 
months  were  spent  there  and  on  thi 
road,  and  it  was  not  until  the  middk- 
of  October  that  he  arrived  at  his  hum- 
ble log  cabin  in  Beaver,  after  an  ab- 
sence of  about  two  years  and  a  half. 
In  March  of  the  following  year,  he  was 
asked  by  Pres.  Young  to  settle  in  Fill- 
more, Millard  county,  which  was  once 
intended  to  be  the  capital  of  the  Terri- 
tory.      He   removed   thither,    and   from 


138 


LATTER-DAY    SAINT 


that  time  on  for  more  than  fourteen 
years,  until  June,  1877,  he  became  a 
leader  in  political,  church,  business  ana 
manufacturing  enterprises  of  that  coun- 
ty. Only  a  few  of  the  more  important 
of  these  can  be  named:  he  was  assist- 
ant assessor  of  United  States  internal 
revenue:  lieutenant-colonel  of  the  first 
regiment  of  militia  in  the  Pauvan  Dis- 
trict at  the  age  of  twenty-five  years: 
member  of  the  House  of  the  General 
Assembly  of  the  State  of  Deseret:  a 
member  of  the  17th,  18th.  22nd  and  23rd 
sessions  of  the  Territorial  legislature; 
county  clerk  and  recorder;  superinten- 
dent of  schools  and  prosecuting  attor- 
ney. When  the  Stake  was  organized, 
March  9,  1869,  he  was  ordained  a  High 
Priest  and  was  later  set  apart  as  a  High 
Councilor;  with  his  father,  he  built, 
owned,  and  operated  the  O.  K.  Flouring 
Mills,  engaging  in  the  flour  and  grain 
trade  and  other  enterprises,  being  also 
secretary  and  treasurer  of  the  county 
co-operative  companies;  doing  also  the 
most  of  the  business  in  connection  with 
the  land  entries,  pre-emptions,  home- 
steads and  townsites  in  that  county. 
It  was  while  residing  here  that  he  re- 
ceived to  wife,  October  4,  1869,  Clara 
Caroline  Callister.  His  second  mission 
to  England  was  also  taken  while  his 
home  was  in  Millard  county.  He  left 
Salt  Lake  City  Oct.  20,  1873,  and  arrived 
in  Liverpool  on  the  12th  day  of  Novem- 
ber. While  on  tAis  mission,  in  addi- 
tion to  his  labors  in  E/gland,  he  madft 
tours  of  Wales,  Bfotland,  Denmark, 
Germany,  Switzerland  and  France. 
With  a  company  of  rtree  hundred 
Saints  he  returned,  arriving  in  New 
York  Sept.  26th,  and  at  his  home  in 
Fillmore  Oct.  11.  1875.  In  1877,  after 
having  attended  to  the  dedication  of 
the  St.  George  Temple,  in  April,  he  was 
called  to  preside  over  the  Tooele  Stake, 
which  was  organized  Jun?  24,  1877.  From 
this  time  on  for  three  years,  his  name 
stands  at  the  head  of  the  affairs  of  that 
Stake  and  county,  religiously  and  po- 
litically. In  August  of  the  year  fol- 
lowing he  was  elected  county  recorder, 
and  also  representative  to  the  legisla- 
ture from  Tooele  county.  The  Liberal 
party  had  held  control  in  that  county 
since  1874,  but  in  1878,  the  legislature 
passed  an  act  providing  for  the  registra 
tion  of  voters,  which  was  a  death  blow 
to  the  so-called  "Toeele  Republic,"  and 
to  the  methods  which  had  enabled  the 
Liberals  to  retain  control  so  long.     By 


corrupt  means,  a  small  minority  had 
conspired  to  control  the  county,  and  in 
doing  so  had  spent  in  four  years  the 
revenue  of  five,  a  balance  of  $5,000,  and 
left  the  county  in  debt  $16,000  in  ad- 
dition. In  the  August  election,  all  the 
People's  party  candidates  were  elected, 
but  the  Liberal  officers  refused  to  count 
the  votes  at  first,  and  then  by  a  system 
of  technicalities  at  length  declared  the 
People's  party  candidates  not  elected, 
although  their  majority  averaged  over 
three  hundred  voter..  It  was  then  that 
the  fighting  qualities  of  the  new  legis- 
lator, Hon.  Francis  M.  Lyman,  mani- 
fested themselves;  a  notice  of  contest 
was  promptly  given,  and  proceedings 
were  taken  before  the  district  court  to 
compel  an  honest  count.  It  was  not 
until  the  29th  of  March  of  the  year  fol- 
lowing, on  peremptory  order  of  the 
court,  the  case  then  having  been  to  the 
supreme  court,  that  the  oflRcers  in 
charge  declared  the  correct  result  of  the 
election,  which  gave  the  offices  to  the 
People's  candidates,  who  filed  their 
bonds  and  entered  upon  their  duties. 
As  he  has  always  been,  so  in  this  in- 
stance, he  became  a  terror  to  the 
wrong-doer.  In  August,  1880,  Elder 
Lvman  with  a  company  made  a  tour 
of  southern  Utah,  Arizona  and  New 
Mexico,  and  while  away  on  this  mission 
he  was  chosen  one  of  the  Twelve  Apos- 
tles, at  the  general  conference,  Oct.  10, 
1880.  He  was  ordained  on  the  27th 
day  of  that  month  by  President 
John  Taylor.  From  that  time  on 
he  has  been  completely  devoted  to 
Church  work.  His  travels  embrace 
nearly  every  city,  tow-n  and  village  in 
the  West,  where  there  is  a  Church  or- 
ganization. He  has  been  a  familiar 
figure  in  the  conferences  of  the  Saints. 
He  keeps  a  minute  daily  record  of  his 
travels,  and  his  journals,  which  are 
written  to  date  and  embrace  the  whole 
history  of  his  life,  are  frequently  con- 
sulted for  important  data  relating  to 
individuals  and  the  Church.  By  com- 
mon consent  he  is  the  keeper  of  the 
genealogical  records  of  his  father's 
family,  and  as  such  carefully  enters 
every  important  item  relating  to  mar- 
riages, births  and  deaths  therein,  hav- 
ing a  prepared  blank  for  the  needed  in- 
formation. In  this  respect,  he  is  an 
f  xample  which  some  one  person  in  all 
other  families,  large  or  small,  would  do 
well  to  emulate.  His  extensive  and 
continuous  labors  stamp  him  as  one  of 


BIOGRAPHICAL   ENCYCLOPEDIA. 


139 


the  energetic  men  of  the  Church,  a 
minute  man  in  very  deed.  In  the  ear- 
ly part  of  1883  Apostle  Lyman  filled  an 
Indian  mission  to  which  he  had  been 
called  by  Pres.  John  Taylor  Nov.  17th. 
the  year  previous.  On  May  5t"h  and 
Cth,  he  attended  the  Wasatch  Stake 
conference  in  Heber  City,  where  he 
made  the  necessary  preparations  for 
the  journey  eastward  to  the  Utes  in 
Uintah.  The  company  camped  in 
Strawberry  valley,  where  they  were 
joined  by  others  from  Sanpete  who 
had  been  compelled  to  leave  their  sup- 
plies in  their  wagon  on  the  top  ol  a 
mountain  in  four  feet  of  snow.  As  a 
guard,  they  had  left  Indian  Nephi  by 
the  wagon.  Strong  efforts  were  made 
to  get  the  goods,  and  while  this  work 
was  being  done,  the  company  remained 
on  Currant  creek.  While  thus  en- 
camped. Apostle  Lyman  took  his  gun 
one  day,  and  went  to  a  mountain  some 
two  miles  distant.  When  this  mission 
had  been  assigned  to  him,  Pres.  Tay- 
lor had  not  given  any  definite  instruc- 
tions as  to  how  the  work  was  to  be 
accomplished,  and  the  method  to  be 
pursued  was  not  clear  to  Brother  Ly- 
man. He  had  also  asked  Pres.  Wood- 
ruff of  the  Council  of  the  Twelve  how 
to  proceed,  but  had  not  received  any 
detailed  counsel  that  left  his  mind  free 
from  doubt  as  to  the  right  course.  He 
had  been  told  that  he  was  personally 
entitled  to  a  knowledge  of  the  work 
and  the  spirit  of  his  mission.  Should 
he  go  right  in  among  the  Indians,  oi 
should  he  ask  permission  of  the  agents? 
In  the  latter  course,  he  ran  the  risk  of 
being  refused,  thus  leaving  his  work 
unaccomplished,  as  was  the  case  with 
others  who  had  asked  permission  to 
preach  to  the  Indians  in  other  mis- 
sions. Arriving  at  the  mountain,  these 
thoughts  were  employing  his  mind, 
when  a  sudden  impulse  caused  him  to 
ascend  the  hill,  which  towered  a  thous- 
and feet  above  the  table  land  in  the 
vicinity.  On  arriving  at  the  top,  he 
found  a  large,  flat  stone  which  he  stood 
upon.  He  then  took  off  his  hat,  his 
face  turned  to  the  east  towards  the 
field  of  his  labors,  fell  upon  his  knees, 
and  poured  out  his  soul  in  prayer  to 
God.  "I  went  before  the  Lord,"  he 
says,  "and  told  Him  all  about  my  trou- 
bles; how  everything  seemed  against 
us;  how  little  I  knew  about  the  work; 
how  I  had  learned  that  the  agents  at 
Uintah    and    Ouray   were    bitterly     op- 


posed to  the  Mormons  and  their  doc- 
trines; and  then  asked  for  the  success- 
ful opening  of  the  mission  to  the  La- 
manites  in  that  region,  and  that  God 
might  guide  me  aright,  and  soften  the 
hearts  of  the  agents  with  favor  to- 
wards us  and  our  cause."  Just  as  he 
kneeled  to  prayer,  the  atmosphere  hav- 
ing been  perfectly  quiet  up  to  that  mo- 
ment, a  wind  began  blowing,  which 
continued  to  grow  stronger  as  he  con- 
tinued his  prayer,  until  at  the  close  of 
the  half  hour  in  which  he  was  engaged, 
it  blew  with  the'  velocity  of  a  tempest, 
so  that  he  could  scarcely  remain  in 
his  position.  When  he  finished  praying, 
the  wind  as  suddenly  abated  as  it  had 
begun,  and  he  retraced  his  steps  to 
camp.  He  felt  convinced  that  to  go 
right  on  with  his  mission,  visit  the 
agents  and  the  Indians  and  preach  to 
them  was  the  right  thing  to  do.  Thit> 
ability  to  receive  impressions  of  ap- 
probation in  his  work,  when  he  is  doing 
right,  is  strongly  developed  in  ApostU- 
Lyman.  In  many  of  the  Important 
steps  of  his  life,  he  has  been  approved 
through  dreams  and  inspirations,  and 
even  visits  of  men  of  God  who  have 
gone  before.  It  has  been  thus  made 
perfectly  clear  to  him  that  his  course 
is  approved  and  his  actions  upheld. 
These  visits  and  inspirations  have  been 
a  source  of  great  comfort  to  him.  On 
the  11th  of  May,  he  engaged  with  the 
men  in  lassoing  some  wild  horses  that 
had  been  brought  into  camp.  He  was 
an  expert  at  this  business,  and  could 
lay  the  rope  around  the  front  feet  ot 
the  animals  to  perfection,  often  taking 
ten  in  a  stretch  without  a  miss.  On 
the  morning  of  the  12th,  the  camp  was 
up  early,  and  it  appeared  that  all  the 
difficulties  which  had  so  far  surround- 
ed them  were  at  length  overcome.  He 
was  sitting  on  a  camp  stool  just  before 
breakfast  and  reached  over  to  pick  up 
some  object,  when  he  was  suddenly 
seized  with  the  most  excruciating  pain 
that  could  be  imagined  in  his  left  side 
— it  was  a  threatened  rupture.  It  was 
so  severe  and  agonizing  that  all  hopes 
of  his  recovery  were  given  up.  Every- 
thing that  could  be  done  was  done  t(. 
relieve  him,  but  all  to  no  avail.  They 
had  no  medicines  of  any  kind;  and  one 
of  the  brethren  proffered  to  send  fifty 
miles  away  for  a  doctor,  but  Brother 
Lyman  forbade  him,  saying  that  he- 
could  not  last  till  the  arrival  of  a 
physician.       It   was  suggested   that   he 


140 


LATTER-DAY    SAINT 


be  taken  back,  but  it  was  impossible  to 
move  him.  the  pain  was  so  tormenting. 
For  two  hours  he  remained  in  such  ter- 
rible agony   that  the  cold  sweat  stood 
out  in  great  beads  upon  his  face.  Dur- 
ing this  time  he  says  that  every  good 
act  of  his  life  passed  before  him,   and 
strange   to  say  not  an  evil  thing  thai 
he  had  done  came  to  his  mind— nothing 
but   good.       He     saw     himself   carried 
home  dead,  and  beheld  the  consterna- 
tion   of   his   family   at   his   death,    and 
what  had  overtaken  him.       During  all 
this  time,  strange  to  say,  neither  he  noi 
his    companions,      although      they    had 
done  every  other  thing  to  alleviate  his 
sufferings,  had  once  thought  of  the  or- 
dinance    of     administration.       At   the 
close  of  that  time,  one  of  the  brethren 
suggested  administering  to  him,  which 
was  accordingly  done.      No  sooner  were 
the   hands   of   his  brethren   lifted   from 
his  head  than  the  pain  left  as  suddenly 
as  it  had  come.       He  became  perfectly 
free,  and  had  thus  been  healed  by  the 
power  of  God  by  the  laying  on  of  hands 
by  the   Elders.       He   fell  into  a  sweet 
sleep,    and    in     a    comparatively    short 
time  was  able  to  proceed  on  the  jour- 
ney.      Up   to   this   time,   Satan   seemed 
determined  that  the  mission  should  not 
be  opened  up.      But  from  this  time  on, 
the    trouble    was    over,    the    way    was 
clear,  everything  was  favorable,  and  it 
seemed    that    every    obstacle      was    re- 
moved without  hands.    Arriving  among 
the  Indians,   the  missionaries  were  re- 
ceived  with   marked   kindness   by  both 
the  Lamanites  and  by  the  agents,  J.  J. 
Critchlow,  of  Uintah,  and  J.  F.  Minness 
of  Ouray.       Everybody     attended     the 
meetings.       The   gospel    and    the   Book 
of  Mormon  were  freely  taught  by  Elder 
Lyman  and  his  brethren,  and  by  Elder 
Nephi  who  was  surnamed  Lehi  by  El- 
der Lyman.  Chief  Tabby  also  preached, 
together  with  many  others  of  the  chief 
Utes  who  were  firm  Latter-day  Saints. 
They  bore  powerful  and  fearless  testi- 
monies.      Missionaries     were     selected, 
sustained  and  set  apart  at  a  conferenc«s 
held  in  Ashley  on  the  19th  and  20th  ot 
May,  and  were  called  to  continue  their 
labors,  which  they  did  with  much  spirit. 
They    were:    Jeremiah      Hatch,      Israel 
Clark,    Jeremiah    Hatch,    jr.,      Thomas 
Karren,    George    Glines,      and    Thomas 
Bingham,  jr.      The  Indians  were  large- 
ly  converted   and   baptized,     and   both 
chiefs  and  laymen  rejoiced  in  the  word 
of  God.       Temporal  good  was  also  ac- 


complished.      The    missionaries    found 
an  old  chief  who  was  more  interested 
in    temporal    than   in   spiritual   affairs. 
He  had  arranged  a  canal  straight  up 
the  banks  of  the  river  to  his  land,  and 
was   waiting   for   the   water   to   mount 
into  it  to  irrigate  his  possessions.    The 
missionaries     remonstrated     with  him, 
saying   that   water   would   not   run   up 
hill.      He  insisted,  however,  In  a  surly 
manner,   that  the   "Mormons"   made  it 
run  up  hill.      It  was  explained  to  him 
that  it     was     only     appearances     that 
seemed  to  him  so,  and  that  water  ran 
only  down  hill.      They  told  him  how  it 
could   be   done,     whereupon   he  wished 
them    to   do   the   work.       They     asked 
permission  from   the  agent   to  build  a 
canal   to  water  the   possessions  of  thb 
old    chief,    which    was   gladly   granted. 
The  six  missionaries  set  to  work  upon/' 
their  task.  They  obtained  plows,  scrap- 
ers,  and   horses,    and   in   the   course   of 
ten    days   had     a     canal   ready   which 
proved  a  great  success  in  watering  tht, 
possessions   of   the   elated   chief.       For 
this  useful  labor,  the  missionaries  were 
afterwards    allowed    $1,000,    which    wai» 
paid  them  by  Agent  Minness,and  which 
they  divided  among  them,  thus  receiv- 
ing both   temporal  and  spiritual  bless- 
ings. Apostle  Lyman  returned  to  Provo 
from    his, successful    mission    May    28, 
1883.     Francis  Marion  Lyman  is  one  of 
the  most  active  workers  in  the  Church. 
His  position  as  a  member  of  the  quo- 
rum of  the  Twelve  Apostles,  as  a  mem- 
ber of  thgt  Sunday  School  Union  Board 
and  the  General  Board  of  Young  Men's 
Mutual       Improvement       Associations, 
brings  him   in   direct  contact  with   the 
people,  young  and  old,  in  the  organized 
Stakes    of    Zion.       His    nature    permits 
no   offered   opportunity   to   pass   unim- 
proved,  to  associate  and   counsel  with 
the  community.  He  has  particular  abil 
ity  in  the  line  of  counselor  among  the 
Saints.       His  bearing  and  conduct  im- 
press  the    people    favorably,   and    they 
often   listen   to   him   when   men  of  less 
genius  in  these  lines  would  be  spurned. 
He  has  a  remarkable  capacity  for  say- 
ing unpleasant  things  in  a  very  accept- 
able way,  and,  further,  he  possesses  a 
si)ecial   gift   of   reconciliation.     If   men 
who  are  enemies,   especially  in  a  pub- 
lic  way,   cannot   be  reconciled   to  each 
other   by   Apostle   Lyman,    it   would   be 
better   that   both     should     retire   from 
public  service,   for  they  are  of  a  class 
who,    for    the    sake    of   peace    and    ad- 


BIOGRAPHICAL.    ENCYCLOPEDIA. 


141 


vancement,  should  never  be  leaders 
among  the  people.  Brother  Lyman 
exemplifies  perfectly  the  seventh  beati- 
tude: "Blessed  are  the  peacemakers, 
for  they  shall  be  called  the  children  of 
God."  He  is  naturally  an  adjuster  of 
difficulties,  and  hence,  in  very  deed,  a 
child  of  God.  He  takes  his  own  meth- 
ods, however,  in  the  accomplishment  ot 
his  ends  of  peace.  He  does  not  always 
use  mild  words  and  pleasant  persua- 
sion. He  is  a  fighter,  if  needs  be;  but 
his  skirmishes  are  onduted  under  the 
inspiration  of  the  Spirit  of  God.  No 
man  is  more  under  the  influence  of  the 
gentle  spirit  of  peace,  breathed  forth 
in  the  life  of  the  Master;  yet,  neitbei 
is  there  a  man  more  imbued  with  thost 
other  dualities  of  the  Savior  which 
could  justly  cause  Him  to  exclaim; 
"Thou  hypocrite,  first  cast  out  the  beam 
out  of  thine  own  eye;  and  then  shalt 
thou  see  clearer  to  cast  out  the  mote 
out  of  thy  brother's  eye,"  or:  "Woe 
unto  you,  Scribes  and  Pharisees,  hypo- 
crites! Ye  serpents,  ye  generation  of 
vipers,  how  can  ye  escape  the  damna- 
tion of  hell?"  A  striking  character- 
istic of  Brother  Lyman  is  his  ability 
to  say  something  to  the  people,  younj, 
and  old,  who  meet  him.  It  is  a  delight 
to  shake  hands  with  him,  for  he  is 
seemingly  loath  to  let  you  go  until  ht 
has  given  expression  to  some  pointed 
word  or  sentence  that  will  cause  you  to 
think.  He  always  has  something  good 
to  say,  and  usually  says  it,  looking  you 
straight  in  the  eyes.  These  expres- 
sions are  mostly  agreeable,  but  some- 
times not  so  pleasant,  in  which  lattei 
case  you  may  be  sure  you  are  off  the 
track  he  sees  ahead.  In  April,  1901,  El- 
der Lyman  departed  on  a  special  mis- 
sion to  act  as  president  of  the  Euro- 
pean interests  of  the  Church,  with 
headquarters  at  Liverpool,  England. - 
Edward  H.  Anderson.  (See  also  "His- 
torical Record,"  Vol.  6,  p.  258;  "South- 
ern Star,"  Vol.  2,  p.  417;  "Juvenile  In- 
structor," Vol.  35,  p.  289.) 

SMITH,  John  Henry,  a  member  oi 
the  Council  of  Twelve  Apostles  since 
1880,  is  the  son  of  Pres.  Geo.  A.  Smith 
and  Sarah  Ann  Libby,  and  was  boru 
at  Carbunca,  near  Kanesville  (now 
Council  Bluffs),  Pottawattamie  county, 
Iowa,  Sept.  18,  1848.  His  grandfather, 
Patriarch  John  Smith,  was  one  of  the 
seven  sons  of  Asahel  and  Mary  Smith. 
His  mother  was  the     daughter  of  Na- 


thaniel Libby  (and  Tirzah  Lord),  who 
was  the  son  of  Captain  Charles  Libby 
(and  Sarah  Pray),  who  was  the  son  of 
Charles  Libby  (and  Abigail  Hilton), 
who  was  the  son  of  Deacon  Benjamin 
Libby  (and  Sarah  Stone),  who  was  the 
son  of  John  Libby  and  Agnes.  John 
was  the  son  of  John  Libby,  the  immi- 
grant, who  was  born  in  England,  aboui 
the  year  1602,  came  to  America  in  1630, 
and  was  employed  for  a  number  of 
years  at  Scarborough,  Maine.  At  the 
time  of  John  Henry's  birth  his  parents 
were  fleeing  before  the  bigotry  and  in- 
tolerance of  their  countrymen.  In  184'i 
his   father   came   with   the  Pioneers  to 


Great  Salt  Lake  valley,  returned  to  the 
Misouri  river  the  same  fall,  and  went 
to  work  to  prepare  for  the  removal  ot 
his  family  to  Utah.  June  22,  1849,  he 
started  with  his  family  for  his  new 
home  in  the  mountains  and  reached 
Salt  Lake  City,  Oct.  27,  1849.  John 
Henry's  mother,  who  had  been  an  in 
valid  for  years,  died  June  12,  1851,  ot 
consumption.  The  boy  was  then  put 
into  the  care  of  his  mother's  sister, 
Hannah  Maria,  who  was  also  his 
father's  wife.  To  her  he  owes  very 
largely  the  success  he  has  attained  so 
far  in  life.  She  was  an  industrious, 
high-spirited  woman,  ever  ambitious  to 
be  advancing  in  everything  that  wa» 
good.  Her  faith  in  the  gospel  was  as 
flrm  as  the  rocks.  At  that  time  she 
had  a  son  of  her  own,  Charles  Warren, 
four  months  younger  than  the  subject 
of  this  sketch.  The  father  was  absent 
from  home  when  John  Henry's  mother 
died.  In  July,  1852,  his  father  moved 
his  wives  Lucy  and  Hannah  to  Provo. 
and  here  John   Henry  lived   under  the 


142 


LATTER-DAY    SAINT 


watchcare  of  two  good  Christian 
mothers,  who  both  tried  her  best  to 
guard  him  and  keep  him  in  the  path 
of  honor.  His  father's  family  were  at 
that  time  widely  scattered,  some  resid- 
ed in  Salt  Lake  City  others  in  Provo, 
and  some  in  Parowan.  The  head  ot 
the  family  spent  but  a  very  small  por- 
tion of  his  time  at  home,  the  duties 
of  his  Apostleship  demanding  almost 
his  entire  attention.  The  schools  in 
these  days  were  poor,  but  an  effort  was 
made  to  give  each  child  as  good  an  edu- 
cation as  possible.  Sept.  18,  1856,  John 
Henry  was  baptized  and  confirmed  a 
member  of  the  Church  of  Jesus  Christ 
of  Latter-day  Saints  by  his  father.  His 
grandfather.  Patriarch  John  Smith, 
gave  him  an  inspired  patriarchal  bless- 
ing, Jan.  18,  1852,  which  has  been  thfe 
guiding  star  of  his  subsequent  life.  He 
attended  school  at  Provo  and  Salt  Lakb 
City,  and  obtained  a  moderately  good 
education  for  the  times.  While  re- 
siding at  Provo,  he  had  a  very  mirac- 
ulous escape  from  drowning  in  the 
Provo  river  during  the  very  high  watei 
of  1862.  On  June  8th,  of  that  year,  he, 
together  with  Thomas  and  George  M. 
Brown,  were  crossing  the  river  in  a 
small  boat  which  capsized;  John  Henry 
became  entangled  in  some  driftwood 
and  was  kept  under  water  for  some 
time.  People  .vho  were  standing  on 
the  shore  had  given  him  up  for  lost, 
when  suddenly  an  unseen  power  seemed 
to  lift  him  bodily  onto  the  bank.  It 
was  afterwards  learned  that  at  that 
very  time  his  father  had  become  for- 
cibly impressed  with  the  feeling  that 
his  son  was  in  extreme  danger,  and 
he  went  and  robed  himself  in  his  Priest- 
ly apparel  and  prayed  the  Lord  to  save 
his  son,  which  was  done  in  the  man- 
ner named.  Oct.  20,  1866,  John  Henry 
married  Sarah  Farr,  daughter  of  Loriii 
Farr  and  Nancy  Chase,  of  Ogden.  AJtei 
their  marriage  the  young  couple  moved 
to  Provo,  where  John  Henry  worked 
as  telegraph  operator.  Some  time  dur- 
ing the  summer  of  1867  he  was  chosen 
by  Bishop  W.  A.  Follet,  ia  connection 
with  H.  C.  Rodgers,  to  be  his  coun- 
selor, and  aid  him  in  the  government 
of  the  Fourth  Ward,  Provo.  He  re- 
mained in  this  position  until  the  time 
the  Pacific  Railroad  was  nearly  com 
pleted,  when  he  left  Provo  and  hired 
out  to  Benson,  Farr  and  West,  aiding 
them  in  the  building  of  two  hundred 
miles   of   the   Central    Pacific    Railway. 


When  this  work  was  completed,  he  was 
offered  a  good  situation  in  Sacramento, 
Cal.,  by  Governor  Leland  Stanford,  but 
his  father  requested  him  to  come  home 
to  Salt  Lake  City  and  labor  with  them. 
This  he  did  and  spent  a  number  of 
years  in  his  employ.  During  the  ses- 
sion of  the  Territorial  legislature  of 
1872,  John  Henry  was  assistant  clerk 
of  the  house  of  representatives;  he  al- 
so acted  as  assistant  clerk  in  the  Con- 
stitutional convention.  Among  the 
members  were  George  Q.  Cannon, 
Frank  Fuller,  Thomas  Fitch  and  many 
others  of  all  shades  of  faith.  A  con- 
stitution was  drafted  and  adopted, hav- 
ing a  minority  representation  clause  iii 
it.  John  Henry  traveled  in  various 
parts  of  the  Territory  with  his  father, 
and  by  this  means  became  acquainted 
with  many  people.  He  also  became 
intimate  with  Pres.  Brigham  Youni^ 
and  asked  him  many  questions  in  re- 
gard to  Church  government.  Among 
other  things  Pres.  Young  told  him  that 
it  was  the  right  of  the  senior  Apostle 
(in  order  of  ordination)  to  preside  in 
case  of  his  (Pres.  Young's)  death,  but 
no  man  that  had  ever  faltered  or  turned 
back  could  lead.  At  the  general  con- 
ference of  the  Church  held  in  May,  1874, 
John  Henry  was  called  to  go  on  a  mis- 
sion to  Europe;  his  father  gave  him  a 
blessing  and  Apostle  John  Taylor  set 
him  apart  for  his  mission.  He  was  also 
ordained  a  Seventy  by  Pres.  Joseph 
Young,  and  set  apart  to  preside  as  om^ 
of  the  counsel  over  the  65th  Quorum  of 
Seventies.  In  the  latter  capacity  he, 
however,  never  acted,  as  some  mistake 
had  been  made,  the  quorum  being  al- 
ready full.  He  left  Ogden  to  fulfil  his. 
mission  June  29,  1874,  and  reached  Ne\\ 
York  city  July  4th.  He  paid  a  visit  to 
his  uncles  (mother's  brothers)  in  New 
Hampshire.  They  received  hirn  kindly. 
July  14,  1874,  in  company  with  David 
McKenzie  and  L.  John  Nuttall,he  sailed 
from  New  York  in  the  steamship  "Ida- 
ho," and  landed  at  Liverpool  July  26th. 
He  visited  a  few  days  with  his  cousin, 
Pres.  Joseph  F.  Smith,  and  was  ap- 
pointed to  labor  in  the  Birminghan., 
conference,  under  the  direction  of  El- 
der Richard  V.  Morris.  Subsequently 
he  visited  most  of  the  conferences  in 
Great  Britain,  and  in  1875,  in  com 
pany  with  Pres.  Joseph  F.  Smith  and 
other  Elders,  visited  Denmark,  Ger- 
many, Switzerland  and  France.  Hie. 
father  being  taken  very  sick,  John 
Henry  was  ordered  home  in  July,  1875. 


BIOGRAPHICAL    ENCYCLOPEDIA. 


143 


He  arrived  in  time  to  spend  fifteen 
days  at  his  father's  bedside,  who  died 
Sept.  1,  1875.  After  this  John  Henry 
was  in  the  employ  of  the  Utah  Central 
Railway  Company  for  several  years. 
Nov.  22,  1875,  he  was  ordained  a  High 
Priest  and  Bishop  by  Pres.  Brig-ham 
Youns-  Geo.  Q.  Cannon  and  Joseph  F. 
Smith,  Pres.  Young  being  mouth,  ana 
set  apart  to  preside  over  the  Seven 
teenth  Ward  of  Salt  Lake  City.  In  this 
position  he  was  sustained  by  the  peo- 
ple of  the  Ward,  and  enjoyed  his  la- 
bors very  much.  At  the  city  election 
in  February,  1876,  he  was  elected  a 
member  of  the  city  council  from  the 
Third  Precinct.  He  was  re-elected  twice 
and  served  six  years  altogether.  In 
August,  1882,  he  was  elected  a  membei 
of  the  Territorial  legislature.  During 
the  excitement  attending  the  passage 
of  the  first  Edmunds  law,  he  and  Mosefr 
Thatcher  were  sent  to  Washington,  D. 
C,  to  labor  with  Elder  George  Q.  Can- 
non, using  their  influence  against  the 
passage  of  that  law.  They  found  it 
impossible  to  approach  public  men,  ow- 
ing to  the  excitement,  and  after  about 
a  month's  sojourn  at  the  capital  the> 
returned  home.  In  April,  1877,  John 
Henry  yielded  obedience  to  the  prin 
ciple  of  plural  marriage  by  marrying 
Josephine  Groesbeck,  a  daughter  of  El- 
der Nicholas  Groesbeck.  He  was  or- 
dained an  Apostle  Oct.  27,  1880,  Presi- 
dent Woodruff  being  mouth,  in  answer 
to  prayer.  After  the  October  confer- 
ence in  1882,  he  was  sent  to  preside 
over  the  European  Mission,  and  was 
away  from  home  two  years  and  fivt 
months,  during  which  time  he  traveled 
extensively  in  England,  Scotland,  Ire- 
land and  Wales.  He  also  visited  tht 
Isle  of  Man,  Denmark, Sweden,  Norwaj;, 
France,  Germany,  Switzerland  and 
Italy.  Since  his  return  from  this  mis- 
sion abroad,  and  during  the  excitement 
incident  to  the  execution  of  the  Ed- 
munds law,  he  has  labored  incessantlj 
among  the  Saints  in  Utah  and  sur- 
rounding States  and  Territories.  He 
was  arrested  in  July,  1885,  on  the  charge 
of  unlawful  cohabitation,  and  was  dis 
charged  by  the  Commissioner.  In  con- 
nection with  Apostle  John  W.  Taylor 
he  organized  the  Uintah  Stake  of  Zion, 
May  9,  1897;  since  then  he  has  assisted 
in  the  organization  of  a  number  ot 
other  Stakes  and  Wards.  Besides  at 
tending  to  his  ecclesiastical  dutiefe.  El- 
der  Smith   has   figured    prominently    in 


the  political  affairs  of  the  State.  In 
February,  1876,  he  was  elected  a  mem- 
ber of  the  Salt  Lake  City  council.  Be- 
ing re-elected  twice,  he  served  for  six 
years  in  the  capacity  of  councilman. 
In  August,  1881,  he  was  elected  a  mem- 
ber of  the  Territorial  legislature.  When 
the  People's  party  and  the  Liberals  di- 
vided upon  national  political  lines  ht 
was  one  of  the  first  and  foremost  in 
advocating  the  principles  of  Repub- 
licanism in  the  Territory,  and  ever  sinct- 
he  has  been  an  active  Republican  in 
politics.  He  was  president  of  the  con- 
vention that  formed  the  constitution 
under  which  Utah  was  admitted  as  a 
State  of  th"  Un'^n.  Since  his  call  to 
the  Apostleship,  "^Ider  Smith  has  de- 
voted practical./  the  whole  of  his  timt 
to  public  duties.  Except  at  times  wheii 
upon  missions  abroad,  he  has  traveled 
almost  constantly  among  the  Stakes  of 
Zion,  attending  conferences,  instruct- 
ing and  encouraging  the  Saints,  organ- 
izing and  setting  in  order  Stakes  and 
Wards,  etc.  He  has  visited  every  Stake 
of  Zion,  and  many  of  them  several 
times  over.  In  1899,  he  also  made  a 
tour  of  the  Southern  States  Mission, 
doing  considerable  preaching  on  the 
way.  A  number  of  times  he  has  at- 
tended as  a  delegate  the  sessions  of  the 
Irrigation  and  the  Trans-Mississippi 
Congresses.  The  _Trans-Mississippi 
Congress  of  April,  1900,  was  held  in 
Houston,  Texas.  After  its  adjourn 
ment  he  went,  with  Pres.  George  Q. 
Cannon  and  others,  to  the  City  of  Mex- 
ico. The  visit  was  of  deep  interest  to 
him,  and  he  was  much  impressed  with 
what  he  witnessed  in  our  sister  repub- 
lic. His  time  being  so  devoted  to 
public  affairs.  Apostle  Smith  has  not 
engaged  personally  to  any  great  ex- 
tent in  business  enterprises,  though  he 
has  ability  in  that  line,  and  is  connect 
ed  with  a  number  of  the  leading  busi- 
ness institutions  of  the  State,  as  an  of- 
ficer or  director.  By  nature  and  train- 
ing he  is  most  eminently  qualified  foi 
public  duties.  He  has  a  good  knowl- 
edge of  human  character  and  an  ex 
tensive  acquaintance  with  prominent 
men,  not  only  in  his  own  State,  but 
throughout  the  nation.  These  quali- 
fications, and  above  all.  his  remarkabl< 
faculty  for  making  friends  wherever 
he  goes,  fit  him  admirably  for  the  po- 
sition and  labors  that  have  fallen  to 
his  lot.  The  character  of  John  Henry 
Smith  is  a  fine  study  for  every  young 


144 


LATTER-DAY    SAINT 


man;  and  from  it  one  can  gain  valuable 
lessons.  It  requires  no  very  close  ac 
quaintance  to  understand  his  disposi- 
tion, for  in  it  there  is  no  element  ol 
deceit  or  artfulness.  The  motives  b> 
which  he  is  actuated  may  be  read  in  his 
open  countenance  and  easy,  natural  and 
unassuming  manner.  He  is  straight- 
forward in  all  his  actions— never  being 
guilty  of  any  double-dealing— and  is 
always  outspoken  and  candid  in  ex- 
pressing his  sentiments.  He  possesses 
courage  of  the  highest  type— a  fearless- 
ness born  of  the  assurance  that  he  is  ii- 
the  right.  These  qualities  impress  all 
people  with  whom  he  comes  in  contact 
that  he  is  sincee  in  his  convictions, 
whether  or  not  they  agree  with  hi^ 
ideas.  He  is  of  a  happy  disposition, 
always  hopeful,  and  he  takes  the  most 
cheerful  view  of  conditions  that  may 
confront  him,  no  matter  how  discour 
aging  the  aspect  may  be.  He  is  quick 
to  discern  and  appreciate  the  good 
qualities  of  others,  is  ever  thoughtful 
regarding  their  welfare,  and  is  broad- 
minded  in  his  views.  He  possesses  the 
same  good  qualities  of  heart  as  of  mind, 
and  he  is  liberal  almost  to  a  fault.  By 
his  continual  upright  cour.se  in  life  he 
has  established  a  credit  for  integrity 
and  honesty,  without  which  no  man  can 
expect  to  gain  and  retain  the  confidence 
of  his  fellows,  no  matter  how  brilliant 
his  other  attainment  may  be.  As  a 
public  speaker.  Apostle  Smith  is  con- 
vincing, forceful  and  eloquent.  His 
eloquence  is  that  of  sincere  earnestness, 
in  private  conversation  he  displays  the 
same  earnestness,  and  is  always  in- 
teresting and  entertaining.  Btlt  the, 
great  secret  of  his  influence  with  man 
kind  is  his  love  for  them.  The  powei 
that  some  men,  more  than  others,  seem 
to  possess  and  exert  over  their  fellows 
—frequently  even  against  the  will  of 
the  latter — is  sometimes  called  personal 
magnetism.  The  force  of  attraction 
possessed  by  Apostle  Smith  is  nothing 
less  than  the  magnetism  of  pure  lovb 
for  humanity.  (See  also  "Southerr. 
Star,"  Vol.  2,  n.  421;  "Juvenile  Tnstruc 
tor."  Vol.  35,  p.  321.) 

TEASDAIjK,      George,      one  of  the 

Twelve  Apostles  since  1882.  is  the  son 
of  William  Russell  Teasdale  and  Har- 
riet Henrietta  Tidey,  and  was  born  Dec. 
8.  1831.  in  London,  England.  Being 
naturally  of  a  studious  and  thoughtful 
disposition,  he  obtained  the  best  educa- 


tion that  could  be  had  at  the  public 
schools  and  the  London  University. 
After  leaving  school,  he  entered  the  of- 
fice of  an  architect  and  surveyor.  He 
did  not  remain  in  this  employment 
long,  owing  to  the  dishonesty  of  the 
employer.  Later  he  learned  the  up- 
holstering business.  Although  his 
mother  was  a  member  of  the  church  of 
England,  he  was  not  at  all  impressed 
by  the  doctrines  which  were  advanced 
and  was  not  confirmed  into  the  church. 
Still,  he  received  many  impressions  on 
religious  subjects  from  his  mother,  and 
from  his  childhood  up  he  was  a  student 
of  the  Scriptures.  In  the  year  1851, 
he  learned  for  the  first  time  something 


of  the  principles  of  the  Church  of  Je- 
sus Christ  of  Latter-day  Saints.  This 
information  came  to  him  through  a 
tract  issued  by  the  Tract  Society  of  the 
church  of  England,  entitled  "Mormon- 
ism."  Shortly  after  this,  a  man  who 
belonged  to  the  Church  came  to  work 
at  the  establishment  where  Brothei 
Teasdale  was  employed.  Although  this 
brother  was  a  plain,  unassuming  man, 
he  bore  a  powerful  testimony,  and  thert 
was  no  doubt  in  his  mind  as  to  the 
truthfulness  of  this  work.  His  fellow- 
workmen  ridiculed  him  and  argued  with 
him,  but  he  was  never  overcome.  So 
impressive  was  this  humble  man'x 
testimony  that  at  least  one  of  his  as- 
sociates was  led  to  investigate  the  prin- 
ciples of  the  gospel  as  he  explained 
them.  Brother  Teasdale  became  inter 
ested  in  this  unpopular  religion,  and, 
as  is  always  the  case,  he  met  with 
opposition  from  his  friends  and  ac- 
quaintances. They  endeavored  to 
show  him  the  folly  of  the  step  which 
they  feared  he  was  about  to  take,  and 


BIOGRAPHICAL    ENCYCLOPEDIA. 


145 


told  him  that  all  his  bright  prospects 
for  life  would  be  ruined  if  he  persisted 
in  such  a  course.  But  when  a  mind 
such  as  that  possessed  by  George  Teas- 
dale  becomes  convinced  that  a  thing 
is  right,  it  requires  more  than  the  op- 
position of  friends  to  turn  it  from  its 
purpose.  Therefore,  without  allowing 
their  ridicule  to  alter  his  determina- 
tion, he  rendered  obedience  to  what  he 
knew  was  a  law  of  God.  After  his 
baptism,  Aug.  8,  1852,  he,  like  nearlj 
all  young  converts,  felt  that  many 
would  believe  his  testimony.  The  gospel 
was  so  plain  to  him,  and  as  he  had 
nothing  to  gain  by  testifying  to  some- 
thing that  was  not  true,  he  felt  that  all 
who  heard  him  must  be  convinced. 
However,  he  learned  by  experience, 
during  his  very  early  days  in  tht 
Church,  that  it  is  a  difficult  matter  to 
convert  this  generation  to  the  truth. 
He  was  ordained  a  Priest  and  later  an 
Elder,  and  spent  much  of  his  time  in 
preaching  and  giving  lectures  on  re- 
ligious subjects.  During  this  time  ht 
learned  how  necessary  it  is  to  have 
the  Spirit  of  the  Lord  in  speaking  on 
the  principles  of  the  gospel.  He  had 
very  little  time  for  study,  and,  he  tells 
us,  he  was  not  naturally  a  speaker, 
his  first  efforts  in  this  direction  bein& 
total  failures;  but  later,  when  he  wa^ 
called  to  go  out  to  speak,  he  dedicatea 
his  labors  to  the  Lord  and  asked  Hi& 
assistance,  and  of  course  was  success- 
ful. While  laboring  in  this  way  Elder 
Teasdale  made  the  acquaintance  ot 
Miss  Emily  Emma  Brown,  and  in  tht- 
year  1853  they  were  married.  From  this 
time  until  her  death  in  1874,  this  gooi 
lady  was  a  great  help  to  her  husband. 
In  the  course  of  his  ministry  in  Eng- 
land they  had  many  trials  to  pass 
through — trials  of  poverty,  of  being 
ridiculed  by  former  friends — but 
through  it  all  Sister  Teasdale  -wsa, 
ever  the  true,  consistent  Latter-day 
Saint, helping  her  husband  by  her  coun- 
sel and  by  the  fortitude  which  she  ex- 
hibited during  all  the  trials  through 
which  they  passed.  Later  in  life  Eldei 
Teasdale  heard  and,  being  converted  to 
the  principle,  obeyed  the  law  of  plurai 
marriage,  taking  good,  faithful  womeii 
as  his  wives.  His  zeal  in  spreading 
the  truth  caused  his  selection  as  presi- 
dent of  the  Somerstown  branch  of  the 
London  conference.  In  addition  tc- 
this  he  was  clerk  of  the  conference, 
auditor   of   the    book   agency   accounts. 

Vol.  1,  No.  10. 


and  president  of  the  tract-distribut- 
ing association.  With  all  these  duties 
his  time  was,  of  course,  completely 
taken  up,  especially  in  view  of  the  fact 
that  his  labor  in  these  callings  was  en- 
tirely gratuitous,  and  he  was  compelled 
to  devote  a  portion  of  his  time  to  earn- 
ing a  livelihood;  but  in  the  year  1857, 
he  was  called  upon  to  give  his  whole 
time  to  the  work  of  the  ministry.  Obe- 
dience  to  this  call  required  the  giving 
up  of  an  excellent  position,  and  the 
breaking  up  of  a  pleasant,  comfortable 
home.  Elder  Teasdale  had  determined 
to  devote  his  life  to  the  work  of  God. 
and  here  was  an  opportunity  for  nim 
to  show  how  firm  this  determination 
was.  He  decided  to  accept  the  call, 
and  in  this  course  he  was  encouraged 
by  his  wife.  He  sold  his  possessions, 
made  his  wife  as  comfortable  as  pos- 
sible and  entered  upon  his  new  duties. 
The  peace  and  joy  which  always  ac- 
company the  performance  of  religious 
duties  were  felt  by  him,  and  he  great- 
ly enjoyed  his  labors,  presiding  ovei 
the  Cambridge  conference.  Though 
often  footsore  and  weary  from  his  long 
walks,  the  Spirit  of  the  Lord  brought 
happiness  to  his  heart.  In  1858,  he 
presided  over  three  conferences,  the 
Wiltshire,  Landsend  and  South  confer- 
ences; in  1859,  he  was  given  charge  of 
the  Scottish  mission,  which  included 
the  Edinburgh,  Glasgow  and  Dundee 
conferences.  In  1861  he  was  released 
to  come  to  Zion.  Here  another  trial 
awaited  him.  Two  of  his  children  had 
died  and  two  were  still  spared.  Fron, 
his  long  missionary  labor,  his  means 
were  all  exhausted,  and  he  and  his 
family  were  compelled  to  make  the 
ocean  voyage  in  the  steerage  of  an  emi- 
grant ship,  the  "Underwriter."  On  his 
arrival  in  Florence,  Nebraska,  he  was 
called  to  assist  Elder  Jacob  Gates  in 
keeping  the  accounts,  etc.,  of  the  emi- 
gration.owing  to  which  he  did  not  leave 
there  until  the  last  company  of  the 
season  arrived,  then  he  crossed  the 
plains  in  Captain  Sextus  E.  Johnson's 
company,  which  arrived  in  Great  Sail 
Lake  valley  Sept.  27,  1861.  Here  he 
found  a  new  experience,  and  for  the 
first  six  months  taught  school  in  the 
Twentieth  Ward,  Salt  Lake  City.  He 
also  became  associated  with  the  Taber- 
nacle choir,  under  the  leadership  ot 
Brother  James  Smithies.  In  1862  ht, 
was  engaged  to  take  charge  of  Pres 
Brigham    Young's     merchandise    store. 

March   9,    1901. 


146 


LATTER-DAY    SAINT 


by   which   he   had    the   privilege   of  be- 
coming   familiar    with      that    excellent 
man   and    his    family.       In    the   fall   of 
1867  he  took  charge  of  the  General  Tith- 
ing Store,  and  in  1868  was  appointed  ori 
a  mission  to  England.     He  crossed  the 
plains  with  mule  teams,  and  on  his  ar- 
rival  in  New  York  stayed   to  assist  in 
that  season's  emigration,  at  the  close  ot 
which    he    crossed      the    ocean    in    the- 
steamship  "City  of  Antwerp,"  with  El- 
der Albert  Carrington,  who  was  on  his 
first  mission  to  England,  and  Jesse  N. 
Smith,  who  was  appointed  to  the  charge 
of  the   Scandinavian  Mission.       On  hib 
arrival    in    Liverpool,    Sept.    9,    1868,    he 
was  appointed  to  labor  in  the  "Millen- 
nial Star"  office.      The  next  year,  being 
called  to  assist  Elder  William  C.  Staines 
In    the    emigration     business     at    New 
York,    he    crossed     the     ocean     in    tht 
steamship   "Colorado,"     and     remained 
there   until    the   close   of   that   season's 
emigration,  returning  home  in  the  fah 
of  1S69.     Zion's  Co-operative  Mercantile 
Institution  was  then  being  started,  and 
he  obtained  employment  in  that  insti- 
tution,   from   one   responsibility   to   an 
other,    until     he     had     charge     of    tht 
produce   department.       In   1875  he   wa& 
appointed  on  a  mission  to  the  Southern 
States,  and  labored  in  Tennessee,  North 
Carolina  and  Virginia.       On  being     re 
leased   in  the  fall  of  1876,  he  returned 
home  by     way     of    Philadelphia,  visit- 
ed   the    Centennial    Exhibition   and   the 
Niagara  Falls.      On  reaching  Salt  Lake 
City,    after    resting     awhile,      he     was 
again  employed  in  Zion's  Co-operative 
Institution.      Being  called  to  the  charge 
of  the  Juab  Stake  of  Zion,  he  was  or- 
dained a  High  Priest  and  set  apart  for 
this  position  under  the  hands  of  Pres. 
Brigham   Young.     This   caused   him    tc 
resign  an  excellent  position  in  Z.  C.  M. 
T.,  but  he  soon  found  suitable  ways  and 
means  by  which  he  could  comfortably 
sustain   his   family.     While   residing   in 
Nephi    he    was   engaged   in    the   tithing 
office,  took  contracts  for  the  construc- 
tion of  a  portion  of  the  Utah  Southern 
Railroad,  acted  as  president  of  the  Ne- 
phi  Co-operative   Store,    and   was   also 
connected  with  other  enterprises.      He 
also  served  in  two  sessions  of  the  Utah 
legislature,    namely    those    of   1880    and 
1882.       In   October,   1882,    he   was  called 
by    revelation    to    the    Apostleship    and 
was    ordained    to    that    high    and    holy 
position    Oct.    13,    1882,    by    Pres.    John 
Taylor.       Tn  1SS3  he  took  a  six  months 


mission  to  the  Indian  Territory,  return- 
ing to  Salt  Lake  City  in  October.  1883. 
In   1884   his  labors  were  chiefly   among 
the    Saints    from    Snake    river,    Idaho, 
north,  to  St.  George,  Washington  coun- 
ty,  Utah,   south.       He  also  visited  the 
Temples  of  Logan  and  St.   George,  at- 
tending to    work    in  ordinances  for  the 
dead,    etc.       In   January,    1885,    he   left 
home  on   a   visit   to   the   Saints   in   the 
southern  country,  in  Nevada  and  Arizo- 
na.     From  there  he  went  to  Old  Mexi- 
co, and  assisted  in  forming  a  colony  in 
that  land.       Thence  he   was   called  ou 
a    mission    to    Europe,    to    assist    Pres. 
Daniel  H.  Wells,  and  afterwards  to  suc- 
ceed him  in  the  presidency  of  the  Eu- 
ropean Mission.       He  arrived  in  Liver- 
pool  Nov.   30,   1886,   and  after  traveling 
quite   extensively   in   the   various   con- 
ferences   of   Great   Britain,    he    entered 
upon  the  responsible  duties  of  his  office 
as  president  of  the  mission   in  Febru- 
ary,  1887.       He   acted  in   that   capacit> 
till   1890,   when  he  was  released   to   re- 
turn home.      While  on  that  mission  he 
traveled   through   France,    Switzerland, 
Germany,   Denmark,   Sweden,     Norway 
and  the  British  Isles.    Since  his  ordina- 
tion   to    the    Apostleship,    Elder    Teas- 
dale's  life  has  been  almost  entirely  de- 
voted to  his  calling  in  the  Church.     II 
not  absent  from  home  on  foreign  mis- 
sions, he  has  spent  his  time  in  travel- 
ing among  the  Stakes  of  Zion,  preach- 
ing to  the  people  and  exhorting  them 
to  live  lives  of  Latter-day  Saints.      In 
all   his   labors   at   home   or  abroad,   he 
has  always   taken  advantage  of  every 
opportunity  to  lift  his  voice  against  sin 
and   iniquity,   and   to   declare   the   glad 
message  of  great  joy  which  is  so  dear 
to    him.      Throughout   all    his    ministry 
he  has  appeared  to  have  the  same  spirit 
which    was    exhibited    by    Paul    of    old 
when   he   said,    "Woe   is  unto  me,   if  I 
preach  not  the  gospel."    Notwithstand- 
ing   the    years    Brother    Teasdale    has 
spent    in    the    missionary    field    and    in 
laboring  among  the  Saints  at  home,  ht 
has  felt  at  times  that  he  was  not  reach- 
ing   enough      ears,      and     this  feeling 
prompted    him    to      write      the    tracts. 
"Glad  Tidings  of  Great  Joy."  and  "The 
Restoration  of  the  Everlasting  Gospel,' 
thousands  of  which  have  been  distribut- 
ed   by    our   missionaries    in    the    world. 
"Elder   Teasdale,"    writes    Elder    Hugh 
J.    Cannon,    "has   always   been    greatly 
interested   in  the  Sunday  school   work. 
While  president  of  the  Juab  Stake,   h. 


BIOGRAPHICAL    ENCYCLOPEDIA. 


147 


also  acted  as  Stake  Superintendent  ot 
Sabbath  Schools,  and  for  some  time  he 
was  teacher  of  the  primary  class  in  the 
vestry  of  the  Nephi  Tabernacle.  For 
several  years  past  he  has  been  a  mem- 
ber of  the  Deseret  Sunday  School 
Union  Board.  In  his  talks  to  the  chil- 
dren he  endeavors  to  impress  upon  their 
minds  the  value  of  a  well-spent  life 
and  the  necessity  of  living  near  to  the 
Lord,  and  in  this  connection  reminds 
them  of  the  importance  of  keeping*  the 
Word  of  Wisdom.  *  *  *  One  of  the 
most  striking  characteristics  of  Apostle 
Teasdale  is  that  he  is  always  the  same. 
WTierever  you  meet  him  he  has  the 
same  genial,  quiet  way  which  makes, 
friends  of  all  with  whom  he  comes  in 
contact.  And  one  of  the  first  impres- 
sions made  on  new  acquaintances  is 
that  he  is  a  man  of  God.  His  life  has 
l3een  so  taken  up  with  his  spiritual 
duties  that  he  takes  more  delight  in 
conversing  on  this  subject  than  on  any 
other.  "Out  of  the  abundance  of  the 
heart  the  mouth  speaketh,"  is  well  il- 
lustrated in  the  case  of  Apostle  Teas- 
dale.  His  heart  is  full  of  the  gospel, 
and  of  a  love  for  his  fellowmen,  and 
knowing  so  well  how  the  principles  of 
truth  have  benefited  him, and  that  man- 
kind can  not  do  without  them  and  makt 
a  success  of  this  life,  he  takes  delight 
in  bringing  these  principles  to  their  at- 
tention. On  every  question  which  comes 
before  him  for  consideration,  his  first 
desire  is  to  find  out  what  the  will  of 
the  Lord  is  on  the  subject,  and  few 
men  are  more  tenacious  than  he  in  do- 
ing what  he  understands  the  will  of 
the  Lord  to  be.  Not  only  does  Apostle 
Teasdale  preach  the  gospel,  but  he  en- 
deavors by  his  daily  life  to  shov/ 
that  he  believes  what  he  teaches.  If 
an  honest,  upright  life  will  benefit  oth- 
ers, it  will  also  benefit  him.  His  life 
is  spent,  therefore,  in  striving,  by  pre- 
cept and  example,  to  lift  mankind 
through  the  saving  principles  of 
truth,  to  a  higher  plane."  (See  al- 
so "Juvenile  Instructor,"  Vol.  35,  p. 
353.) 

GRANT,  Heber  Jeddy,  a  member 
of  the  Council  of  Twelve  Apostles  since 
1882,  is  the  son  of  Jedediah  M.  Grant 
and  Rachel  Ridgeway  Ivins,  and  was 
born  Nov.  22,  1856,  in  Salt  Lake  City, 
Utah.  His  father  was  a  most  zealous 
Elder  in  the  Church,  and  his  mother, 
who  is  still  living  in  Salt  Lake  City,  is 


one  of  Zion's  brightest  and  noblest 
heroines.  Heber  J.  is  the  first  of 
Utah's  sons  to  be  honored  with  the 
sacred  office  and  calling  of  an  Apostle. 
He  is  his  mother's  only  son,  but  has 
several  brothers  and  sisters  who  bear 
his  father's  name.  There  are  Jedediah 
Morgan,  Joseph  Hyrum,  George  Smith, 
Joshua  F.,  and  Brigham  Frederick; 
Caroline  (who  died  when  sixteen),  Mar- 
garet (who  died  and  was  buried  on  the 
plains),  Susan  Vilate  Muir  (who  died 
several  years  ago,  leaving  ten  children), 
and  Henrietta  Marshall.  Heber  J. 
Grant  was  baptized  June  22,  1864,  being 
then  nearly  eight  years  of  age.  He" 
obtained  his  business  training,  as  well 
as  his  education,  by  self-effort  and 
sheer  force  of  determination,  which 
quality  is  the  peculiar  and  leading  in- 
dex to  his  character  and  career.  When 


a  child,  he  attended  a  school  taught  by 
the  mother  of  Matthias  F.  Cowley;  an 
other  school  in  which  he  gathered  his 
early  instruction  was  that  taught  by 
the  father  and  mother  of  Hon.  A.  F. 
Doremus.  As  a  young  man,  he  subse 
quently  attended  school  in  Pres. 
Young's  school  house.  Eighteenth 
Ward,  and  in  the  Thirteenth  Ward, 
also  at  the  Deseret  (now  Utah)  Uni- 
versity; and  he  was  also  a  pupil  of 
Mary  E.  and  Ida  lone  Cook.  He  was 
never  much  of  a  student,  owing  to  his 
suffering  from  severe  headaches  caused 
by  stigmatism  of  the  eyes,  but  ot 
which  cause  he  knew  nothing  until  he 
grew  to  manhood.  AVhen  he  set  his 
mind  to  any  task,  however,  there  wei» 
few  indeed  who  could  excel  him.  Oni. 
of  his  main  qualities  is  tenacity.  He 
took    little    interest    in    studies      unless 


148 


LATTER-DAY  SAINT 


some  incident  occurred  to  arouse  his 
determination,  and  in  such  case  he  first 
resolved,  dreaming  out  his  course,  then 
set  to  work,  and  never  quit  until  he 
came  out  acltnowledged  victor.  Theu 
generally  he  lost  interest  again.  The 
goal  was  reached,  and  unless  there  was 
fresh  incitement, his  enthusiasm  lagged. 
That  characteristic  has  grown  with  him 
to  manhood.  He  is  a  better  promoter 
than  plodder,  a  better  fighter  up  the 
mountain  side,  than  warrior  on  the 
level  summit.  To  get  the  best  results 
from  such  characters  is  to  postpone 
achievement,  delay  the  final  purpose, 
cover  the  path  with  enlarged  obstaclea, 
and  add  fresh  heights  to  the  summit. 
Many  Incidents  might  be  related  to  il- 
lustrate this  trait  in  his  character, 
which  are  inspirational  to  others  who 
lack  energy  to  try.  He  was  a  miser- 
able penman,  and  his  schoolmates  made 
him  a  laughing-stock,  and  guyed  him 
over  it,  until  he  resolved  to  excel  them 
all,  and  vowed  he  would  set  copies  for 
the  best  of  them.  Then  he  began  to 
write,  and,  heachache  or  not,  he  never 
quit  practice  until. his  vow  was  fulfilled 
to  the  letter;  and  he  is  to  this  day  one 
of  the  best  penmen  in  the  State.  Ho 
became  professor  of  penmanship  in  thtw 
Deseret  University,  and  won  a  diploma, 
for  the  finest  penmanship  from  the  Des- 
eret Agricultural  and  Manufacturing 
Society.  He  could  not  play  ball,  but 
he  went  home  and  nearly  pounded  in 
the  gable  of  his  neighbor's  barn,  prac- 
ticing throwing  and  catching  until  he 
conquered.  He  finally  played  in  tht- 
"nine"  that  won  the  championship  of 
the  Territory — "The  Red  Stockings." 
Then  seeing  no  profit  further,  he  quit 
the  business.  It  was  the  same  with 
marbles  and  other  games.  When  ht- 
was  a  mere  youth,  his  mother,  who  wab 
very  poor,  needed  greatly  to  have  hei 
house  repaired,  and  Bishop  Edwin  D. 
Woolley  and  some  friends  in  the  Thir- 
teenth Ward,  recognizing  the  necessity 
of  it,  asked  to  do  the  work  for  her.  He 
begged  his  mother  not  to  allow  them  to 
do  it,  and  at  the  same  time  promisea 
her  that  when  he  became  a  man  he 
would  build  her  a  new  home.  The 
Bishop  heard  of  this,  and  remarked  that 
if  Sister  Grant  waited  for  her  boy  to 
build  her  house,  she  would  never  have 
one.  Owing  to  Heber's  ball  and  mar- 
ble practices,  which  the  Bishop  had  ob- 
.^erved,  he  had  christened  him  the  lazi- 
est   boy    in    the    Thirteenth     Ward,      a 


regular  good-for-nothing.  But  the 
Bishop  changed  his  mind  later,  and  be- 
came one  of  Heber's  warmest  and  dear- 
est friends  and  one  of  his  greatest  ad- 
mirers. The  young  man  never  forgot 
his  promise,  and  one  of  the  reasons, 
doubtless,  was  the  incentive  created  by 
the  Bishop's  doubting  remarks.  He 
determined  to  show  the  Bishop!  When 
twenty-one  years  of  age  he  built  hit. 
mother  a  nice  home,  and  invited  Bishop 
Woolley  and  others  to  its  dedication 
The  Bishop  was  reminded  of  his  ut- 
terance of  years  ago,  and  was  asked 
to  dedicate  the  house,  but  this,  how- 
ever, was  done  by  Pres.  Daniel  H. 
Wells.  Apostle  Grant  is  pre-eminently 
a  business  man,  and  would  doubtless? 
have  devoted  his  days  to  financial  af- 
fairs exclusively,  if  the  call  to  tht 
Apostleship  had  not  changed  the  trend 
of  his  life  from  its  natural  course,  and 
awakened  in  him  that  less  prominent 
but  nevertheless  strongly  rooted  reli- 
gious feeling  that  possesses  his  soul. 
He  entered  the  business  world  as  a  mes- 
senger boy  in  an  insurance  office.  Fronr 
thence  he  arose  step  by  step  by  de- 
termined effort  and  close  attention  to 
duty.  His  efforts  to  learn  banking  led 
to  his  securing  the  position  of  assist- 
ant cashier  in  Zion's  Savings  Bank  and 
Trust  Co.,  during  the  absence  on  a  mis- 
sion of  Cdshier  B.  H.  Schettler.  This 
position  led  him  to  desire  the  presiden- 
cy of  a  bank,  which  desire  was  grati- 
fied by  his  becoming  the  president  of 
the  State  Bank  of  Utah,  at  its  organi- 
zation in  1890,  which  position  he  re- 
signed to  fill  a  mission  to  Japan  whither 
he*  was  called  to  open  the  gospel  door, 
leaving  Salt  Lake  City  July  24,  1901.  H-3 
has  held  other  responsible  business  po- 
sitions, having  been  vice-president  of 
the  Salt  Lake  Herald  Co.,  a  director  of 
the  ProvoWoolen  Mills  Co.  and  the  Des- 
eret National  Bank,  also  a  director  of 
the  Oregon  Lumber  Co.,  and  at  present 
he  is  president  of  the  Home  Fire  In- 
surance Co  of  Utah,  the  Salt  Lake 
Theatre  Co.,  the  Co-op  Wagon  &  Ma- 
chine Co.,  and  of  the  insurance  firm  of 
H.  J.  Grant  «&  Co.  He  was  elected  a 
director  in  Z.  C.  M.  I.  in  1887,  ani 
subsequently  became  chairman  of  the 
executive  committee  of  that  institution. 
His  business  maxims  are:  Promptness 
in  keeping  appointments  and  in  fulfill- 
ing promises.  He  always  aimed  to 
give  value  received  to  those  who  em- 
ployed  him,   and   since  he   became     an 


BIOGRAPHICAL    ENCYCLOPEDIA. 


149 


employer,  he  has  always  sought  to  treat 
his  employes  with     respect  and  consid- 
eration.     There  is  an  inspiring  illustra- 
tion in  his  career  which  shows  that  a 
desire,  a  dream,  in  a  young  person,  fol- 
lowed   by   persistent   effort,    is    sure   of 
fruition    and    fulfillment.        His    father 
died  when  he  was  nine   days  old,   and 
the   family   was   left   in    poor    financial 
circumstances.      In  fact.  Apostle  Grant 
as  a  boy,  was  reared  in  poverty.       He 
was   passionately   fond   of   the   theatre, 
and  not  being  able  to  pay  the  admis- 
sion  price   of  twenty-five   cents   to   the 
third  gallery,  he  secured  admission  by 
carrying   water   into    that    height.      He 
was     soon    promoted    because    of    his 
faithfulness — a  leading  trait   in  all  his 
work— to  the  second  gallery,  which  gave 
him  great  delight  and  encouragement. 
The  boy  dreamer  of  progress     became 
the  principal     stockholder     in  the  Salt 
Lake  Theatre,  and  had  the  privilege  of 
occupying  a  box  with  six  chairs,  free  of 
charge.      One  may  easily  imagine  with 
what  satisfaction  he  gazed  up  into  the 
third  gallery,  recalling  the  episodes  of 
his    youth.       Apostle    Grant    has    filled 
a  number   of  important   financial   mis- 
sions for  the  Church  and  for  the  insti- 
tutions with  which  he  is  connected.  In 
the  panic  of  1890-91,  he  visited  leading 
eastern  and  western  cities, and  obtained 
several  hundred  thousand  dollars  to  aid 
institutions  in  Utah  that  were  in  finan- 
cial   distress.       During    the    succeeding 
dark  days  of  1893,  he  crossed  the  con- 
tinent on  such  missions  four  times, and 
succeed    marvelously,    and    by    the    aid 
of  God  as  he  declares,  in  securing  some- 
thing   over    half    a   million    dollars    for 
the    Church,    and    business    institutions 
with  which  he  is  connected.       He  was 
sent  with  the  promise  of  Pres.  Wood- 
ruff that  he  should  succeed;     he     had 
implicit  faith     in     the  Prophet  of  God, 
and    that    his   words    would    be   veried, 
which   they  were.       When   the   first  T. 
M.  M.  I.  A.  was  organized  in  the  Thir- 
teenth Ward,   Salt  Lake  City,  June  10, 
1875,  Heber  J.  Grant  was  chosen  as  one 
of    the   counselors    to    the    president    of 
the    association.        He    held    the    offices 
of  Elder  and   Seventy  prior   to   his  or- 
dination to  a  High  Priest,  in  October, 
1880,  when  he  became  president  of  the 
Tooele  Stake  of  Zion,  being  ordained  by 
Pres.   John  Taylor.       He  was  ordained 
an    Apostle    under     the     hands   of    the 
First  Presidency  and  the  Apostles,  Oct. 
16,  1882,  Pres.   George  Q.  Cannon  being 


spokesman.   His  ecclesiastical  missions 
prior  to  his  mission  to  Japan  were  iu 
various    Stakes   of     Zlon,     in    different 
States   and   Territories     of   the   Union, 
and  in  Mexico.      With  Apostle  Brigham 
Young  and  others,  he  went  to  Sonora, 
Mexico,  before  any  of  the  Saints  were 
located  in  that  country.      Their  special 
work  was  to  open  up  the  gospel  to  the 
Yaqui    Indians,       In     1883-84    he,    with 
Apostle  Young,   visited  the  Indians  of 
the   Navajo   nation,     and     the  Moquis, 
Zuni,    and    Pappago     Indians.       While 
away,  they  called  a  number  of  brethren 
and   set   them     apart     to   labor  amonfe 
these  Indians.     Apostle  Grant's  efforts, 
both  in  the  business  and  the  religious 
world,    have    been    largely    inspired    by 
his  strong  love   for  his  mother,   whose 
love    for   him.    he    declares,    is    beyond 
his  ability  to  tell.       In  his  youth,   his 
principal    inspiration    for     effort    came 
from    her.        He    has    strengthened    his 
testimony    in    the    gospel    of   Christ   by 
exerting    himself    diligently      to    faith- 
fully perform  the  duties  imposed  upon 
him.     The  reading  of  Smiles'  works  on 
"Character,"  "Self-Help"  and  "Thrift," 
in  his  boyhood,  has  aided  greatly  in  as- 
sisting him  to  exert  his  best  efforts  to 
succeed.       He    declares,    too,    that     the 
articles  in  the  old  Wilson  and  National 
school    readers    have      had      great    in- 
fluence in  the  formation  of  his  charac- 
ter.      He   was   greatly   impressed   with 
the  articles,    "Never  Despair,"   "Daniel 
Webster    at    School,"    "Behind    Time," 
and  the  articles  on   "Early  Bible   His- 
tory," and     he     was  profoundly  moved 
with  the  life  of  Nephi,   as  recorded  in 
the   Book   of   Mormon,    which   he    read 
when    a   lad    of     thirteen     or   fourteen 
years    of    age.        He     admired    Nephi's 
faith,     devotion       and     uncomplaining 
spirit;    and    his    statements     when    re- 
quested to  return  to  Jerusalem  to  get 
the  plates,  have  been  guiding  stars  in 
his  life.     (1  Nephi,  chapters  3  and  4.)  It 
can  not  be  said,  however,  that  he  has 
been  a  great  reader,  but  what  he  has 
read    has    been    matter    that    is    worth 
remembering.       He  has  always  sought 
for   the   gem   in  his  reading,   and   then 
tried  to  put  the  good  therein  into   the 
practice    of    his    life.        He    is    fond    of 
poetry  and  music.       Pope's   "Essay  on 
Man,"  and  "Essay  on  Criticism,"  have 
pleased   him    greatly;      but     the   books 
which  he  enjoys  most  are  such  as  in- 
spire the  young  to  success— such  as  the 
works   of  Samuel   Smiles.       He  is  pas- 


150 


LATTER-DAY    SAINT 


sionately  fond  of  music,  and  while  na- 
ture does  not  seem  to  have  specially 
intended  him  for  a  singer,  his  determi- 
nation to  learn  to  sing  the  songs  of 
Zion  is  worthy  of  emulation,  and  his 
success  in  this  line  is  an  illustration  of 
the  truth  that  he  who  tries  will  con- 
quer. Apostle  Grant  is  a  thorough  be- 
liever in  work,  and  he  has  little  use  for 
boys  and  girls,  men  or  women,  who 
shirk  labor.  He  has  had  no  oppor- 
tunity to  learn  a  trade,  and  he  has  no 
profession.  His  leading  aim  in  life 
is  to  discharge  acceptably  the  duties 
which  devolve  upon  him  as  an  Apostle 
of  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  and  he  en- 
joys that  work  best  which  brings  him 
as  a  minister  among  the  youth  of 
Zion.  He  is  active,  energetic,  deter- 
mined; and  the  obstacle  must  be  great 
indeed  which  shall  deter  him  from 
achieving  success  in  any  line  that  he 
may  set  his  heart  upon.  One  of  his 
leading  traits  of  character,  in  fact, 
is  his  desire  and  determination  to  suc- 
ceed when  he  sets  out  to  win.  He  takes 
genuine  pleasure  in  laboring  to  accom- 
plish results,  and  this  is  one  of  the 
main  reasons  why  he  has  succeeded. 
He  was  promised  in  youth  in  a  patri- 
archal blessing  that  he  would  be  asked 
to  fill  a  mission  to  preach  the  gospel. 
He  expected  that,  like  Erastus  Snow. 
Joseph  F.  Smith  and  others  who  were 
ministers  at  the  age  of  fifteen  and  six- 
teen years,  he  would  be  thus  called  at 
an  early  age.  But  years  passed,  and 
he  was  not  selected.  "Some  of  my 
associates,"  he  said  to  the  writer,  "were 
called,  and  returned  home,  still  I  was 
left,  and  a  spirit  constantly  followed 
me  whispering  that  I  knew  the  Patri- 
arch had  lied  to  me,  and  therefore  I 
ought  to  renounce  my  allegiance  to  the 
work  of  God.  I  finally  said  to  myself, 
I  know  the  gospel  is  true,  I  have  had 
so  many  testimonies  that  I  can  not 
doubt  it;  and  no  matter  how  many 
Patriarchs  have  made  statements  that 
are  not  true.  I  do  not  purpose  making 
shipwreck  of  my  faith,  and  lose  eternal 
salvation  because  of  a  mistake  on  the 
part  of  a  Patriarch."  It  was  not  long 
after  he  had  so  determined  that  he  was 
called,  just  before  he  was  twenty-four 
years  of  age.  to  preside  over  the  Tooele 
Stake  of  Zion.  the  youngest  Stake 
president  in  all  the  Church.  In  this 
call  to  preside  over  a  Stake  of  Zion 
came  the  fulfillment  in  very  deed  of 
the  words  of  the  Patriarch,  upon  which 


the  young  president  had  so  far  placed 
a  wrong  interpretation.  As  the  truth 
dawned  upon  him,  he  felt  that  he  had 
conquered  doubt  by  faith  in  God  and 
in  His  work.  Other  promises,  made 
by  the  servants  of  the  Lord  to  him, 
have  been  fulfilled,  in  which  he  sees 
added  testimony  of  the  interest  of  the 
Divine  in  the  affairs  of  this  Church. 
Thus,  when  he  was  blessed  by  Patri- 
arch John  Rowberry,  while  still  actin;^ 
as  president  of  the  Toeele  Stake,  he 
was  promised  that  he  would  be  chosen 
to  be  one  of  the  leaders  of  Israel.  In 
his  youth.  Sister  Eliza  R.  Snow,  in  the 
gift  of  tongues,  promised  him  that  he 
should  be  one  of  the  leading  men  in 
the  Church,  the  interpretation  being 
given  by  Zina  D.  Young  at  the  home 
of  the  late  William  C.  Staines.  His 
call  to  the  Apostleship  is  in  fulfillment 
of  these  inspired  sayings,  and  it  has 
all  strengthened  his  faith.  Brother 
Grant's  experience  is  full  of  testimonies 
that  God  lives  and  that  He  answers 
prayers.  When  his  wife,  Lucy  String- 
ham,  to  whom  he  was  married  in  St. 
George,  Nov.  1,  1877.  died,  some  years 
ago,  he  received  a  manifestation  from 
the  Lord  in  direct  answer  to  his  prayer. 
His  wife  was  one  of  the  noble  daugh- 
ters of  God,  a  woman  of  excellent 
character,  sweet  disposition,  and  a 
judgment  in  business  affairs  which  was 
no  small  factor  in  Heber's  early  finan- 
cial success.  While  she  was  dying, 
her  daughter  Lucy,  then  a  little  over 
twelve  years  of  age.  insisted  that  the 
father  should  administer  to  the  mother 
and  heal  her — such  was  the  child's 
faith.  "I  sent  my  children  out  of  the 
room,"  he  told  me,  "and  pleaded  with 
the  Lord  to  give  some  special  mani- 
festation that  in  the  death  of  my  wife 
His  will  would  be  done.  I  told  Him 
that  I  acknowledged  His  hand  in  life 
or  in  death,  in  prosperity  or  in  adver- 
sity, but  that  I  lacked  strength  to  see 
my  wife  die  and  have  it  affect  the 
faith  of  my  children  in  the  ordinances 
of  the  gospel."  Shortly  thereafter,  his 
wife  died,  and  when  he  then  called  the 
children  into  the  room,  his  daughter 
Licy,  putting  her  arms  around  the 
necks  of  her  younger  sisters,  and  also 
her  little  brother,  told  them  not  to 
cry,  oecause  the  voice  of  the  Lord  had 
told  her:  "In  the  death  of  your  mamma, 
the  will  of  the  Lord  will  be  done."  As 
the  child  knew  nothing  of  the  father's 
prayer,   it  is  evident   the  answer  came 


BIOGRAPHICAL,   ENCYCLOPEDIA. 


151 


from  God  to  her  in  answer  thereto,  a 
fact  which   Brother   Grant  considers  a 
special   manifestation     of     the     Lord's 
goodness  to  him,  and  which  he  declares 
he  will   ever   remember  with  gratitude 
and  thanksgiving.       Another     incident 
will  suffice.  His  only  son,  Heber  String- 
ham,    upon   whom   he   had   built   great 
hopes,  died  some  time  after  the  death 
of  his  mother.      Brother  Grant  is  nat- 
urally    an     affectionate      man,     easily 
moved   to   tears,    and   quite   emotional, 
and  yet  his  son  under  these  conditions, 
passed  away  without  the  father  shed- 
ding a  tear.      "There  was  in  my  home 
a  very  calm,  sweet,  heavenly  influence. 
Without  the  supporting  influence  of  the 
Holy    Spirit,"    he    declares,    "it     would 
be  impossible    for    me  to  undergo,  al- 
most joyfully,  a  scene  of  this  kind.     I 
felt    almost    a    heavenly  joy,    notwith- 
standing the  sorrow     which  had  come 
into  my  life."      He  explained     that    a 
dream  was   the  cause  of  it.       "Just  a 
few    hours    before    my    son's    death,    I 
dreamed  his  mother  came  for  him,  and 
after  a   discussion   with  my  mother,    I 
dreamed    I    had    allowed    her    to    take 
my    son,    as    I    felt    impressed    in    my 
dream  that  he  would  be  a  cripple  all 
his  life,  should  he  live,  since  his  trou- 
ble was  hip  disease."      In  his  own  life, 
too,  he  and  his  have  been  assured  with 
faith   in   the  promises  of  God.       Thus, 
some  years  ago,  when  he  was  operated 
on  for  appendicitis,  his  wife  Lucy,  who 
as  stated,  is  dead,  visited  his  home  and 
promised  his  wife  Augusta  Winters,  to 
whom  he  was  married  May  6,  1884,  that 
he   should   recover.       He     felt     so   im- 
pressed  himself,   and   believed   that  he 
should  live  through  the  ordeal.    When, 
therefore,  after  the  operation  the  doc- 
tors said  that  blood  poison  had  set  in, 
and  he  could  not  live,  neither  his  wife 
nor  himself   felt   any   alarm,    but   both 
had  a  perfect  assurance  that  he  should 
recover  and  their  faith  was  not  in  vain. 
In  political  life.  Apostle  Grant  has  had 
some    experience,      having    served    one 
term  in   the  council   of  the   Territorial 
legislature,    and    several    terms    in    the 
city  council  of  Salt  Lake  City  as  coun- 
cilman.   Apostle  Grant  is  tall  and  erect 
in    flgure,      with      prominent      features  ' 
which  indicate  energy  and  push.       His 
desire   to   aid   others   has   given   him   a 
disposition  to  feel  for  his  fellows,  and 
there    is    not    a    man    in    Zion    with    a 
more    loving,    helping    heart    than    has 
Heber   J.    Grant.      He    possesses    a    de- 


termination to  overcome  obstacles  and 
defects  that  stand  in  his  way  to  the 
perfection  of  his  character.  When  he 
discovers  a  fault  in  himself,  he  en- 
deavors by  persistent  and  continued  ef- 
fort, such  as  only  few  are  capable  of, 
to  overcome.  And  thus  his  life  is 
growing  better  as  the  years  increase, 
and  will  continue  until  his  ideal  of  per- 
fection, which  enlarges  with  his  deeper 
knowledge,  shall  be  reached.  He  has 
gained  the  love,  respect  and  confidence 
of  his  friends  and  business  associates; 
and  the  authorities  of  the  Church  im- 
pose in  him  the  fullest  trust.  He  is 
an  active  worker  in  the  cause  of  God, 
and  has  learned  to  feel  the  keenest  de- 
light in  his  labors  among  the  Saints. 
He  loves  the  youth  of  Israel,  and  in 
his  sermons  frequently  addresses  his 
earnest  remarks  to  them.  Associated 
with  the  Twelve,  and  with  the  general 
boards  of  the  Sunday  Scools  and  the 
Improvement  Associations,  he  is  con- 
stantly among  the  people,  and  his  coun- 
sel and  practical  advice,  in  temporal 
as  well  as  spiritual  affairs,  are  eagerly 
sought.— Edward  H.  Anderson.  (See 
also  "Juvenile  Instructor,"  Vol.  35,  p. 
393.) 

TAYLiOR,  John  Whittaker,  a  mem- 
ber of  the  Council  of  Twelve  Apostles 
since  1884,  is  the  son  of  Pres.  John 
Taylor  and  Sophia  Whittaker,  and  was 
born  May  15,  1858,  in  Provo,  Utah  coun- 
ty, Utah.  This  was  at  the  time  when 
Johnston's  army  was  approaching  Utah 
with  hostile  intent;  the  Saints  living 
in  Salt  Lake  City  prepared  to  burn 
their  homes,  and  then  moved  south- 
ward to  various  places  in  Utah  county. 
The  late  Pres.  John  Taylor  and  family 
were  among  the  exiles  who  located  tem- 
porarily in  Provo,  where  they  rented 
from  Roger  Farrar  a  house  of  small 
dimensions  and  unpretentious  appear- 
ance. In  this  humble  abode  the  sub- 
ject of  this  sketch  was  born.  Upon 
the  settlement  of  the  trouble  which 
caused  the  exodus  from  the  northern 
settlements,  Pres.  Taylor  and  his  fami- 
ly returned  to  their  home  in  the  Four- 
teenth Ward,  Salt  Lake  City.  Here 
Brother  John  W.  was  reared  until  he 
attained  his  twenty-fifth  year,  when 
he  married  and  removed  to  Cassia 
county,  Idaho.  In  his  boyhood  days, 
as  in  later  life,  he  was  industrious  in 
his  habits,  being  richly  endowed  with 
bodily    health    and      a      strong,    active 


152 


LATTER-DAT    SAINT 


mind.  He  worked  some  at  farming, 
and  spent  considerable  time  laboring 
in  his  father's  saw  mill,  which  was 
near  Kamas,  towards  the  headwaters 
of  the  Provo  river.  His  father  being 
somewhat  hampered  financially,  the 
children's  opportunities  for  scholastic 
education  were  not  so  abundant  as 
those  afforded  the  sons  and  daughters 
of  some  other  families;  but  with  Pres. 
Taylor  the  education  acquired  in  the 
schoolroom,  though  not  deprecated  in 
the  least,  was  regarded  only  as  a  small 
part  of  the  broader  education  to  be 
gained  in  the  practical  walks  of  life. 
He  taught  his  children  with  great  em- 
phasis that  whatever  they  undertook 
to   do   they     should     seek   to   do   well — 


that  people,  on  examining  a  piece  of 
work  they  admired,  would  first  ask  who 
did  it,  but  would  care  little  about 
knowing  what  length  of  time  it  re- 
quired to  complete  it.  He  taught  them 
to  respect  each  other's  rights;  and  in- 
stead of  governing  his  family  by  per- 
sonal direction,  he  instructed  them  in 
the  principles  of  righteousness  and 
placed  them  upon  their  own  responsi- 
bility to  act  for  themselves.  The  grand 
and  noble  truths  he  sought  to  implant 
within  the  hearts  of  his  children  were 
conspicuously  exemplified  in  his  own 
life;  and  withal  he  possessed  a  spiritu- 
ality and  a  veneration  for  God  and 
truth  so  great  that  few  men  in  this 
world  have  equaled  him  in  the  posses- 
sion of  such  qualities.  The  mother 
of  John  W.,  Sophia  Whittaker  Taylor, 
was  of  a  highly  spiritual  nature.  She 
was  patient,  industrious  and  God-fear- 
ing. Indeed  she  was  the  ideal  type  of 
a  true     Saint.      No  one  of  the  numer- 


ous posterity  of  Pres.  Taylor  inherited 
more  of  his  excellent  characteristics  or 
developed  them  in  a  stronger  measure 
than  did  his  son  John  W.      In  his  ear- 
ly youth  he  displayed  an  understanding 
of  principle  usually  found  only  in  per- 
sons  of    more   mature   years.       He   at- 
tended   Sunday    Schools   and    meetings 
with    great    regularity,    and      with    his 
bosom    friend    and    neighbor,    Matthias 
F.   Cowley,   studied   the  Scriptures  and 
memorized   scores  of  passages   bearing 
upon  the  most  important  principles  of 
the  gospel.      By  the  time  he  concluded 
his  first  mission  in  the  Southern  State.s 
he    had    memorized    and    arranged      in 
systematic    order    some     four    hundre,1 
such  passages,     chiefly     from     the    Old 
and    New   Testaments.       At   about   th? 
age  of  fourteen  years  he  was  ordaine  1 
a    Deacon,    and    magnified    his    callin:; 
by  the  faithful  performance  of  the  du- 
ties of  that  office.      Two  years  later  he 
became   a    Teacher   in    the    Ward     and 
worked   faithfully  in  this   capacity  fo  • 
a    number    of   years.       After    receivin;^ 
his  blessings  in  the  house  of  the  Lord, 
and   being  ordained   an   Elder,    he   was 
chosen    counselor,    with    Brother    Mat- 
thias  F.    Cowley,    to  Pres.   Edward  W. 
Davis  of  the  Elders'  quorum.      In  thi^ 
capacity  he  also  collected  donations  f  j.- 
the  building  of   the   Salt   Lake   Temp!.' 
at  a  time  when  contributions  for  that 
purpose    was    raised    through    the   quo- 
rums of  the  Holy  Priesthood.      Brother 
Taylor    was   also    an    active    worker   in 
the    Fourteenth    Ward    Sunday    School. 
He  had  charge  of  the  primary     class, 
consisting  of     about     one  hundred  pu- 
pils.      His  ability   to  entertain   and  ai 
the  same  time  to  impress  the  children 
with    good,    sound    doctrine     was   very 
marked.       He   possesses  a  vein  of  hu- 
mor and   a   happy   faculty   for   making 
appropriate  comparisons  which  enabled 
him  to  attract  and  retain  the  attention 
of  children.      The  late  general  assistant 
superintendent  of  Sunday  Schools,   El- 
der     George        Goddard,        pronounced 
Brother  Taylor  the  best  primary  teach- 
er he  knew  of  in  the  Church.     A  little 
incident  which  occurred  one  day  in  his 
Sunday     School     class     will    show   his 
practical   way  of  teaching,   and  at  the 
same     time     illustrate     his     novel  yet 
graceful   and   effective   manner   of  cor- 
recting   what    he    regarded    as    an    er- 
roneous  idea.       The    Fourteenth   Ward 
meeting  house  being  near  to  the  prin- 
cipal hotels  of  the  city,   tourists     from 


BIOGRAPHICAL    ENCYCLOPEDIA. 


153 


the  east  and  west  would  frequently 
visit  the  Sunday  School  held  therein. 
Upon  one  occasion  when  a  large  num- 
ber of  these  visitors  came  into  Bro. 
Taylor's  class-room  he  invited  some  of 
them  to  address  the  children.  One  re- 
ligious gentleman  exhorted  the  children 
to  be  very  prayerful,  and  reminded 
them  how  nice  a  prayer  was  the  sim- 
ple rhyme, 

Now  I  lay  me  down  to  sleep, 
I  pray  the  Lord  my  soul  to  keep; 
If  I  should  die  before  I  wake, 
I  pray  the  Lord  my  soul  to  take. 

This  little  verse  he  repeated  to  the 
children  several  times,  and  sought  to 
impress  the  beauty  of  it  upon  their 
minds.  When  he  concluded  his  re- 
marks. Brother  Taylor  arose  and  ques- 
tioned the  pupils  in  substance  about 
as  follows:  "How  many  of  you  say 
your  prayers?"  All  hands  went  up. 
"When  do  you  pray?"  The  answer 
came,  "Night  and  morning."  "To  whom 
do  you  pray?"  "To  the  Lord,"  was 
the  ready  response.  "For  what  do  you 
pray?"  "We  pray  for  what  we  want," 
again  came  the  answer.  "Very  good," 
said  the  teacher,  "these  ladies  and  gen- 
tlemen are  going  on  a  visit  to  Califor- 
nia: would  you  like  them  to  have  a 
good  time  and  to  return  home  alive  and 
well?"  "Tes,  sir,"  was  the  hearty  re- 
ply. "How  will  you  help  them  to  do 
that?"  inquired  the  teacher.  "By 
praying  for  them,"  once  more  came  the 
children's  explanation.  "Will  you  say 
in  your  prayer,  "Now  I  lay  me  down 
to  sleep?"  etc.,  asked  the  teacher,  lead- 
ing the  class  to  the  point  he  wished 
to  make,  and  gently  reproving  the  vis- 
iting speaker,  by  the  emphasis  he 
placed  upon  the  question.  "No,  sir," 
shouted  the  children  in  chorus.  "Then 
what  will  you  say  in  your  prayer?" 
came  the  final  question.  "We'll  ask 
the  Lord  to  keep  the  train  from  jump- 
ing the  track,"  was  the  sensible  re- 
ply. The  lesson  thus  taught  would 
not  be  forgotten  very  soon  either  by 
the  children  or  the  visitors.  At  this 
period  Bro.  Taylor  was  only  about  nine- 
teen years  old,  and,  besides  being  a 
Sunday  School  teacher,  was  a  worker 
in  the  Mutual  Improvement  Associa- 
tion, a  Teacher  in  the  Ward  and  a 
counselor  in  the  Elders'  quorum;  and 
for  daily  employment  he  secured  a  po- 
sition in  the  county  recorder's  office.  He 


afterwards  was  employed  for  some  time 
in  the  office  of  the  "Deseret  News."  As 
a  penman  he  was  among  the  best  in 
the  country;  and  his  ingenuity  in  me- 
chanical pursuits  was  also  of  an 
exceptional  order.  In  his  boyhood 
days,  while  working  at  his  father's  saw- 
mill, he  received  some  remarkable 
dreams  that  were  prophetic  in  their 
nature,  and  which  have  since  been 
verified.  These  manifestations  were 
living  testimonies  to  him  that  Jesus 
is  the  Christ  and  that  Joseph  Smith 
was  truly  a  Prophet  of  God.  So  vivid 
were  these  dreams  that  they  are  as 
clear  on  his  memory  to-day  as  when 
they  were  given.  In  1876  he  received 
a  patriarchal  blessing  under  the  hands 
of  Patriarch  William  McBride,  in 
which  his  call  to  the  public  ministry 
was  predicted,  together  with  other  most 
remarkable  prophecies,  several  of  which 
have  already  been  fulfilled.  In  the 
fall  of  1880  Elder  Taylor  was  called 
upon  a  mission  to  the  Southern  States, 
and  with  Elder  Matthias  F.  Cowley, 
the  companion  of  his  boyhood,  was  as- 
signed by  Pres.  John  Morgan  to  in- 
troduce the  gospel  into  Terrell  and 
Randolph  counties,  southwest  Georgia, 
they  being  the  first  Elders  in  that  part 
of  the  State.  He  labored  in  those  two 
counties  during  the  winter  of  1880-81, 
baptized  two  individuals,  and  bore  tes- 
timony to  hundreds  of  people.  In  the 
spring  the  two  Elders  went  north  to 
Clayton,  Campbell  and  Henry  counties, 
where  they  labored  a  few  months,  and 
after  the  conference  of  the  State,  held 
in  Harolson  county,  he  labored  with  El- 
der William  J.  Packer  in  Polk  and  other 
counties,  where,  in  a  short  time  be- 
tween thirty  and  forty  people  received 
the  gospel  through  their  administra- 
tion. Elder  Taylor  was  then  sent  to 
the  State  of  Kentucky.  Here  he  labored 
with  Jacob  G.  Bigler  with  great  suc- 
cess, baptizing  about  eighteen  people. 
He  was  released  in  the  spring  of  1882. 
During  this  mission  he  enjoyed  much 
power  in  preaching  the  gospel,  and  the 
spirit  of  prophecy  rested  upon  him  to 
a  great  extent.  Many  times  when 
standing  before  a  congregation  of  peo- 
ple, his  countenance  was  resplendent 
with  the  light  and  inspiration  of  the 
Holy  Ghost.  Many  people  were  im- 
pressed with  the  divinity  of  the  mes- 
sage which  he  bore,  and  some  honest- 
in-heart  remarked,  "Surely  you  must 
be  inspired,  or  you  could  not  speak  as 


154 


LATTER-DAY    SAINT 


you  do!"  In  missionary  labor  Bro. 
Taylor  in  a  happy  manner  always 
adapted  himself  to  the  circumstances 
of  the  people  with  whom  he  labored. 
He  would  help  them  plow  the  corn, work 
in  the  cotton  or  tobacco  fields, and  while 
side  by  side  with  the  farm  laborers  he 
was  equal  or  superior  to  them  in  speed 
and  endurance;  while  thus  working  in 
the  field  he  would  preach  the  gospel  to 
those  about  him.  He  had  great  faith 
in  administering  to  the  sick,  and  many 
were  healed  under  his  administration. 
The  spirit  of  prophecy  is  enjoyed  to  a 
marked  extent  by  Elder  Taylor.  The 
following  occurrences  will  serve  to  bear 
out  his  statement:  When  he  read  the 
inaugural  address  of  President  James 
A.  Garfield,  a  spirit  of  inspiration  came 
upon  him  and  he  remarked,  "Some- 
thing will  happen  to  that  man!"  On 
learning  of  the  assassination  of  the 
President,  some  months  later.  Elder 
Taylor's  missionary  companion,  to 
whom  the  prophetic  utterance  was 
made,  recalled  the  prediction  While  la- 
boring with  Elder  Bigler,  the  two  ap- 
proached a  house  one  evening  and  ap- 
plied for  entertainment  Filled  with 
the  gift  of  inspiration  Brother  Taylor, 
in  his  characteristic  manner,  said, 
"We  have  a  message  for  you  from 
heaven;  and  If  you  will  entertain  us, 
it  shall  be  made  known  to  you  by 
dreams  this  very  night  that  we  are  the 
true  servants  of  the  Lord."  They  were 
invited  in  and  their  wants  provided  for. 
That  night  the  father  of  the  house- 
hold as  well  as  some  of  the  children 
had  dreams  that  were  satisfying  to 
them  that  the  Elders  they  were  enter- 
taining were  servants  of  the  Lord.  The 
mother  also  had  a  dream  or  vision 
which  was  most  assuring  to  her  mind 
that  these  men  were  sent  of  God.  In 
this  dream  a  heavenly  messenger  ap- 
peared to  her.  She  had  been  for  some 
time  in  a  quandary  about  which  of  (he 
religions  she  was  acquainted  with  was 
the  right  one  So  she  enquired  of  this 
messenger  concerning  the  matter.  There- 
upon there  passed  before  her  all  the 
preacers  she  was  acquainted  with  or 
had  ever  seen  in  the  neighborhood. 
Then  the  messenger  asked  if  she  was 
satisfied  with  either  of  them.  She  re- 
plied that  she  was  not.  She  was  next 
carried  away  in  a  vision  to  a  steep 
cliff  the  top  of  which  she  was  trying 
to  reach.  One  of  the  sectarian  preach- 
ers whom  she  had  before  met  appeared 


above  her  and  offered  her  something 
to  grasp  and  thereby  draw  herself  up 
to  the  summit  of  the  rock.  What  he 
held  out  to  her  proved  to  be  nothing 
but  a  straw,  and  it  snapped  in  two  the 
moment  she  caught  hold  of  it.  He 
next  offered  a  stick,  but  this  too  proved 
to  be  useless  as  it  was  rotten.  Pres- 
ently Elder  Taylor  appeared  on  the  top 
of  the  cliff.  He  offered  his  hand  to 
help  her  up,  and  she  at  once  gained  the 
desired  footing  upon  the  rock.  Still 
she  was  not  entirely  satisfied  as  to  who 
had  the  truth.  Another  scene  then  pre- 
sented itself  to  view.  An  open  field 
spread  out  before  her  in  which  ap- 
peared all  the  preachers  she  previously 
saw  in  vision.  In  a  moment  they  all 
vanished  from  her  sight  and  directly 
before  her  there  stood  the  two  "Mor- 
mon" Elders  who  had  received  shelter 
under  her  roof.  Upon  being  asked 
again  by  the  messenger  if  she  was 
satisfied,  she  replied  that  she  was.  Thi 
family  was  afterwards  baptized  into 
the  Church.  Some  time  later  Elder 
Taylor,  on  leaving  the  house,  one  very 
clear,  bright  morning,  said  to  a  little 
girl,  belonging  to  this  same  family, 
whom  he  saw  in  the  front  yard,  "My 
little  girl,  a  storm  is  coming  here  to- 
day." The  child  told  her  parents  what 
the  Elder  had  said,  and  they  in  their 
honest  confidence  in  the  word  of  Bro. 
Taylor,  without  waiting  for  further  in- 
dications of  a  storm,  housed  themselves 
up  and  waited  for  its  approach.  Sure 
enough  in  the  afternoon  the  howling 
tornado  came  and  did  considerable 
damage.  But  the  family  who  believed 
in  a  living  Prophet  prepared  for  the 
predicted  event  and  escaped  all  harm. 
While  laboring  in  Rochester,  Butler 
county,  Kentucky,  March  19,  1882,  on 
this  same  mission,  he  wrote  a  letter  to 
Elder  Matthias  F.  Cowley,  who  at  the 
time  was  also  laboring  as  a  missionary 
in  St.  Louis,  Missouri.  In  this  letter 
he  made  this  prediction:  "I  believe  I 
speak  by  the  spirit  of  prophecy  when 
I  say,  if  you  are  faithful  you  will  yet 
become  one  of  the  Twelve  Apostles  of 
the  Church  of  Jesus  Christ  in  all  the 
world,  and  by  the  power  of  God  and  the 
eternal  Priesthood  will  become  great 
in  wisdom  and  knowledge.  Amen."  No 
one  but  the  two  Elders  knew  of  this 
prophecy  until  after  its  fulfillment,  fif- 
teen years  later,  when  Elder  Cowley 
was  chosen  and  ordained  an  Apostle. 
Another  incident  in  his  career  will  serve 


BIOGRAPHICAL    ENCYCLOPEDIA. 


155 


to  show  his  inspirational  nature:  While 
addressing  a  public  meeting  on  the 
principles  of  the  gospel,  during  his  la- 
bors in  the  Colorado  mission,  he  be- 
came impressed  that  a  certain  lady  who 
was  present  would  accept  the  gospel. 
At  the  close  of.  the  meeting  he  inquired 
of  her  what  she  thought  of  the  doc- 
trines she  had  heard.  The  lady  ex- 
pressed herself  as  being  pleased,  and 
willing  to  hear  more  about  the  faith 
of  the  Latter-day  Saints.  An  appoint- 
ment was  therefore  made  for  Elder 
Taylor  to  visit  her  and  her  husband. 
The  result  was  that  the  lady  soon  af- 
terwards joined  the  Church.  Upon  his 
return  from  the  Southern  States,  Elder 
Taylor  was  called  as  a  counselor  to  El- 
der Joseph  H.  Felt,  president  of  the 
Young  Men's  Mutual  Innprovement  As- 
sociations of  the  Salt  Lake  Stake.  In 
this  position  he  labored  with  his  char- 
acteristic energy  and  vim.  In  the  spring 
of  1884  he  was  chosen  to  fill  a  vacancy 
In  the  quorum  of  the  Twelve  Apostles, 
being  ordained  an  Apostle  on  April  9th, 
of  that  year,  by  his  father,  who  was 
then  President  of  the  Church.  Years 
previous  to  his  ordination  to  this  office 
it  had  been  predicted  that  he  would 
receive  this  calling.  The  prediction 
was  made  by  a  sister  who  spoke  in 
tongues  in  a  fast  meeting  in  the  Four- 
teenth Ward,  Salt  Lake  City.  After 
his  call  to  the  Apostleship  much  of 
his  time  has  been  devoted  to  the  min- 
istry, and  he  has  fulfilled  many  im- 
portant calls  of  a  public  character 
which  have  been  made  upon  him  by 
those  in  authority.  Once  he  went  to 
Washington,  D.  C,  in  company  with 
others  and  presented  to  President  G  ro- 
ver Cleveland  an  appeal  from  the 
Saints  for  their  rights.  In  1884  he  went 
on  a  mission  to  Mexico,  and  had  the 
privilege  whilii  there  of  meeting  Presi- 
dent Diaz.  On  his  return  from  this 
mission  he  served  a  term  in  the  Utah 
legislature.  Another  mission  given 
him  was  to  preach  to  the  people  of  the 
Uintah  Stake.  Here  he  performed  a 
good  work,  bringing  a  large  number 
of  people  there  into  the  Church,  and 
awakening  to  renewed  spiritual  life 
many  Church  members  who  had  be- 
come cold  and  indifferent.  He  has 
had  considerable  business  transactions 
with  the  government  officials  of  Cana- 
da, by  whom  he  is  held  in  high  esteem. 
In  1887  he  had  an  interview  with  the 
then    Canadian    premier.    Sir    John     A. 


McDonald,    and    to    whom    he    had    the 
privilege    of   bearing    testimony    to    the 
truth  of  the  gospel.      His  labors  in  the 
interest  of  the  colonies  of  the  Latter- 
day   Saints  in   Canada  have   been   per- 
sistent and  fruitful.       By  his  practical 
preaching  and  inspired  prophesying  he 
has   greatly   encouraged    the    Saints    in 
that  newly-settled  country,  and  has  en- 
deared himself  to  them  by  the  interest 
he  has  taken  in  their  spiritual  as  well 
as   temporal  welfare.       In  1896  he  was 
called  to  open  a  mission  of  the  Church 
in   the     adjoining     State     of   Colorado. 
Elders  Herbert  A.   White,     William  C. 
Clive,  J.  H.  Boshard,  Horace  S.  Ensign 
and  Fred.  C.  Graham  were  assigned  as 
misionaries  to  tjie  same  field,  to  assist 
him  in   the  work.       In   the  latter   part 
of  December,  1896,  he  proceeded  to  Den- 
ver, some  of  his  fellow-misionaries  hav- 
ing gone  there  a  few  days  before.  Here 
the  brethren  at  once  began  active   la- 
bors,  traveling  without  purse  or  scrip. 
Their  efforts  were   attended  with   suc- 
cess, and  within  six  months  some  forty- 
four  persons  were  baptized.      The  work 
there    has    continued      to      grow    and 
spread,  and  over  three  hundred  people 
have  been  brought  into  the  fold  in  this 
State    alone.       The    mission    now     em- 
braces Colorado,.  Wyoming,  New  Mex- 
ico and  Arizona.      Elder  Taylor  is  still 
president  of  the  mission.       His  call  to 
this  work  and  the  success   that  would 
attend   the   labors   of   the   Elders   there 
were     foretold       through       the     gift  of 
tongues  before  any  move  was  made  to 
open  up  the  work  in  that  part  of  fhe 
country.       In     many     respects  Apostle 
Taylor  is  quite  unlike  the  generality  of 
mankind,   as   he   possesses   a   combina- 
tion of  traits  that  is  somewhat  uncom- 
mon.     And  while  these  traits  are  what 
might  be  regarded  as  peculiarities, they 
are    nevertheless     evidences     of   moral 
strength  and  independence  of  spirit,  as 
well  as  originality  of  thought  and  ac- 
tion.       He    is    pre-eminently    spiritual- 
minded,    as   will    be   readily     perceived 
from  what  has  been  related  in  the  fore- 
going;  and  his  talents,  while  not  of  a 
showy   kind,      are    such   as   to   fit   him 
admirably  for  the  public  ministry.     As 
a    missionary   he   is    highly    successful. 
He  has  baptized  over  two  hundred  and 
fifty  new  converts  to  the  gospel,  most 
of   whom    accepted    the    truth    through 
his   personal   ministration.       Having   a 
wide  acquaintance  with  the  Scriptures, 
and  being  sound  in  doctrine,  as  well  as 


156 


LATTER-DAY    SAINT 


apt  in  illustration  by  means  of  anec- 
dote and  incident,  he  is  always  able  to 
hold  the  attention  of  his  hearers, 
whether  in  private  conversation  or  >n 
public  speaking.  What  is  more  im- 
portant, his  preaching  evinces  great 
freedom  of  the  Spirit.  At  times  he 
speaks  with  much  power  and  his  words 
carry  conviction  to  the  hearts  of  thoso 
who  listen.  Again,  particularly  when 
speaking  upon  every-day  duties,  his  re- 
marks are  replete  with  wise  counsel  and 
suggestion,  accompanied  often  with 
quaint  humor. — Edwin  F.  Parry. 

MKRRIIjIi,  MarrinerAVood.a  mem- 
ber of  the  Council  of  Twelve  Apostles 
since  1SS9,  is  the  son  pf  Nathan  Mer- 
rill and  Sarah  Ann  Reynolds,  and  was 
born  Sept.  25,  1832,  in  Sackville,  West- 
moreland county,  New  Brunswick.  His 
father  never  came  to  the  west,  but  de- 
voted his  life  to  farming  and  the  cut- 
ting and  hauling  of  timber  in  his  na- 
tive land.  Apostle  Merrill  was  one  of 
a  family  of  thirteen  children,  and  is 
himself  the  fourth  son.  In  early  youth 
his  life  was  not  unlike  that  of  the  far- 
mer of  those  regions  of  country  in 
which  he  lived,  but  the  spiritual  in- 
fluences of  his  life  began  early  to  mani- 
fest themselves  and  became  prophetic 
of  what  his  later  years  would  be.  Ac 
the  age  of  nine  years  he  received  in 
an  open  vision  a  picture  of  his  own 
future  life  and  that  of  the  people  with 
whom  he  subsequently  became  identi- 
fied. In  simple,  earnest  and  convinc- 
ing words  that  vision  was  related  to  the 
writer  as  follows:  "When  I  was  a  boy 
of  nine  years  my  mother  sent  me  to  the 
hay-field  where  my  father  and  broth- 
ers were  at  work,  to  call  them  to  din- 
ner. On  the  way  I  became  unconscious 
and  was  clothed  with  a  vision  which  I 
distinctly  remembered  when  I  gained 
my  usual  feelings  and  thoughts.  After 
I  became  conscious  I  found  myself  in 'a 
log  cabin  located  on  the  way  to  the 
field.  In  this  cabin  I  was  on  my  knees 
in  the  attitude  of  prayer.  In  the  vision 
I  saw  the  Church  and  the  Prophets  Jo- 
seph and  Brigham.  I  saw  the  travel.s 
of  the  latter  and  of  the  Saints  from 
Nauvoo  and  "\Vinter  Quarters  to  Utah. 
In  the  vision  the  sight  of  covered  bug- 
gies and  wagons  was  peculiar  to  me. 
for  at  that  time  I  had  never  seen  suuh 
vehicles,  nor  had  I  ever  seen  the  mules 
which  I  beheld  in  my  vision.  I  saw 
two   and    sometimes   six     mules     to     a 


wagon,  and  in  the  company  of  pioneers 
I  beheld  two  men  who  had  been  boy 
friends  of  my  youth,  and  each  of  them 
had  more  than  one  wife.  In  my  vision 
at  that  time  the  divinity  of  plural 
marriage  was  revealed  to  me.  I  com- 
prehended the  doctrines  and  principles 
as  they  had  been  revealed.  The  pro- 
gre.ss  and  development  of  the  Church 
were  shown  and  the  persecutions  of 
the  faints  were  made  clear  to  my  un- 
derstanding, and  I  heard  a  voice  which 
told  me  that  all  I  beheld  was  true,  but 
I  was  cautioned  to  keep  to  myself  what 
I  had  seen  until  I  should  have  the  op- 
portunity of  leaving  my  native  country. 
Upon  reaching  home  I  was  pale,  and  it 
was  some  time  before  I  could  speak 
distinctly.  That  incident  of  my  life 
made  a  very  strong  impression  upon 
my  boyish  mind,  and  one  day  I  ven- 
tured to  ask  my  mother  a  question 
about  plural  marriage,  why  it  was  not 
practiced  now  as  in  the  days  of  God's 
ancient  people.  She  answered  in  sur- 
prise   by    asking    what    I    knew  about 


such  things.  Fearing  that  I  might 
betiay  that  secret  revealed,  I  made  no 
more  mention  of  the  matter."  The 
gospel  was  first  preached  to  Apostle 
Merrill  by  a  native  Elder.  Later,  El- 
ders John  Skerry  and  Jesse  W.  Cros- 
by came  into  the  neighborhood  of  his 
home.  In  April,  1852,  at  the  age  of 
nineteen  years,  he  was  baptized  by 
Elder  Skerry,  and  on  the  5th  of  Sep- 
tember of  the  same  year  was  ordained 
a  Priest  by  Elder  Crosby.  About  a 
year  before  this  he  had  learned  that 
his  mother  had  been  for  a  long  time  a 
member  of  the  Church,  she  having  been 
baptized  as  early  as  1836.  His  father 
never  joined   the  Church.       One  of  his 


BIOGRAPHICAL    ENCYCLOPEDIA. 


157 


sisters  joined  the  Church  but  subse- 
quently married  a  non-Mormon  and 
soon  turned  away  from  the  faith.  The 
other  members  of  the  family,  though 
not  willing  to  embrace  the  gospel, 
never  manifested  any  hostile  opposition 
to  it.  Feeling,  that  there  was  work  to 
accomplish  which  could  not  be  done  in 
New  Brunswick,  the  spirit  of  gathering 
having  taken  possession  of  Bro.  Merrill, 
he  started  about  a  year  after  his  bap- 
tism for  the  west.  He  had  gone  no 
farther  than  Boston  when  his  father 
died,  and  word  came  from  his  mother 
to  return  and  settle  the  estate.  After 
affairs  had  been  settled  at  home,  in 
1853  he  started  out  again  and  came  di- 
rect to  Boston.  From  there  he  went  to 
Buffalo  by  rail  and  traveled  on  the 
laikes  to  Chicago.  From  Chicago  he 
rode  on  the  first  railroad  from  Chicago 
to  the  head  of  the  Illinois  river.  At 
the  latter  point  he  took  a  boat  for  St. 
Louis,  which  was  then  headquarters  for 
supplies,  and  then  came  to  Keokuk  by 
steamboat.  As  he  journeyed  westward 
he  stopped  a  week  at  Kanesville,  but 
met  no  Saints  there.  The  company 
with  which  he  traveled  crossed  the 
river  on  ferryboats  and  pursued  their 
way  on  to  Salt  Lake  City.  There  were 
eleven  wagons  in  the  company.  Jesse 
W.  Crosby  was  captain,  and  was  assist- 
ed by  William  Atkinson.  The  com- 
pany arrived  in  Salt  Lake  City  Sept.  11, 
1853.  The  most  important  event  on 
this  journey  associated  with  the  life 
of  Apostle  Merrill  occurred  at  Platte 
river,  where  he,  with  one  other  boy,  de- 
cided to  cross  the  river  and  get  some 
cattle  which  had  been  left  by  other 
pioneers.  They  plunged  into  the  river, 
but  he  soon  became  exhausted,  as  the 
current  was  strong.  Brother  Merrill 
was  unable  to  keep  his  head  out  of 
water,  and  while  floating  down  stream 
went  under  twice;  whereupon  the  com- 
pany became  alarmed,  and  a  Brother 
Reese  was  sent  to  his  assistance.  As 
tie  started  to  sink  a  third  time  he  land- 
ed mysteriously  on  a  sandbar,  and  was 
almost  exhausted.  The  circumstance 
was  peculiar,  because  the  Brother 
Reese  who  had  sought  his  rescue  was 
unable  to  find  the  bar  upon  which 
Brother  Merrill  stood.  The  two  now 
made  their  way  to  the'  opposite  shore, 
where  it  was  shallow  enough  to  walk 
up  stream  until  they  reached  a  place 
where  the  current  moved  from  one  side 
to  the  other.      Here  they  tied    a    com- 


forter to  their  waists,  plunged  again 
into  the  water,in  which  they  were  born? 
safely  across  the  river  by  the  favorable 
current.  Thev  were  both  thankful  to 
get  back  alive,  and  the  cattle,  which 
they  found  disabled,  were  left  undis- 
turbed. Brother  Merrill's  first  effort 
on  reaching  the  Valley  was  to  secure 
work.  His  early  efforts  were  a  source 
of  trial,  as  his  employers  sometimes 
proved  to  be  unreliable.  In  Salt  Lake 
City  he  agreed  to  work  for  $20  per 
month.  After  three  weeks,  some  trou- 
ble arose  and  he  was  about  to  leave  his 
employer,  when  the  latter  offered  him 
$26  per  month.  He  thereupon  agreed 
to  remain  and  work  in  the  canyon  get- 
ling  out  shingle  timber,  where  he  made 
as  many  as  one  thousand  shingles  in 
a  day.  He  was  then  promised  his 
board  and  a  certain  percentage  of  the 
shingles  sold,  but  his  employer  did  the 
selling  and  kept  the  money.  After 
some  controversy,  however,  payment 
was  secured,  and  the  experience  no 
doubt  did  much  to  induce  the  habit 
which  has  subsequently  become  promi- 
nent in  the  life  of  Brother  Merrill,  a 
habit  of  working  on  his  own  account. 
In  November,  1853,  Brother  Merrill  was 
married  to  Sarah  A.  Atkinson,  and  im- 
mediately w-ent  to  a  place  in  Bingham 
canyon,  seven  miles  above  its  mouth, 
where  he  passed  the  winter  in  making 
shingles.  The  new  venture  became  a 
profitable  one.  The  shingles  then  sold 
at  $8  per  thousand,  and  he  was  able  to 
make  five  hundred  a  day.  After  stay- 
ing in  the  canyon  six  weeks  he  ven- 
tured on  a  perilous  journey  home  to  see 
his  wife.  The  snow  was  seven  feet 
deep,  and  having  no  food  with  him 
when  he  began  the  journey,  he  was 
overborne  by  fatigue  and  weakness,  and 
almost  fainted  before  he  reached  a 
cabin  where  a  woman  gave  him  a  small 
piece  of  bread  to  satisfy  his  craving. 
This  was  only  a  taste  for  a  starving 
man,  but  in  a  few  hours  more  food 
was  given,  and  little  by  little  he  over- 
came the  exhausted  condition  to  which 
his  physical  system  was  brought.  After 
his  long  walk  and  sufferings  he  was 
disappointed  in  not  finding  his  wife  at 
home,  as  she  had  gone  off  to  work,  so 
that  he  was  obliged  to  return  without 
seeing  her.  During  Apostle  Merrill's 
life  in  Salt  Lake  City  he  engaged  in 
work  in  North  Mill  Creek  canyon,  and 
gives  the  following  remarkable  experi- 
ence in  an  article   printed   in   the   "Ju- 


158 


LATTER-DAY    SAINT 


venile  Instructor"  of  October  15,  1892. 
The  circumstances  of  the  narration  are 
so  remarkable  that  I  give  it  here  in 
full:  "In  the  winter  of  1855,  I  worked 
in  what  was  then  called  North  Mill 
Creek  canyon.  The  only  team  I  had 
at  that  time  was  one  yoke  of  oxen; 
with  this  I  kept  myself  busy  during 
the  latter  part  of  the  fall  of  1854  and 
the  beginning  of  the  winter  of  1855,  in 
hauling  wood  from  the  canyon  to  Salt 
Lake  City,  where  I  sold  it  for  what  I 
could.  In  January,  1855,  the  snu'w  in 
the  mountains  was  so  deep  u^dt  I  was 
unable  to  procure  firewood;  and  I 
decided  to  haul  some  pine  house  and 
stable  logs.  Myself  and  some  breth- 
ren therefore  shoveled  and  broke  the 
road  to  a  small  red  pine  patch  of  tim- 
ber on  the  side  mountain,  and  when  this 
road  was  completed,  for  two  days  we 
together  hauled  logs  and  timber  to  the 
city.  Just  at  this  time  the  weather 
became  extremely  cold  and  a  dense 
winter  fog  hung  over  the  valley,  hut 
high  up  in  the  mountains  one  could 
overlook  the  cloud  of  fog.  This  condi- 
tion prevailed  for  several  days,  but  ex- 
actly how  cold  it  was  I  cannot  say, 
as  thermometers  were  very  scarce  in 
those  days  It  was  during  one  of  the 
early  days  of  this  cold  spell  that  the 
following  incident  occurred:  I  left  home 
very  early  in  the  morning  to  obtain  a 
load  of  logs.  My  wife  remonstrated 
with  me  and  tried  to  prevail  upon  me 
not  to  go,  as  the  weather  was  so  very 
cold.  I  did  not,  however,  heed  her 
kind  entreaties,  but  started  upon  my 
journey;  and  on  arriving  at  the  timber, 
was  surprised  to  find  that  I  was  the 
only  one  who  had  come  for  a  load.  I 
worked  very  rapidly  for  two  reasons: 
one  was  that  I  might  keep  warm,  and 
the  other  that  I  might  return  home 
early.  I  cut,  trimmed  and  prepared  five 
nice,  red  pine  logs,  about  thirty  feet 
long  and  ten  inches  thick  at  the  butt- 
end,  and  about  six  inches  at  the  top. 
These  I  succeeded  in  getting  down  to 
the  place  where  I  had  left  my  bob- 
sled and  camp  outfit,  about  a  half  mile 
distant.  The  place  of  loading  was  very 
slippery,  it  being  rather  on  a  side  hill. 
I  had  my  five  logs  arranged  side  by  side 
below  the  sled,  my  oxen  being  chained 
to  a  stump  where  they  were  quietly 
eating  their  hay.  I  proceeded  to  load 
the  logs,  designing  to  place  three  on  the 
bottom  and  two  on  the  top  of  the  three, 
which   was  my  usual     way  of  baulin'j 


timber  of  that  kind.  I  succeeded  in  get- 
ting the  first  log  on  the  sled  without 
much  difficulty.  The  bunk  (canyon 
men  will  know  what  a  bunk  is.  especial- 
ly if  they  were  born  in  New  Bruns- 
wick) being  icy,  it  was  with  some  diffi- 
culty that  I  could  make  the  log  stay 
where  I  had  placed  it  on  the  sled;  but 
I  finally  succeeded  in  blocking  it  up, 
and  thought  it  secure.  Then  I  turned 
around  to  load  the  second  log,  and  as 
I  did  so,  the  blocking  gave  way  and 
the  first  log  slid  rapidly  from  the  sled, 
catching  me  in  the  hollow  of  my  legs 
and  throwing  me  forward  on  my  face 
across  the  logs  lying  there.  In  falling, 
the  hand-spike  in  my  hand,which  I  had 
been  using  in  loading  the  logs,  fell  far 
from  my  reach;  and  I  was  thus  pin- 
ioned completely  across  the  timber.  The 
log  that  had  slipped  from  the  sled  lay 
across  my  legs,  which  were  on  the  hard 
ice,  and  my  body  was  lying  across  the 
four  logs.  I  began  to  think  that  I  was 
thus  doomed  to  perish  in  the  canyon. 
I  struggled  desperately  to  release  my- 
self, but  every  effort  seemed  to  bind 
me  the  more  firmly  beneath  the  terrible 
load  which  seemed  crushing  my  very 
bones.  While  thus  struggling  for  relief 
I  also  prayed  earnestly  to  the  Lord  for 
assistance,  and  while  doing  so  I  lost 
consciousness.  When  I  next  regained 
my  senses  I  was  a  half  a  mile  down 
the  canyon  from  the  place  where  I  be- 
gan to  load,  and  was  seated  upon  the 
logs,  which  were  loaded  in  the  exact 
position  that  I  had  designed  to  put 
them — three  on  the  bottom  and  two  on 
the  top  of  the  three.  All  were  nicely 
bound  with  chains;  I  was  sitting  upon 
my  sheep-skin  with  the  woolly  side  up; 
my  whip  was  placed  on  the  load  care- 
fully so  it  could  not  lose;  my  overcoat, 
home-made  jeans,  lay  across  the  load 
in  front  of  me,  but  within  my  reach. 
As  I  aroused  from  my  stupor,  I  spoke 
to  my  oxen  and  they  stopped;  and  I 
viewed  my  surroundings  with  feelings 
that  cannot  be  described.  I  quickly 
took  my.  bearings,  as  I  was  familiar 
with  every  point  in  the  canyon.  Be- 
ing quite  cold,  I  essayed  to  jump  from 
the  load,  and  put  on  my  overcoat;  but 
to  my  surprise  my  limbs  refused  to  do 
my  bidding,  they  were  so  sore  and  my 
body  was  so  badly  bruised.  I  sat  there 
and  reflected  for  a  few  moments  upon 
my  peculiar  situation;  looked  around 
mv  load  and  found  everything  in  place 
just   as   I   would   have   put    things   my- 


BIOGRAPHICAL,    ENCYCLOPEDIA. 


159 


self;  my  ax  was  firmly  bedded  in  the 
butt  end  of  one  of  the  logs,  and  every- 
thing- else  was  in  first-class  condition. 
After  making  another  unsuccessful  ef- 
fort to  get  from  the  load,  I  reached  my 
coat,  put  it  on  as  best  I  could  in  a  sit- 
ting posture,  and  started  my  oxen  for 
home.  I  arrived  safely  about  an  hour 
later  than  my  usual  time.  My  wife 
was  very  uneasy  about  me  on  account 
of  the  lateness  of  my  arrival,  and  be- 
cause of  the  fear  ever  present  with  her 
during  the  whole  day,  that  something 
would  happen  to  my  injury.  She  met 
me  at  the  corral  and  carried  me  in  her 
arms  to  the  house,  which  she  was  then 
quite  able  to  do,  I  weighing  but  a  little 
over  a  hundred  pounds.  I  was  placed 
in  a  comfortable  position  on  the  bed, 
and  she  then  cared  for  my  team.  For 
some  days  she  carefully  nursed  me  be- 
fore I  was  able  to  move  around  the 
house.  I  have  hesitated  to  narrate 
this  incident  because  of  the  skepticism 
which  is  so  common  at  the  present  day, 
even  among  some  who  profess  to  be 
Saints,  concerning  things  somewhat  su- 
pernatural; but  I  can  truthfully  testi- 
fy in  all  soberness,  that  some  power 
which  I  did  not  see  assisted  me  from 
the  position  which  doubtless  would 
have  speedily  cost  me  my  life.  As  T 
was  preserved  for  some  purpose  known 
to  my  Heavenly  Father,  so  do  I  also 
believe  that  God  will  bless  and  preserve 
the  lives  of  His  faithful  children,  just 
as  long  as  it  is  necessary  for  them  to 
live  to  accomplish  their  missions  upon 
the  earth.  The  youth  of  Zion,  and  ail 
who  have  made  covenants  with  the 
Lord,  should  therefore  exercise  faith  in 
Him,  and  He  will,  if  necessary,  send 
angelic  visitors  to  sustain  and  preserve 
those  who  put  their  trust  in  him."  In 
the  early  spring  of  1854  Elder  Merrill 
moved  to  Bountiful,  where  he  engaged 
in  shingle-making.  At  this  time  there 
were  very  few  inhabitants  in  the  town 
and  the  land  was  in  process  of  distribu- 
tion. Brother  Merrill  received  a  certi- 
ficate from  Pres.  Young  granting  him 
one  hundred  acres,  an  unusually  large 
amount  at  that  time.  Of  this  Bro. 
Merrill  gave  one-third  to  his  father-in- 
law,  and  later  divided  what  was  left 
to  him  with  a  poor  Scandinavian  neigh- 
bor. A  few  months  later,  Pres.  Young 
spoke  to  Bro.  Merrill  about  the  land 
and  was  pleased,  though  not  surprised, 
to  learn  that  he  had  divided  it  up 
among  his  brethren,  Pres.  Young  then 


remarking  that  when  the  certificate  was 
given  he  felt  satisfied  that  Bro.  Merrill 
would  not  keep  it  all.  During  the 
winter  of  1859  and  1860  Elders  Benson 
and  Hyde  called  at  the  home  of  Bro. 
Merrill  and  advised  him  to  move  to 
Cache  valley,  where  there  was  mor^ 
land  and  were  better  prospects  finan- 
cially, and  a  good  opening  for  tlie 
Saints.  He  made  preparation,  and  in 
February,  1860,  went  to  P.ichmond,  but 
did  not  remain  long.  In  March,  of  the 
same  year,  he  made  the  journey  again 
and  found  the  snow  still  very  deep.  At 
this  time  there  were  but  few  people  in 
Logan  or  Cache  valley,  the  first  set- 
tlers having  come  to  that  place  in  1859. 
Journeying  farther  north,  Elder  Mer- 
rill made  his  way  to  Richmond,  in 
company  with  others,  and  encamped 
for  some  time  where  the  dairy  north  of 
the  town  now  stands,  and  they  were 
about  to  continue  in  a  northerly  direc- 
tion their  travels,  when  a  voice  came 
to  Brother  Merrill,  saying,  "Turn 
around  and  go  south."  The  words  were 
repeated,  and  without  saying  anything 
to  his  companions.  Elder  Merrill  started 
southward  and  stopped  when  he 
reached  the  point  where  Richmond  now 
stands,  and  there  began  work.  It  was 
during  these  early  years  that  Brother 
Merrill  established  his  reputation  as  a 
most  indefatigable  and  ceaseless  work- 
er. From  four  in  the  morning  till  late 
at  night  he  toiled  in  the  canyons,  mak- 
ing his  two  trips  a  day.  Naturally  a 
leader  of  the  community  in  which  he 
lived,  he  was  selected  in  1861  as  the 
second  Bishop  in  Richmond,  which  of- 
fice he  filled  for  eighteen  years.  It 
was  during  the  years  of  his  bishopric 
at  Richmond  that  the  Utah  Northern 
railroad  was  under  construction  from 
Ogden  to  Idaho  and  Montana.  Elder 
Merrill  became  a  contractor  in  the  con- 
struction of  the  new  road,  and  in  a 
sense  a  mediator  between  the  people 
of  Cache  valley  and  the  railroad  com- 
pany. During  his  relations  with  that 
road  he  distributed  among  the  people 
for  work  done  some  $780,000.  For  his 
own  work  he  received  $150  per  month. 
In  addition  to  his  personal  services  he 
also  entered  into  contract  with  the 
company  by  which  he  used  his  own 
teams  and  gave  employment  to  his 
family.  This  was  the  beginning  of 
his  financial  progress.  The  relation- 
Khip  between  the  company  and  Brother 
Merrill  became  in  time  of  the  most  cor- 


160 


LATTER-DAY    SAINT 


dial  character.  His  judgment  was  re- 
lied upon,  and  the  company  was  highly 
satisfied  with  the  relation  sustained 
between  it  and  him.  In  some  places, 
as  In  Beaver  canyon,  the  work  was 
taken  at  such  a  low  figure  by  the  con- 
tracts into  which  he  entered  that  he 
himself  made  nothing,  but  the  people 
did  well.  The  company,  learning  of 
this  and  aware  of  the  money  and  time 
he  had  saved  them,  gave  him  as  a 
souvenir  a  gold  watch.  On  his  return 
to  Richmond  after  the  construction  of 
the  road,  he  invested  his  money  in  three 
hundred  and  twenty  acres  of  land 
and  a  grist  mill.  The  latter  brought  in 
very  little  income,  but  proved  of  very 
great  value  to  the  people.  It  was  now 
the  natural  bent  of  his  inclinations,  and 
his  time  has  since  been  devoted  to 
stock  raising  and  agriculture.  To-day 
his  large  farms  and  the  enormous 
products  which  they  yield,  attest  his 
splendid  success  in  advanced  agricul- 
ture, a  profession  for  which  he  pos- 
sessed the  strongest  inclinations.  In 
1870  he  was  given  a  three  months'  leave 
of  absence  to  take  a  short  mission  to 
Nova  Scotia  and  New  Brunswick,  but 
in  two  months  was  recalled.  In  1879 
he  was  called  to  act  as  a  counselor  to 
Stake  President  "Wm.  B.  Preston,  an 
office  which  he  held  for  ten  years.  In 
1884  he  was  counselor  in  the  Stake  to 
President  Charles  O.  Card,  and  in  the 
same  year  was  appointed  to  the  presi- 
dency of  the  Logan  Temple,  with 
Apostle  Moses  Thatcher  and  Elder  N. 
C.  Edlefsen  as  his  counselors.  In  1889 
he  was  ordained  an  Apostle  by  Presi- 
dent Wilford  Woodruff.  George  Q.  Can- 
non and  Joseph  F.  Smith  and  eight  of 
the  Apostles  being  present.  The  follow- 
ing year  he  went  east  to  get  the  gene- 
alogy and  record  of  his  family.  In 
October.  1899,  he  was  appointed  presi- 
dent of  the  Cache  Stake  of  Zion.  Dur- 
ing his  residence  in  Cache  valley  he  ha.s 
been  prominent  in  the  civil  affairs  of 
the  county  and  State.  In  1876  and 
1878  he  served  two  terms  in  the  legis- 
lature, one  in  the  house  and  one  in  the 
council.  He  was  a  member  of  the 
county  court  for  more  than  ten  years. 
The  position  of  postmaster  in  Rich- 
mond he  held  for  twenty  years.  In 
189G  he  was  appointed  a  member  of  the 
Agricultural  College  board,  which  office 
he  held  for  nearly  four  years.  At  pres- 
ent he  is  a  member  of  the  Brigham 
Young  College  hoard.       Perhaps  one  of 


the  greatest  characteristics  of  Apostle 
Merrill's  life,  and  the  one  for  which  he 
will  be  most  noted  among  generations 
to  come,  is  the  large  and  honorable 
family  which  will  ever  characterize 
his  name.  His  family  is  not  only  one 
of  the  largest  in  the  Church,  but  one 
of  the  most  exemplary  to  be  found  any- 
where. He  is  the  father  of  forty-five 
children,  five  of  whom  are  dead.  Ha 
is  the  grandfather  of  one  hundred  and 
twenty-seven,  and  has  twenty-six  chil- 
dren married.  Six  of  his  sons  have  al- 
ready been  called  on  missions.  A  num- 
ber have  become  prominent  in  educa- 
tional circles,  and  all  are  industrious 
and  thrifty  citizens  of  the  communi- 
ties in  which  they  live.  All  his  chil- 
dren enjoy  a  good  standing  in  the 
Church  and  it  is  not  known  that  any 
of  them  are  addicted  to  any  bad  hab- 
its. Apostle  Merrill  is  one  of  those 
positive  characters  who  do  not  yield  to 
floating  opinions  and  momentary  preju- 
dices. His  convictions  grow  by  ex- 
perience and  observation,  and  when 
once  formed  are  not  easily  removed. 
His  life  has  always  been  characterized 
by  the  greatest  earnestness  and  sin- 
cerity, and  the  simple  and  unaffected 
manner  of  his  intercourse  with  men 
constitute  one  of  the  greatest  charms 
of  his  personality.  Ke  is  further  a 
man  of  strong  attachments,  and  his 
friendship  when  once  bestowed  is  of  the 
most  enduring  quality  His  great  sym- 
pathies and  generous  nature  make  his 
advice  frequently  sought  by  his  breth- 
ren, and  he  is  perhaps  nowhere  strong- 
er in  the  Church  today  than  in  the 
capacity  of  a  private  adviser  and  coun- 
selor to  those  in  misfortune  as  well 
as  to  those  who  need  guidance  in  the 
affairs  of  life  His  life  in  Cache  val- 
ley and  its  far-reaching  influence 
throughout  northern  Utah  and  south- 
ern Idaho  has  for  many  years  made 
him  a  leading  character  among  men. 
His  great  farms,  his  beautiful  homes, 
his  industrial  enterprises  in  dairying 
and  milling  all  indicate  a  high  degree 
of  thrift  and  enterprise  which  show  up 
strongly  the  life  and  character  of  the 
man.  His  powers  of  organization,  his 
personal  and  family  discipline,  his  per- 
sistent effort  and  indomitable  will, make 
his  life  a  study  of  value  to  all  young 
men  who  undertake  to  grasp  and  deal 
with  the  material  conditions  of  life 
and  bring  the  forces  of  nature  to  their 
aid  and  use.      The  Apostle's  broad  form 


BIOGRAPHICAL,    ENCYCLOPEDIA. 


161 


and  the  set  features  of  his  face,  in- 
dicate superior  strength,  aiid  his  whole 
bearing  indicates,  above  all  things, 
power.  He  is  not  a  man  of  many 
words,  but  is  prone  to  feel  the  silent 
forces  of  life  and  observe  the  feelings 
and  thoughts  of  others.  Little  given 
to  speculative  philosophy  and  poetical 
imaginations,  he  is  nevertheless  a  man 
of  strong  and  abiding  faith,  of  faith 
that  has  to  do  with  the  practical  af- 
fairs of  life,  and  which  serves  the  pres- 
ent needs  of  those  who  have  strong 
convictions. — Joseph    M.    Tanner. 

L/UND,  Anthon  Henrik,  a  member 
of  the  Council  of  Twelve  Apostles  since 
1889,  was  born  May  15,  1844,  in  Aalborg, 
Denmark.  When  he  was  three  years 
and  a  half  old  his  mother  was  taken 
seriously  sick.  The  visit  of  the  doc- 
tor, the  subdued  talking,  and  the  anxie- 
ty he  saw  on  the  faces  around  him  im- 
pressed him  deeply.  He  even  remem- 
bers what  a  dismal,  rainy  day  it  was. 
Next  he  remembers  seeing  his  beloved 
mother  lying  in  her  coffin.  These  two 
occasions  are  indelibly  stamped  on  his 
memory.  In  the  fall  of  1847  his  father 
was  drafted  into  the  Danish  army  and 
sent  to  Schleswig,  where  an  insurrec- 
tion was  threatening.  In  1848  Schles- 
wig and  Holstein  revolted  and  with  the 
aid  of  Prussia  and  Germany  waged  a 
sanguinary  war  for  three  years.  Dur- 
ing this  struggle,  Denmark  needed  all 
her  patriotic  sons, and  his  father  served 
with  distinction  through  the  whole 
war,  and  did  not  return  until  the  boy 
was  seven  years  old.  It  was  a  beauti- 
ful day  when  the  victorious  army  re- 
turned; and  standing  near  a  triumphal 
arch,  having  hold  of  his  grandmother's 
hand,  the  boy  watched  the  soldiers 
marching  under  it.  At  last  his  grand- 
mother pointed  out  the  smiling  face 
of  his  father,  marching  with  his  mus- 
ket on  his  shoulder.  A  few  hours  later 
he  was  folded  in  his  father's  arms. 
This,  was  a  happy  day  for  the  boy. 
Shortly  after  his  father  moved  away 
about  thirty-five  miles,  and  he  was  left 
with  his  grandmother,  who  proved  a 
tender,  loving  mother  to  him,  and  he 
became  very  much  attached  to  her: 
and  when  his  father  a  couple  of  years 
later  wanted  to  take  the  boy  with  him 
home,  he  pleaded  to  be  left  with  his 
grandmother.  She  bestowed  upon  him 
a  mother's  love  and  devotion.  She  was 
the  soul  of  honor,  and  though  her  own 

Vol.  1,  No.  11. 


children  thought  her  discipline  rather 
strict.  Brother  Lund  only  remembers 
how  tenderly  she  cared  for  him.  At 
the  early  age  of  four  years  Anthon 
Lund  was  sent  to  a  private  school, 
where  he  mastered  the  first  elements 
of  reading,  writing,  arithmetic,  etc., and 
when  seven  years  old  he  entered  the 
public  school  of  the  city  of  Aalborg. 
His  industry  as  a  student  and  his  ap- 
titude for  learning  are  shown  in  the 
fact  that  he  rapidly  advanced  from  one 
grade  to  another,  passing  entirely  over 
the  second  grade.  And  while  prepar- 
ing himself  for  graduation  in  the  course 
of  study  given  in  the  school,  he  took, 
besides,  private  lessons  in  English, and 
also  studied  German  and  French.  At 
the  age  of  eleven  years  he  held  the  first 


place  in  the  school.  Already  at  thi.s 
early  age  Brother  Lund  had  an  ir- 
resistible desire  to  study  the  word  of 
God.  In  his  grandmother's  house  was 
a  Bible  belonging  to  his  uncle,  which 
the  latter  had  forbidden  him  to  touch 
for  fear  he  should  soil  or  otherwise  de- 
face the  precious  volume.  But  his 
grandmother  often  asked  him  to  read 
some  of  its  chapters  to  her.  This  filled 
him  with  an  ardent  desire  to  read  the 
whole  book,  and  encouraged  in  this  by 
his  grandmother  he  commenced  at  the 
beginning  and  made  himself  familiar 
with  the  main  events  narrated  in  that 
sacred  volume.  One  day  in  Lent,  when 
the  streets  were  filled  with  people  look- 
ing at  the  Lent  procession,  he  thought: 
What  a  delightful  day  I  can  have  read- 
ing the  Bible!  He  imagined  that  his 
uncle  would  be  among  the  sight-see- 
ing multitude.  He  had  comfortably 
settled    himself    in    his    favorite     place 

March  16.  1901. 


162 


LATTER-DAY    SAINT 


with  the  Bible  open.reading  the  fascin- 
ating history  of  Israel  under  the  kings, 
when  he  heard  a  step  on  the  stairs;  the 
door  opened,  and  there  stood  his  uncle 
before  him.  He  asked  his  uncle  to 
excuse  his  having  taken  the  Bible  with- 
out permission.  His  uncle  answered: 
"I  am  delighted,  my  boy,  to  find  you 
thus  employed  on  a  day  like  this.  Read 
it  as  much  as  you  like."  As  he  was 
only  in  his  eighth  year,  his  uncle  was. 
surprised  to  find  how  much  he  had 
read,  and  how  well  he  had  grasped  the 
meaning.  Brother  Lund  says  those 
early  readings  have  been  a  great  help 
to  him,  as  they  fastened  the  events  of 
Bible  narrative  securely  upon  his  mind. 
Not  having  brothers  or  sisters  he  was 
left  to  himself  much  of  the  time,  and 
books  became  his  company.  He  read 
all  the  books  he  could  get  and  all  his 
pocket  money  was  spent  at  the  book 
stores.  He  was  then,  as  later,  fond  of 
visiting  such  places.  When,  in  the  year 
1850,  Elder  Erastus  Snow  arrived  in 
Denmark,  to  open  up  the  mission  in 
the  Scandinavian  countries,  one  among 
the  early  converts  was  the  uncle  of 
Anthon  Lund,  Jens  Andersen,  at  pres- 
ent a  respected  resident  of  Cedar  City, 
Utah  His  grandmother,  too,  accepted 
the  gospel  just  before  his  uncle  emi- 
grated, and  was  baptized  in  1853,  when 
Anthon  was  nine  years  old.  In  this 
way  he  came  in  constant  contact  with 
"Mormonism."  In  his  grandmothers 
home  he  found  an  abundance  of  "Mor- 
mon" literature.  He  read  this  eager- 
Iv  and  the  Lord  opened  his  heart  and 
his  understanding  to  believe  and  to 
comprehend  the  truths  set  forth.  He 
soon  became  familiar  wath  the  history 
of  the  Church  and  its  doctrines.  El- 
der Anthon  Lund  says  he  can  hardly 
remember  a  time  when  he  was  not  con- 
vinced of  the  truth  of  the  gospel.  From 
the  first  moment  it  was  presented,  it 
appeared  to  him,  in  comparison  with 
common  orthodoxy,  as  the  clearest  day- 
light compared  to  the  uncertain  flare 
of  the  northern  aurora.  It  became  tc 
him  "the  pearl  of  great  price,"  for  the 
possession  of  which  he  would  gladly 
sacrifice  everything.  Yet  there  was 
many  a  conflict  in  his  young  heart,  be- 
fore the  step  was  taken  which  united 
him  with  the  Church.  Those  who  at 
that  time  identified  themselves  with 
the  Church  were  generally  ostracised 
socially,  and  often  subjected  to  perse- 
cution,  and  some  years  elapsed  before 


Anthon,  though  fully  convinced  of  the 
truth  of  the  ^-  spel,  asked  for  baptism. 
At  that  time  there  was  a  great  deal 
of  persecution  of  the  Saints  in  Aalborg, 
and  this  spirit  actuated  even  the 
school  boys,  and  to  such  an  extent  that 
none  of  the  Saints  could  send  their 
children  to  the  public  schools.  Brother 
j-iund  was  the  only  one  belonging  to 
the  Saints  w^ho  attended  the  school. 
Sometimes  the  boys  threatened  to 
"baptize"  him,  and  at  other  times  they 
united  in  beating  him,  but  as  a  general 
lule  he  was  a  favorite  with  both 
teachers  and  fellow-students.  One  of 
his  father's  younger  brothers,  about 
three  years  older  than  Anthon,  w'as  In 
the  same  class,  and  although  he  hated 
"Mormonism,"  he  would  not  allow  any- 
one to  abuse  his  nephew.  Having  tact 
enough  never  to  complain  against  those 
who  had  persecuted  him,  and  always 
ready  to  help  the  boys  in  their  studies, 
he  won  them.  Nearly  every  one  in  his 
class  was  two  or  three  years  his  senior; 
still  they  did  not  envy  him  his  promo- 
tion. To  become  "Dux."  or  first  in 
the  upper  class,  was  the  ambition  or 
all  the  pupils.  When  the  school  met 
after  the  summer  vacation,  when 
Brother  Lund  was  eleven  years  old,  and 
all  were  anxious  to  know  where  their 
places  would  be,  the  class  was  unani- 
m.ous  in  giving  the  first  place  to  him 
and  would  not  allow  him  to  take  his 
old  place.  At  the  examination  the 
bishop  of  the  diocese  was  present  and 
personally  catechised  Brother  Lund. 
The  answers  surprised  him,  and  he 
said  to  the  whole  school:  "I  have  not 
heard  a  boy  answer  so  well  in  any  of 
the  two  hundred  schools  in  my  dio- 
cese." All  the  teachers  but  one  were 
proud  of  the  praise  bestowed  on  one  of 
their  pupils.  One,  however,  a  bitter 
"Mormon-hater,"  felt  much  chagrined. 
On  several  occasions  he  would  slur  the 
boy  because  of  his  belief.  One  day  he 
said:  "It  is  expected  that  the  'Dux'  of 
the  school  shall  give  a  good  example 
to  the  pupils.  What  a  shame  if  they 
should  imitate  yours  and  become  Mor- 
mons!" Brothel'  Lund  answered,  "They 
would  never  regret  it."  The  principal 
of  the  school  was  Brother  Lund's  best 
friend.  When  he  learned  that  the  boy 
acted  on  his  own  conviction  he  said: 
'I  thought  you  were  persuaded  by 
others,  but  I  see  you  are  thoroughly 
convinced  of  the  truth  of  'Mormon- 
ism.'    Follow   your   honest   convictions, 


BIOGRAPHICAL    ENCYCLOPEDIA. 


163 


my  boy.  I  would  not  hinder  you  from 
obeying  the  dictates  of  your  con- 
science." Brother  Lund  loved  this  good 
man,  and  when  he  went  back  on  his 
first  mission  he  learned  with  regret 
that  he  had  died  a  short  time  before. 
He  loved  his  relatives  dearly,  and,  as 
they  were  opposed  to  "Mormonism" 
they  sought  to  keep  him  from  joining 
the  Church.  They  wanted  him  to  take 
a  collegiate  course,  which  especially 
suited  his  inclinations;  his  teachers  al- 
so urged  him  to  take  such  a  course. 
They  did  not  know  how  great  a  temp- 
tation this  v.as  to  the  boy,  but  the  Lord 
gave  him  strength  to  resist  it,  and  His 
Spirit  continually  strove  with  him,  re- 
minding him  of  his  duty.  He  was  bap- 
tized May  15,  1856,  on  the  twelfth  anni- 
versary of  his  birth,  by  Elder  Jacob 
Julander,  who  died  a  short  time  ago 
at  Monroe;  and  on  the  18th  of  May  he 
was  confirmed  by  Elder  Peter  Madsen. 
now  livirig  in  the  Second  "Ward,  Salt 
Lake  City.  When  Brother  Lund  joined 
the  Church,  Elder  Christian  D.  Fjeld- 
sted  presided  over  Aalborg  conference. 
Brother  Fjeldsted's  sermons  made  a 
deep  impression  on  the  young  boy.  His 
original,  convincing  and  entertaining 
style  was  much  admired.  At  the  same 
time  Elder  Christian  A.  Madsen,  now 
Bishop  of  Gunnison,  was  pastor  over 
Aalborg  and  several  other  conferences. 
His  excellent  wife,  who  was  a  highly 
educated  lady,  rendered  the  boy  much 
assistance  in  his  studies  of  English, 
and  he  became  very  much  attached 
to  Brother  and  Sister  Madsen.  When 
Brother  Lund  was  thirteen  years  old 
he  was  called  to  labor  in  the  vineyard. 
His  mission  was  to  teach  emigrating 
Saints  English,  to  distribute  tracts  and 
help  the  Elders  hold  meetings.  When 
eiving  his  first  report  at  the  confer- 
ence. Brother  Fjeldsted  lifted  him  upon 
a  table,  and  thus  he  made  his  debut 
before  an  audience.  Besides  his  tracts 
he  always  carried  copies  of  the  "Mil- 
lennial Star,"  which  he  would  read  to 
the  Saints,  he  being  able  to  translate 
them  into  Danish  nearly  as  fluently  as 
if  he  were  reading  Danish.  The  Saints 
were  delighted  to  listen  and  were 
strengthened  in  their  faith.  A  series 
of  articles  published  in  the  "Millen- 
nial Star,"  entitled  "Answers  to  Objec- 
tions," was  a  great  help  to  him  in  meet- 
ing the  arguments  of  the  ministers, 
who  were  then  publishing  in  Danish 
the   same   falsehoods   about   the    "Mor- 


mons," which  had  flooded  America 
and  England.  When  he  was  first  sent 
out  to  perform  missionary  work,  some 
thought  the  "Mormons"'  were  very  un- 
wise in  sending  one  so  young.  Such 
a  remark  was  once  reported  to  Brother 
Lund.  He  said:  "Never  mind,  I  will 
make  that  man  my  friend."  He  did  so, 
for  in  the  course  of  time  the  man  who 
had  spoken  so  slightingly  of  him  asked 
to  be  baptized  and  wanted  Brother 
Lund  to  perform  the  ordinance. 
Brother  Lund  became  well  acquainted 
in  the  whole  conference.  He  traveled 
"without  purse  and  scrip,"  and,  during 
the  four  years  and  a  half  he  labored 
as  a  missionary,  he  does  not  remember 
having  bought  half  a  dozen  meals. 
Friends  were  raised  up  to  him  on  every 
hand,  and  men  outside  of  the  Church 
told  him  to  let  them  know  what  he 
needed  and  they  would  furnish  him  the 
money,  and  they  did  so.  One  day,  while 
he  was  out  tracting,  he  visited  a  large 
mill-owner,  whom  he  found  in  his  libra- 
ry with  another  gentleman.  After 
spending  an  hour  in  answering  their 
questions,  the  man  of  the  house  said: 
■'It  is  too  bad  that  you  are  a  'Mormon.' 
If  you  will  study  theology  at  the  uni- 
versity in  Copenhagen  and  become  a 
Lutheran  minister,  I  will  pay  the  ex- 
penses and  I  will  make  you  my  heir." 
Brother  Lund  answered,  "I  have  no 
doubt  you  are  a  rich  man,  but  you  have 
not  money  enough  to  buy  my  allegiance 
to  the  Church  of  God."  The  answer 
seemed  to  please  both  the  gentlemen. 
Brother  Lund  has  wondered  since 
whether  the  man  made  the  offer  in  good 
faith.  He  believed  at  the  time  that 
he  did;  but  it  was  no  temptation  to 
him.  He  felt  he  had  found  "the  pearl 
of  great  price."  His  experiences  in 
the  mission  field  were  varied  and  in- 
teresting. Once  he  had  promised  to 
meet  at  a  certain  place  to  help  hold  a 
meeting.  To  reach  this  place  he  walked 
about  ten  miles  facing  a  heavy  snow 
storm.  When  he  arrived  at  the  place 
he  found  the  house  full  of  people,  but 
the  Elders  had  not  come.  He  sat  down 
among  the  people  and  heard  them  say: 
"The  'Mormons'  have  fooled  us  today." 
When  the  time  for  the  commencement 
of  the  meeting  came,  and  he  saw  no  one 
else  would  be  there,  he  arose  and  asked 
the  people  kindly  to  give  him  their  at- 
tention. How  astonished  the  people 
looked  at  the  boy!  But  they  were  so 
still   that  you   could   hear   a   pin   drop. 


i<;4 


LATTER-DAY    SAINT 


After  the  meeting  every  one  present 
came  and  shook  hands  with  him  and 
thanked  him.  Several  present  have 
since  joined  the  Church  and  emigrated 
to  Zion.  It  was  not  often  Brother  Lund 
was  molested.  Even  in  places  where 
other  Elders  had  suffered  persecution 
he  succeeded  in  making  friends.  Some- 
times, however,  he  also  tasted  the  op- 
posite. On  one  occasion,  when  he  was 
out  inviting  people  to  a  meeting  in  the 
evening,  he  came  into  a  house  and  in- 
formed a  woman  he  met  that  there 
would  be  a  meeting  that  evening,  and 
invited  her  to  attend.  "What  kind  of 
a  meeting?"  she  asked.  "A  'Mormon' 
meeting,"  he  replied.  There  came  a 
change  over  her  face  instantly  and 
she  became  a  perfect  fury.  She  grabbed 
her  fire-tongs  and  screamed,  "I  will 
give  you  'Mormon*  meetingi"  and  flew 
at  him.  He  thought  discretion  the 
better  part  of  valor,  and  ran  oiit  of  the 
house,  but  the  woman  followed,  and  in 
her  highest  key  called  on  her  husband 
to  shoot  the  "Mormon."  She  made 
such  a  disturbance  that  the  neighbors 
came  running  to  see  what  was  the  mat- 
ter. Years  afterwards,  when  Brother 
Lund  had  charge  of  the  Ephraim  Co- 
op., a  lady  came  into  the  store  and 
said  to  him:  "You  do  not  know  me, 
but  I  have  seen  you  once.  Do  you  re- 
member a  woman  who  ran  after  you 
with  a  pair  of  fire-tongs?"  "Yes,"  he 
answered,  "but  you  are  not  that  wo- 
man, for  her  face  I  have  never  forgot- 
ten." "No,"  she  said,  "I  was  her  neigh- 
bor, and  seeing  her  running  after  you, 
I  asked  her  what  you  had  done.  She 
said  that  you  had  invited  her  to  a  'Mor- 
mon' meeting.  I  became  curious  to 
learn  something  about  the  'Mormons' 
and  went  to  the  meeting.  I  heard  you 
speak  and  was  convinced  of  the  truth." 
The  Lord  made  use  of  the  wrath  of  an 
enemy  to  further  His  purpose.  Brother 
Lund  had  on  one  occasion  obtained 
permission  to  hold  a  meeting  in  a  town 
where  it  had  hitherto  been  impossible 
to  make  an  opening.  The  meeting  was 
appointed  for  the  next  Sunday;  and  in 
company  with  a  couple  of  Elders  Broth- 
er Lund  went  there.  On  entering 
the  town  they  were  warned  not  to  go 
to  the  meeting,  as  the  mob  would  dis- 
turb the  meeting,  and  they  had  given 
the  blacksmith,  the  bully  of  several 
parishes,  all  the  liquor  he  would  drink 
in  order  to  get  him  to  assail  the  "Mor- 
mon" Elders.      They  thanked  their  in- 


formant, but  said  they  must  honor 
their  appointment.  They  found  the 
house  full  of  people  and  great  numbers 
outside  that  could  not  get  in.  The 
meeting  was  opened,  and  in  stalked  the 
blacksmith.  Brother  Lund  says  when 
he  saw  him.  he  thought  he  was  a  very 
Polyphemus.  He  had  only  one  eye,  a 
sinister  look,  and  fists  like  sledge  ham- 
mers. The  Elders  prayed  earnestly 
that  God  would  overrule  the  plans  of 
the  w'icked.  The  advent  of  the  black- 
smith was  the  signal  for  disturbing  the 
meeting,  and  some  commenced  calling 
the  Elders  liars,  etc.  The  blacksmith 
arose  to  his  feet  when  he  heard  the  in- 
terruptions, and  slowly  eyeing  the  au- 
dience he  said:  "I  want  you  all  to  un- 
derstand that  these  are  men  of  God, 
and  they  speak  His  word  pure  and 
simple.  If  any  one  again  interrupts 
them  he  shall  feel  the  weight  of  this," 
showing  his  large  fist.  The  crowd  did 
not  know  what  this  meant:  he  had 
drank  their  liquor  and  promised  to  beat 
the  Elders:  he  must  be  joking.  A  loud- 
mouthed fellow  commenced  again  call- 
ing the  Elders  opprobious  names,  when 
the  blacksmith  elbowed  his  way 
through  the  dense  crowd,  and  taking 
hold  of  the  disturber,  threw  him  out  of 
the  door.  This  settled  it.  For  two  hours 
the  Elders  preached  tO  the  congrega- 
tion, and  the  one-eyed  giant  stood 
guard  as  a  policeman;  but  as  soon  as 
the  meeting  was  dismissed,  he  seemed 
10  realize  that  he  was  on  the  wrong 
side  and  he  commenced  to  be  ugly  and 
wanted  to  quarrel  with  the  brethren, 
but  they  got  away  as  quickly  as  pos- 
sible. Brother  Lund  was  the  last  to 
leave,  and  he  heard  those  behind  say 
to  those  in  front  of  him,  "Give  him  a 
diff!"  but  Brother  Lund  nodded  polite- 
ly to  the  crowd  as  he  passed  through 
and  got  away  unhurt.  Some  of  those 
present  have  since  come  to  Utah  and 
have  informed  Brother  Lund  that  even 
the  man  who  opened  his  house  for  the 
meeting  was  in  the  conspiracy  against 
the  Elders.  The  Elders  felt  that  their 
prayers  were  heard  in  an  almost  mir- 
aculous manner.  Brother  Lund  often 
found  that  his  youth  was  the  means 
of  gaining  sympathy  for  him,  and  a 
hearing  which  was  denied  others,  and 
the  Lord  blessed  his  efforts  with  many 
conversions.  At  the  age  of  sixteen  he 
was  ordained  an  Elder  and  appointed 
president  of  the  Aalborg  branch,  and 
traveling  Elder  in  five  other  branches. 


BIOGRAPHICAL,   ENCYCLOPEDIA. 


165 


This  was  at  the  time  quite  a  respon- 
sible position,  tlie  branch  being  large 
and  requiring  constant  care.  Elder 
Lund  continued  his  missionary  labors 
until  the  year  1862,  when,  at  the  age  of 
eighteen,  he  emigrated  to  Utah.  He 
left  Hamburg  on  the  "Benjamin  Frank- 
lin." While  lying  in  that  city  measles 
came  aboard  and  made  fearful  ravages 
among  the  children.  There  was  no  doc- 
tor on  board,  and  the  captain  would 
deliver  the  medicines  and  wine  for  the 
sick  only  on  an  order  from  a  physician. 
Elder  Christian  A.  Madsen  laid  the 
matter  before  the  Saints,  and  they  vot- 
ed to  appoint  Brother  Lund  the  physi- 
cian of  the  company.  He  received 
the  medicine  chest  and  with  it  a  book 
treating  on  common  diseases  and  their 
cures.  This  he  studied  diligently  and 
performed  his  duties  so  well  that  he 
gained  the  confidence  of  both  the  crew 
and  the  passengers.  Brother  Lund  was 
always  in  demand.  At  times  he  had 
to  hide  so  as  to  get  the  much  needed 
rest  and  sleep.  This  was  rather  re- 
markable for  a  doctor  that  had  been 
given  his  diploma  by  popular  vote  in- 
stead of  by  a  medical  faculty.  Pour 
ships  left  Denmark  in  the  beginning 
of  that  year  with  emigrating  Saints. 
These  all  met  at  Florence,  whence  some 
continued  the  journey  in  the  convey- 
ances furnished  by  the  Utah  Saints. 
The  others  were  organized  into  two 
independent  companies,  one  under  the 
leadership  of  Bishop  Christian  A.  Mad- 
sen,  and  one  under  the  care  of  Patri- 
arch Ola  N.  Liljenquist.  Brother  Lund 
traveled  over  the  plains  in  Elder  Mad- 
sen's  company.  The  route  traveled  was 
via  Elkhorn  river,  Loup  Fork,  Wood 
River,  Willow  Lake,  Rattlesnake  creek. 
Fort  Laramie,  Upper  Platte  Bridge, 
Devil's  Gate,  South  Pass  and  Green 
river,  and  the  travelers  arrived  in  Salt 
Lake  City  Sept.  23,  1862.  The  over- 
land travel  had  lasted  seventy-one 
days.  It  had  been  an  exceptionally 
pleasant  journey.  The  Saints  had  found 
good  camping  places  with  an  abun- 
dance of  grass  and  water.  Some  had 
walked  the  entire  distance,  and  very 
often  the  men  had  carried  the  women 
and  the  children  across  the  rivers,  but 
there  were  no  accidents,  and  a  good 
spirit  prevailed.  The  "Deseret  News" 
of  Sept.  24,  1862,  says  the  health  of  the 
arrived  immigrants  was  excellent,  and 
the  animals  were  in  good  condition. 
They  only  lost  seven  or  eight  animals 


on  the  road,  and  the  only  accident  that 
happened  was  the  breaking  of  a  wagon 
tongue,  near  the  end  of  the  journey. 
The  hand  of  Providence  was  over 
Brother  Lund,  and  with  the  rest  of  his 
fellow-travelers  he  arrived  in  Salt 
Lake  City,  rejoicing  at  having  reached 
in  safety  the  goal  of  the  long  journey 
over  sea  and  land.  Elder  Anthon  H. 
Lund's  life  since  his  arrival  in  the  val- 
leys of  the  mountains  has  been  one  of 
continual  activity  and  usefulness.  He 
has  filled  numerous  positions  of  trust 
both  in  the  Church  and  State.  He  first 
located  at  Fairview,  Sanpete  county, 
but  three  months  later  moved  to  Mt. 
Pleasant.  Here  he  remained  till  the 
fall  of  1870.  His  first  employment  in 
Utah  was  at  farm  labor,  digging  pota- 
toes, working  on  the  threshing  ma- 
chines, etc.,  as  long  as  such  work  could 
be  had,  and  then  he  got  employment 
in  a  harness  shop  and  afterwards  in  a 
shoe  shop.  Brother  John  Barton  of- 
fered him  a  home  in  his  family  and 
engaged  him  to  teach  his  children  in 
the  evenings.  He  was  treated  by  those 
excellent  people  as  if  he  were  one  of 
the  family.  To  Brother  Lund,  as  to  so 
many  others  who  have  come  to  Utah, 
the  first  impressions  and  experiences 
of  the  new  country  were  rather  discour- 
aging. He  missed  his  books  perhaps 
more  than  anything  else.  An  old  hand 
book  in  astronomy,  without  maps, which 
he  happened  to  find,  became  one  of  his 
literary  treasures.  He  studied  it  and 
drew  his  own  maps,  using  the  hearth- 
stone for  a  table,  and  was  able  to  lo- 
cate the  constellations  of  the  stars  and 
trace  the  planets.  Thus  passed  his  first 
winter  in  Utah.  He  felt  that  this  was 
the  land  of  Zion,  the  place  to  which 
God  had  led  him,  and  his  heart  swelled 
with  sentiments  of  joy  and  gratitude, 
in  1864  he  was  called  to  go  as  a  Church 
teamster  to  the  Missouri  river,  to  bring 
back  immigrating  Saints.  He  per- 
formed this  mission  faithfully.  When 
Pres.  Brigham  Young  called  a  number 
of  young  men  to  come  to  Salt  Lake 
City  to  learn  telegraphy.  Elder  Lund 
was  selected  as  one  of  them.  During 
his  stay  in  the  city  at  this  time  he  be- 
came acquainted  with  Elder  John  Hen- 
ry Smith  and  others,  with  whom  he 
later  has  been  intimately  associated  in 
the  ecclesiastical  work.  Having  learned 
telegraphy,  he  returned  to  Mt.  Pleasant 
and  kept  the  telegraph  office  there.  He 
also    had    a    photograph    gallery.      And 


l66 


LATTER-DAT    SAINT 


when   the   first  co-operative  Institution 
was  started  in  that  city,  he  was     ap- 
pointed its     secretary.     He     was     also 
elected  a  member  of  the  city  council. 
But  notwithstanding   these   varied  du- 
ties, he  found  time  to  devote     to     the 
Church.    In  1865  he  helped  to  start  the 
first  Sunday  school  in  the  city  where  he 
..ved,    and    achieved    great    success    in 
this  labor  of  love.      He  remained  in  Mt. 
Pleasant  until  the  fall  of  1870,  when  he 
moved  to  Ephraim.     In  the  same  year 
he  married  Sister  Sarah  Ann  Peterson, 
a  daughter  of  Stake  President  Canute 
Peterson.  The  issue  of  this  happy  union 
is  nine  children,  of  whom  seven  are  still 
living.     In  1871  Elder  Lund  was  called 
to    perform    his    first    foreign    mission, 
since  his  arrival  in  Utah.    He  was  sent 
to  Scandinavia  in  company  with  Elder 
Canute  Peterson.      The  latter  was  ap- 
pointed  president  of  the  Scandinavian 
mission,   and  Elder  Lund  became     the 
business  manager  of  the  central  office, 
in    Copenhagen.      On      his    return    to 
Ephraim   he   became   interested   in   the 
co-operative    store   of    that   place,    and 
the  next  year  he  was  placed  in  charge 
of  that   institution.     He   held   this   po- 
sition  for   nine    years,    and   it   is   gen- 
erally conceded  that  it  was,  during  this 
time,  one  of  the  most  successful  in  the 
county.       In  1874  he  was  appointed     a 
member  of   the   High   Council   in   San- 
pete, and  when  the  Stake  was  organ- 
ized,   in    1877,    he    became    Stake    clerk 
and  a  member  of  the  new  High  Coun- 
cil.    In  1878  he  became  superintendent 
of    the    Sunday    School    in    Ephraim,    a 
labor  which  he  much  enjoyed.     In  1883 
he  was  called  to  fill  another  mission  to 
Scandinavia.     He  succeeded  Elder  Chr. 
D.    Fjeldsted   as   president  of   the   mis- 
sion,  and   was  absent  from   home   two 
years    and    three    months.      During    his 
absence  he  was  elected  a  member  of  the 
Igislature  of  the  Territory  of  Utah,  and 
he   took   his  seat   in   that   body  on   his 
arrival  home.    In  1888,  he  was  re-elect- 
ed.      The     Ogden   Reform   School   and 
Agricultural  College  at  Logan  are  last- 
ing   monuments    of    his    untiring    work 
in  the  legislative  assembly  of  Utah,  as 
well   as   of   his   wisdom   and   solicitude 
for  the  welfare  of  the  people.      In  May, 
1888,    he   was   appointed   vice   president 
of    the    Manti    Temple,    assisting    Pres. 
Daniel   H.   Wells,   and   in   1891   he   suc- 
ceeded Brother  Wells  in  the  presidency. 
At   the     organization     of     the   General 
Church  Board  of  Education  he  became 


a  member  of  that  board.       At  the  Oc- 
tober conference,  1889,  he  was  called  to 
the    high    office   of   an    Apostle    in    the 
Church  of  Jesus  Christ.       He  was  or- 
dained   Oct.    7,    1889,    by    Pres.    Geo.    Q. 
Cannon.  In  1893  he  was  sent  to  Liverpool, 
to  preside  over  the  European  mission. 
He  was  gone  more  than  three  years.and 
his    administration    was    marked     with 
much   success.       His   linguistic   ability 
was  a  great  help  to  him  in  the  perform- 
ance  of  his  duties,   while   traveling  in 
the   various   conferences.       At   the   de- 
mise of  Apostle  Abraham  H.   Cannon, 
Elder  Lund  was  appointed  director  of 
the  Z.  C.  M,  I.,  and,  some  years  before, 
of  the  Zion's  Savings  Bank.     In  1897  he 
was   called   on   a   mission   to   Palestine 
and  Syria  to  organize  the  Saints  there 
into  branches,   and  to  look  after   their 
welfare  generally.      He  returned  in  the 
summer    of   1898.      In    the    fall    of    that 
year    he    moved      to      Salt    Lake    City, 
where  he   now  resides.     Since   then  he 
has  continued  his  labors  as  an  Apostle, 
in   the   various   Stakes   of   Zion.     Since 
April,  1900,  he  has  also  been  the  super- 
intendent of  the  religion  classes,  ani  in 
Aueust,  1900,  he  succeeded  Pres.  Frank- 
lin D.  Richards  in  the  important  office 
of  Church   historian.       This,   certainly, 
is  a  most  remarkable   career,   and   the 
kev   to   it   should   be   of  value     to   the 
readers  of  this  brief  sketch.  The  writer 
once   having   the    privilege     of    an   in- 
timate      conversation       with     Brother 
Lund,  asked  him,  "What  has  been  the 
leading    principle    by     which   your    life 
has   been   guided?"     To    which   he   re- 
plied, after  a  moment  of  deep  thought: 
"I    have    always    endeavored     to     find 
out  what  is  right,   and  then  to  do  it." 
That  tells  all.     No  one  guided  by  that 
principle   can   fail  in   life.     The   Son  of 
God  Himself  attained  glory  and  power 
and  dominion  because  He  yielded  faith- 
ful obedience  to  the  will  of  His  Father 
in   Heaven.       A     striking     feature     of 
Brother   Lund's   character   is  his     ten- 
dency to  religious  thought  and  medita- 
tion, which  almost  reminds  one  of  the 
best   representatives     of     the   Pietistic 
school   which   during   the   last   century 
had  so  much  influence  upon  Lutheran 
Protestantism;      it     should     be   added, 
though,  that  his  practical  training  dur- 
ing a  life  rich  in  experiences  has  pre- 
served him  from  the  errors  of  mystic- 
ism,   which      under     different    circum- 
stances might  have     been     difficult   to 
avoid.       In  his  public  speaking     it     is 


BIOGRAPHICAL    ENCYCLOPEDIA. 


167 


easy  to  perceive  that  his  thoughts  cen- 
ter round  the  great  themes  of  the  gos- 
pel: the  Redeemer,  in  His  two-fold 
character  of  Priest,  atoning  for  the 
sins  of  the  world;  and  King,  coming 
to  rule  and  to  restore  all  things.  As 
a  teacher  in  Israel  he  evidently  at  all 
times  endeavors  to  magnify  his  calling 
as  an  Apostle  and  witness  for  the  Lord 
Jesus  Christ.  It  follows  that  in  the 
daily  events  of  life  he  readily  acknowl- 
edges the  hand  of  the  Lord  in  all 
things.  Through  a  varied  experience 
he  has  obtained  a  firm  faith  in  the 
promises  of  God  to  hear  and  to  answer 
prayers,  and  this  is  a  source  of 
strength  to  him,  which  never  fails.  It 
is  no  wonder  that  Brother  Lund  i^ 
much  respected  and  loved  by  all  who 
know  him,  or  that  the  feelings  of  re- 
gard grow  stronger,  as  the  acquamt- 
ance  with  him  becomes  more  intimate. 
Few  men  go  through  life  without  ene- 
mies but  Brother  Lund  appears  to  be 
one  of  the  few.  He  is  very  much  like 
the  late  Pres.  Wilford  Woodruff  in  this 
respect  of  whom  it  was  said  that  even 
his  antagonists  loved  him.  The  regard 
in  which  he  is  held  by  his  associates  m 
the  council  of  Apostles  was  ver^  weU 
expressed  by  Elder  Heber  J.  Grant, 
Xn  ::   a   meeting   of     Bcandina;i- 

saints  in  this  city,  1^%^^^^-  Jj^te^f 
Snow  was  my  ideal  of  an  ^postle  ot 
the  Lord,  and  Brother  Snow's  mantle 
has,  in  my  opinion,  fallen  upon  Elder 
Anthon  H.  Lund.-J-  M.  S3odahl.  (See 
also  "Juvenile  Instructor,  Vol.  35.  p. 
705.) 

rANNON.  Abraham  Hoagland,  a 
member  of  the  Council  Qf  Twelve  Apos- 
^eTfrom  1880  to  1896,  was  the  -0^ 
Pres.  Geo.  Q.  Cannon  ^nd  Elizabeth 
Hoagland,  and  was  born  March  12^8^9 
in  Salt  Lake  City,  Utah.  As  a  t)oy  he 
was  given  the  best  opportunity  that  the 
times  afforded  for  an  education,and  be- 
n"  of  a  studious  nature,  he  availed 
himself  of  that  privilege,  finishing  his 
studies  in  the  Deseret  University.  For 
a  time  when  his  father  was  editor  of 
the  "Deseret  News"  he  was  employed 
in  that  office  as  errand  boy.  I^ate^.  he 
learned  the  carpenter's  trade  at  the 
Church  carpenter  shop,  and  worked  on 
the  Temple  Block.  He  also  studied 
architecture  under  the  late  Obed  Tay- 
lor and  became  an  architect.  In  1879 
Le'was  called  on  a  mission  to  Europe. 
After  laboring     for     some   time   in   the 


Nottingham  conference.  England,  he 
was  assigned  to  the  Swiss  and  German 
Mission,  where  he  mastered  the  Ger- 
man language  and  traveled  as  a  mis- 
sionary in  both  Switzerland  and  Ger- 
many. He  wrote  some  of  the  hymns 
which  the  German  Saints  now  sing  in 
their  congregations.  During  his  ab- 
sence on  this  mission,  his  mother  died. 
He  returned  home  in  June,  1882,  and 
was  ordained  and  set  apart  as  one  of 
the  First  Seven  Presidents  of  Seven- 
ties Oct.  9,  1882,  in  which  calling  he 
labored     with     diligence     and  zeal  and 


traveled  extensively  throughout  the 
Church  in  the  interest  of  the  Seven- 
ties. In  1882,  when  twenty-three  years 
old,  he  assumed  business  control  of  the 
"Juvenile  Instructor"  and  associate 
publications,  developing  what  was  a 
small  printing  office  into  one  of  the 
foremost  publishing  houses  in  the  west. 
During  the  time  of  his  management, 
which  lasted  until  his  death,  a  large 
number  of  publications  were  issued 
under  his  direction;  and  while  he  laid 
no  claims  to  great  literary  genius,  he 
found  time,  between  his  many  other 
duties,  to  write  many  articles  for  pub- 
lication. Having  entered  the  order  of 
plural  marriage,  he  was  arrested  on  a 
charge  of  unlawful  cohabitation,  and 
being  convicted,  he  was  sentenced, 
March  17,  1886,  by  Judge  Zane,  to  a 
term  of  six  months  in  the  penitentiary 
and  to  pay  a  fine  of  $300.  He  served 
his  trrm  end  was  released  Aug.  17.1886. 
At  the  October  conference,  1889,  he  was 


168 


LATTER-DAY    SAINT 


sustained  as  one  of  the  Twelve  Apos- 
tles, and  was  ordained  by  Pies.  Joseph 
F.  P)Tiith.  Oct.  7.  1889.  In  October,  1892, 
in  connection  with  his  brother,  John  Q. 
Cannon,  he  took  charge  of  the  "Des- 
eret  News,"  forming  the  publishing 
company  which  for  a  number  of  years 
conducted  that  paper,  and  he  assumed 
the  business  management  thereof.  In 
1892,  also,  he  became  the  editor  and 
publisher  of  the  "Contributor."  He 
was  connected  with  many  other  busi- 
ness enterprises.  He  was  the  moving 
spirit  in  the  Salt  Lake  and  Pacific  and 
the  Utah  and  California  railways — en- 
terprises which  had  for  their  object  the 
connection  by  rail  of  Salt  Lake  City 
and  California  and  the  building  of  a 
line  into  the  Deep  Creek  country.  He 
was  also  director,  vice-president  and 
assistant  manager  of  the  Bullion-Beck 
mining  company;  director  and  one  of 
the  organizers  of  the  State  Bank  of 
Utah:  director  of  the  Utah  Loan  and 
Trust  Co.,  at  Ogden;  director  in  Z.  C. 
M.  I.;  vice-president  of  Geo.  Q.  Cannon 
&  Sons  Co.;  director  in  the  Co-opera- 
tive Furniture  Co.;  first  vice-president 
of  the  Salt  Lake  Chamber  of  Com- 
merce; the  owner  oi  a  prosperous  book 
and  stationery  business  in  Ogden.  He 
was  also  an  active  promoter  in  canal 
and  irrigation  enterprises;  and  was  a 
member  of  the  Deseret  Sunday  School 
Union,  to  the  duties  of  which  he  gave 
much  attention.  In  the  vast  amount 
of  labor  which  he  performed,  and  in 
which  he  never  seemed  to  tire,  he  ac- 
complished much  more  in  the  course 
of  twenty  years  than  many  truly,  ac- 
tive men  have  been  able  to  do  in  dou- 
ble that  time.  He  had  extraordinary 
qualifications  for  business  management, 
and  conducted  with  success  many  en- 
terprises undertaken  under  adverse 
circumstances.  For  some  time  previous 
to  his  death  he  suffered  with  severe 
headache;  in  returning  from  a  business 
trip  to  California  he  became  seriously 
ill,  and  he  underwent  operations  for 
ear  troubles;  general  inflammation  set 
in,  resulting  in  death  July  19,  1896,  at 
his  residence  in  Salt  Lake  City.  In 
an  article  published  in  the  "Deseret 
News"  at  the  time  of  his  demise  the 
editor  of  that  paper  says:  "In  his 
religious  life  and  duties  Abraham  H. 
Cannon  was  scrupulously  strict  and  en- 
ergetic. He  did  not  shrink  from  any 
duty  devolving  upon  him  and  avoided 
no  obligation;    but   responded   to  every 


call  with  piomptness  and  fidelity.  His 
precision  in  this  regard  was  remarkable 
and  was  characteristic  of  him  from  his 
youth  up.  As  a  boy  and  as  a  man  he 
was  frank  and  fearless  with  a  love  for 
truth  and  virtue  that  was  sublime.  He 
never  sought  to  shift  to  others  any 
burden  that  devolved  on  him,  and 
never  hesitated  to  undertake  a  task 
that  fell  to  his  lot.  In  his  public  re- 
ligious calling  and  in  his  private  life 
he  was  a  true  disciple  of  Christ,  essen- 
tially a  servant  of  God,  whose  conduct 
endeared  him  to  all  associates  by  the 
bonds  of  that  pure  and  holy  love  which 
comes  of  conformity  to  divine  prin- 
ciples. When  in  the  course  of  events, 
during  the  persecutions  of  the  Saints, 
it  came  his  turn  to  endure  imprison- 
ment for  his  religion,  he  did  so  cheer- 
fully, praising  God  that  he  was  worthy 
to  suffer  in  His  cause;  and  all  suffer- 
ings and  privations  then  and  at  other 
times  in  his  ministry  he  bore  without 
murmuring,  being  willing  to  endure  all 
for  the  gospel's  sake.  In  his  record 
as  a  man  of  God  he  will  ever  live  in  the 
hearts  of  the  Latter-day  Saints,  by 
whom  he  was  greatly  beloved." — (See 
also  "Contributor,"  Vol.  17,  p.  644.) 

COWLEY,  Matthias  Foss,  a  mem- 
ber of  the  Council  of  Twelve  Apostles 
since  1897,  is  the  son  of  Matthias  Cow- 
ley and  Sarah  Elizabeth  Foss,  and  was 
born  Aug.  25,  1858,  in  Salt  Lake  City, 
Utah,  just  after  the  return  of  his  par- 
ents from  Springville,  whither  they  had 
gone  during  the  "Move."  His  father 
was  of  Celtic  descent,  and  emigrated 
from  the  Isle  of  Man  with  his  parents, 
to  Nauvoo,  in  1843.  His  mother  was 
a  native  of  the  State  of  Maine.  They, 
as  well  as  Matthias  F.'s  grandparents 
on  both  sides  of  the  house,  embraced 
the  gospel.  At  the  time  of  the  Nau- 
voo martyrdom,  Matthias,  the  elder, 
then  thirteen  years  of  age,  was  a  resi- 
dent of  Warsaw,  111.;  after  the  exodus, 
he  went  to  St.  Louis  to  aid  in  earning 
means  for  the  emigration  of  the  fami- 
ly to  the  mountains.  At  the  age  of  fif- 
teen years,  he  learned  the  printer's 
trade  in  the  office  of  the  "Missouri  Re- 
publican," subsequently  laboring  in  the 
office  of  the  "Frontier  Guardian," 
Kanesville,  under  Elder  Orson  Hyde. 
He  emigrated  to  Salt  Lake  City  in  1852, 
where  he  married  Miss  Foss,  in  1857. 
His  wife.  Apostle  Cowley's  mother, early 
taught  school  in  her  native  State.      She 


BIOGRAPHICAL    ENCYCLOPEDIA. 


169 


continued  in  this  vocation  until  her 
parents  and  other  members  of  the 
family,  who  with  her  had  embraced 
the  gospel  through  the  missionary  ef- 
forts of  Apostle  Wilford  Woodruff  and 
John  F.  Boynton,  emigrated  to  Utah 
in  1850.  Apostle  Cowley  was  the  first 
child  of  four  in  the  family.  In  1864, 
the  elder  Cowley  died.  His  wife,  some 
years  after,  married  the  well-known 
early  civil  engineer  Jesse  W.  Fi'v,  who 
thus  became  the  foster-father  uf  the 
boy.  The  future  Apostle  assisted  the 
noted  surveyor  in  his  labors  on  the 
Utah  Southern  Railway  (now  a  branch 
of  the  Oregon  Short  Line  south  of  Salt 
Lake  City)  for  seven  summers.  In  the 
winter  season,  he  attended  the  Deseret 


(now  Utah)  University;  his  early  edu- 
cation was  obtained  from  his  mother, 
who,  after  the  death  of  her  first  hus- 
band, devoted  herself  to  her  early  pro- 
fession to  support  her  family.  His 
education,  therefore,  was  obtained 
piecemeal,  for  he  never  attended  school 
an  entire  year  successively.  But  not- 
withstanding his  school  years  were  thus 
broken  into  by  work,  he  advanced  to 
the  study  of  algebra  and  geometry, 
achieving  more  than  ordinary  su  -oess 
in  these  and  other  studies.  xi'is  moth- 
er was  desirous  that  he  should  learn 
a  trade  or  profession,  but  circum- 
stances stood  in  the  way  of  the  fulfill- 
ment of  his  mother's  desires,  and  both 
trade  and  profession  were  abandoned. 
An  inborn  desire  towards  religion  is 
characteristic  of  Apostle  Cowley.  It  is 
natural  for  some  men  to  make  money, 
but  he  has  been  endowed  with  the 
missionary  spirit;  his  natural  work  is 
to  make  converts  to  the  cause  of  God. 


While  in  the  surveying  field,  he  carried 
an  old  Bible  which  his  father  had  used 
while  on  a  mission  to  England.  This 
he  read  at  intervals,  snatching  a  few 
minutes  to  con  a  chapter,  more  or  less, 
according  to  the  time  at  his  disposal. 
He  has  a  retentive  memory  which  aias 
him  greatly  to  interest  his  audiences, 
and  he  early  placed  it  to  the  test  by 
memorizing-  many  Scripture  passages. 
At  the  expiration  of  his  second  mission 
in  the  Southern  States,  he,  with  Elder 
John  W.  Taylor,  had  memorized  well- 
nigh  four  hundred  Bible  verses,  and 
that  in  a  systematic  way,  all  bearing 
upon  the  gospel  and  especially  upon 
its  first  principles.  Apostle  Cowley 
has  grown  naturally  and  steadily  to 
the  position  he  now  occupies  in  the 
Church.  He  was  blessed  when  eight 
days  old,  by  Apostle  Orson  Hyde,  as- 
sisted by  his  own  father;  was  baptized 
by  Elder  Samuel  R.  Turnbow  Nov.  1, 
1866,  and  confirmed  by  Bishop  Abraham 
Hoagland.  In  October,  1874,  he  was  or- 
dained a  Deacon  and  a  Teacher,  serv- 
ing in  these  capacities  for  a  number  of 
years.  On  Dec.  28,  1874,  he  was  or- 
dained an  Elder  by  Elder  Oluf  F.  Due, 
and  received  his  endowments.  In  April, 
1875,  he  was  chosen  counselor  to  Ed- 
ward W.  Davis  of  the  first  quorum  of 
Elders,  serving  in  that  office  with  El- 
der Russell  and  subsequently  with  El- 
der John  W.  Taylor,  his  youthful  com- 
panion and  bosom  friend.  He  served 
as  collector  for  his  quorum,  at  the  time 
when  the  quorums  donated  for  the 
erection  of  the  Salt  Lake  Temple,  and 
acted  as  Ward  Teacher  almost  con- 
tinuously, from  October,  1874,  to  Feb- 
ruary 24,  1878,  at  which  time  he  was 
called  upon  his  first  mission  to  the 
Southern  States.  Returning  from  his 
mission,  in  the  course  of  six  months, 
he  was  again  called  to  the  same  field, 
and  arrived  home  from  his  second  mis- 
sion in  July,  1882.  Prior  to  his  departure 
on  his  second  mission  he  was,  on  mo- 
tion of  Apostle  Wilford  Woodruff,  or- 
dained a  Seventy  by  Pres.  Joseph 
Young.  In  1882  he  became  identified 
with  the  "Contributor,"  published  by 
Elder  Junius  F.  Wells  In  the  interest 
of  the  M.  T.  A.J  and  was  called  on  a 
mission  to  travel  for  it,  and  to  preach 
to  the  young  people  at  home.  He 
visited  ten  Stakes  of  Zion,  holding 
meetings  in  nearly  every  Ward  there- 
of. He  increased  the  circulation  of 
the   magazine   to  over     four     thousand 


no 


LATTER-DAT  SAINT 


copies,  revived  the  lagging  interest  in 
the  associations,  and  practically  in- 
troduced himself  to  the  Latter-day 
Saints.  Thousands  will  remember  with 
what  force  and  spirit  he  proclaimed  to 
the  young  people  the  first  principles  of 
the  gospel.  For  a  short  interval  he 
was  engaged  as  clerk  in  the  city  re- 
corder's office  at  Salt  Lake  City,  under 
Hon.  John  T.  Caine  and  Gov.  Heber  M. 
Wells,  and  in  the  winter  of  1883-4,  he 
acted  as  chaplain  in  the  House  of  the 
Utah  legislature.  On  the  day  the  Lo- 
gan Temple  was  opened  for  endow- 
ments, May  21,  1884,  Elder  Cowley  was 
married  to  Miss  Abbie  Hyde.  He  was 
ordained  a  High  Priest  Oct.  25,  1884. 
by  Apostle  Francis  M.  Lyman,  and 
chosen  and  sustained  as  the  superin- 
tendent of  the  Y.  M.  M.  I.  A.  of  Oneida 
Stake,  Idaho.  He  traveled  extensively 
among  the  seventeen  Wards  of  the 
Stake,  laboring  with  zeal  in  the  cause 
for  three  years.  When  Pres.  George  C. 
Parkinson,  in  1887,  was  chosen  Stake 
president.  Elder  Cowley  was  made  his 
second  counselor,  in  which  position  he 
served  for  ten  years,  until  called  to 
the  Apostleship.  It  was  while  he  was 
still  acting  in  this  capacity  that  he  was 
called  to  accompany  Elder  Edward 
Stevenson  to  open  the  Northwestern 
States  Mission,  comprising  Montana, 
Washington,  Northern  Idaho  and  Ore- 
gon. He  spent  about  four  months  in 
this  field,  visiting  the  States  named,  but 
spending  most  of  the  time  in  the  first 
named,  where  thirty-nine  souls  were 
baptized.  Within  three  weeks  of  his 
ordination  as  an  Apostle,  he  was  called 
to  accompany  Apostle  Francis  M.  Ly- 
man to  the  Southern  States  Mission, 
in  which,  with  Pres.  Elias  S.  Kimball, 
they  visited  every  conference,  giving 
choice  instructions  to  the  people  and 
to  five  hundred  Elders  from  Zion  then 
in  the  field.  From  thence,  they  pro- 
ceeded to  Brooklyn,  preaching  in  the 
Eastern  States  Mission,  and  visiting 
points  of  historic  interest  in  Philadel- 
phia, New  York  and  Washington. 
While  in  the  latter  place,  they  were 
introduced  by  Hon.  Wm.  H.  King  to 
President  McKinley,  who  received 
them  very  cordially  and  mentioned 
with  pleasure  his  visit  to  Salt  Lake 
City.  Apostle  Cowley  is  constantly 
traveling  in  the  interest  of  the  Church, 
having  visited  all  the  Stakes  of  Zion, 
having  also  lifted  his  voice  in  testify- 
ing to  the  mission  of  Christ,  and  borne 


testimony  to  the  restoration  of  the  gos- 
pel through  the  Prophet  Joseph  Smith, 
in  thirty-three  States  and  Territories 
of  the  Union  Apostle  Cowley  is  un- 
pretentious in  his  demeanor,  and  the 
spirit  of  humility  that  accompanies  his 
administrations  draws  the  hearts  of  the 
people  to  him.  He  has  laid  a  founda- 
tion upon  which  the  strength  of  his 
growing  manhood,  aided  by  the  Lord, 
will  find  no  trouble  in  building  a  super- 
structure of  finished  excellence  and 
worth.  His  sermons,  deliberate,  sound 
and  spoken  from  the  heart,  are  full  of 
force  and  effectiveness.  Simplicity  and 
earnestness  make  him  a  strong  advo- 
cate with  the  Father,  and  endear  him 
in  the  hearts  of  the  people.  He  is 
naturally  and  wholly  spiritualminded, 
and  finds  pleasure  in  the  contemplation 
of  those  higher  principles  of  man's  be- 
ing that  lift  the  soul  from  the  material 
to  things  divine.  On  July  5,  1876,  a 
patriarchal  blessing  was  bestowed  upon 
Elder  Cowley  by  William  McBride,  in 
which  it  was  predicted  that  he  would 
soon  be  called  into  the  ministry,  and 
would  "travel  much  for  the  gospel's 
sake,  both  by  sea  and  by  land,  even 
unto  the  ends  of  the  earth."  This 
prediction  was  further  corroborated  in 
a  blessing  given  him  by  Patriarch  John 
Smith  prior  to  Elder  Cowley's  depar- 
ture for  his  mission  to  the  Southern 
States,  in  which  blessing  were  also 
many  other  predictions  concerning  his 
life  which  have  been  literally  fulfilled. 
In  a  meeting  of  the  Aaronic  Priest- 
hood, held  in  the  Fourteenth  Ward  of 
Salt  Lake  City,  also  prior  to  his  de- 
parture for  the  South  on  a  mission.  El- 
der Cowley  was  blessed  by  Bishop^ 
Thomas  Taylor,  who  prophesied  that 
since  he  had  been  faithful  at  home, 
the  Lord  would  exceedingly  bless  him 
abroad.  People  would  have  dreams  of 
his  coming,  and  be  prepared  to  receive^ 
him.  When  set  apart  for  his  mission 
to  Montana,  Apostle  Francis  M.  Ly- 
man promised  him  that  with  his  com- 
panion, he  should  have  influence  with 
prominent  men  whom  they  would  meet 
in  their  travels.  In  Elder  Cowley's 
call  to  the  Apostleship,  a  prophecy  was 
fulfilled  uttered  by  Elder  John  W. 
Taylor,  in  a  letter  written  to  St.  Louis 
to  the  former  from  Kentucky,  March 
19,  1882,  in  which  Elder  Taylor  wrote: 
"If  you  are  faithful,  you  will  yet  be- 
come one  of  the  Twelve  Apostles  of  the 
Church   of  Jesus   Christ   of   Latter-day 


BIOGRAPHICAL    ENCYCLOPEDIA. 


171 


Saints  in  all  the  world."  Pres.  Joseph 
Young,  when  ordaining  him  to  the  of- 
fice of  Seventy,  said:  "Your  name  cor- 
responds to  that  of  an  Apostle  of  old, 
and  you  shall  perform  a  similar  mis- 
sion." Apostle  Cowley  has  lived  to 
prove  worthy  of  the  fulfillment  of  all 
of  these  predictions  in  his  life.  Dur- 
ing his  first  mission,  Bishop  Taylor's 
prediction  that  he  should  find  a  people 
prepared  to  receive  him,  was  literally 
fulfilled.  He  was  appointed  to  labor 
in  Virginia,  and  it  was  in  Tazewell, 
Bland  and  Smith  counties  where  he 
found  such  a  people,  chiefiy  young  men 
and  women  whose  parents  and  grand- 
parents had  heard  the  gospel  preached 
by  Elder  Jedediah  M.  Grant,  in  1840. 
Some  had  embraced  it,  many  others 
had  become  life-long  friends,  and  the 
seeds  sown  by  Elder  Grant  had  borne 
fruits  in  the  hearts  of  children  and 
grandchildren  one  and  two  generations 
later.  In  two  years.  Elders  Cowley 
and  Barnett,  and  four  other  Elders, 
who  were  present  only  a  short  time  of 
the  two  years,  performed  one  hundred 
and  fourteen  baptisms  in  that  field. 
Many  children  were  blessed,  and  hun- 
dreds of  people  heard  the  testimony 
that  the  gospel  is  again  restored  to 
earth  by  holy  angels.  The  promise  to 
him  by  Apostle  Lyman  was  literally 
fulfilled,  but  notably  in  Montana  where 
he  and  his  companion  were  received 
by  Governor  Richards  with  the  utmost 
hospitality.  Before  their  leaving  He- 
lena, the  governor  gave  them  a  letter 
of  commendation  to  the  people  of  the 
State,  affirming  their  sincerity  and 
honesty.  In  one  of  those  lonely  nights 
that  come  to  all  niissionaries.  Elder 
Cowley  on  his  first  mission  dreamed 
twice  of  being  home  before  the  right 
time.  He  says  that  the  horrors  which 
he  experienced  in  these  dreams  were 
such  as  to  keep  him  ever  after  con- 
stantly contented  in  the  missionary 
field.  It  was  in  one  of  these  dreams, 
tljat  he  met  Pres.  John  Taylor,  who 
said  to  him:  "Well,  you  are  home,  are 
you?  You  may  prepare  to  go  to 
Georgia  now."  Here,  also,  was  a 
prophecy,  for,  strange  to  say,  although 
Elder  Cowley  did  not  return  until  after 
the  expiration  of  his  mission  of  twen- 
ty-seven months,  he  was  soon  called, 
as  we  have  seen,  to  return  to  the  south, 
and  this  time  was  appointed  by  Pres. 
John  Morgan  to  travel  with  Elder  John 
W.    Taylor    in    Georgia.       Prior    to    his 


journey  to  Georgia,  he  was  appointed 
to  conduct  a  company  of  Saints  from 
the  Southern  States  to  southern  Colo- 
rado. Several  bodies  of  the  Saints 
came  together  from  Virginia,  Georgia 
and  Alabama,  at  Chattanooga,  Tenn., 
which  was  the  central  starting  point. 
At  Huntington,  Tenn., the  company  was 
joined  by  fifty-seven  souls,  men,  women 
and  children,  from  Henderson  county, 
of  the  same  State.  These  were  the 
converts  of  the  mysterious  preacher, 
Robert  Edge,  who  preached  the  first 
principles  of  the  gospel,  healing,  the 
millennium,  etc.,  as  taught  by  the 
Saints,  but  who  would  not  officiate  in 
any  of  the  ordinances.  He  said  this 
authority,  however,  to  officiate  was 
upon  the  earth.  The  similarity  be- 
tween his  teachings  and  those  of  the 
Elders,  led  his  converts,  whom  he  de- 
nied baptism,  to  send  for  the  Elders. 
The  people  investigated,  were  con- 
vinced of  the  truths  of  the  gospel,  and 
were  subsequently  baptized  by  Elders 
George  Carver  and  Hyrum  Belnap.  The 
company  numbered,  with  additions 
from  Mississippi,  brought  to  Columbus, 
Kentucky,  by  Elder  John  M.  Gibson, 
one  hundred  and  seventeen  souls,  and 
arrived  in  Manassa  in  November,  1880. 
Returning  eastward,  he  was  met  in 
St.  Louis  by  Elder  John  W.  Taylor, 
whence  they  proceeded  to  west  Georgia, 
laborihg  four  months  in  a  new  district. 
Thence  they  went  to  the  northern  part 
of  the  State,  laboring  afterwards  in 
St.  Louis  with  Elder  George  C.  Par- 
kinson. Here  they  hired  a  hall,  and 
held  regular  meetings  which  Were  ad- 
vertised in  the  papers,  among  which 
was  the  St.  Louis  "Republican,"  in  the 
office  of  which  his  father  had  labored 
some  thirty  years  before  to  obtain 
means  to  help  himself  and  parents  to 
emigrate  to  Utah.  While  in  this  city. 
Elder  Cowley  wrote  several  articles  for 
the  papers,  defending  the  Saints  and 
explaining  the  principles  of  the  gospel. 
He  led  a  company  of  Saints  to  Manassa, 
Colo.,  in  the  spring  of  1882,  and  it  was 
on  his  return  east  with  Pres.  John 
Morgan,  that  he  called  on  David  Whit- 
mer,  one  of  the  three  witnesses  to  the 
Book  of  Mormon,  and  heard  that  man's 
testimony  that  he  had  seen  an  angel 
and  the  plates  upon  which  were  the 
sacred  writings,  which  testimony  David 
Whitmer  maintained  without  variation 
or  modification  to  the  end  of  his  days. 
Apostle  Cowley  is  an  energetic  worker 


172 


LATTER-DAY     SAINT 


In  the  mission  field,  and  the  Saints 
where  he  has  labored  are  greatly  at- 
tached to  him  because  of  his  plain  man- 
ner, his  simplicity  and  open-hearted- 
ness.  His  energy  has  even  increased, 
in  his  missionary  labors  at  home,  since 
his  call  to  his  present  exalted  station, 
and  his  value  as  a  laborer  in  the  cause 
of  God  becomes  more  apparent  as  the 
years  roll  by.  The  gifts  of  the  gospel 
are  enjoyed  by  him,  while  the  power  of 
the  Spirit  of  God  is  richly  manifest  in 
his  administrations  among  the  people. 
With  short,  well-knit  frame,  indicating 
physical  strength;  with  robust  health, 
a  clear  spiritual  discernment,  abiding 
love  for  the  people,  an  Israelite  without 
guile.  Apostle  Cowley  stands  upon  the 
threshold  of  a  career  which  gives 
promise  of  great  activity  and  results 
for  good,  for  the  glory  and  advance- 
ment of  the  kingdom  of  God.— Edward 
H.  Anderson. 

WOODRUFF,     Abraham   Owen,     a 

member  of  the  Council  of  Twelve  Apos- 
tles since  1897,  is  the  son  of  Pres.  Wil- 
ford  Woodruff  and  Emma  Smith  and 
was  born  Nov.  23,  1872,  in  a  primitive 
log  house,  situated  just  a  short  dis- 
tance south  of  Salt  Lake  City,  and 
built  by  his  father  some  twelve  years 
before.  The  neighborhood  is  one  of  the 
most  beautiful  and  peaceful  rural  dis- 
tricts to  be  found  in  all  our  scenic 
land.  To  the  east  stands  the  rugged 
Wasatch  range.  To  the  west,  stretch 
farm-lands,  orchards  and  meadows 
threaded  by  canyon  streams,  wrapped 
in  quietude,  beneath  the  giant  forms  of 
the  mountains.  Amid  such  natural 
environments,  which  were  peaceful  and 
subdued,  as  well  as  inspiring  and  sub- 
lime, and  surrounded  by  that  plod- 
ding and  persistent  industry  which 
characterizes  western  pioneer  life,  was 
the  subject  of  our  sketch  born  and 
reared.  It  was  in  such  a  place  that 
he  spent  his  boyhood's  happy  hours, 
and  there,  too,  during  the  formative 
period,  when  youth  buds  into  manhood, 
he  si)ent  his  days  in  honest,  natural 
toil.  There,  ho  passed  his  evenings 
in  the  humble  cottage  before  the  glow- 
ing embers  of  the  cedar  and  the  pine, 
and  listened  to  the  stories  of  a  pilgrim 
people,  who,  upheld  by  a  sublime  faith, 
experienced  perils  and  hardships  un- 
surpassed in  all  ages.  It  was  in  such 
a  peaceful  home,  too,  that  he  enjoyed 
the    sweet     slumbers     of   untrammeleu 


youth  and  dreamed  of  the  future  and 
what  it  could  hold  in  its  embrace  for 
him.  Of  the  earliest  recollections 
which  still  live  in  his  mind,  perhaps 
the  most  impressive  is  that  of  the 
funeral  of  Pres.  Brigham  Young.  He 
lecalls  vividly  how  his  mother  raised 
him  in  her  arms,  that  he  might  view 
the  great  leader  in  his  casket.  At  six 
his  school  days  began.  In  the  course 
of  time  he  mastered  "addition,  sub- 
traction and  multiplication."  And  as 
is  the  experience  of  most  school  boys, 
his  labors  were  not  confined  to  the 
school  room  and  with  books,  for  he  en- 
joyed all  the  dignified  privileges  of 
"chore-boy"  around  the  farm.      At  ten 


he  herded  cows,  by  which  means  he  of- 
ten realized  as  much  as  fifteen  dollars 
per  month.  Prior  to  that,  however, 
his  proclivity  to  engage  in  commerce 
led  him  to  the  Liberty  Park  springs, 
where  he  gathered  water-cress  for  the 
market,  thereby  supplying  his  boyish 
needs  in  the  way  of  pocket-money.  He 
assures  us  that  the  money  spent  in 
those  days  was  too  dearly  earned  to 
be  spent  in  useless  things,  so  that  ar- 
ticles of  real  utility  alone  attracted  his 
ready  cash.  As  his  years  advanced,  he 
passed  from  the  40th  District  school 
to  the  Latter-day  Saints'  College.  Here 
he  was  trained  under  the  splendid 
tutelage  of  Professors  Done,  Talmage 
and  Maeser.  At  eighteen,  he  was 
placed  in  a  bank,  where  he  served  the 
institution,  first  as  a  collector,  and  next 
as  assistant  bookkeeper.  It  was  while 
thus  employed,  that  he  received  a  call 
to  the  mission-field.  In  the  year  1893, 
his  father  was  far  from  enjoying  his 
usual  good  health.  The  illness  of  his 
father,    consequently,    made   his   depar- 


BIOGRAPHICAL    ENCYCLOPEDIA, 


173 


ture  to  a  foreign  land  not  a  very  easy 
matter,  but,  trusting-  in  Providence, and 
acquiescing  with  his  father's  wishes, 
he  started  for  the  Swiss  and  German 
Mission.  Within  a  few  days  after  his 
arrival  at  the  mission  headquarters  Jie 
was  appointed  to  labor,  without  a  com- 
panion, in  Frankfort-on-the-Main,  at 
which  place  he  was  instructed  to  open 
the  mission.  A  very  charitable  family 
opened  their  doors  to  him,  which  ma- 
terially lessened  the  difficulties  under 
which  he  was  to  begin  his  labors.  The 
first  great  task  before  him  was  that 
of  mastering  the  difficult  German 
tongue.  But  this  good  family  gave 
him  willing  and  efficient  aid  in  his 
task.  He  would  read  in  concert  with 
the  children,  and  he  found  in  them  his 
natural  teachers.  He  would  arise  at 
six  o'clock  in  the  morning  and  put  in 
two  hours  of  diligent  work  on  the  Ger- 
man grammar.  He  did  not,  however, 
spend  all  his  time  in  studying  the  lan- 
guage and  reciting  it,  but  with  singular 
courage  and  characteristic  zeal,  he  set 
about  his  "Father's  business."  He 
distributed  tracts  during  the  day,  and 
held  meetings  in  the  evening.  His 
knowledge  of  German  was,  of  course, 
exceedingly  small,  but  he  straightway 
began  to  preach  and  to  expound  the 
Scriptures  in  a  broken,  stammering 
manner.  He  was  at  first  laughed  at, 
but  nothing  daunting,  he  prosecuted  his 
labors,  and  in  an  exceedingly  short 
time,  acquired  the  language.  It  came 
to  him,  he  says,  as  a  gift.  After  five 
months  of  aggressive,  single-handed 
labor,  a  companion  was  sent  to  him. 
and  in  a  short  time  a  branch  of  the 
Church  was  organize'd  where  he  la- 
bored. Two  more  months  elapsed, when 
he  wa.s  called  to  the  presidency  of  the 
Dresden  branch.  Not  long  after  he  had 
commenced  his  labors  there,  he 
dreamed,  one  night,  that  he  was  fish- 
ing in  a  beautiful  stream  of  water.  In 
the  dream,  he  was  fortunate  enough  to 
catch  three  trout.  The  dream  proved 
to  be  prophetic,  for  very  soon  after- 
wards he  baptized  a  man  and  his  wife 
and  daughter.  The  ordinance  was  per- 
formed in  the  River  Elbe,  beneath  the 
shade  of  the  spreading  lindens,  on  the 
exact  spot  where,  many  years  before. 
Elder  Budge  baptized  two  of  our  very 
highly  respected  brethren — Elders  Karl 
G.  Maeser  and  Fred  W.  Schoenfeld. 
Elder  Woodruff,  at  this  time,  had  great 
pleasure   in   meeting  and   preaching   to 


the  old-time  associates  and  fellow- 
teachers  of  these  brethren.  They  showed 
him  great  respect  and  were  courteous 
in  their  attention  to  Elder  Woodruff, 
but  it  seemed  that  they  were  actuated 
by  a  sense  of  regard  for  their  old  as- 
sociates rather  than  the  teachings  they 
heard.  While  he  was  presiding  over 
this  new  conference,  Elder  Woodruff 
spent  much  of  his  time  in  distributing 
the  written  word  in  the  villages  that 
border  the  Elbe,  extending  from  Dres- 
den to  Bohemia.  He  even  entered  one 
Bohemian  village  and  delivered  his 
message  there.  He  was  called  from 
Dresden  to  Berlin,  over  which  confer- 
ence he  presided  one  year.  This  con- 
ference comprehended  such  cities  as 
Berlin,  Hanover,  Stettin,  Sorau  and 
Droskau.  "^'Tiile  laboring  there,  the 
civil  officials  undertook  the  banishment 
of  the  "Mormon"  Elders,  and  in  order 
that  the  good  work  might  not  be 
stayed,  the  Elders  were  often  compelled 
to  employ  most  subtle  methods  in  order 
to  carry  on  their  labors  without  detec- 
tion and  consequent  interruption.  At 
Ernst,  Elder  Woodruff  was  disguised 
as  a  country  swain.  He  donned  th<; 
rude  garb  and  heavy  clogs,  and,  with 
the  other  peasants,  toiled  in  the  shop 
or  field,  during  the  day.  With  his  fellow- 
rustics,  he  ate  the  black  bread  and 
"smear."  No  sooner,  however,  did  the 
evening  shades  fall,  than  he  would  meet 
in  some  humble  cottage,  a  company  of 
eager  Saints,  who  would  perchance 
bring  some  trusted  friend  with  them, 
whom  they  hoped  to  lead  into  the  gos- 
pel light.  One  thing  that  impressed 
Brother  Woodruff  deeply,  was  the  ab- 
solute trustworthiness  of  those  coun- 
try Saints.  He  found  them  as  true  as 
steel,  and  never  were  they  known  to 
disappoint  an  Elder,  or  betray  his  confi- 
dence, in  those  trying  times.  At  this 
juncture,  a  furlough  was  granted  him. 
during  which  he  made  a  most  enjoyable 
tour  of  the  greatest  European  cities. 
He  visited  Austria  and  Italy,  and  spent 
the  4th  of  July  in  Geneva.  He  spent 
ten  days  in  Rome,  visiting,  among  other 
places,  the  Vatican.  From  there  he 
went  to  Naples,  Pompeii,  and  Hercu- 
laneum.  Having  read  Bulwer-Lytton's 
fascinating  novel,  these  two  latter 
places  were  exceptionally  delightful  to 
him.  He  then  returned  to  the  mission, 
and,  after  reviewing  his  old  field  of 
labor,  received  a  release  to  return 
home,  having  performed  a  faithful  and 


174 


LATTER-DAY     SAINT 


acceptable  mission.  Elder  Woodruff 
returned  to  his  native  city  in  1896.  For 
a  short  time,  he  resumed  his  work  in 
the  bank.  On  the  30th  of  June,  he  was 
married  to  Miss  Helen  May  Winters. 
During  October  conference  of  the  same 
year  he  was  called  to  the  Apostleship, 
and  on  the  7th  day  of  October  was  or- 
dained to  that  office  by  his  father.  In 
reviewing  his  brief  life,  Apostle  Wood- 
ruff tells  us,  that  though  he  was  led 
into  some  follies,  common  to  youth, 
though  he  was  often  found  in  unwhole- 
some company,  and  many  times  gave 
way  to  the  weaknesses  of  the  flesh,  yet 
he  never,  for  a  moment,  felt  himself 
liberated  from  that  restraint  which  a 
belief  in  God  imposes.  This  belief  had 
been  early  and  deeply  implanted  in  his 
heart.  As  a  Deacon,  he  did  his  duty; 
a,s  a  Sunday  School  member  he  was 
faithful.  There  is  no  doubt  that  the 
influence  of  these  two  duties,  which  by 
practice  had  become  habits  in  him, 
stayed  his  feet  from  running  toward 
sin,  in  that  critical  period  of  life,  when 
youth,  manhood  and  common  sense  are 
struggling  against  the  temptations  that 
are  spread  like  the  fowler's  snare, 
across  the  paths  of  the  young.  To 
understand  the  character  and  disposi- 
tion of  Apostle  Woodruff,  one  need  but 
to  know  his  parents,  for  he  has  re- 
ceived, like  the  rest  of  that  exceptional 
family,  the  priceless  heritages  which  a 
true  and  noble,  God-fearing  mother, 
and  a  peaceful,  devoted,  God-serving 
father,  bequeathed  them  in  their  birth. 
The  strongest  qualities  of  the  Wood- 
ruff family  are,  perhaps,  natural  hon- 
esty, child-like  simplicity,  implicit  faith 
in  God,  and  a  due  reverence  for  just 
and  holy  men.  These  very  estimable 
qualities,  combined  with  a  gift  of  in- 
dustriousness,  and  a  total  absence  of 
ostentation,  are  the  splendid  endow- 
ments which  Apostle  Woodruff  possess- 
es in  a  high  degree.  These  qualities, 
under  a  wise  and  tender  mother's  train- 
ing, in  his  earlier  years,  and  the  power- 
ful influence  of  a  true  father,  in  later 
years,  constitute  the  agencies  which 
formed  his  character,  and  determined 
his  high  course  in  life.  He  enjoyed 
the  closest  association  with  his  father 
during  the  later  years  of  that  good 
man's  life.  They  were  most  confiden- 
tial one  toward  the  other.  There  was 
a  companionship  between  them,  so 
close  that  it  even  excluded  his  nearest 
boy   friends.     In    his   father    he    beheld 


a  shining  example,  in  whose  life  truth 
had  been  held  as  the  paramount  qual- 
ity. He  had  a  profound  reverence  for 
his  father,  not  only  as  a  parent,  but 
as  a  Prophet  of  God.  Since  his  ap- 
pointment to  the  Apostleship,  Elder 
Woodruff  has  been  most  diligent  in  the 
high  duties  and  offices  of  his  calling. 
Perhaps  the  greatest  special  labor 
which  has  been  given  him  was  the 
colonization  of  the  Big  Horn  country. 
That  work  was  placed  in  his  hands  by 
the  First  Presidency  and  has  thus  far 
been  carried  on  most  successfully.  He 
possesses  the  gifts  of  humility  and  so- 
ciability, by  which  he  is  in  close  touch 
with  common,  toiling  people,  thereby 
gaining  their  confidence  and  love.  In  ad- 
dition to  these  qualities,  he  is  highly 
spiritual  in  his  temperament.  Thus  are 
blended  the  very  elements  necessary 
in  the  man  who  is  to  build  up  a  coun- 
try and  at  the  same  time  build  up  the 
Kingdom  of  God  on  earth.  His  ap- 
pointment to  the  Quorum  of  the  Twelve 
was  a  happy  choice.  It  was  an  inspira- 
tion; and  in  the  work  of  the  eventful 
future,  w'hich  he  will  be  called  upon  to 
perform,  we  can  see  in  Abraham  Owen 
Woodruff  those  qualities  and  gifts  and 
dispositions  which  are  needed  in  the 
man  who  is  to  assist  in  guiding  and  di- 
recting this  people  to  their  higher  des- 
tinies. It  is  altogether  too  early  to 
write  his  life,  as  it  has  only  just  begun. 
It  is  pleasing  to  contemplate,  however, 
that,  like  a  vessel  that  has  left  its 
moorings,  with  sails  spread  and  full 
and  bending  to  the  wind,  we  see  him 
well  on  his  splendid  career.  Along 
the  pathway  of  safe  and  honest  pur- 
pose, will  he,  too,  speed  on,  guided  by 
true  principle  and  impelled  by  a  high 
sense  of  duty  — Nephi  L.  Morris. 

CLAWSON,  Rudger,  a  member  of 
the  Council  of  Twelve  Apostles  since 
1898,  is  the  son  of  Hiram  B.  Clawson 
and  Margaret  Gay  Judd,  and  was  born 
March  1,  1857,  in  Salt  Lake  City.  Utah. 
He  was  educated  in  the  schools  of  his 
native  city.  The  teachers  who  seem 
to  have  influenced  him  most  were  Dr. 
Karl  G.  Maeser,  Miss  Ida  I.  Cook  and 
Dr.  John  R.  Park.  From  his  earliest 
boyhood,  Elder  Clawson  vvas  religious- 
ly inclined.  One  of  the  shaping  forces 
of  his  character  was  his  early  reading 
of  the  Book  of  Mormon.  His  own 
words  on  this  subject  teach  a  lesson 
full  of  interest  and  deep  meaning  to  the 


BIOGRAPHICAL,    ENCYCLOPEDIA. 


175 


young-  Latter-day  Saints.  "Early  in 
life  I  became  deeply  interested  in  the 
Book  of  Mormon,"  he  says,  'which  I 
read  and  re-read,  and  drew  from  its 
divine  pages  inspiration  and  hope. 
Faith  sprang  up  in  my  heart.  By  a 
careful  study  of  that  glorious  book, 
well  defined  ideas  of  right  and  wrong 
were  firmly  fixed  in  my  younthful  mind, 
and  I  was  thus  measurably  able  to 
withstand  the  temptations  that  assailed 
me  and  was  able  to  escape  many  of  the 
sins  and  follies  to  which  some  of  the 
young  are  addicted.  With  advanced 
years,,  the  conviction  has  constantly 
grown  upon  me  that  the  Book  of  Mor- 
mon is  one  of  the  grandest  books  of 
the  age."  Regarding  the  meeting-go- 
ing of  the  small  boy.  Elder  Clawson 
bear:'  this  te?timuny:  "I  remember  the 
interest  I  fell,  as  a  boy,  in  the  Sun- 
day meetings  at  the  Old  Tabernacle, 
and  1:  1    i    in  tlu    1  ii  ^.    \.  w    1  ib,  rnacle. 


The  sermons  of  Presidents  Brigham 
Young,  Heber  C.  Kimball,  George  A. 
Smith  and  the  Apostles  and  Elders 
made  a  profound  impression  on  my 
mind  for  good.  From  my  own  ex- 
perience I  am  led  to  believe  that  the 
effects  and  influence  of  the  teachings 
of  our  leaders  upon  the  youth  of  Zion 
—I  mean  the  very  small  boys  and  girls, 
who,  in  the  midst  of  the  congregations 
sit  almost  unnoticed — is  greater  than 
many  suppose."  An  important  adjunct 
to  Elder  Clawson's  school  life  was  the 
Wasatch  Literary  Society,  whose  mem- 
bership was  composed  of  his  compan- 
ions and  associates,  boys  and  girls  of 
early  days,  many  of  whom  have  since 
become  prominent  in  public  life  Short- 
ly after  leaving  school  the  young  man, 
then   only  eighteen   years  old,     became 


private  secretary  to  Hon.  John  W. 
Young,  then  president  of  the  Utah 
Western  Railway  company.  In.  this 
capacity  he  spent  two  years  in  the 
East,  visiting  most  of  the  prominent 
cities,  but  spending  the  greater  part 
of  his  time  in  New  York  City.  This 
trip  gave  the  young  man  much  prac- 
tical and  valuable  experience.  In 
1879,  Elder  Clawson  was  called  on  a 
mission  to  the  Southern  States;  and  it 
was  while  laboring  in  the  State  of 
Georgia,  preaching  the  gospel  of  Christ, 
that  his  friend  and  companion  mis- 
sionary. Elder  Joseph  Standing,  was 
shot  down  by  a  brutal  mob.  The  news 
at  the  time  sent  a  thrill  of  horror 
through  the  Church.  Briefly  told,  the 
terrible  experience  and  Elder  Clawson's 
part  in  it  is  as  follows:  In  the  sum- 
mer of  1879,  Elder  Clawson  and  Elder 
Standing, who  were  laboring  in  Georgia, 
started  for  a  conference  of  the  Elders 
to  be  held  in  the  city  of  Rome.  On 
the  way,  they  were  to  call  on  some 
members  of  the  Church  living  at  Var- 
nell's  Station,  Whitfleld  county.  Elder 
Standing  had  previously  labored  in  that 
section  and  had  succeeded  in  raising 
up  a  branch  of  the  Church.  The  mis- 
sionaries reached  the  place  on  the  even- 
ing of  Saturday,  July  9th.  Calling  at 
the  house  of  a  Church  member,  they 
found  the  family  to  be  in  a  state  of 
great  excitement,  owing  to  the  threats 
made  against  the  Elders  in  the  neigh- 
borhood. Because  of  this  bitter  and 
murderous  feeling  the  brethren  were  re- 
fused the  privilege  of  stopping  over 
night  at  the  house.  They  were,  how- 
ever, directed  to  the  house  of  a  Mr. 
Henry  Holston,  who  was  not  a  member 
of  the  Church,  but  was  friendly  to  the 
Elders.  Mr.  Holston  received  the  mis- 
sionaries kindly,  and  when  the  situation 
was  explained  to  him,  he  said  he  would 
defend  them  as  long  as  they  were  under 
his  roof. 'Elder  Standing  appeared  pale 
and  anxious  over  the  trouble  which 
threatened  them.  A  dream  he  had  had 
a  short  time  previous  seemed  to  worry 
him,  as  it  appeared  to  forebode  evil. 
The  next  day  was  Sunday.  The  morn- 
mg  opened  beautiful,  and  the  two  El- 
ders set  out  to  get  their  satchels  and 
bring  them  back  to  Mr.  Holston's  place. 
They  found  the  family  still  fearful  of 
trouble,  hence,  they  did  not  remain 
long.  The  road  between  the  two  houses 
was  densely  wooded  on  both  sides.  On 
the    way    back    to    Holston's,    the    two 


176 


LATTER-DAY  SAINT 


young:  missionaries  suddenly  came  upon 
twelve  men,  some  on  horseback  and 
some  on  foot.  They  were  all  armed, 
and  as  they  caught  sight  of  the  Elders, 
they  set  up  great  yells  of  exultation, 
and  came  rushing  towards  them  like 
a  pack  of  hungry  wolves.  Elder  Stand- 
ing asked  the  men  by  what  authority 
they  were  thus  molested  on  the  public 
highway.  "We'll  show  you  by  what  au- 
thority we  act!"  they  replied.  One  of 
them  then  jumped  from  his  horse,  an<l 
came  up  to  Elder  Clawson  with  a 
cocked  revolver,  pointing  it  into  his 
face  and  at  the  same  time  uttering 
vile  and  most  blasphemous  language. 
The  mob  then  ordered  the  brethren  to 
follow  them,  which  they  did.  To  the 
expostulation  of  the  Elders  that  they 
were  peaceable,  law-abiding  citizens, the 
mob  replied:  "The  government  of  the 
United  States  is  against  you, and  there 
is  no  law  in  Georgia  for  Mormons."  In 
this  march  to  violence  Elder  Clawson 
walked  rather  slowly  and  thus  lagged 
somewhat.  At  this,  one  of  the  rufflan.s 
came  up  behind  and  struck  him  a  ter- 
rible blow  on  the  back  of  the  heac"., 
causing  him  to  fall  forward.  He  was, 
however,  up  again  in  an  instant,  but 
he  knew  he  could  do  nothing  to  resent 
the  attack.  Shortly  after  the  wretch 
attacked  him  again  with  a  club,  which 
only  his  comrades  prevented  him  from 
using  over  Elder  Clawson's  head.  After 
a  time  they  left  the  road  and  went 
deeper  into  the  woods.  The  party  met 
an  old  man,  well  known  in  the  neigh- 
borhood, and  a  girl  by  the  name  of 
Mary  Hamblin,  who  had  come  to  warn 
the  Elders.  Elder  Clawson  feared  that 
the  mob  would  injure  the  girl,  but  they 
let  her  go  with  a  threat.  Soon  they 
came  to  a  beautiful  spot  in  the  woods 
— a  spring  of  clear  water  shaded  by  a 
large  tree.  Here  a  halt  was  made  and 
the  party  seated  themselves  around  the 
pool  of  water.  Then  the  mobbers  con- 
versed for  about  an  hour  and  a  half, 
accusing  the  Mormons  of  all  manner 
of  vile  acts.  They  seemed  very  eager 
to  learn  something  of  the  whereabouts 
of  Elder  John  Morgan,  against  whom 
they  appeared  to  have  a  deep-seated 
hatred.  They  were  much  disappointed 
when  they  learned  that  he  was  in  Utah. 
Piesently  three  horsemen,  who  had  left 
the  party  a  short  time  previously,  rode 
up  again.  One  of  them  gave  the  com- 
mand: "Follow  us."  At  the  same  time. 
Elder   Standing,    who   was   sitting  with 


his  back  to  the  rider,  suddenly  leaped 
to  his  feet,  turned,  clapped  his  hands 
together  and  shouted  the  word.  "Sur- 
render!" A  man  seated  close  to  him 
pointed  his  pistol  at  him  and  fired,  and 
the  young  missionary  instantly  fell. 
The  mobbers  at  once  arose,  and  one  of 
them,  pointing  to  Elder  Clawson,  said 
to  his  companions:  "Shoot  that  man  " 
Instantly  every  weapon  was  turned 
upon  him,  and  it  seemed  to  the  young 
man  that  he  was  standing  on  the  brink 
of  eternity.  He  faced  the  mob,  folded 
his  arms  and  said,  "Shoot!"  But  the 
order  not  to  shoot  was  given,  and  the 
guns  were  lowered.  Elder  Clawson  then 
went  to  his  murdered  companion  and 
looked  into  his  face.  A  ghastly  wound 
was  in  his  forehead  where  the  bullet 
had  entered.  Elder  Clawson  got  per- 
mission from  the  mob  to  go  after  some 
assistance  for  his  friend.  Running 
through  the  woods  he  hailed  a  wood- 
chopper,  and  asked  him  to  assist  in  re- 
moving the  body.  "No;  I  haven't  time,' 
was  the  reply.  Arriving  at  Mr.  Hols- 
ton's  that  gentleman  gave  Brother 
Clawson  a  horse  to  go  after  the  coroner, 
while  he  left  for  the  scene  of  the  as- 
sassination. Elder  Clawson  again  met 
the  mob  on  the  road  fleeing  from  the 
State.  He  feared  they  would  murder 
him  also,  but  they  let  him  pass  un- 
harmed, and  with  a  thankful  heart  he 
traveled  on.  Arriving  at  Catoosa 
Springs,  a  fashionable  -watering  place, 
telegrams  were  sent  to  Salt  Lake  City, 
and  also  to  the  governor  of  the  State. 
The  coroner,  his  clerk,  and  Brother 
Clawson.  then  set  out  to  get  the  body. 
They  were  joined  by  Mr.  Holston  on 
the  way.  The  coroner  held  an  inquest, 
and  the  body  was  laid  upon  a  plank 
and  carried  to  the  house  of  Mr.  Hols- 
ton. Here,  during  that  gloomy  night, 
by  the  light  of  a  candle,  with  the  awe- 
stricken  spectators  standing  near.  El- 
der Clawson  performed  the  last  act  of 
kindness  to  his  friend  in  washing  the 
awful  stains  from  his  body  and  pre- 
paring it  for  its  final  rest.  After  much 
difficulty  and  danger.  Elder  Clawson 
got  the  body  safely  on  the  train,  and 
arrived  with  it  in  Salt  Lake  City  Au- 
gust 3rd.  In  September  of  the  next 
year  Elder  Clawson  went  back  to 
Georgia  to  attend  the  trial  of  the  mur- 
derers. Feeling  was  high  against  him 
in  the  State,  but  he  had  a  duty  to  per- 
form, and  he  did  it,  although  at  the 
risk  of  his  life.    Three  of  the  murderers 


BIOGRAPHICAL    ENCYCLOPEDIA. 


177 


had  been  captured,  and  they  had  been 
indicted  for  murder  in  the  first  degree. 
The  trial  continued  for  three  days.  The 
jury's  verdict  was  "not  guilty!"  The 
result  was  greeted  with  great  demon- 
stration by  the  spectators.  A  friend  told 
Elder  Clawson  that  he  was  in  danger, 
and  as  soon  as  possible  after  the  trial 
he  got  quietly  away.  Having  obeyed 
the  law  of  plural  marriage,  Elder 
Clawson  was  one  of  the  first  victims 
of  that  terrible  persecution  which  be- 
gan under  the  Edmunds  law.and  which 
made  many  thousand  sufferers  for  con- 
science sake.  After  a  trial  which  at- 
tracted wide  attention,  Elder  Clawson 
was  convicted.  He  was  sentenced  to 
be  imprisoned  in  the  Utah  Penitentiary 
for  a  term  of  four  years,  and  to  pay  a 
fine  of  $800.  He  entered  the  prison  Nov. 
3,  1884.  Just  prior  to  passing  sentence. 
Judge  Charles  S.  Zane  asked  him  if  he 
had  anything  to  say  why  judgment 
should  not  be  pronounced,  and  he 
promptly  replied:  "Tour  honor:  Since 
the  jury  in  my  case  has  seen  proper 
to  find  a  verdict  of  guilty,  I  have  only 
this  to  say  why  judgment  should  not 
be  passed  upon  me:  I  very  much  re- 
gret that  the  laws  of  my  country 
should  come  in  conflict  with  the  laws 
of  God;  but  whenever  they  do,  I  shall 
invariably  choose  to  obey  the  latter.  If 
I  did  not  so  express  myself  I  should  feel 
unworthy  the  cause  I  represent.  The 
constitution  of  the  United  States  ex- 
pressly provides  that  Congress  shall 
make  no  law  respecting  the  establish- 
ment of  religion  or  prohibiting  the  free 
exercise  thereof.  It  cannot  be  denied, 
I  think,  that  marriage,  when  attended 
and  sanctioned  by  religious  rites  and 
ceremonies,  is  an  establishment  of  re- 
ligion. The  anti-polygamy  law  of  1862 
and  the  Edmunds-Tucker  law  of  1882 
were  expressly  designed  to  operate 
against  marriage  as  believed  in  and 
practiced  by  the  Latter-day  Saints. 
They  are  therefore  unconstitutional, 
and,  of  course,  as  such,  cannot  com- 
mand the  respect  that  constitutional 
laws  would.  That  is  all  I  have  to  say, 
your  honor."  Elder  Clawson  was  but 
twenty-seven  years  of  age  when  this 
terrible  experience  came  to  him — a 
young  man, full  of  the  energy  of  life, with 
bright  prospects  opening  before  him, 
condemned  to  a  loathsome  prison  cell 
for  four  years!  A  man  of  refinement, 
accustomed  to  the  society  of  the  noble 
and  the  pure,   forced  now  to  associate 

Vol.  1.     No.  12. 


with  men,  low  and  degraded  with  vice; 
to  come  in  close  contact  with  them,  to 
eat  and  sleep  with  men  repulsively  vile 
and  debased;  to  mingle  with  robbers 
and  murderers;  to  be  served  with  poor 
food,  hardly  fit  to  eat;  to  breathe  the 
filthy  tobacco-laden  air  of  the  cells. 
There  was  but  one  source  from  which 
to  ask  relief— God,  the  merciful;  and 
from  Him  and  His  comforting  Spirit 
the  young  man  received  the  strength 
to  carry  him  through  the  awful  ordeal. 
For  a  long  time  the  prison  oflS^cials 
treated  Elder  Clawson  with  indignities. 
He  had  to  bear  the  insults  of  his  fel- 
low-convicts, some  of  whom  took  a  de- 
light in  persecuting  the  lone  "Mor- 
mon." After  a  time  other  brethren 
were  received  at  the  "pen,"  and  Elder 
Clawson's  life  now  became  more  bear- 
able. His  father.  Bishop  Hiram  B. 
Clawson,  entered  the  prison  in  Novem- 
ber, 1885,  and  remained  nearly  six 
months.  Naturally  the  young  man 
took  great  comfort  in  his  father's  so- 
ciety, though  at  the  same  time  grieved 
to  see  him  in  prison.  Slowly  the  months 
lengthened  into  years.  His  brethren 
came  and  went,  but  Rudger  was  still 
there.  The  great  number  of  "Mormon" 
convicts  had  its  modifying  infiuence  on 
the  prison  and  its  life  was  easier  to 
bear.  During  Elder  Clawson's  incar- 
ceration President  Lorenzo  Snow  served 
a  term  of  eleven  months  in  prison.  The 
aged  Apostle  was  a  great  comfort  to  the 
brethren  in  showing  them  how  to  bear 
their  affliction  with  due  fortitude.  El- 
der Clawson  was  pardoned  by  Pres. 
Grover  Cleveland,  and  he  left  the  peni- 
tentiary Dec.  12,  1887.  "During  my  im- 
prisonment of  three  years,  one  month, 
and  ten  days,"  says  Elder  Clawson,  "I 
never  once  felt  to  murmur  or  complain, 
and  as  I  emerged  from  the  prison  walls 
my  faith  in  the  principle  of  plural  mar- 
riage was  just  as  firm  and  unshaken 
as  when  I  entered.  I  felt  to  praise  and 
glorify  the  Lord  that  He  had  deemed 
me  worthy  to  suffer  bonds  and  im- 
prisonment in  defense  of  the  right." 
Elder  Clawson  received  a  letter  from 
Pres.  Wilford  Woodruff,  dated  Dec. 
23,  1887,  calling  him  to  preside  over  the 
Box  Elder  Stake  of  Zion.  At  the 
quarterly  conference  of  Box  Elder 
Stake,  held  in  Brigham  City,  February 
5th,  his  name  was  presented  and  sus- 
tained. Elder  Clawson  at  once  moved 
to  Brigham  City,  and  entered  upon  the 
discharge    of   his    duties.       Under     his 

March  23,  1901. 


178 


LATTER-DAY    SAINT 


presidency  the  Box  Elder  Stake  came 
■well  up  to  the  front  rank  in  the  com- 
pleteness of  its  Church  organizations 
and  the  general  progressiveness  of  the 
Saints.  During  his  presidency  new 
meeting  houses  were  erected  in  eleven 
of  the  fourteen  Wards  of  the  Stake.  At 
the  destruction  of  the  Brigham  City 
Tabernacle  by  fire.  President  Clawson 
at  once  took  steps  for  its  rebuilding, 
and  thirteen  months  afterward,  the  ele- 
gant new  tabernacle  was  erected,  paid 
for  and  dedicated.  Pres.  Clawson  was 
called  to  the  Apostleship  at  the  general 
conference  held  in  October,  1898.  He 
was  ordained  on  the  10th  by  Lorenzo 
Snow.  Since  that  time  he  has  been  oc- 
cupied in  the  duties  of  his  calling  in 
traveling,  organizing,  instructing,  and 
in  office  work  for  the  Church.  "What, 
Brother  Clawson,"  asked  the  writer  of 
this  sketch,  "has  been  the  most  potent 
factor  in  aiding  you  to  success  in  life?" 
and  the  answer  unhesitatingly  was: 
"Mv  success  in  life,  if  I  have  attained 
to  any,  is  due  to  a  fixed  and  unyielding 
determination  on  my  part  to  seek  and 
abide  by  counsel.  I  know  there  is  safe- 
ty in  counsel,  and  that  he  who  turns 
therefrom  and  seeks  to  become  a  law 
unto  himself  must  surely  fall."— Nephi 
Anderson. 


which,  next  to  the  great  man  whose 
name  it  bears,  and  co-equally  with  Dr. 
Maeser,  its  educational  founder,  owes 
its  existence  to  our  Apostle's  honored 
sire,  the  late  Pres.  Abraham  O.  Smoot. 
Reed  attended  the  Academy's  first  term 
in  April,  1876,  being  one  of  twenty-nine 
students  with  which  the  institution 
opened.  He  passed  through  all  the 
higher  branches  then  taught  there,  and 
at  one  time  was  the  only  student  in 
the  academic  department,  from  which 
he  was  graduated  in  1879.  He  studied 
principally  along  commercial  lines,  and 
at  intervals,  mainly  during  vacations, 
worked  in  the  Provo  Woolen  Mills, 
which  his  father  and  others  had  found- 
ed and  which  started  up  in  1872.  There 
he  obtained  his  first  insight  into  manu- 
facture, a  practical  insight,  for  he 
worked  in  every  department  of  the  fac- 
tory.      Immediately  upon  entering  the 


SMOOT,  Reed,  a  member  of  the 
Council  of  Twelve  Apostles  since  1898, 
is  the  son  of  Abraham  O.  Smoot  and 
Anna  Kirstine  Mouritsen,  and  was  born 
Jan.  10,  1862,  in  Salt  Lake  City,  Utah. 
He  received  his  first  schooling  under 
Miss  Barbara  Romney,  daughter  of 
George  Romney  of  the  Twentieth 
Ward,  who  in  1868  opened  a  small 
school  in  her  father's  house.  The  fol- 
lowing year  the  boy  attended  the  Ward 
school,  taught  by  Wm.  Willes,  and 
kc^t  up  his  attendance  until  after  the 
school  was  taken  in  charge  by  Dr.  Karl 
G.  Mae.ser  in  the  year  1870.  Two  years 
later  that  part  of  Abraham  O.  Smoot's 
family  of  which  Reed  was  a  member 
removed  to  Provo,  where  another  por- 
tion of  the  family  had  resided  since 
1868  and  where  Bishop  Smoot,  ex-mayor 
of  Salt  Lake  City,  was  elected  to  a 
similar  office  and  was  also  appointed 
president  of  the  Utah  Stake  of  Zion. 
His  son  Reed  has  continued  to  live 
there  up  to  the  present  time.  At  Provo 
he  attended  the  Timpanogas  branch  of 
the  University  of  Deseret,  the  prede- 
cessor of  the  Brigham  Young  Academy, 


mills,  he  formed  the  characteristic  re- 
solve to  one  day  become  their  man- 
ager; an  ambition  realized  eleven  years 
later.  Upon  leaving  school,  and  after 
conferring  with  his  father  and  his  tutor. 
Dr.  Maeser,  he  fully  made  up  his  mind 
to  pursue  a  commercial  career,  and 
with  that  in  view  took  a  humble  posi- 
tion in  the  Provo  Co-operative  Institu- 
tion, the  first  co-operative  store  or- 
ganized in  Utah  under  the  impetus  of 
the  great  co-operative  movement  pro- 
jected by  Pres.  Brigham  Young  in  1868. 
Beginning  at  the  bottom  of  the  ladder, 
Reed  went  to  work  sacking  fruit,  sort- 
ing potatoes,  and  doing  odd  jobs  about 
the  place,  but  all  the  while  keeping 
his  eye  on  the  mark  for  which  he  had 
set  out.  One  day  his  father  entered 
the  store,  and  in  conversation  with  the 
superintendent,    Robert     C.    Kirkwood, 


BIOGRAPHICAL,   ENCYCLOPEDIA. 


n9 


happened  to  say,  "I  see  you  have  Reed 
here,  but  I  guess  he  won't  stay  with 
you  very  long."  Reed  overheard  the 
remark,  and  though  not  meant  unkind- 
ly nor  said  slightingly,  it  caused  the 
youthful  sacker  of  potatoes  to  set  his 
teeth  together  and  inwardly  determine: 
"I  will  stay  here  until  I  am  superin- 
tendent of  this  institution."  That  de- 
termination was  adhered  to,  and  in 
September,  1880,  less  than  eighteen 
months  after  he  uttered  the  prediction, 
it  was  fulfilled.  He  became  superin- 
tendent of  the  Co-operative  Institution 
and  remained  such  until  April,  1884, 
when  he  was  made  manager  of  the 
Provo  Woolen  Mills;  thus  realizing  his 
previous  resolve.  His  first  call  to  the 
mission  field— supplementing  a  notice 
previously  given — came  in  the  year  1880, 
but  was  rescinded,  as  his  services  were 
needed  as  superintendent  of  the  co- 
operative store.  His  second  call  was  in 
March,  1884,  when  he  was  again  stopped 
from  going  abroad,  and  given  by  Pres. 
John  Taylor  a  five  years'  mission  as 
manager  of  the  Woollen  Mills.  Another 
call  was  made  upon  him  in  October, 
1890,  and  in  November  of  that  year,  he 
left  home  en  route  for  Liverpool,  the 
headquarters  of  the  European  Mission. 
This  was  his  first  absence  from  Ameri- 
ca, barrine  a  brief  visit  with  his  father 
to  the  Hawaiian  Islands,  from  May 
2nd  to  July  19th,  1880;  but  he  had  vis- 
ited on  business  nearly  every  State  of 
the  Union.  Prior  to  going  upon  his 
mission  he  had  not  been  very  active 
in  religious  matters,  but  had  thrown 
his  whole  soul  into  business  and  was 
fast  becoming  a  man  of  means  and  of 
consequent  financial  influence  in  the 
community.  In  fact,  he  was  so  pros- 
perous, and  so  intensely  interested  in 
money  makinsr,  that  it  was  feared  and 
said  by  some  that  Reed  Smoot  and  re- 
ligion were  drifting  apart.  Some  went 
so  far  as  to  predict  that  if  another  call 
came  for  a  mission  (he  had  already  had 
two,  and  had  been  prevented  from  go- 
ing through  no  fault  of  his  own)  he 
would  refuse  to  accept  it.  How  ground- 
less these  fears  and  assertions,  and 
how  unwarranted  such  a  prediction, 
was  shown  by  his  prompt  departure  for 
Europe  in  the  fall  of  1890,  and  by  the 
subsequent  great  change  that  came 
over  him  in  relation  to  spiritual  things. 
While  abroad  he  labored  principally  in 
the  Liverpool  office  as  bookkeeper  and 
emigration  clei-k,  under  the  presidency 


of  Apostle  Brigham  Young.  He  also 
visited  and  spoke  at  the  various  con- 
ferences, and  from  July  2nd  to  August 
6th,  1891,  was  absent  from  England 
touring  the  continent  with  Dr.  James  E. 
Talmage,  who  was  visiting  Europe, and 
Elder  Samuel  A.  King,  one  of  the  Utah 
missionaries.  The  party  passed  suc- 
cessively through  Belgium,  Holland, 
Germany,  Switzerland,  Italy  and 
France.  While  at  Liverpool  Elder 
Smoot  became  well  acquainted  with 
the  leading  officials  of  the  Guion  Steam- 
ship line,  which  had  for  many  years 
the  bulk  of  the  "Mormon"  emigration 
from  Liverpool,  and  was  treated  by 
them  with  the  greatest  courtesy  and 
consideration.  Mr.  George  Ramsden, 
the  old-time  manager  of  the  Guion 
shipping  agency,  made  him  welcome 
at  his  home  and  manifested  almost  a 
father's  love  for  him.  Mr.  John  A. 
Marsh,  the  head  man  of  the  Guion 
company,  also  took  much  interest  in 
him,  and  appointed  him  his  agent  as  a 
passage  broker;  a  situation  which, 
though  it  brought  no  salary,  was  of  ad- 
vantage to  the  emigrational  interests 
of  the  Church.  While  he  was  acting 
in  this  capacity  the  change  was  made 
by  which  "Mormon"  emigrants,  who 
formerly  had  but  the  usual  steerage 
accommodations,  were  provided  with 
intermediate  passage  over  the  Atlantic. 
Elder  Smoot  was  called  home  by  a  tele- 
gram from  Pres.  Wilford  Woodruff, 
which  informed  him  of  the  serious  ill- 
ness of  his  father,  and  in  response  to 
this  summons  he  sailed  from  Liverpool 
on  the  19th  of  September,  and  arrived 
at  Provo  Oct.  1,  1891.  For  a  short  time 
he  assisted  his  father  as  manager  of 
the  Provo  Lumber  Manufacturing  and 
Building  Company,  one  of  the  indus- 
tries that  Pres.  Smoot  had  established, 
and  straightened  out  a  contract  be- 
tween that  company  and  the  Territorial 
Insane  Asylum.  In  the  spring  of  1892. 
he  resumed  his  former  position  as  man- 
ager of  the  Provo  Woolen  Mills,  which 
under  his  able  superintendency  have 
achieved  a  splendid  success.  That  po- 
sition he  still  holds.  At  the  time  El- 
der Smoot  went  to  Europe  he  was  a 
married  man  and  had  been  since  Sept. 
17,  1884,  when  he  wedded  Miss  Alpha  M. 
Eldredge,  daughter  of  Horace  S.  El- 
dredge,  one  of  the  First  Seven  Presi- 
dents of  the  Seventies.  Her  mother 
was  Mrs.  Chloe  A.  Redfield  Eldredge, 
daughter  of  Harlow  Redfield,  one  of  the 


180 


LATTER-DAY    SAINT 


founders  of  Provo.    There  Elder  Smoot 
built  a  handsome  home  as  the  domicile 
of  himself  and  wife  and  their  steadily 
increasing  family.      They  have  had  six 
children,   five  of  whom  are  living,  and 
their    married    life    has   been    a   happy 
one.    After  his  return  from  England,  he 
launched   out   in  business  more   exten- 
sively than  ever,  and  his  spiritual  de- 
velopment,   which      his     mission      had 
awakened,  likewise  continued.    He  was 
the  main  promoter  of  the  Provo  Com- 
mercial and  Savings  Bank,  one  of  the 
soundest  institutions  in  the  State,  and 
has   been   from  the   first  its   president. 
He  engaged  considerably  in  mining,and 
was  made  vice  president  of  the  famous 
Grand   Central   Mining   Company;    also 
of  the  Victoria  Mining  Company.     He 
erected   a   number   of   business   blocks, 
and   became   a  director     in  the   Clark- 
Eldredge  Company  of  Salt  Lake  City, 
as  well  as  in  various  other  important 
concerns.      His  latest  notable  appoint- 
ment was  a  directorship  of   the  much 
talked   of   Los  Angeles  and   Salt  Lake 
Railroad,  about  to  be  constructed.     In 
politics  Mr.  Smoot  is  a  staunch  Repub- 
lican.    He  has  never  sought  an  office, 
but  has  been  honored   with  important 
official  positions.   From  March  15,  1894, 
until  the  advent  of  Statehood,  he  served 
as  a  director  of  the  Territorial  Insane 
Asylum,    by   appointment   of   Governor 
Caleb  W.  West,  and  after  Utah  entered 
the  Union,  he  was  appointed  by  Gover- 
nor Heber  M.  Wells  as  a  member  of  the 
Semi-Centennial  Commission,  which  in 
1897   conducted    the   great   Pioneer   Ju- 
bilee.     Elder  Smoot's  ecclesiastical  rec- 
ord is  as  follows:     He  was  baptized  at 
eight  years  of  age  in  the  Endowment 
House  at  Salt  Lake  City,  and  was  or- 
dained a  Deacon  July  15,  1877.      In  1879 
he   was  made   a   Priest,   and   in   April, 
1880,   an   Elder.       Four   years   later   he 
was  ordained  a  Seventy  by  Elder  Abra- 
ham H.  Cannon,  and  in  April,  1895,  was 
ordained  a  High  Priest  under  the  han-ds 
of  Pres.  Joseph  F.  Smith.    At  the  same 
time    he    was   appointed    second    coun- 
selor  to  Pres.   Edward   Partridge,   who 
had  succeeded  Pres.  Abraham  O.  Smoot, 
deceased,  as  the  presiding  authority  of 
the  Utah  Stake  of  Zion.      Elder  Smoot 
continued  to  serve  as  one  of  the  presi- 
dency of  that  Stake  until  called  to  the 
Apostleship   April   8,    1900.       The    same 
day  he   was   sustained  in  that  exalted 
position   by   the   voice   of     the   general 
conference,  and  was  ordained  an  Apos- 


tle   by   Pres.    Lorenzo    Snow     the     day 
following.       While     a    member    of    the 
Utah  Stake  presidency  he  was  appoint- 
ed to  raise  naeans  to  pay  off  the  debt 
hanging  over  the  unfinished  Stake  Tab- 
ernacle,    and     to  complete  that  struc- 
ture.     That  duty  he  performed  with  his 
usual    promptitude     and     success,    the 
debt  being  cancelled  and  the  building 
completed.      He  has  acted  for  years  as 
one    of    the    board    of    trustees    of    the 
Brigham  Young     Academy,     and   is   a 
member  of  its  executive  committee.  He 
solicited  subscriptions  for  and  was  the 
main  instrument  in  the  erection  of  the 
new  college     hall,     an     adjunct  to  the 
Academy.  In  the  success  of  this  worthy 
institution  he  has  ever  been  deeply  in- 
terested.     It  can  truly  be  said  of  Apos- 
tle  Smoot   that   he   has   never     sought 
preferment,  either  civil  or  ecclesiastical. 
He  has  worked  honestly  and  faithfully 
at  whatever  he  had  in  hand — industry 
and   continuity  being  his   watchwords, 
recognized  by  him  even  while  a  boy  as 
the    keys    to   success   and    prosperity — 
and  his  talents  and  labors  alone  have 
recommended  him  for  promotion.      This 
accounts    for    the    general    feeling    of 
satisfaction   naanifested     by     the   vast 
congregation,   which,   in   the  afternoon 
of  Sunday,  April  8,  1900,  at  the     great 
Tabernacle   in   Salt     Lake   City,   voted 
unanimously  to  sustain  him  as  one  of 
the  Twelve  Apostles  of  the  Church  of 
Jesus    Christ     of     Latter-day     Saints. 
Much  of  this  good  feeling  was  doubt- 
less due  to  the  fact  that  many  present 
were  acquainted,     not     only     with  the 
marked  ability  of  the  young  man,  but 
with    the    good    and    wise    use    he    has 
made  of  that  ability.      Many  know  of 
the  valuable  aid  Reed  Smoot  has  ren- 
dered from  time  to  time  in  a  financial 
and  executive  way  to  this  or  that  strug- 
gling institution,  but  few  are  aware  of 
his  private  acts  of  beneficence.     It  has 
been  said  that  ostentatious  charity  in- 
sults the  misery  it  would  relieve.  Reed 
Smoot's    charity    is    not    of   that    kind. 
He   does   not   ask  a  friend   in   trouble, 
"What  can  I  do  for  you?"  or  say,   "If 
there   is  anything     you     want,   let  me 
know;"  thus  throwing  upon  the  afflicted 
soul  an  additional  burden  and  subject- 
ing it  to  unnecessary  humiliation.     He 
shrewdly   sees   the   need   and   tactfully 
supplies  it,  without  speaking  or  await- 
ing a  word.      And  this  is  charity,  true 
charity;   for  it  is  generosity,  it  is  big- 
ness of  heart,  and  as  far  outsoars  mere 


BIOGRAPHICAL    ENCYCLOPEDIA. 


181 


almsgiving  as  the  eagle  outsoars  the 
swan.  In  person  Apostle  Smoot  is  tall 
and  well  built,  though  his  unusual 
height  makes  him  appear  almost  slen- 
der in  frame.  He  moves  with  the 
rapid,  energetic  stride  characteristic  of 
the  rustling  business  man.  He  is  punc- 
tual in  keeping  his  appointments,  and, 
as  he  says,  owes  his  greatest  losses  in 
time    to    the    failure    of    other   men    to 


dren,  namely:  Alvin.  born  Feb.  11,  1798; 
Hyrum,  born  Feb.  9,  1800;  Sophronia', 
born  May  16,  1803;  Joseph,  born  Dec. 
23,  1805;  Samuel  Harrison,  born  March 
13,  1808;  Ephraim,  born  March  13,  1810; 
William,  born  March  13,  1811;  Catherine' 
born  July  28,  1812;  Don  Carlos,  born 
March  25,  1816;  and  Lucy,  born  July  18, 
1824.  At  his  marriage  he  owned  a 
handsome  farm  in  Tunbridge  In  180'' 
proniptly  keep  theirs.      He  pos^esses^a     he  rented  it  and  engaged  in  mercantile 

j^^^.^^^^^   ^^^   ^^^^  ^^^^^  embarked  in 

a  venture  of  ginseng  to  send  to  China, 
and  was  swindled  out  of  the  entire  pro- 
ceeds by  the  shipmaster  and  agent;  he 
was  consequently  obliged  to  sell  his 
farm  and  all  of  his  effects  to  pay  his 
debts.  About  the  year  1816  he  re- 
moved  to  Palmyra,  Wayne  county  New 
are  of  the  first  order,  and  the  fallacy  York,  bought  a  farm  and  cleared  two 
is  long  since  exploded  that  the  Lord  hundred  acres,  which  he  lost  in  conse- 
quence of  not  being  able  to  pay  the 
last  instalment  of  the  purchase  money 
at  the  time  it  was  due.      This  was  the 

,  ,  ,  .,  ,,  *v,  ^  V,  ^^^^  "^**^  ^  ^^^^t  number  of  farmers 
Apostle's  favorite  motto,  one  that  he  j^  ^^^  York  who  had  cleared  land  un- 
faithfully exemplifies.  His  father  was  ^^^  ^,^,^^^  ^^^^^^  He  af  erwards 
born  in  the  State  of  Kentucky,  and  his  ^^^^^  ^^  Manchester,   Ontario  county 


fearless  candor,  says  exactly  what  he 
thinks,  and  yet  is  courteous,  consider- 
ate and  kind-hearted.  While  neither  a 
preacher  nor  a  writer,he  expresses  him- 
self with  intelligence,  earnestness  and 
humility,  both  by  tongue  and  pen.  His 
genius  is  practical  and  progressive.  As 
a  financier  and  an  executive  his  talents 


needs  but  one  class  of  men  in  any 
department  of  His  mighty  and  marvel- 
ous work.  "My  duty  first,  my  pleasure 
afterwards,"    may     be   said   to   be   our 


mother  was  a  native  of  Norway.  Both 
were  of  heroic  mould  and  mettle,  both 
sacrificed  much  for  the  gospel's  sake, 
and  the  Apostle  is  the  inheritor  of 
many  of  their  noblest  qualities;  chief 
among  which  is  the  ability  and  inclina- 
tion to  do  good,  publicly  and  privately, 
and  to  thoroughly  enjoy  the  doing.— 
Orson    F.    Whitney. 

SMITH,  Joseph,  senior,  th«  first 
presiding  Patriarch  of  the  Church  of 
Jesus  Christ  of  Latter-day  Saints,  and 
father  of  the  Prophet  Joseph  Smith, 
was  born  July  12,  1771,  in  Topsfield, 
Essex  county,  Mass.;  he  was  the  second 
son  of  Asahel  Smith  and  Mary  Duty. 
The  subject  of  this  sketch  was  born  in 
Topsfield,  March  7,  1744;  he  was  the 
youngest  son  of  Samuel  and  Priscilla 
Smith.  Samuel  was  born  January  26, 
1714,  in  Topsfield;  he  was  the  eldest  son 
of  Samuel  and  Rebecca  Smith.  Sam- 
uel was  born  in  Topsfield,  Januaray  26, 
1666,   and  was   the   son   of   Robert   and 


New   York,      procured     a     comfortable 
home  with  sixteen  acres  of  land,  where 
he  lived  until  he  removed  to  Kirtland. 
Ohio.       He   was    the    first    person    who 
received  his  son  Joseph's  testimony  af- 
ter he  had  seen  the  angel,  and  exhorted 
him  to  be  f'  ithful  and  diligent  to  the 
message  he  had  received.    He  was  bap- 
tized April  6.  1830.     In  August,  1830,  in 
company  with  his  son  Don  Carlos,   he 
took  a  mission  to  St.  Lawrence  county. 
New   York,    touching   on    his    route   at 
several  of  the  Canadian  ports,  where  he 
distributed   a   few   copies   of   the   Book 
of  Mormon,  visited  his  father,  brothers 
and   sisters   residing     in   St.   Lawrence 
county,   bore     testimony     to  the  truth, 
which    resulted    eventually    in    all    the 
family    coming   into     the    Church,    ex- 
cepting  his    brother   Jesse     and    sister 
Susan.      He  removed  with  his  family  to 
Kirtland  in  1831,  where  he  was  ordained 
to  the  High  Priesthood  June  3,  1831,  by 
Lyman  Wight.    He  was  ordained  a  Pa- 
triarch   and     president     of     the    High 
Mary  Smith,   who  emigrated  from  Old     Priesthood,  under  the  hands  of  Joseph 
England,     Joseph  Smith,  sen.,  removed     smith,  Oliver  Cowdery,  Sidney  Rigdon 
with   his   father   to   Tunbridge,    Orange     and    Frederick    G.    Williams     Dec     18 
county.   Vermont,   in  1791,  and  assisted    i833,  and  was  chosen  a  member  of  the 
in   clearing  a   large   farm     of  a   heavy     first  High  Council,   organized   in   Kirt- 
growth   of   timber.     He   married   Lucy,     land,   Ohio,   Feb.   17,   1834.       In  1836    he 
daughter  of  Solomon  and  Lydia  Mack,     traveled   in   company  with   his   brother 
Jan.  24,  1796,  by  whom  he  had  ten  chil-     John    2.400   miles    in    Ohio,    New    York. 


182 


LATTER-DAY  SAINT 


Pennsylvania,       Vermont       and       New 
Hampshire,    visiting    the    branches     of 
the   Church   in   those   States,   and     be- 
stowing  patriarchal   blessings   on    sev- 
eral   hundred    persons,      preaching    the 
gospel  to  all  who  would  hear,  and  bap- 
tizing  many.       They   arrived   at   Kirt- 
land  Oct.  2,  1836.      During  the  persecu- 
tions in  Kirtland,  in  1837,  he  was  made 
a  prisoner,  but  fortunately  obtained  his 
liberty,  and  after  a  very  tedious  jour- 
ney in  the  spring  and  summer  of  1838. 
he   arrived   at   Far   West,   Mo.       After 
his   sons,      Hyrum     and    Joseph,    were 
thrown   into  the   Missouri  jails  by  the 
mob,  he  fled  from  under  the  extermin- 
ating  order   of   Governor     Lilburn   W. 
Boggs,  and  made  his  escape  in  midwin- 
ter to  Quincy,  111.,  from  whence  he  re- 
moved  to   Commerce   in   the   spring   of 
1839,  and  thus  became  one  of  the  found- 
ers of  Nauvoo.      The  exposures  he  suf- 
fered brought  on  consumption,  of  which 
he  died   Sept.   14,   1840,     aged   69  years, 
two  months  and  two  days.     He  was  6 
feet   2   inches   tall,    was   very   straight, 
and  remarkably  well  proportioned.  His 
ordinary  weight  was  about  two  hundred 
lbs.,  and  he  was  very  strong  and  active. 
In  his  young  days  he  was  famed  as  a 
wrestler,    and,    Jacob     like,      he    never 
wrestled   with  but  one   man  whom  he 
could  not  throw.       He  was  one  of  the 
most  benevolent  of  men,   opening     his 
house  to  all  who  were  destitute.  While 
at  Quincy,  111.,  he  fed  hundreds  of  the 
poor  Saints  who  were  fleeing  from  the 
Missouri  persecutions,  although  he  had 
arrived  there  penniless  himself. 


SMITH,  Asahel,  the  fourth  pre- 
siding Patriarch  of  the  Church,  was 
the  son  of  Asahel  Smith  and  Mary 
Duty,  and  brother  of  Joseph  Smith,  sen- 
ior, the  Prophet's  father.  He  was  born 
May  21,  1773,  in  Windham,  Rockingham 
county,  N.  H.,  and  married  Betsy  Schil- 
linger  March  21,  1802.  In  1809  he  set- 
tled in  St.  Lawrence  county,  N.  Y. 
When  Joseph  Smith,  sen.,  accompanied 
by  his  son  Don  Carlos,  visited  his  fa- 
ther and  brother  in  St.  Lawrence  coun- 
ty, in  August,  1830,  Asahel  received  his 
testimony,  and  though  he  was  not  bap- 
tized till  1835,  he  became  (from  the  time 
of  this  visit  of  his  brother  Joseph)  a 
warm  advocate  of  the  Book  of  Mormon 
and  the  restoration  of  the  everlasting 
gospel,  for  which  he  received  much 
abuse  from  his  brother  Jesse.  He  was 
baptized    by   Lyman   E.    Johnson   June 


29,    1835,    in    Stockholm,    St.    Lawrence 
county.   New   York    and  removed  with 
his    family    to    Kirtland,    Ohio,    in    1836. 
Soon  after  his  arrival  there  he  was  or- 
dained  a   High   Priest   by   Don   Carlos 
Smith,  and  in  1837  he  became  a  member 
of  the  High  Council  at  Kirtland.       He 
was  chosen  to  flU  a  similar  position  in 
Lee    county,    Iowa,    when   a   Stake     of 
Zion  was  organized   there   Oct.   5,   1839, 
and  served  in  that  capacity  until  Jan. 
6,    1842,    when    the    Stake    organization 
in  Iowa  was  discontinued.      During  this 
time  Brother  Smith  resided     at  Nash- 
ville, Iowa.     He  was  ordained  a  Patri- 
arch by  the  Twelve  Apostles  in  Nauvoo, 
111.,  Oct.  7,  1844,  and  after  the  rejection 
of  William  Smith  (his  nephew)  in  1845, 
the  patriarchal  office,  according  to  the 
hereditary  order,     belonged     to  Asahel 
Smith;   but  as  his  health  was  poor,  he 
is  not  known  to  have  taken  any  active 
part  in  the  office  of  presiding  Patriarch. 
He  died  July  20,  1848,  at  lowaville,  Wa- 
pello county,     Iowa,     en    route  for  the 
West.      The  following  is  recorded  about 
him  in  Church  history:    "His  principles, 
precepts  and  examples  were  worthy  of 
imitation,  and  shed  a  lustre  that  does 
honor  to  his  high  and  holy  calling;   he 
died  after   a  long  and   painful   illness, 
and   has   left   a   numerous     family     to 
mourn  his  loss." 

SMITH,  John,  the  fifth  presiding 
Patriarch  of  the  Church,  was  born 
July  16,  1781,  in  Derryfleld  (now  Man- 
chester). Rockingham  county.  N.  H. 
He  was  a  son  of  Asahel  and  Mary  Smith 
(formerly  Mary  Duty)  and  uncle  to  the 
Prophet  Joseph.  In  1815  he  married 
Clarissa  Lyman,  by  whom  he  had  three 
children — George  Albert,  Caroline  and 
John  Lyman.  The  subject  of  Joseph 
Smith's  mission  was  introduced  to  John 
Smith  by  his  brother  Joseph,  the 
Prorihet's  father,  which  resulted  in  his 
baptism  Jan.  9,  1832,  at  a  time  of  sick- 
ness near  to  death,  and  when  the  Ice 
had  to  be  cut  to  reach  the  water;  but 
from  that  time  he  gained  health  and 
strength,  althouerh  he  had  been  given 
up  by  the  doctors  to  die  of  consump- 
tion. He  was  baptized  and  confirmed 
by  his  brother  Joseph  Smith,  sen.,  and 
at  the  same  time  ordained  an  Elder. 
In  1833,  he  moved  to  Kirtland,  Ohio, 
where  he,  on  June  3.  1831,  was  ordained 
a  High  Priest  by  Lyman  Wight,   and 

in  1838  to  Far  West.   Caldwell  county, 
Missouri,  and  thence  to  Adam-ondi-Ah- 


BIOGRAPHICAL    ENCYCLOPEDIA. 


183 


man,  in  Daviess  county,  where  he  pre- 
sided over  that  branch  of  the  Church 
until  expelled  by  the  mob  in  1839,  and 
arrived  in  Illinois  on  the  28th  of  Feb- 
ruary of  that  year.  He  located  at 
Green  Plains,  six  miles  from  Warsaw, 
where  he  put  in  a  crop  of  corn,  split 
rails,  and  performed  much  hard  labor 
unsuited  to  his  health  and  years,  but 
obliged  to  be  done  for  the  support  of 
his  family.  In  June  he  moved  to  Com- 
merce (since  Nauvoo),  and  on  October 
5th  was  appointed  to  preside  over  the 
Saints  in  Iowa.  On  the  12th  he  moved 
to  Lee  county  to  fulfill  that  mission.  In 
October,  1843,  he  moved  to  Macedonia, 
Hancock  county,  Illinois,  having  been 
appointed  to  preside  over  the  Saints  in 
that  place.  He  was  ordained  a  Patri- 
arch Jan.  10.  1844,  by  Joseph  the 
Prophet,  and  in  November,  of  that  year, 
was  driven  by  mobbers  from  Macedonia 
to  Nauvoo.  where  he  continued  to  ad- 
minister patriarchal  blessings,  to  the 
joy  of  thousands,  until  Feb.  9,  1846, 
when  he  was  compelled  by  the  mob  vio- 
lence of  the  free  and  sovereign  State  of 
Illinois  to  again  leave  his  home  and 
cross  the  Mississippi  river,  with  his 
family,  in  search  of  a  peaceful  location, 
far  off  amid  savages  and  deserts,  in 
the  valleys  of  the  mountains.  After 
passing  a  dreary  winter  on  the  right 
bank  of  the  Missouri,  at  Winter  Quar- 
ters, he  again  took  up  th.  f.'eary  ox 
train  march  on  the  9th  of  June.  1847. 
and  reached  Great  Salt  Lake  valley 
Sept.  23rd,  where  he  presided  over  the 
Church  in  the  mountains  until  October, 
1848.  Jan.  1,  1849.  he  was  ordained  pre- 
siding Patriarch  over  the  Church,  un- 
der the  hands  of  Pres.  Brigham  Young 
and  Heber  C.  Kimball.  He  moved  out 
of  the  Fort  on  to  his  city  lot  in  Febru- 
ary. 1849,  and  this  was  the  only  spot 
on  which  he  had  been  privileged  to 
cultivate  a  garden  two  years  in  suc- 
cession during  the  last  twenty-three 
years  of  his  life.  In  addition  to  a  vast 
amount  of  varied  and  efficient  aid  to 
thousands  in  the  way  of  salvation,  dur- 
ing his  long  and  faithful  ministry,  he 
administered  5,560  patriarchal  blessings, 
which  were  recorded  in  seven  large  and 
closely  written  books,  which  are  now 
at  the  Historian's  office.  He  died  in 
Salt  Lake  City  May  23,  1854.  "He 
closed  the  arduous  duties  of  a  well  oc- 
cupied probation,"  writes  the  editor  of 
the  "Deseret  News,"   "and  passed  to  a 


position  of  rest,  where  his  works  will 
nobly  follow  and  honor  him  and  where 
he  will  continue  his  able  counsels  for 
the  prosperity  and  welfare  of  Zion." 

SMITH,  John,  the  sixth  presiding 
Patriarch  of  the  Church  and  the  pres- 
ent incumbent  of  that  office,  is  the  son 
of  Hyrum  Smith  and  Jerusha  Barden, 
and  was  born  Sept.  22,  1832,  in  Kirtland, 
Geuaga  (now  Lake)  county,  Ohio.  His 
mother  died  Oct.  13,  1837.  She  had  six 
children— two  sons  and  four  daughters, 
and  she  died  when  the  youngest  was 
eight  days  old.  His  father  was  away 
from  home  at  the  time  of  her  death. 
Dec.  24.  1837.  his  father  rnarried  Miss 
Mary  Fielding,  who  bore  him  two  chil- 


dren, a  son  and  a  daughter.  In  the 
spring  of  1838  John  went  with  his  fa- 
ther's family  to  Far  West,  Caldwell 
county,  Missouri,  where  he  shared  with 
the  rest  of  the  Saints  in  the  persecu- 
tions. In  the  fall  of  1838  his  father, 
his  uncle  Joseph  and  others,  were  taken 
prisoners  by  a  ruthless  mob.  and,  after 
being  abused  in  many  ways,  threatened 
with  death,  etc.,  were  finally  lodged  in 
Liberty,  Clay  county  jail.  During  the 
winter  his  father's  family,  in  connec- 
tion with  many  others,  were  driven  out 
of  Missouri.  Although  small,  John 
suffered  much  from  cold  and  hunger. 
The  family  landed  at  Quincy,  Ills.,  ear- 
ly in  1839.  where  they  remained  a  .short 


184 


LATTER-DAY    SAINT 


time.      Brother     Hyrum      Smith     came 
home   from   Liberty  jail   April   22,   1839. 
The   family   subsequently   went   up   the 
Mississippi  river  to  a  place  called  Com- 
merce, afterwards  the  city  of  Nauvoo. 
Soon  afterwards  they  moved  about  two 
miles   down   the   river,   where   they   re- 
mained   in     comparative     peace    for   a 
short  season.    His  father  and  his  uncle, 
Joseph   the  Prophet,   were  martyred  in 
Carthage   jail    by   a   bloodthirsty   mob, 
June  27,  1844.     In  the  month  of  Febru- 
ary,   1847,    John    left   his   father's   folks 
and  started  west  with  Heber  C.  Kim- 
ball's family.     At  this  time  he  did  not 
know  where  the  people  were  going,  but 
he  supposed  to  California.       This  com- 
pany  crossed    the    Mississippi    river   on 
a  ferryboat,     and     encamped  on  Sugar 
creek,  about  nine  miles  out.    After  two 
or  three  days,  boy-like,  he  got    home- 
sick  and    went   back   to   see   his   folks. 
During   his   stay   at   home,    which   was 
only  for  a  few  days,     the     river  froze 
over,   and   he   crossed   back   on   skates, 
and  joined   the  company.       During  the 
journey   he    had    to   drive    loose    stock, 
drive  team,  herd  cattle  and  horses,  and 
do  any  kind  of  work  he  could:     Many 
times    he    was    drenched    in    the    rain. 
On  one  occasion  Brother  Heber  P.  Kim- 
ball   and    himself    were    driven    by    the 
force  of  the  storm,   stock  and  all,   for 
a   mile   or   so,    although   they   were   on 
horseback.     The     company     journeyed 
westward  through  Iowa,  stopping  many 
times   by    the   way     in   consequence   of 
storms   and    soft   roads,     or,    to    speak 
more  correctly,  no  roads  but  soft  prai- 
rie.      They    finally   landed   on   the   hill 
where  now  stands  Council  Bluffs  city, 
and  crossed  over  the  Missouri  river  at 
a  noint  near  the  present  site  of  Omaha, 
called    at    that    time    Sarpee's    Trading 
Post,  among  the  Pottawatamie  Indians. 
They  then  went  up  about  six  miles  to 
the    Little    Papillon,    and    remained     a 
short   time.     During  his   stay   there  he 
became  acquainted  with  Col.  Thomas  L. 
Kane,   who   was   taken   very   sick,   and 
John  was  his  nurse  for  two  weeks.    In 
or   about    the    month    of    August    they 
moved  into  Winter  Quarters,  where  the 
town  of  Florence  now  stands.      In  the 
fore  part  of  September  he  learned  that 
his   father's   family   were   on    the   road, 
and  he  went,  in  company  with  Brother 
Almon    W.    Babbitt,      back     about   one 
hundred  and  fifty  miles  and  met  them. 
They  eame  to  Winter  Quarters,  where 
they  remamed  two  winters.    John  went 


to    work    with    hired    help,    built    a    log 
house   for   the   winter,   and   during  the 
summer  of  1847   made  fence,   tilled   the 
soil,  and  took  a  man's  place  in  the  hay 
and   harvest  field,   as  he  was  the  only 
male   member  of  the   family  who   was 
able  to  work.      In  April,  1848,  the  fami- 
ly started  for  Great  Salt  Lake  valley. 
It  was  rather  a  hard  journey,  as  they 
did  not  have  teams  enough.      John  had 
to  drive  a  team  composed  of  wild  steers, 
cows  and  oxen,  with  two  wagons  tied 
together,  and,  before  they  had  traveled 
more  than  two  miles,  a  wagon  tongue 
broKe   and    they   had    to   camp   for    the 
night.      On  the  way  over  the  plains  he 
broke  and  they    had    to    camp  for  the 
steers   to   work.       He     had   to    take   a 
man's    place,    by    standing      guard    at 
night,   and   in  the  day  time   to  be   the 
boy  who  brought  the  wood  and  water, 
herded  the  cows  and  assisted  to  double 
teams  over  bad  places,  up  hills,  etc.  On 
one   occasion   a  circumstance   occurred 
which   he   will   never   forget.     One   day 
about   sundown,   while   the   party  were 
encamped   on   the   Platte   river,   it   was 
reported  that  a  woman  was  lost.    With- 
out ceremony  he  took  his  coat  on  his 
arm  and  a  piece  of  corn  bread  in  his 
hand  and  started  out  up  the  road,   to 
follow  a  party  of  the  company  which 
had  left  at  noon.    He  had  not  gone  far 
when  he  came  up  with  a  dead  carcass, 
which   was  covered   with  wolves  fight- 
ing and   howling.     He   walked  past  as 
fast    and    as    quietly   as    possible.     He 
traveled   six   miles   before   he  came   up 
with  any  wagons.    During  this  distance 
he  passed  about  twenty  such  frightful 
scenes,   but   he   got   through   safe,    and 
he    thinks    he    was    unnoticed    by    the 
wolves.       He   stopped   for   the   balance 
of  the  night  with  an  acquaintance,  and 
at  daybreak  proceeded  on  his  journey, 
and  found  the  lost  woman,  a  little  after 
sunrise,    safe      with      her    mother,    six 
,miles    from    where    he    stayed    for    the 
night.     On  Sept.  22,  1848,  his  sixteenth 
birthday,   he   drove   five   wagons   down 
the  "Big  Mountain,"  east  of  Salt  Lake 
City;   it  was  dark     long  before  he  got 
into  camp  with  the  last  wagon.    On  the 
way,  one  wheel  of  his  wagon  ran  into 
a  tree  which  was  about  fifteen  inches 
through.     He   had    to   lie   on   his   back 
and  chop  the  tree  down  with  a  dull  ax 
before   he  could   go   any   further.     The 
next  day  he  arrived  in  the  Great  Salt 
Lake   valley.       In     the   spring   of   1850 
John   was   enrolled    in   a   company     of 


BIOGRAPHICAL  ENCYCLOPEDIA. 


185 


horsemen,  called  the  "Battalion  of  Life 
Guards,"   for   the   purpose   of   standing 
guard,    or    going    out      at      a    minute's 
warning,    to   protect     the     settlements 
from  the  marauding  Indians,  who  were 
very   angry   at   that   time.     For   about 
ten  years  he  was  compelled  to  keep  on 
hand    a    saddle    horse    and    everything 
necessary  for  that  purpose.  Many  times 
he  was  called  and  got  up  in  the  night 
and  started  off  at  once;  at  other  times 
he  had  to  leave  in  the  heat  of  harvest, 
and  then  his  wife  was  obliged  to  take 
his  place  in  the  field.     This  he  had  to 
do  in  connection  with  working  in   the 
canyon  and   attending   to   the  farm   to 
support  the  family.     Sept.   21,   1852,   his 
stepmother  died,  leaving  him  to  provide 
for  a  family  of  eight,   three  of  them— 
one  man  and  two  women— being  old  peo- 
ple, the  youngest  over  sixty-three  years 
old;    also    one    brother  and  three  sisters 
younger  than  himself.     He  was  at  that 
time   twenty  years,   less   one   day,   old. 
Dec.    25,    1853,    he    married    Miss    Helen 
Maria  Fisher,  who  bore  him  nine  chil- 
dren, five  sons  and  four  daughters.     In 
the    spring  of  1856   he   went   on   horse- 
"back  to  Salmon  river  with  Pres.  Brig- 
ham  Young's  party,   a  distance   of  480 
miles,    and   returned,    which   trip   occu- 
pied   six    weeks'    time.        Feb.    18,    1855, 
Brother  Smith  was  ordained  to  the  of- 
fice   of   Patriarch    under   the    hands    of 
Presidents    Brigham    Young,    Heber   C. 
Kimball   and   Jedediah   M.    Grant,    and 
Apostles  Orson  Hyde,  Orson  Pratt, Wli- 
ford    Woodruff,    George    A.    Smith    and 
Lorenzo     Snow,      Pres.      Young    being 
mouth.      It  may  be  well  here  to  state 
that  this  is  the  only  office  in  the  Church 
which  is  handed  down  from  father  to 
son   by   right   of   lineage.       His   grand- 
father, Joseph  Smith,  sen.,  was  the  first 
Patriarch  to  the  Church.       He  was  or- 
dained by  his  son,  the  Prophet  Joseph 
Smith.      John's  father,  Hyrum     Smith, 
was  ordained  to  this  offie  by  his  father; 
and   John   would   doubtless   have   been 
ordajned  by  his  father  if  he  had  lived 
until  John  had  arrived  at  a  proper  age. 
Sept.  16,  1859,  John  started  for  Florence 
with   a   four-mule   team,    to   bring     his 
sister  and  her  husband  and  family  to 
Utah.      He    traveled    in    company    with 
Elder  John  Y.  Greene  across  the  plains, 
and  made  the  trip  from  Salt  Lake  City 
to  Florence  in  thirty-two  days,   laying 
over  on  the  road  two  days  of  the  time 
— distance,  1011  miles.      During  his  stay 
in  the  East  he  took  his  sister  and  her 


two   youngest     children     and   traveled 
across  Iowa  to  Montrose,  a  distance  of 
350  miles,  in  eight  days,  with  a  pair  of 
mules  and  a  light  wagon,  and    visited 
Nauvoo  and  different  places  in  Illinois, 
reviewed  many  places  of  his  boyhood, 
and  found  quite  a  number  of  his  con- 
nections.     He  returned  to  Florence  in 
February,  1860,  where  he  spent  consid- 
erable time  in  assisting  to  put  wagons 
and  handcarts   together,   and   in   doing 
all   he   could   to   expedite    the   starting 
of   the   European     emigrants     on     the 
plains.      In  the  month  of  June  he  was 
appointed  by  Elder  George  Q.  Cannon, 
who  had  charge  of  the  emigrants  that 
season,  to  organize  a  company  and  take 
charge  of  it  across  the  plains.  He  went 
to    work    at    once,    got    a    company    of 
more  than  forty  wagons   in  readiness, 
loaded  his  sister  and  family,  and  start- 
ed out.      The  trip  was  made  in  seven- 
ty  days.       At   the   general   conference, 
April,    1862,    he    was    called    to    take     a 
mision    to    Scandinavia.       On    the    17th 
of    May    following    he    started    out    on 
horseback,    without    purse    or   scrip,    to 
cross   the   plains   and   the   ocean.       He 
was  invited  by  Elder  John  R.  Murdock 
to  go  with  him  to  the  Missouri  river,  as 
he  had  charge  of  a  company  of  wagons 
and   teams     to     bring     out   emigrants. 
Brother  Smith  accepted  the  invitation, 
and  Brother  Murdock  assisted  him  with 
provisions.       All  went  well  until  about 
noon  one  day,  as  the  company  left  the 
Sweetwater  river,  when  Brother  Smith 
was  taken  down  with  mountain  fever. 
During   the   night   the   fever  was   very 
severe,     and     the     pain    through  every 
joint  was   excruciating.       Toward     the 
latter  part  of  the  night  he  was  admin- 
istered to  by  some  of  the  Elders,  and  in 
the   morning   was   able   to   pursue     his 
journey   on   horseback.       He   was   very 
weak  and  had  to  get  down  often  from 
his   horse    to   rest.       At    Fort   Laramie 
he  sold  his  horse,  which  was  worth  $90, 
for   $40,   and   at     Florence     his   saddle, 
which  was  worth  $20.  for  $10.      He  met 
friends,  who  gave  hirp  money  to  assist 
him    on    his    journey.        His    fare    from 
Florence   to   Liverpool   was  about   $100. 
When   he  arrived   in   Liverpool  he  had 
twenty-one  shillings  in  his  pocket.  This 
paid  his  fare  to  London,  where  he  had 
to   get  a   passport   from   the   American 
Minister  before  he  could  cross  the  con- 
tinent of  Europe.     There   he   borrowed 
money  to  take  him  through   (which  he 
afterwards   paid)    from    Hull,    England, 


186 


LATTER-DAY    SAINT 


to  Hamburg,  Germany.  The  boat  met 
headwinds  and  a  rough  sea,  and  all  on 
board  were  sick;  everi  the  captain  had 
to  get  on  deck  for  air.  At  Hamburg 
he  met  his  cousin.  Elder  Jesse  N.  Smith, 
who  had  preceded  him  about  eighteen 
months.  Brother  Jesse  had  with  him 
an  interpreter,  and  all  went  well.  They 
landed  at  Korsoer,  Denmark,  Sept.  6, 
1862.  Brother  Smith  remained  on  this 
mission  until  April  13,  1864,  when  he 
sailed  from  Copenhagen,  on  his  return 
home.  While  on  this  mission  he  studied 
hard  and  obtained  a  good  understand- 
ing of  the  Scandinavian  languages — 
Danish-Norwegian  and  Swedish.  On 
arriving  at  Grimsby,  England,  they 
found  some  emigrants  for  Zion  await- 
ing them,  who  had  traveled  by  way  of 
Lubeck,  and  they  all,  about  three  hun- 
dred in  number,  continued  their  jour- 
ney by  rail  to  Liverpool.  There  he 
was  appointed  president  of  the  ship's 
company.  He  embarked  in  the  large 
sailing  ship,  "Monarch  of  the  Sea,' 
bound  for  New  York,  having  on  board 
973  souls  of  the  Saints— Danes,  Swedes, 
Norwegians,  Germans,  Scotch,  Welsh, 
Irish,  English  and  Americans— the 
largest  company  of  Latter-day  Saints 
which,  up  to  that  time,  had  left  the 
shores  of  Europe.  They  were  over 
forty  days  out  at  sea,  with  head  winds 
a  good  deal  of  the  time.  On  the  banks 
of  Newfoundland  they  saw  a  number 
of  very  large  icebergs.  On  their  ar- 
rival at  Castle  Gardens,  New  York, 
June  3,  1864,  they  went  immediately  on 
board  the  steamboat  "St.  Johns,"  and 
sailed  up  the  Hudson  river  to  Albany; 
from  there  they  traveled  by  rail  to  St. 
Joseph,  Missouri,  and  thence  by  steam- 
boat up  the  Missouri  river  to  Wyoming, 
Nebraska.  On  Brother  Smith's  ar- 
rival at  Wyoming,  he  was  appointed  to 
take  charge  on  the  plains  of  a  Scan- 
dinavian company  of  thirty  wagons. 
He  was  there  joined  by  more  wagons 
in  charge  of  Captain  Patterson,  mak- 
ing in  all  over  sixty,  for  safety  against 
the  Indians,  as  the  latter  were  very 
hostile  that  season,  many  people  hav- 
ing been  killed,  and  horses,  mules  and 
cattle  stolen,  and  wagons  burned.  Many 
times  on  the  journey  ranchers,  traders, 
and  also  officers  at  government  posts 
would  use  every  argument  possible  to 
Induce  them  to  stop  for  safety.  The 
answer  Brother  Smith  would  give  them 
was,  "We  are  used  to  Indian  warfare, 
and  we  have  only  provisions  enough  to 


take  us  home,  even  if  we  keep  moving; 
and  we  would  rather  run  our  risk  of 
fighting  Indians  than  starve  on  the 
plains."  The  company  reached  Salt 
Lake  City,  Oct.  1,  1864.  After  a  few 
days  the  immigrants  were  distributed 
among  their  respective  friends  in  the 
various  settlements,  but  for  several 
years  Brother  Smith  was  kept  busy  as 
an  interpreter  for  the  Scandinavians. 
Since  that  time  he  has  been  engaged 
in  the  duties  of  his  calling  as  a  Patri- 
arch, traveling  through  the  settlements 
of  the  Saints,  and  attending  to  other 
business,  and  on  the  farm.  Up  to  date 
he  has  given  to  the  Saints  15,660  patri- 
archal  blessings. 

AL.DR1CH,  Hazen,  one  of  the  First 
Seven  Presidents  of  Seventies  from 
1835-37,  joined  the  Church  at  an  early 
day,  and  was  ordained  to  the  office  of  a 
High  Priest.  As  a  member  of  Zion's 
Camp  he  marched  to  Missouri  and 
back  in  1834;  he  was  ordained  a  Seven- 
ty under  the  hands  of  Joseph  Smith 
and  others,  Feb.  28,  1835,  at  Kirtland, 
Ohio;  and  when  the  first  quorum  of 
Seventy  was  fully  organized  soon  after- 
wards, Bro.  Aldrich  was  set  apart  as 
one  of  the  seven  presidents  of  the  same. 
Some  of  the  High  Priests  and  a  num- 
ber of  the  Seventies  introduced  a  ques- 
tion as  to  which  was  the  greatest 
among  them,  the  Seventies  or  the  High 
Priests.  Their  discussions  increased 
with  so  much  warmth  that  it  amounted 
to  jealousy,  and  at  length  it  attracted 
the  attention  of  Joseph  the  Prophet, 
who  called  a  council  in  November,  1835, 
to  decide  the  question.  At  this  meet- 
ing the  Prophet  asked  the  newly-organ- 
ized quorum, if  any  of  their  number  had 
been  ordained  High  Priests,  previous 
to  their  ordination  as  Seventies.  Five 
out  of  the  seven  presidents,  namely 
Hazen  Aldrich,  Leonard  Rich,  Zebedee 
Coltrin,  Lyman  Sherman  and  Sylvester 
Smith,  acknowledged  that  they  were 
High  Priests  before  they  were  ordained 
Seventies.  Accordingly,  the  Prophet 
invited  them  to  take  their  places  in  the 
High  Priests'  quorum  again,  which  was 
complied  with.  This  left  only  Joseph 
Young  and  Levi  W.  Hancock  in  the 
original  council  of  Seventies.  Owing 
to  these  changes,  Hazen  Aldrich's  con- 
nection with  the  Seventies  in  a  quorum 
capacity  ceased  April  6,  1837.  During 
the  great  apostasy  in  Kirtland  in  1837" 
and  1838,  Hazen  Aldrich  was  numbered 


BIOGRAPHICAL    ENCYCLOPEDIA. 


187 


among-  those  who  rebelled  against  the 
legitimate  authorities  of  the  Church, 
and  became  an  apostate.  Subsequently 
he  joined  the  Brewster  movement  and 
published  a  paper  at  Kirtland  called 
"The  Olive  Branch,"  of  which  the  first 
number  was  dated  August,  1848.  He 
became  a  leading  man  among  the  Brew- 
sterites,  and  finally  emigrated  to  Cali- 
fornia, where  he  is  supposed  to  have 
died. 

-^  YOUNG,   Joseph,     one  of  the     First 
Seven    Presidents    of     Seventies     from 
1835  to  1881,  was  the  son  of  John  Toving 
and  Nabbie  Howe,  and  an  elder  brother 
of  Pres.  Brigham  Young.     He  was  born 
-  April   7,   1797,   in   Hopkinton,    Middlesex 
county,  Mass.     His  childhood  and  early 
youth  were   spent  at   home,    where   his 
kind  and  affectionate  nature  was  stim- 
ulated   by    the    tender      treatment    and 
,  Christian    precept,    characterizing     his 
parents  and  their  family.     He  imbibed 
at  an  early  period  of  life  the  spirit  of 
religion,    and    became    an    enthusiastic 
church  member.      Joining  the  Method- 
ists, he  soon  began  to  preach  their  doc- 
trines, and  was  thus  engaged,  when,  in 
the  early  spring  of  1832,  his  brother,  the 
late  Pres.  Brigham  Young,  brought  the 
glad  tidings  of  the  restored  gospel  of 
Jesus   Christ,     as     announced     by   the 
Prophet  Joseph   Smith.       His  religious 
enthusiasm  proved  to  be  a  genuine  love 
of  truth,   rather  than  bigoted  devotion 
to  a  sectarian  creed,  and  he  was  easily 
converted  to  the  principles  of  the  gos- 
pel, which  he  received  in  a  grateful  and 
believing  heart.      He  was  baptized  April 
6,  1832,  by  Elder  Daniel  Bowen  in  Co- 
lumbia, Penn.,  and  a  few  days     after- 
wards  ordained     an     Elder   under   the 
hands  of  Ezra  Landen.     After  preach- 
ing in  the  State  of  New  York  for  sev- 
eral months,  he  took  a  mission  to  Can- 
ada in  the  summer  of  1832,  in  company 
with  his  brother  Phineas,  Eleazer  Mil- 
ler and  others;  they  raised  up  two  small 
branches,    and   returned   in   about   four 
months.       He    then    went    to    Kirtland, 
Ohio,    with   his   Brother   Brigham     and 
Heber   C.    Kimball.      His    next    mission 
was  to  Canada  in  the  winter  of  1832- 
33,   in  company  with  his  brother  Brig- 
ham.      Here  they  raised  up  a  >^ranch 
of  about  twenty  members  in  West  Low- 
boro.      They  were  gone  about  six  weeks, 
and   baptized   upwards   of   forty   souls. 

-~   Feb.    18,    1834,    Joseph     Young    married 
Jane  Adeline  Bicknell,  who  bore  to  him 


eleven  children,   among  whom   may   be 
mentioned:   Jane  Adeline,  Joseph,  Sey- 
mour Bicknell,   Marcus  De   La  Grande 
and  Brigham  Bicknell.  He  went  in  com- 
pany with  Presidents  Joseph  and   Hy- 
rum   Smith,   in  1834,    to   Missouri,    as   a 
member   of   Zion's   camp,    returning   to 
Kirtland  with  the  Prophet  and  others, 
in    the   fall.       He   was   chosen   and   or- 
dained one  of  the  first  Seventies  in  the 
Church  Feb.  28,  1835,  under  the  hands  of 
Joseph  Smith  and  others,  and  the  next 
day    (March  1,    1835,)    he   was   ordained 
a    president   of     Seventies,      a   position 
which  he  honorably  filled  during  the  re- 
mainder of  his  life.       In  1835  he  filled 
a  mission  to   the   States  of  New  York 
and    Massachusetts,    in    company   with 
Burr  Riggs;  they  traveled  and  preached 
in  many  places,  sowing  the  seed  as  they 
journeyed  along.      In  1836,  after  having 
received  his  blessings  in  the  Temple  at 
Kirtland,  agreeable  to  the  Prophet's  in- 
structions, he  accompanied  his  brother 
Brigham   to   the   East,   to   visit  among 
their     relatives       and       friends;      they 
preached  the  gospel  to  them  and  bore 
testimony  of  the  latter-day  work.    This 
mission  occupied  several  months,     and 
subsequently  many  of     their  relatives 
and  friends  came  into  the  Church.  July 
6,  1838,  Joseph  and  family  left  Kirtland. 
in   company  with  many  of  the  Saints, 
and     went     to     Missouri,     arriving     at 
Haun's  Mill  Oct.  28th;  he  remained  un- 
til   Tuesday,    the    30th,      and   witnessed 
the  horrid  massacre  at  that  place,  dur- 
ing  which   he   was     miraculously   pre- 
served.      In  the  winter     of     1838-39- he, 
together   with   the   rest   of   the   Saints, 
was    driven    out   of    the    State    of    Mis- 
souri, under  the  exterminating  order  of 
Governor  Boggs.      He  arrived  at  Quin- 
cy.   111.,   in   May,   where  he  engaged  in 
farming  during  the  season,  and  in  the 
spring  of  1840     removed   to   Commerce, 
afterwards   called   Nauvoo,     where     he 
followed  the  occupation  of  painting  and 
glazing,  and  attended  to  his  ministerial 
labors  as   senior  president  of  the  quo- 
rums  of   Seventies.       In   the   spring  of 
1844  he  went  to  Ohio  to  lay  before  the 
people    Gen.    Joseph    Smith's    views    of 
the   powers   and  policy   of  the   govern- 
ment of  the  United  States.    After  hear- 
ing of  the  massacre  of  the  Prophet  and 
Patriarch,     he       returned     to   Nauvoo. 
When   the   Saints,    in     1846,    were   com- 
pelled to  leave  their  beautiful  city,  and 
Temple,  Joseph  Young  again  became  an 


188 


LATTER-DAY    SAINT 


exile  and  started  for  the  great  and  un- 
known west.  He  remained  at  Winter 
Quarters  and  at  Carterville,  Iowa,  un- 
til 1850,  when  he  crossed  the  plains  with 
his  family  with  ox  teams,  and  settled 
in  Salt  Lake  City,  where  he  resid- 
ed until  his  death.  He  traveled  and 
preached  extensively  in  the  Territory, 
and  in  fulfilment  of  a  prediction  by  the 
Prophet  Joseph  he  visited  the  British 
Isles  in  1870,  and  thus  preached  in  the 
old  world.  He  was  greatly  beloved  by 
the  people  everywhere,  being  one  of 
those  lovable  dispositions  that  always 
attract  those  with  whom  they  become 
associated.  He  was  a  benevolent  and 
merciful  man,  full  of  kindness  and  good 
works,  and  full  of  integrity  to  the 
cause  he  had  espoused.  He  never 
wearied  of  proclaiming  its  principles. 
"Uncle  Joseph,"  as  he  was  familiarly 
called,  died  in  Salt  Lake  City,  Utah, 
July  16,  1881.  He  had  for  several  weeks 
succumbed  to  general  weakness  and  de- 
bility incident  to  old  age,  and  quietly 
fell  asleep,  surrounded  by  loving  kin- 
dred and  friends.  His  body  was  free 
from  disease,  and  his  last  days  were 
devoid  of  pain.  Like  a  shock  of  corn 
fully  ripe  he  was  gathered  home.  Hav- 
ing fulfilled  his  mission  on  the  earth 
and  lived  beyond  the  time  usually  al- 
lotted to  man,  he  realized  in  his  clos- 
ing hours  on  earth  that  "the  end  of  the 
righteous  is  peace." 

'  HANCOCK,   Levi    Ward,  one  of  the 

First  Seven  Presidents  of  Seventies 
from  1835  to  1882,  was  the  youngest  son 
and  seventh  child  of  Thomas  Hancock 
and  Amy  Ward,  and  was  born  April  7, 
1803,  in  the  town  of  Old  Springfield, 
Hampden  county,  Mass.  In  1805  his 
father  removed  with  his  family,  con- 
sisting of  his  wife,  seven  children  and 
his  widowed  mother,  to  New  York 
State  and  settled  in  Bristol,  Ontario 
county.  Later,  they  removed  to  Chag- 
rin, Cayahoga  county,  Ohio.  As  a 
boy  and  young  man  Levi  exhibited  no- 
ble characteristics  and  industrious  hab- 
its, and  was  able  to  render  his  father 
efficient  help  from  his  early  youth. 
His  education  was  limited,  as  he  was 
raised  on  the  frontier;  and  through 
force  of  circumstances  he  was  com- 
pelled to  work  for  others  for  a  living. 
He  also  learned  the  trade  of  a  cabinet 
maker.  About\  the  year  1827  he  pur- 
chased some  land  and  built  a  house  at 
Rome,   Ashtabula  county,   Ohio,   where 


he  lived,  though  yet  unmarried,  when 
Parley  P.  Pratt  and  fellow  mission- 
aries passed  through  that  part  of  the 
country  on  their  journey  to  the  west. 
They  held  meetings  at  Chagrin,  where 
the  senior  Hancock  still  lived,  and 
among  the  first  baptized  at  that  place 
were  Levi's  father  and  his  sister  Cla- 
rissa. Levi  followed  the  missionaries 
to  Kirtland,  where  he  was  baptized  by 
Elder  Pratt  Nov.  16,  1830,  and  soon  af- 
terwards he  was  ordained  an  Elder  by 
Oliver  Cowdery.  He  then  commenced 
to  preach  the  gospel  successfully  in  the 
.surrounding  country.  In  June,  1831, 
he  was  called  by  revelation,  together 
with  other  Elders,  to  travel  to  Mis- 
souri and  preach  the  gospel  "by  the 
way,"   with  Zebedee  Coltrin  as  a  trav- 


eling companion.  They  performed  suc- 
cessful missionary  labors  in  Ohio,  In- 
diana and  Illinois,  and  after  their  ar- 
rival in  Missouri,  Levi  participated  in 
the  preparatory  work  done  for  the 
building  of  Zion.  After  his  return  to 
Ohio,  he  became  a  zealous  and  faithful 
worker  for  the  cause,  and  contributed 
liberally  toward  the  erection  of  the 
Lord's  House  at  Kirtland.  In  1834  he 
marched  to  Missouri  as  a  member  of 
Zion's  Camp,  and,  having  returned  to 
Ohio,  was  chosen  and  ordained  one  of 
the  first  Seventies  of  the  Church  Feb. 
28,  1835,  under  the  hands  of  Joseph 
Smith  and  others;  soon  afterwards  he 
was    chosen    one    of     the    First    Seven 


BIOGRAPHICAL    ENCYCLOPEDIA. 


189 


Presidents  of  Seventies,  which  position 
he  occupied  with  honor  and  faithful- 
ness for  forty-seven  years,  or  until  the 
day  of  his  death.  In  1838  he  removed 
to  Missouri,  where  he  passed  through 
the  p'ersecutions  which  the  Saints  were 
called  upon  to  endure,  and  when  the 
Church  was  expelled  from  that  State 
in  1838,  Bro.  Hancock  was  among-  those 
who  covenanted  to  place  their  means  at 
the  disposal  of  the  committee  which 
had  been  appointed  for  the  removal  of 
the  poor  Saints,  to  the  State  of  Illinois. 
After  the  founding  of  Nauvoo  he  be- 
came a  prominent  and  energetic  citizen 
of  that  place,  w^here  he  also  acted  as 
a  police  officer.  Early  in  1844  he  was 
called  on  a  mission  to  Vermont.  He 
had  previously  filled  a  mission  to  In- 
diana. In  common  with  the  rest  of 
the  Saints  he  suffered  persecutions  and 
consequent  hardships  in  Illinois  and 
became  an  exile  for  conscience  sake  in 
1846.  Arriving  with  the  camps  of  Is- 
rael on  the  Missouri  river,  he  enlisted 
in  the  famous  Mormon  Battalion  and 
marched  with  that  military  body  to 
California,  being  the  only  man  of  the 
general  authorities  of  the  Church  who 
thus  enlisted.  On  the  long  and  tedi- 
ous march  his  wise  counsel  and  exem- 
plary course  did  much  to  mould  the 
character  of  the  soldiers.  He  acted 
as  chaplain  of  the  Battalion.  As  an 
illustration  of  his  susceptibility  to  the 
spirit  of  inspiration  the  following  is 
related:  A  non-Mormon  by  the  con- 
sent of  the  Battalion  joined  the  com- 
pany and  soon  after  required  baptism. 
Brother  Hancock,  in  company  with 
others  of  the  brethren,  took  him  dowfi 
to  the  Missouri  ri\'>^er  and  performed 
the  ceremony.  On  raising  him  from 
the  water  he  said,  as  if  wrought  upon 
by  the  spirit,  "If  I  have  baptized  a 
murderer,  it  will  do  him  no  good."  His 
words  had  such  an  effect  upon  the 
stranger  that  he  soon  afterwards  con- 
fessed that  he  w^as  a  murderer,  having 
killed  his  own  brother.  As  many  of 
the  men  of  the  Battalion  were  mem- 
bers of  the  Seventies'  quorums.  Seven- 
ties' meetings  were  held  occasionally 
in  the  camp, when  circumstances  would 
permit,  under  the  presidency  of  Bro. 
Hancock,  who  did  his  best  to  influence 
the  men  to  live  as  their  religion  taught 
under  every  circumstance.  On  account 
of  his  zeal  in  this  regard,  some  of  the 
officers  WTongfully  accused  him  of  be- 
ing officious.       After   the   discharge   of 


the  Battalion  in  California,  in  1847,  Bro. 
Hancock  marched  to  Great  Salt  Lake 
valley  with  the  main  body  of  the  sol- 
diers, arriving  there  in  October.  From 
that  time  until  his  demise  he  labored 
assidiously  for  the  upbuilding  of  the 
kingdom  of  God  and  for  making  the 
wilderness  a  fit  place  for  the  habita- 
tion of  man.  He  traveled  extensively 
throughout  the  Territory  in  the  interest 
of  the  Seventies  and  the  Church  gen- 
erally. He  was  also  one  of  the  Pio- 
neer settlers  of  Manti,  Sanpete  county, 
from  whence  he  was  sent  thrice  as  a 
representative  to  the  Utah  legislature. 
Subsequently  he  moved  to  Payson, 
Utah  county,  and  still  later  located  in 
Salt  Lake  City.  About  1866  he  removed 
to  southern  Utah  and  settled  in  Har- 
risburg;  afterwards  he  became  a  resi- 
dent of  Leeds,  and  still  later  of  Wash- 
ington. About  ten  years  before  his 
death  he  was  ordained  a  Patriarch  in 
which  capacity  he  blessed  thousands 
of  the  Saints.  He  died  at  his  home  in 
Washington,  Washington  county,  Utah, 
June  10,  1882.  Elder  Hancock  was  a 
sparsely  built  man,  quick  and  active. 
He  was  a  natural  minute  man  and  a 
good  musician. 

RICH,  Leonard,  one  of  the  First 
Seven  Presidents  of  Seventies  from 
•  1835  to  1837.  joined  the  Church  at  an 
early  day  and  his  name  is  first  men- 
tioned in  the  history  of  Joseph  Smith, 
in  connection  with  a  council  of  High 
Priests  and  Elders,  held  in  Kirtland, 
Ohio,  Feb.  12,  1834,  where  he  was  called 
in  question  for  transgressing  the  Word 
of  Wisdom  and  for  selling  the  revela- 
tions at  an  extortionary  price  while 
"journeying  east  with  Father  Lyons." 
Bro.  Rich  confessed  and  the  council 
forgave  him  upon  his  promising  to  do 
better  and  reform  his  life.  Later,  he 
marched  to  Missouri  as  a  member  of 
Zion's  Camp,  and  after  his  return  to 
Kirtland  he  was  ordained  one  of  the 
first  Seventies  in  the  Church  Feb.  28, 
1835,  under  the  hands  of  Joseph  Smith 
and  others.  Soon  afterwards  he  was 
chosen  one  of  the  First  Seven  Presi- 
dents of  Seventies  and  took  an  active 
part  in  the  public  affairs  of  the  Church 
for  some  time.  Joseph  Smith,  in  his 
history  of  Dec.  9,  1835,  writes:  "I  would 
remember  Elder  Leonard  Rich,  who 
was  the  first  one  that  proposed  to  the 
brethren  to  assist  me  in  obtaining  wood 
for  the  use  of  my  family,  for  which  I 


190 


LATTER-DAT    SAINT 


-^ 


pray  my  heavenly  father  to  bless  him. 
*  *  *  And  I  shall  ever  remember  him 
with  much  gratitude  for  his  testimony 
of  benevolence  and  respect."  In  a 
letter  written  by  the  Prophet  In  Sep- 
tember, 1837,  the  following  occurs: 
"Leonard  Rich  and  others  have  been  in 
transgression,  but  we  hope  they  may 
be  humble,  and  ere  long  make  satis- 
faction to  the  Church;  otherwise  they 
cannot  retain  their  standing."  Having 
been  ordained  a  High  Priest  previous 
to  his  ordination  to  the  office  of  a  Sev- 
enty, he  was  counseled  to  identify  hini 
self  with  the  High  Priests;  and  his 
place  among  the  Seventies  was  filled 
April  6,  1837,  by  the  appointment  of 
James  Foster  as  one  of  the  First  Seven 
Presidents. 

COL.TRIN,     Zebedee,      one     of     the 

First  Seven  Presidents  of  Seven- 
ties from  1835  to  1837,  was  a 
son  of  John  and  Sarah  Coltrin 
and  was  born  Sept.  7,  1804,  at  Ovid, 
Seneca  county,  N.  Y.  He  was  baptized 
soon  after  the  organization  of  thf- 
Church,  and  is  mentioned  as  an  Elder 
as  early  as  June,  1831;  subsequently 
he  was  ordained  to  the  office  of  a 
High  Priest,  in  which  capacity  he 
served  occasionally  as  an  alternate 
member  of  the  High  Council  at  Kirt- 
land.  He  enjoyed  the  spiritual  gifts 
of  the  gospel  in  a  great  degree,  and  as 
early  as  Jan.  24,  1834,  he  is  mentioned 
in  Church  history  as  one  of  those  who 
spoke  in  tongues  at  Kirtland,  Ohio. 
Later  in  that  year  he  went  to  Missouri 
as  a  member  of  Zion's  Camp,  but  re- 
turned to  Kirtland  in  the  fall.  At  the 
organization  of  the  first  quorum  of 
Seventy,  Feb.  28,  1835,  he  was  ordained 
a  Seventy  under  the  hands  of  Joseph 
the  Prophet  and  others,  and  when  the 
quorum  was  more  fully  organized  he 
was  chosen  as  one  of  its  seven  presi- 
dents. At  a  meeting  held  at  Kirtland, 
Ohio,  Jan.  28,  1836,  he  had  a  vision  of 
"the  Savior  extended  before  him,  as 
upon  a  cross,  and  a  little  after,  crowned 
with  glory  upon  his  head,  above  the 
brightness  of  the  sun."  A  few  days 
later  he  saw  the  "Lord's  hosts"  in  an- 
other glorious  vision.  Having  been  or- 
dained a  High  Priest  prior  to  his  iden- 
tification with  the  Seventies,  he  was 
advised  to  join  the  High  Priests'  quo- 
rum, which  he  did;  and  the  vacancy 
caused  thereby  in  the  Council  of  Sev- 
enties   was    filled    April    6,    1837,      when 


Daniel  S.  Miles  was  chosen  to  succeed 
him.  After  passing  through  the  Mis- 
souri persecutions  Elder  Coltrin  located 
in  Illinois;  but  subsequently  returned 
to  Kirtland,  where  he  was  chosen  sec- 
ond counselor  to  Almon  W.  Babbitt  in 
the  presidency  of  that  Stake,  May  22, 
1841;  but  later  he  is  found  among  the 
Saints  in  Illinois.  When  an  attempt 
was  made  to  kidnap  Joseph  the  Prophet 
in  1843,  Elder  Coltrin  rendered  efficient 
service  to  save  his  beloved  leader,  and 
he  afterwards  traveled  in  the  State  of 
Illinois  to  allay  the  excitement  caused 
by  Joseph's  arrest  and  deliverance.  In 
1844  he  was  called  on  a  mission  to 
Michigan.  After  suffering  during  the 
persecutions  in  Illinois,  we  find  Bro. 
Coltrin  a  Pioneer  of  1847,  traveling  to 
Great  Salt  Lake  valley  under  the  lead- 
ership of  Pres.  Brigham  Young.  He 
returned  to  the  East,  but  came  back 
to  the  Valley  at  an  early  day,  and  was 
for  many  years  a  resident  of  Spanish 
Fork,  Utah  county,  where  he  died  July 
21,  1887.  At  the  time  of  his  death  the 
"Deseret  News"  said  editorially:  "This 
respected  and  venerable  man  was  one 
of  the  oldest  members  of  the  Church 
and  was  identified  with  many  of  its 
earliest  incidents  in  the  days  of  Kirt- 
land. He  was  closely  associated  with 
the  Prophet  Joseph  and  has  often  tes- 
tified to  having  been  a  witness  of  and 
participant  in  many  marvelous  spiritual 
manifestations.  Father  Coltrin  has 
for  many  years  past  officiated  as  a  Pa- 
triarch, and  has  left  an  excellent  record 
for  faithfulness." 

SHERMAN,  Lyman,  one  of  the  First 
Seven  Presidents  of  Seventies  from 
1835  to  1837,  embraced  the  gospel  at  an 
early  day  and  was  ordained  a  High 
Priest.  He  also  made  the  famous  trip 
from  Ohio  to  Missouri  as  a  member  of 
Zion's  Camp;  and  after  his  return  to 
Ohio,  he  was  ordained  a  Seventy,  Feb. 
2-8,  1835,  at  Kirtland,  under  the  hands  of 
Joseph  the  Prophet  and  others.  When 
the  first  quorum  of  Seventy  was  or- 
ganized, soon  afterwards,he  was  chosen 
as  one  of  its  seven  presidents.  In  De- 
cember, 1835,  he  came  to  Joseph  the 
Prophet  and  requested  to  have  the 
word  of  the  Lord  through  him;  "for," 
said  he,  "I  have  been  wrought  upon  to 
make  known  to  you  my  feelings  and 
desires,  and  was  promised  that  I 
should  have  a  revelation  which  should 
make  known  my  duty."      In  answer  to 


BIOGRAPHICAL    ENCYCLOPEDIA 


191 


his  request  a  revelation  was  given 
(Doc.  and  Cov.,  Sec.  108),  in  wtiicli  lie 
was  commanded  "to  be  more  careful 
henceforth"  in  observing  his  vows.  Be- 
ing numbered  among  those  who  had 
previously  been  ordained  High  Priests, 
he  was  released  from  his  position  as 
a  president  of  Seventies  April  6,  1837, 
and  identified  himself  with  the  High 
Priests.  Josiah  Butterfield  was  chosen 
as  his  successor.  Oct.  1,  1837,  Elder 
Sherman  was  chosen  a  High  Councilor 
at  Kirtland,  in  place  of  Jared  Carter 
who  had   removed   to   Missouri. 

SMITH,       Sylvester,        one     of     the 

First  Seven  Presidents  of  Seventies, 
from  1835  to  1837,  was  baptized  soon 
after  the  organization  of  the  Church, 
and  was  one  of  the  early  Elders  of  the 
same;  he  was  ordained  a  High  Priest 
by  Oliver  Cowdery  Oct.  25,  1831,  and 
performed  considerable  missionary  la- 
bor, being  specially  called  to  the  min- 
istry by  a  revelation  given  through 
the  Prophet  Joseph  Smith  Jan.  25,  1832 
(Doc.  and  Gov.,  75:  34).  When  the  first 
High  Council  was  organized  at  Kirt- 
land, Ohio,  Feb.  17,  1834,  Sylvester 
Smith  was  chosen  one  of  the  members. 
Soon  afterwards  he  became  a  member 
of  Zion's  Camp  and  marched  in  that 
body  to  Missouri  and  back.  On  that 
famous  journey  he  manifested  a  quar- 
relsome spirit,  and  rebelled  on  several 
occasions  against  Joseph  the  Prophet 
and  the  established  order  of  the  camp, 
for  which  he  was  tried  before  the  High 
Council  after  his  return  to  Kirtland. 
He  confessed  his  faults  and  retained 
his  standing  in  the  Church.  When 
the  first  selection  of  Elders  to  be  or- 
dained Seventies  was  made,  Sylvester 
Smith  was  among  the  number  chosen. 
He  was  ordained  a  Seventy  Feb.  28, 
1835,  at  Kirtland,  Ohio,  under  the  hand? 
of  Joseph  Smith  and  others;  and  on  the 
following  day  (March  1,  1835,)  he  was 
ordained  a  president  of  Seventies.  His 
place  in  the  High  Council  was  filled 
Jan.  13,  1836,  by  the  appointment  of 
Noah  Packard  as  a  High  Councilor.  At 
a  solemn  meeting  held  at  Kirtland  Jan. 
22.  1836,  "the  heavens  were  opened  upon 
Elder  Sylvester  Smith,  and  he,  leaping 
up,  exlaimed,  'The  horsemen  of  Israel 
and  the  chariots  thereof.'  "  During  that 
winter  Sylvester  Smith  studied  He- 
brew, together  with  Joseph  the  Prophet 
and  others,  in  a  class  taught  by  Pro- 
fessor  Seixas.     Owing   to   his   previous 


ordination  to  the  office  of  a  High 
Priest,  he  was  released  from  his  posi- 
tion as  a  president  of  Seventies,  at  a 
meeting  held  in  the  Kirtland  Temple, 
April  6,  1837.  John  Gaylord  was  chosen 
to  fill  the  vacancy  caused  thereby  in 
the  First  Council  of  Seventy. 

GOULD,  John,  one  of  the  First  Seven  m, , 
Presidents  of  Seventies  for  a  short  pe-  "**«• 
riod  of  time  in  1837,  joined  the  Church 
at  an  early  day  and  was  numbered 
among  its  first  Elders.  In  the  fall  of 
1833,  together  with  Orson  Hyde,  he  was 
sent  as  a  special  messenger  from  Kirt- 
land to  the  Saints  in  Missouri.  From 
this  important  mission  they  returned 
to  Kirtland  Nov.  25,  1833,  bringing  the 
"melancholy  intelligence  of  the  riot  in 
Zion"  the  previous  July.  He  was  or- 
dained and  set  apart  as  one  of  the 
First  Seven  Presidents  of  Seventies 
April  6,  1837,  under  the  hands  of  Sid- 
ney Rigdon  and  Hyrum  Smith.  At  a 
conference  held  at  Kirtland,  Sept.  3, 
1837,  he  was  objected  to  as  a  president 
of  Seventies.  Six  brethren,  instead  of 
five,  had  been  selected  to  fill  vacancies 
in  the  council  of  Seventies  in  April, 
1837,  it  being  supposed  at  the  time  that 
Levi  W.  Hancock,  who  was  absent 
from  Kirtland,  had  also  been  ordained 
a  High  Priest.  This  being  a  mistake 
the  Prophet  requested  Bro.  Joseph 
Young  to  see  John  Gould  and  signify 
to  him  the  desire  of  the  Prophet  to 
have  him  placed  in  the  High  Priests- 
quorum.  Bro.  Gould  complied  with 
the  wishes  of  the  Prophet,  and  he  was 
consequently  ordained  a  High  Priesl. 
The  last  mention  made  of  John  Gould 
in  the  history  of  Joseph  Smith  is  his 
call  to  perform  missionary  labor  in  Illi- 
nois in  April,   1844. 

POSTER,  James,  one  of  the  First  /-- 
Seven  Presidents  of  Seventies  from 
1837  to  1844,  was  born  April  1,  1775.  He 
is  first  mentioned  in  the  history  of  Jo- 
seph Smith  under  date  of  Aug.  17,  1835, 
when  he  was  blessed  at  a  meeting  held 
at  Kirtland.  Having  previously  been 
ordained  to  the  Priesthood,  he  was  set 
apart  as  one  of  the  First  Seven  Presi- 
dents of  Seventies,  April  6,  1837,  under 
the  hands  of  Sidney  Rigdon  and  Hy- 
rum Smith,  to  fill  a  vacancy  caused  by 
Leonard  Rich  joining  the  High  Priests 
quorum.  When  the  Seventies  and 
others  organized  at  Kirtland  for  tra- 
veling to  Missouri  in  the  famous  Kirt- 
land  Camp   in  1828.   James  Foster  was 


192 


LATTER-DAT    SAINT 


chosen  as  one  of  the  leaders  of  that 
organization.  At  a  general  conference 
held  at  Nauvoo  in  April,  1841,  he  an- 
swered to  some  charges  that  had  been 
made  against  him,  "after  which  it  was 
resolved  that  Elder  James  Foster  con- 
tinue his  standing  in  the  Church."  It 
appears  that  Elder  Foster,  instead  of 
gathering  with  the  Saints  at  Nauvoo, 
settled  at  Jacksonville,  Morgan  county, 
111.,  and  had  no  direct  communication 
with  his  brethren.  It  was  also  re- 
ported at  Nauvoo  that  he  took  sick 
and  died  Dec.  21,  1841,  in  the  66th  year 
of  his  age,  and  was  buried  in  Morgan 
county,  111.,  near  the  Illinois  river.  Al- 
bert P.  Rockwood  was  subsequently 
called  to  fill  the  vacancy  caused  by 
Bro.  Foster's  death  in  the  council  of 
the  Seventies. 

^)  MILES,  Daniel  S.,  one  of  the  First 
^Seven  Presidents  of  Seventies  from  1837 
to  1845,  was  baptized  at  an  early  day 
and  is  first  mentioned  in  the  history  of 
Joseph  Smith  in  connection  with  a 
Priesthood  meeting  held  in  the  Kirt- 
land  Temple  Feb.  24,  1836,  at  which 
"Daniel  Miles  was  considered  worthy 
to  be  ordained  to  the  Priesthood."  He 
was  ordained  a  Seventy  April  6,  1837, 
by  Hazen  Aldrich  and  set  apart  as  one 
of  the  First  Seven  Presidents  of  Sev- 
enties on  the  same  day,  under  the 
hands  of  Sidney  Rigdon  and  Hyrum 
Smith.  In  the  latter  capacity  he  was 
duly  sustained  at  a  conference  held  at 
Kirtland,  Ohio,  Sept.  3,  1837.  Early  in 
1838  he  removed  to  Missouri,  arriving 
at  Far  W'est  March  14.  1838.  Here  he 
represented  the  Seventies  at  a  solemn 
meeting  held  April  6,  1838,  and  subse- 
quently passed  through  the  persecu- 
tions which  terminated  in  the  expulsion 
of  the  Saints  from  Missouri.  He  was 
among  the  first  "Mormon"  settlers  at 
Commerce  (afterwards  Nauvoo),  111.; 
and  is  mentioned  in  a  revelation  given 
through  the  Prophet  Joseph  Jan.  19, 
1841.  (Doc.  and  Cov.  124:  138.)  Elder 
Miles  died  as  a  faithful  member  of  the 
Church  in  the  early  part  of  1845,  in 
Hancock  county.  111.,  and  the  vacancy 
occasioned  by  his  death  was  filled  by 
Benjamin  L.  Clapp  in  April,  1845.  Pres. 
Joseph  Young  describes  Elder  Miles  as 
"a  man  of  good  faith,  constant  in  his 
attendance  at  the  meetings  of  the  coun- 
cil, until  the  time  of  his  death,  which 
occurred  at  fiuite  an  advanced  stage  of 
his  life." 


BLTTERFIELD,  Josiah,  one  of  the 

First  Seven  Presidents  of  Seventies 
from  1837  to  1844,  was  a  native  of  the 
State  of  Maine.  He  is  first  mentioned 
in  the  history  of  Joseph  Smith  in  con- 
nection with  a  meeting  held  at  Kirt- 
land, Ohio,  March  8,  1835,  when  he  was 
blessed  for  having  assisted  in  the  build- 
ing of  the  Kirtland  Temple.  He  was 
ordained  and  set  apart  as  one  of  the 
First  Seven  Presidents  of  Seventies, 
April  6,  1837,  under  the  hands  of  Sid- 
ney Rigdon  and  Hyrum  Smith;  and  he 
was  appointed  one  of  the  commission- 
ers to  lead  the  Kirtland  Camp,  which 
journeyed  from  Ohio  to  Missouri  in 
1838.  As  they  traveled  through  the 
country,  Elder  Butterfield,  together 
with  others,  was  arrested  by  a  county 
sheriff  near  Mansfield,  Ohio,  on  a 
charge  connected  with  "Kirtland  Safe- 
ty Society  Money,"  and  committed  to 
jail.  The  brethren,  who  were  thus  de- 
prived of  their  liberty,  were  discharged 
the  next  day  by  the  court  sitting  in 
Mansfield,  as  no  bill  was  found  against 
them.  When  the  Saints  were  expelled 
from  Missouri,  Elder  Butterfield  en- 
rolled his  name  among  those  brethren 
who  covenanted  to  assist  the  poor  to 
remove  from  that  State.  At  Nauvoo, 
111.,  he  appeared  to  be  an  active  man, 
and  he  was  called  on  a  mission  to  the 
State  of  Maine  in  April,  1844.  He  was 
finally  excommunicated  from  the 
Church  for  neglect  of  duty  and  for 
other  causes,  at  the  general  conference 
held  at  Nauvoo  Oct.  7,  1844.  The  va- 
cancy caused  thereby  in  the  First 
Council  of  Seventies  was  filled  by  the 
appointment  of  Jedediah  M.  Grant,  to 
be  one  of  the  First  Seven  Presidents  of 
Seventies.  Some  years  later,  on  his 
way  to  California  with  a  herd  of  stock, 
he  visited  Fort  Herriman,  Salt  Lake 
county,  Utah,  where  his  nephew, 
Thomas  Butterfield,  resided.  At  that 
time  he  explained  to  his  relatives  that 
his  faith  in  "Mormonism"  was  as 
strong  as  ever.  He  continued  his  jour- 
ney to  California,  where  he,  according 
to  the  statement  of  Pres.  Joseph 
Young,  died  in  Monterey  county,  in 
April,  1871. 

GEE,  Salmon,  one  of  the  First 
Seven  Presidents  of  Seventies  from 
1837-38,  was  born  Oct.  16,  1792,  in  Lyme 
New  London  county.  Conn.  When  he 
was  about  seventeen  years  old  he  re- 
moved to  Ohio,  and  located  in  Ashta- 


BIOGRAPHICAL.    ENCYCLOPEDIA. 


193 


bula  county.  In  1828  he  removed  to 
Geauga  county,  where  he  joined  the 
Church,  being-  baptized  in  July,  1832, 
by  Zebedee  Coltrin.  Shortly  after- 
wards (Feb.  4,  1833)  he  was  ordained  an 
Elder  by  Sidney  Rigdon,  and  he  re- 
moved to  Kirtland  in  April,  1834.  When 
the  second  ouorum  of  Seventy  was  or- 
ganized in  1836,  he  was  ordained  a 
member  thereof,  and  at  the  time  of  the 
reorganization  of  the  Seventies,  April 
6,  1837,  he  was  called  to  fill  the  vacancy 
in  the  Council  caused  by  the  removal 
of  Elder  Zebedee  Coltrin  to  the  High 
Priests'  quorum.  He  was  ordained  un- 
der the  hands  of  Sidney  Rigdon  and 
Hyrum  Smith.  At  a  meeting  of  the 
Seventies  held  at  Kirtland,  March  6, 
1838,  the  quorum  withdrew  their  fel- 
lowship from  Bro.  Gee  for  neglect  of 
duty  and  other  causes,  but  he  was 
never  excommunicated  from  the 
Church.  When  Almon  W.  Babbitt  re- 
organized the  Stake  in  Kirtland,  in 
1841,  Elder  Gee  was  chosen  as  a  mem- 
ber of  the  High  Council  at  that  place, 
where  he  remained  until  1844,  when  he 
removed  to  Ambrosia,  Lee  county, 
Iowa.  There  he  died,  Sept.  13,  1845,  as 
a  faithful  member  of  the  Church.  His 
remains  were  interred  at  Nauvoo.  One 
of  the  last  acts  of  his  life  was  to  call 
the  members  of  his  family  around  him 
and  exhort  them  to  faithfulness,  advis- 
ing them  also  to  follow  the  Church 
wherever  it  went. 

GAYLORD,  John,,  one  of  the  First 
Seven  Presidents  of  Seventies,  from 
1837  to  1838,  was  born  July  12,  1797,  and 
joined  the  Church  at  an  early  day.  He 
was  ordained  a  Seventy  by  Hazen  Aid- 
rich  Dec.  20,  1836,  and  set  apart  as  one 
of  the  First  Seven  Presidents  of  Sev- 
enties April  6,  1837,  under  the  hands  of 
Sidney  Rigdon  and  Hyrum  Smith.  At 
a  meeting  of  the  High  Council  held  in 
Kirtland,  Ohio,  Jan.  13,  1838, Elder  Gay- 
lord,  together  with  many  others,  were 
excommunicated  from  the  Church  for 
rising  up  in  rebellion  against  the  high- 
er Church  authorities.  Henry  Harri- 
man  was  subsequently  called  to  fill  the 
vacancy  in  the  First  Council  of  Seven- 
ties. Afterwards  John  Gaylord  re- 
joined the  Church  and  was  with  the 
Saints  in  Nauvoo,  where  he  received  his 
endowments  in  the  Temple  before  the 
Church  left  for  the  wilderness. 

HARRIMAN,     Henry,,     one     of    the 

First    Seven      Presidents     of    Seventies 
Vol.  1,  No.  13. 


from  1838  to  1891,  was  the  son  of  Enoch 
Harriman  and  Sarah  Fowler,  and  was 
born  June  9,  1804,  at  Rowley  (now 
Georgetown),  Essex  county,  Mass.  He 
was  baptized  by  Orson  Hyde  in  the 
early  part  of  1832.  In  1834  he  removed 
to  Kirtland,  Ohio,  and  that  same  year 
he  accompanied  the  Prophet  Joseph 
and  about  two  hundred  other  men  to 
Missouri  in  Zion's  Camp.  He  returned 
to  Kirtland  in  the  fall  of  1834,  and  in 
1835  he  was  ordained  a  Seventy  under 
the  hands  of  Joseph  Smith  and  Sidney 
Rigdon.  Feb.  6,  1838,  he  was  ordained 
and  set  apart  as  one  of  the  First  Seven 
Presidents  of  Seventies,  to  fill  a  vacan- 
cy caused  by  the  removal  of  John  Gay- 
lord.  This  high  and  responsible  posi- 
tion he  occupied  until  the  time  of  his 
death— a  period  of  more  than  fifty- 
three  years,  and  after  the  death  of 
Levi  W.  Hancock  in  1882  until  his  own 
demise  he  was  the  senior  president  of 
all  the  Seventies.  By  comparison  it 
will  be  seen  that  Elder  Harriman  oc- 
cupied the  same  position  in  the  Church 
longer  than  any  other  man  among  the 
general  authorities  since  the  organiza- 
tion of  the  Church.  In  1838  he  acted 
as  one  of  the  leaders  of  the  so-called 
Kirtland  Camp,  which  traveled  about 
a  thousand  miles  from  Ohio  to  Adam- 
ondi-Ahman,  in  Daviess  county,  Mo. 
At  the  latter  place  Elder  Harriman 
spent  a  few  months,  and  was  then 
forced  to  leave  his  possessions  in  Da- 
viess county  and  remove  to  Far  West, 
where  he  remained  until  early  in  the 
spring  of  1839,  when  he,  together  with 
the  rest  of  the  Saints,  was  expelled 
from  Missouri  under  the  exterminat- 
ing order  of  Gov.  Lilburn  W.  Boggs. 
After  this  he  took  an  active  part  in 
the  upbuilding  of  Nauvoo,  until  he 
again  was  made  an  exile  in  1846,  and 
came  west  during  the  general  exodus 
of  the  Saints,  after  receiving  his  en- 
dowments in  the  Nauvoo  Temple.  He 
finally  arrived  in  Great  Salt  Lake  val- 
ley in  1848,  crossing  the  plains  in  Heber 
C.  Kimball's  company.  In  the  spring 
of  1849, he  became  one  of  the  four  breth- 
ren who  first  settled  Fort  Herriman,  in 
Salt  Lake  county.  The  new  settlement 
\va"  named  in  honor  of  Elder  Harri- 
man, who  was  also  the  first  presiding 
El::>r  there.  In  the  spring  of  1857 
he  was  called  on  a  mission  to  Great 
Britain.  In  crossing  the  plains  from 
Salt  Lake  City  to  the  Missouri  river 
he  acted  as  president  of  the  only  corn- 
March  30,   1901. 


194 


LATTER-DAY    SAINT 


pany  of  missionaries,  who  ever  crossed 
the  plains  with  handcarts.  Though 
fifty-two  years  of  age,  he  pulled  his 
handcart  as  faithfully  and  ably  as  his 
younger  missionary  companions.  To- 
gether with  nineteen  other  Elders  from 
the  Valley  he  arrived  in  Liverpool, 
England,  Aug.  4,  1856;  but  they  all  re- 
turned in  1858  owing  to  the  so-called 
Utah  war,  which  gave  occasion  for 
nearly  all  the  American  Elders  abroad 
to  be  called  home.  Elder  Harriman 
embarked  from  Liverpool  in  the  ship 
"Underwriter"  Jan.  21.  1858,  to  return 
home.  About  four  years  later,  he  was 
called  on  the  Dixie  mission,  where  he 
remained  about  twenty-five  years,  and 
finally  removed  to  Huntington,  Emery 
county,  in  December,  1887,  where  he  re- 
sided until  the  time  of  his  death,  which 
occurred  May  17,  1891.  During  the  last 
few  years  of  his  life  his  health  was 
poor.  Henry  Harriman  was  one  of  the 
Elders  who  were  present  at  Adam- 
ondi-Ahman,  in  1838,  when  the  Prophet 
Joseph  declared  that  the  remnants  of 
an  altar  found  on  the  top  of  the  hill, 
-near  Grand  river,  were  what  was  left 
of  the  identical  altar  upon  which  Fa- 
ther Adam  offered  sacrifice. 

PULSIPHER,  Zera,  one  of  the  First 
Seven   Presidents     of     Seventies     from 
1838  to  18G2,  was  born  June  24,  1789,  in 
Rockingham,     Windham     county,  Ver- 
mont.      In  his  youth  he  served  in  the 
wars  of  his  country  and  heard  the  ful- 
ness of  the  gospel  preached  in  the  State 
of  New  York.       He   was  baptized  and 
ordained   to  the  ministry     in  January. 
1832,    after    which      he      traveled    and 
preached  extensively  through  the  East- 
ern States  and  Canada.      Among  those 
baptized    by    him    was    the    late    Pres. 
Wilford     Woodruff.       He     removed    to 
Kirtland.    Ohio,    in    1835.        When      the 
bulk  of  the  Saints  removed  from  Ohio, 
to    Missouri    in    the      famous    Kirtland 
Camp,  in  1838,  Elder  Pulsipher  was  one 
of  the  commissioners  appointed  to  lead 
said    camp,    having   previously    (March 
6,  1838)  been  ordained  and  set  apart  as 
one   of    the    First    Seven    Presidents   of 
Seventies,     under    the  hands  of  Joseph 
Young  and  James  Foster.     After  pass- 
ing through  the  Missouri  persecutions, 
he  became  a  resident  of  Nauvoo,  and  is 
mentioned    in    the      famous    revelation 
given  through  the  Prophet  Joseph  Jan. 
19,  1841.  After  the  exodus  of  the  Saints 
from  Illinois,  he  shared  in  all  the  hard- 


ships endured  by  his  people  on  the 
plains  and  mountains  and  arrived  in 
Great  Salt  Lake  valley  in  1847  or  1848. 
For  twenty-four  years  after  that  he 
was  a  resident  of  the  valleys  of  Utah, 
and  thoroughly  learned  the  hardship  of 
pioneer  life.  He  transcended  the  bounds 
of  the  Priesthood  in  the  ordinance  of 
sealing,  for  which  he  was  cited  to  ap- 
pear before  the  First  Presidency  of 
the  Church  April  12,  1862.  It  was  there 
voted,  that  he  be  rebaptlzed,  recon- 
firmed and  ordained  to  the  office  of  a 
High  Priest,  or  go  into  the  ranks  of 
the  Seventies.  Subsequently  he  was 
ordained  a  Patriarch.  Elder  John  Van 
Cott  was  chosen  as  his  successor  in 
the  First  Council  of  Seventies.  Elder 
Pulsipher  was  the  father  of  seventeen 
children,  eight  of  whom  came  to  the 
mountains  with  him.  At  the  time  of 
his  death,  which  occurred  at  Hebron, 
Washington  county,  Utah,  Jan.  1,  1872. 
his  posterity  included  65  grand-children 
and  37  great-grand-children.  He  died 
as  a  member  in  full  fellowship  in  the 
Church. 

ROCRWOOD,  Albert  P.,  one  of  the 

First    Seven    Presidents      of    Seventies 
from  1845  to  1879.  was  born  June  5,  1805 
in  Holliston,   Middlesex  county,     Mass. 
Having  heard  of  the  Latter-day  Saints 
through  Elders     Brigham     Young  and 
Willard  Richards,  he  came  to  Kirtland, 
Ohio,    to    make    further   investigations. 
He  soon   became     converted     and  was 
baptized  at  Kirtland,  July  25.   1837.   by 
Brigham    Young.        After    his    baptism 
Bro.   Rockwood  returned   to   the  East- 
ern States.       He  was  ordained  a  Sev- 
enty Jan.   5.   1839,   under  the   hands  of 
Joseph  Young,  Zera  Pulsipher.     Henrj- 
Harriman  and  Levi  W.  Hancock.       He 
gathered   with   the   Saints  to   Missouri, 
where   he   passed   through   severe   per- 
secutions.      Later,   he  settled   at  Nau- 
voo.   111.,    where   he   took   a   prominent 
part  in  the  affairs  of  the  growing  city. 
When  the  Nauvoo  Legion  was  first  or- 
ganized in  1841  he  was  elected  captain 
of  one  of  the  companies  and  was  also 
appointed  drill  officer;  later  he  acted  as 
commander     of     Joseph     Smith's     life 
guard,  and  when  Joseph  was  kidnapped 
in  Dixon,   Illinois,  in  1843,  Elder  Rock- 
\iOod,  as  acting  adjutant  of  a  compa- 
ny of  horsemen,  rendered  efficient  ser- 
vice  in    his    rescue.       Still    later.     Bro. 
Rockwood  ranked  as  a  general  in  the 
Legion.      He  also  acted  as  a  municipal 


BIOGRAPHICAL   ENCYCLOPEDIA. 


195 


officer  in  Nauvoo.  Having  been  called 
to  fill  a  vacancy  in  the  First  Council 
of  Seventies,  caused  by  the  release  of 
James  Foster,  Elder  Rockwood  was  or- 
dained and  set  apart  as  one  of  the 
First  Presidents  of  Seventies  at  Nau- 
voo, Dec.  2,  1845,  under  the  hands  of 
Apostles  Brigham  Young,  Heber  C. 
Kimball,  Orson  Hyde,  Parley  P.  Pratt 
and  Geo.  A.  Smith.  When  the  Saints 
were  expelled  from  Nauvoo,  Elder 
Rockwood  shared  in  the  genertl  suffer- 
ings and  hardships  endured  by  the 
Camps  of  Israel,  and  in  1847  he  came 
to  Great  Salt  Lake  valley  as  one  of  the 
Pioneers,  under  the  immediate  leader- 
ship of  Pres.  Brigham  Young.  During 
his  many  years'   residence   in  Utah  he 


worked  diligently  for  the  upbuilding  of 
the  country,  and  he  filled  many  im- 
portant positions  of  honor  and  trust. 
For  many  years  he  acted  as  warden  of 
the  Territorial  penitentiary.  After  a 
long  life  of  usefulness  and  diligence, 
Elder  Rockwood  departed  this  life  Nov. 
25,  1879,  at  his  residence  in  the  Sugar 
House  Ward,  Salt  Lake  county,  Utah, 
He  had  been  confined  to  his  bed  with 
a  disease  of  the  lungs  for  three  weeks. 
In  his  obituary  published  in  the  "Des- 
eret  News"  at  the  time  of  his  death, 
the  following  occurs:  "He  (Elder  Rock- 
wood) has  been  a  prominent  member 
of  the  Church  and  a  man  of  integrity, 
position  and  influence  in  the  communi- 
ty. He  served  in  the  first  legislature 
of    Utah,    has    been    a    member    of    the 


same  body  ever  since  and  was  elected 
for  the  approaching  session  this  win- 
ter. He  was  also  the  pioneer  fish 
commissioner  of  the  Territory,  and  one 
of  the  directors  of  the  Deseret  Agricul- 
tural and  Manufacturing  Society.  In 
fact,  through  all  his  career,  he  has  held 
high  and  responsible  positions  with 
honor  to  himself  and  benefit  to  the  com- 
munity in  which  he  has  resided.  A  good 
man  has  gone  to  rest  after  a  long  life 
of  usefulness.  He  died  peacefully 
surrounded  by  his  family  and  friends! 
and  previous  to  his  death  shook  hands 
with  and  bade  them  all  good  bye." 

CLAPP,  Benjamin  L.,     one     of   the 

First  Seven  Presidents  of  Seventies 
from  1845  to  1859,  was  born  Aug.  19^ 
1814,  in  Alabama.  He  joined  the 
Church  at  an  early  day  and  labored  as 
a  missionary  in  Kentucky  in  1838.  He 
gathered  with  the  Saints  to  Missouri, 
where  he  passed  through  severe  perse- 
cutions, and  after  participating  in  the 
Crooked  river  battle  he,  together  with 
others  fled  into  the  wilderness  in  or- 
der to  escape  their  enemies.  They 
traveled  through  the  northern  part  of 
Alissouri,  and  the  southern  part  of 
Iowa  and  finally  reached  Illinois  in 
safety.  At  a  political  meeting  held  at 
Nauvoo  Feb.  2,  1843,  Elder  Clapp  deliv- 
ered a  speech,  in  which  ho  said  that 
Joseph  and  Hyrum  Smith  had  attempt- 
ed to  take  away  the  rights  of  the  citi- 
zens at  a  late  municipal  election.  Two 
days  later  he  made  a  public  confession 
to  the  effect  that  he  was  wrong  in  his 
accusation.  When  Joseph  the  Prophet 
was  arrested  at  Dixon,  111.,  in  1843,  and 
an  attempt  was  made  to  kidnap  him 
to  Missouri,  Elder  Clapp  -joined  the  ex- 
pedition which  rescued  the  Prophet. 
Soon  after  this  he  departed  on  a  mis- 
sion to  Alabama,  on  which  he  had  been 
called  at  the  previous  April  conference. 
He  was  ordained  and  set  apart  as  one 
of  the  presidents  of  the  eighth  quorum 
of  Seventy  Oct.  20,  1844,  under  the  hands 
of  Joseph  Young  and  Levi  W.  Hancock, 
and  set  apart  as  one  of  the  First  Seven 
Presidents  of  Seventies  Dec.  2,  1845, 
under  the  hands  of  Apostles  Brigham 
Young,  Heber  C.  Kimball,  Orson  Hyde, 
Parley  P.  Pratt,  and  George  A.  Smith. 
He  came  west  in  the  general  exodus 
of  the  Saints  from  Nauvoo,  111.,  and  af- 
ter residing  for  several  years  in  Salt 
Lake  City  he  removed  his  family  to 
Ephraim,  Sanpete  county,  where  he  had 


196 


LATTER-DAY  SAINT 


some  difficulty  with  Bishop  Warren  S. 
Snow.  After  investigation  before  the 
council  of  Seventies,  he  was  dropped 
from  his  position  in  the  council  and 
finally  excommunicated  from  the 
Church  at  the  general  conference  held 
in  Salt  Lake  City  April  7,  1859.  He 
died  in  California  about  the  year  1860. 
with  a  settled  conviction  of  the  truth 
of  the  latter-day  work. 

ELiDREDGE,  Horace  S.,  one  of  the 

First  Seven  Presidents  of  Seventies 
from  1854  to  1888,  was  the  son  of  Alan- 
son  Eldredge  and  Esther  Sunderlin.and 
was  born  Feb.  6,  1816,  in  Brutus,  Cay- 
uga county,  New  York.  When  he  was 
eight   years   old,    his   mother   died,    and 


his  training  devolved  upon  his  eldest 
sister  and  an  aunt.  The  influences  by 
which  he  was  surrounded  during  boy- 
hood were  those  of  refinement  and  pie- 
ty, and  we  have  his  own  testimony 
to  the  effect  that  at  a  very  early  age 
his  mind  was  engrossed  with  reflec- 
tions concerning  a  future  state  and  the 
necessity  of  preparing  for  it.  When 
sixteen  years  old  he  united  with  the 
Baptist  church,  but  he  was  not  able  to 
accept  certain  doctrines  of  the  Calvin- 
istic  creed.  He  remained  a  member 
of  the  Baptist  church,  however,  until 
the  spring  of  1836.  when  for  the  first 
time  he  heard  the  gospel  of  Christ 
taught  in  its  fulness,  and  he  was  soon 
afterwards  baptized.     During  the  sum- 


mer of  1836  he  married  and  settled  on 
a  farm  near  Indianapolis,  Indiana;  but 
prompted  by  the  spirit  of  gathering, he 
sold    his   farm    in    the    fall    of   1838   and 
went  to  Missouri.       He  located  at  Far 
West.  Mo.,  where  he  purchased  a  large 
farm  and  a  house  and  lot  in  the  town, 
expecting  to  make  the  place  his  perma- 
nent   home.        But    he    shared     in      the 
disappointment    of   thousands   of   other 
Saints  who  went  to  Missouri  with  simi- 
lar anticipations.      He  had  occupied  his 
new  home  only  a  few  weeks  when  the 
fires  of  mobocratic  hatred  towards  the 
Saints  burst  forth  with  such  fury  that 
they  had  to  flee,  and  in  December,  18.38. 
Bro.   Eldredge   left   Far  West  and     re- 
turned to  Indiana.      He  always  retained 
the  title  to  his  real  estate  in  Missouri, 
and  never  received  a  dollar  for  it.  Dur- 
ing the  fall  of  1840,  he  joined  the  fast 
gathering  comjnunity  of  Saints  at  Nau- 
voo.  111.,  and  was  present  at  the  break- 
ing of  ground  for  the  Nauvoo  Temple, 
an  event  which   occurred  shortly  after 
his  arrival.      He  resided  in  Nauvoo  till 
the  exodus  therefi-om  in  the  spring  of 
1846,  and  shared  in  the  expatriation  of 
the  inhabitants  of  that  devoted  city  and 
in  their  march  through  the  wilderness 
to  Winter  Quarters.      Here  he,  with  his 
family,  spent  two  winters,  and  here  he 
buried    two   childi'en,    victims   of   hard- 
ship and   privation.       In   the   spring  of 
1848,  he  started  for  Great  Salt  Lake  val- 
ley,   where    he     arrived     the    following 
September.       Soon  after  his  arrival  he 
was    appointed    marshal    of    the    Terri- 
tory,   assessor   and     collector   of   taxes 
and  a  brigadier-general  of  militia.     At 
the   general    conference   of    the    Church 
held  in  October.  1852.  he  was  appointed 
to  preside  over  the  St.  Louis  (Mo.)  con- 
ference  and    act    as   a   general    Church 
and  emigration  agent.  The  duties  thus 
placed   upon   him   were   of  a  very     im- 
portant and  arduous  character,  but  he 
discharged  them  well.      The  autumn  of 
1854    found    him    home    again    with    his 
family,   when   he  was  chosen  and     or- 
dained  one   of    the    First    Seven    Presi- 
dents of  Seventies.      Joseph  Young  of- 
ficiated in  the  ordination.       In  the  fol- 
lowing winter  he  served   as  a  member 
of  the   Territorial   legislature.       In   the 
fall    of    1856    he    formed    a    partnership 
with   Wm.   H.    Hooper  and   engaged   in 
mercantile    business,      opening    with    a 
$15,000  stock  of  goods  in  Provo.      In  the 
spring  of  1857   he   was  assigned   to   his 
former  position  and  duties  at  St.  Louis, 


BIOGRAPHICAL   ENCYCLOPEDIA. 


197 


Mu.  He  was  absent  over  a  year,  dur- 
ing which  "the  move"  had  taken  place. 
About  the  time  of  his  return  to  Utah 
the  Saints  began  to  return  to  their 
homes:  and  after  getting  his  family 
back  to  their  home  in  Salt  Lake  City, 
he  again  started  east,  in  September, 
185S.  This  time  he  went  to  purchase 
merchandise  and  machinery.  He  was 
absent  nearly  a  year,  and  on  his  re- 
turn the  firm  of  Hooper  &  Eldredge 
opened  out  with  a  large  stock  of  goods 
in  the  store  just  north  of  the  Deseret 
Bank  corner,  in  Salt  Lake  City.  From 
this  time  on  he  was  a  leading  figure 
in  the  mercantile  and  financial  circles 
of  the  Territory,  and  was  rated  as  one 
of  its  ablest  business  men.  But  busi- 
ness pursuits  by  no  means  engrossed 
all  of  his  time  or  attention.  In  the 
spring  of  1862,  after  having  served  an- 
other term  in  the  legislature,  he  was 
appointed  Churh  emigration  agent  at 
New  York,  which  appointment  was  re- 
peated one  year  later.  From  1864-69 
inclusive  his  time  was  mostly  devoted 
to  business  affairs,  and  during  thai 
period  he  helped  to  establish  Z.  C.  M.  I., 
being  at  the  time  of  his  death  one  of 
the  oldest  directors  of  that  institu- 
tion. At  the  April  conference,  1870, 
he  was  called  to  preside  over  the  Eu- 
ropean mission.  He  was  absent  about 
fourteen  months,  during  a  portion  of 
which  time  his  health  was  very  poor, 
his  lungs  being  badly  affected.  After 
his  return  from  that  mission  he  made 
repeated  journeys  to  the  East  and  the 
Pacific  coast,  generally  on  business.  He 
served  several  terms  as  superintendent 
of  Z.  C.  M.  I.,  which  position  he  held 
at  his  death.  He  also  acted  as  vice- 
president  and  president  of  the  institu- 
tion. He  was  one  of  the  organizers 
of  the  Deseret  National  Bank  and  of 
the  First  National  Bank  of  Ogden,  of 
both  of  which  ho  was  president  at  the 
time  of  his  death.  The  disease  which 
terminated  his  life  was  a  lung  trouble, 
from  which  he  suffered  a  number  of 
years.  He  died  at  his  residence  in 
Salt  Lake  City  Sept.  6,  1888.  Horace 
S.  Eldredge  was  a  man  of  magnificent 
physique.  He  was  fully  six  feet  in 
height,  broadshouldered  and  compact- 
ly built.  He  had  a  fine  countenance, 
the  forehead  being  broad  and  high  and 
the  features  of  exquisite  mould.  His 
eye  was  clear  and  impressive,  and  his 
whole  appearance  expressive.  His  voice 
was    peculiar,    being    remarkable    reso- 


nant. When  he  made  up  his  mind 
upon  any  matter,  he  could  scarcely  be 
moved:  and  he  generally  took  an  un- 
equivocal stand  upon  every  point  of 
importance  with  which  he  had  to  deal, 
so  that  there  was  never  any  reason 
for  doubt  as  to  where  he  stood  He 
had  great  native  force,  was  strikingly 
straightforward  in  his  utterances  and 
had  the  most  unqualified  contempt  for 
every  species  of  trickery,  to  which  he 
never  resorted  in  his  financial  affairs. 
(For  a  more  detailed  life  sketch  see 
History  of  Salt  Lake  City,  by  Edward 
W.  Tullidge,  sup.  p.  65.) 

GATES,  Jacob,  one  of  the  First 
Seven  Presidents  of  Seventies  from  1862 
lo  1892,  was  the  son  of  Thomas  Gates 
and  Patty  Plumbly,  and  was  born  May 
9,  1811,  in  St.  Johnsbury, Caledonia  coun- 
ty, Vermont.  His  father  was  a  farmer, 
and  during  the  early  period  of  Brother 
Gates'  life  he  worked  on  the  farm.  He 
also  worked  at  the  carpenter  and  joiner 
trade,  and  his  education  was  confined 
to  a  limited  period  of  time.  He  mar- 
ried Millie  M.  Snow,  daughter  of  Levi 
Snow  and  Lucinia  Streeter,  March  16, 
1S33.  He  was  baptized  by  Orson  Pratt 
June  18,  1833,  and  confirmed  a  member 
of  the  Church  the  same  day  by  Zerub- 
babel  Snow.  April  11,  1834,  with  his 
young  wife,  he  left  his  father's  house 
for  Missouri,  where  he  arrived  June 
30,  1834,  and  located  seven  miles  west 
of  Liberty,  Clay  county,  which  was 
quite  a  small  village  at  that  time. 
While  here  Brother  Gates  was  invited 
to  go  with  Caleb  Baldwin  upon  a  mis- 
sion, on  which  he  left  Jan.  25,  1836.  At 
Flat  Branch,  Sangamon  county.  111., 
on  Feb.  18,  1836,  he  was  ordained  an 
Elder  in  the  Church  under  the  hands  of 
Elder  Baldwin,  and  on  the  25th  of  the 
same  month  he  left  Edgar  county.  111., 
to  return  .home  to  Clay  county,  in  com- 
pany with  32  souls,  who  chose  Elder 
Gates  as  their  captain.  In  the  fall  of 
1836  Elder  Gates  moved  to  Caldwell 
county.  Mo.,  a  distance  of  about  fifty 
miles,  where  he  was  ordained  a  Seven- 
ty under  the  hands  of  the  Prophet  Jo- 
seph Smith  and  Sidney  Rigdon,  Dec. 
19,  1838.  In  the  same  fall  (1838)  he  had 
been  compelled  to  march  under  a  large 
military  escort,  in  company  with  some 
fifty-seven  other  brethren,  a  distance 
of  about  forty  miles,  to  Richmond,  Ray 
county,  to  which  place  Joseph  and  Hy- 
rum   Smith   had   also   been   taken   from 


198 


LATTER-DAY    SAINT 


Far  West.      Elder  Gates'  journal  says: 
"It  was  here  that  we  were  tried  for  all 
the   capital    crimes,     save     one,    before 
Judge  Austin  A.  King,  and  we  were  im- 
prisoned some  three  weeks.    Finally  we 
went    each   other's    bail    and    were    re- 
leased, when  we  left     for  Quincy,  Illi- 
nois."     Not  long  after  this  Elder  Gates 
went  to  Hancock  county  and  received 
a  commission  as  ensign  in  a  company 
of   militia.       The   same    month    he    left 
home  in  company  with   Chandler  Hol- 
brook  to  preach  the  gospel,  going  as  far 
east  as  Kirtland,  Ohio,  and  Clay  coun- 
ty, Mo.,  and  in  the  fall  returned  home. 
In   company  with     Wm.     Snow  he  left 
Nauvoo,   July    7,   1843,   on  a  mission   to 
La  Porte,   in  the  northern   part  of  In- 
diana, and   in  the  fall  of  1841  he  went 
south  into  Marshall  county  and  organ- 
ized a  branch  of  the  Church;   a  goodly 
number  were  baptized.       In  June,  1843, 
he  again  left  home  for  a  mission  to  the 
New  England  States,  and  before  going 
he  met.  the  Prophet  Joseph.  His  health 
was  feeble,   but  the  Prophet  said:    "Go 
and  fill  your  mission,  and  we  will  wres- 
tle after  you  come  back."  The  Prophet 
and    Elder    Gates    would    often    engage 
in  the  game  for  exercise.      When  Elder 
Gates  returned  home  from  his  mission, 
May  26,  1844,  he  saw  the  Prophet  for  the 
last  time,  a  little  distance  from  him,  on 
his  horse,  going  to  his  martyrdom.    At 
the    October    conference,    1844,    he    was 
ordained  and  set  apart  senior  president 
of  the  fourth  quorum  of  Seventies,  un- 
der the  hands  of  Parley  P.  and  Orson 
Pratt.     In  the  autumn  of  184V  he  came 
to  Utah,   and  in   the  fall  conference  of 
1849  he  was  apopinted,  with  several  oth- 
ers, to  take  a  mission  to  England.     He 
left   Salt    Lake    City   Oct.    19,    1849,    and 
embarked    at     New      Orleans    on     the 
steamer     "Maine,"      which     arrived    in 
Liverpool   April   6.   18.i0.      While  on   this 
mission,  which  lasted  three  years.  Elder 
Gates  filled  several  important  positions 
In  presiding  over  different   divisions  of 
the    British    mission,    and    many    were 
added    to    the    Church.      On    his    return 
home  he  was  appointed  to  take  charge 
of  a  company  of  Saints  which  he  suc- 
cessfully brought  across  the  plains,  ar- 
riving in  Salt   Lake  City  Sept.  30,  1853. 
During  the  following  few  years  he  trav- 
eled throughout   Utah,   assisting  in   the 
organization    of    the    different    quorums 
of  Seventy.     In   1859  he   was  called   on 
another  mission  to  Europe.    To  fill  it  he 
left    Utah    Sept.    19,    1859,    and    reached 


Liverpool  on  the  13th  day  of  December, 
Soon  after  his  arrival  there  he  received 
a    letter    from    Prest.    Brigham    Young, 
informing  him  that  he  had  been  select- 
ed as  one  of  the  First  Council  of  Sev- 
enties.     While    upon    this    mission    he 
traveled  with  Apostles  Amassa  M.   Ly- 
man and   Charles  C.   Rich.     In   1861   he 
returned  home;   on  his  way  he  stopped 
at   the  different  points  and  assisted   in 
the     outfitting    work    of    companies    of 
Saints  about  to  cross  the  plains.    At  the 
October    conference,    1862,    he    was    or- 
dained a  member  of  the   First  Council 
of     Seventies.       While     living     in     St. 
George,  Washington  county,   he  served 
as   a   member  of   the  county   court   for 
several   years.     He   was  also   elected   a 
member  of  the  house  of  representatives 
of  the  legislative  assembly  of  the  Terri- 
tory to  represent  the  district  composed 
of     the     counties     of     Washington  and 
Kane.       He       was       re-elected       three 
times     to     the     same     officer,     namely, 
in  the  years  1864,  1865,  1866  and  1867.    He 
was     also     elected     a     member     of  the 
council   of   the   legislative    assembly    in 
1873,  to  represent  the  district  composed 
of  the  counties  of  Kane  and  Washing- 
ton.     May   12,    1866,    he   was   appointed 
brigade  aid-de-camp.   First  Brigade  of 
the  Nauvoo  Legion  Militia  of  Utah,   in 
Iron  military  district,  with  the  rank  of 
colonel  of  infantry.     After  a  well  spent 
life  Elder  Gates  died  at  his  residence  in 
Provo,    Utah    county,    Utah,    April    14, 
1892,  as  a  true  and  faithful  Latter-day 
Saint. 

VAN  COTT,  John,  one  of  the  First 
Seven  Presidents  of  Seventies  from  1862 
to  1883,  was  born  Sept.  7,  1814,  in 
Canaan,  Columbia  county.  New  York, 
and  embraced  the  fulness  of  the  gospel 
under  the  administration  of  Parlej'  P. 
Pratt  at  Nauvoo,  111.,  in  September, 
1845.  He  was  ordained  a  Seventy  Feb. 
25,  1847,  by  Joseph  Young,  and  was  one 
of  the  early  pioneers  of  Utah,  arriving 
in  Great  Salt  Lake  valley  Sept.  25,  1847. 
In  1852,  agreeable  to  call,  he  went  on  a 
mission  to  Europe,  and  after  reaching 
England,  he  was  sent  to  Scandinavia 
to  succeced  the  late  Willard  Snow  in 
the  presidency  of  the  Scandinavian 
mission.  He  presided  in  that  capacity 
nearly  four  years,  and  returned  to  his 
mountain  home  in  1856,  after  a  most 
successful  ministry.  In  18.59  he  was 
called  on  a  second  mission  to  Scan- 
dinavia,   and    again    presided   over   the 


BIOGRAPHICAL,    ENCYCLOPEDIA. 


199 


mission,  this  time  about  two  and  a  half 
years.  He  returned  home  in  1862.  On 
these  two  missions  he  became  very 
much  endeared  to  the  Scandinavian 
Saints,  whose  sterling  qualities  and  in- 
tegrity he  learned  to  appreciate.  He 
also  acquired  the  Danish  language  to 
a  considerable  degree  of  perfection. 
After  his  return  home  from  his  second 
foreign  mission,  he  was  chosen  as  one 
of  the  First  Seven  Presidents  of  Sev- 
enties, being  first  sustained  in  that 
capacity  at  the  October  conference, 
1862.  Soon  afterwards  he  was  called 
on  a  special  mission  to  the  Scandina- 
vian Saints  in  Utah,  and  while  laboring 
in   that  calling  made  his  home   tempo- 


rarily in  Sanpete  county.  He  continued 
his  labors  among  the  Seventies  with 
zeal  and  fidelity  until  his  death,  which 
occurred  at  his  home  a  short  distance 
south  of  Salt  Lake  City,  Feb.  18,  1883, 
after  a  lingering  illness  of  several 
months.  In  an  obituary  notice  published 
in  the  "Deseret  News,"  the  editor  of 
that  paper  says:  "It  would  be  difficult 
to  find  a  more  exemplary  or  conscien- 
tious man  than  Brother  Van  Cott.  He 
was  a  good  man  in  the  broad  sense,  not 
negatively  so,  but  as  a  producer  of  the 
good  fruits  of  a  well  spent  life.  He  was 
one  of  those  whose  character  and  mo- 
tives appeared  so  far  beyond  reproach 
that  we  doubt  if  they  have  ever  been 
the  subject  of  even  suspicion.  *  *  • 
At  home  and  abroad,  whenever  Brother 
Van   Cott     sojourned,   he   was  regarded 


with  esteem  and  regard,  his  very  pres- 
ence and  appearance  inspiring  senti- 
ments of  that  nature." 

TAYIiOli,  William  AVhittakrr.  one 

of  the  First  Seven  Presidents  of  all  the 
Seventies  fiom  1880  to  1884,  was 
the  son  of  President  John  Taylor,  and 
Harriet  Whittaker,  and  was  born  Sept. 
11,  1853,  in  Salt  Lake  City,  Utah.  With 
the  exception  of  the  time  spent  on  a 
mission  to  Great  Britain,  he  resided  in 
the  Fourteenth  ward  (where  he  was 
born)  constantly  from  birth  to  death. 
After  leaving  school  he  obtained  em- 
ployment in  the  manufacturing  estab- 
lishment of  Messrs.  Folsom,  Romney 
&  Taylor,  and  succeeded  in  obtaining 
considerable  knowledge  of  the  busi- 
ness and  of  the  carpenter's  trade  before 
he  was  called  on  a  mission  to  Europe. 
While  yet  a  youth  he  became  a  Teacher 
in  the  Ward  and  in  the  Sunday  School, 
where  he  lived,  performing  the  duties 
of  each  to  the  entire  satisfaction  of  his 
superiors.  Though  naturally  of  a  se- 
date turn  of  mind,  religiously  inclined, 
and  free  from  all  levity,  he  had  a  keen 
sense  of  humor  and  could  appreciate 
pleasantry  with  great  enjoyment.  A 
little  incident  is  related  by  an  intimate 
friend  which  fully  exemplifies  his  high 
sense  of  probity  and  honor.  When  a 
mere  boy  he,  with  a  companion,  went  to 
the  old  adobe  yard,  where  a  skating 
pond  had  been  prepared,  for  entering 
which  a  charge  of  25  cents  was  made. 
William  and  his  friend  were  anxious 
to  get  on  the  pond  to  skate,  but  tltey 
had  no  money.  They  succeeded,  how- 
ever, without  the  knowledge  of  the 
proprietor,  in  effecting  an  entrance. 
When  William  thought  of  what  he  had 
done,  he  felt  condemned,  and  to  satisfy 
his  conscience  resolved  to  repay  the 
man  with  the  first  money  he  could 
earn.  In  course  of  time  he  earned  a 
dollar,  and  he  immediately  took  it  to 
him  and  insisted  upon  his  taking  a 
four-fold  payment  for  the  wrong  he 
had  done  him.  At  the  April  confer- 
ence, 1875,  he  was  called  on  a  mission 
to  Great  Britain;  he  was  ordained  a 
Seventy  and  set  apart  for  that  mission 
Oct.  11,  1875,  by  Orson  Pratt,  and  on 
the  26th  of  the  same  month,  he  took 
his  departure.  He  returned  home  Oct. 
16,  1877,  bringing  with  him  the  love  and 
confidence  of  the  Elders  and  Saints 
with  and  among  whom  he  labored.     He 


200 


LATTER-DAY    SAINT 


filled  his  mission  to  England  with  that 
zeal  and  fidelity  which  were  character- 
istic of  him  in  all  his  labors.  Shortly 
after  his  return,  at  a  meeting  of  the 
Priesthood  of  the  Salt  Lake  Stake  of 
Zion.  held  Nov.  3.  1877,  he  was  chosen 
as  Stake  clerk  and  clerk  of  the  High 
Council.  This  position  he  filled  till  the 
time  of  his  death.  He  was  a  sample 
clerk,  possessing  the  rare  faculty  of 
seizing  all  the  salient  points  of  th. 
case  under  discussion  and  presenting 
them  in  a  terse  and  condensed  form. 
No  one  could  fail,  after  reading  his 
minutes,  to  get  a  clear  conception  of 
every  point  involved  and  the  arguments 
of  both  sides,  and  it  was  rarely  they 
had  to  be  corrected.  At  the  death  of 
Albert  P.  Rockwood.  the  question  arose 
as  to  who  should  be  appointed  to  fill  the 
vacancy  made  by  his  departure  in  the 
First  Cnuncil  of  Se\entie«.  The  i)ie'-i- 
dents  in  attendance  at  a  certain  meet- 
ing mentinned  various  names,  and  as 
they  did  not  readily  unite  upon  any  one. 
President  Joseph  Young,  who  had  fa- 
vored the  selection  of  Wm.  W.  Taylor 
for  the  position,  suggested  that  all  the 
names  be  written  on  separate  slips  of 
paper  and  be  placed  in  a  box.  and  that 
one  of  the  brethren  should  draw  each 
slip  separately,  while  he  should  sit 
with  his  back  to  the  box:  and  when  the 
slip  should  be  drawn  that  the  spirit  in- 
dicated held  the  name  that  should  be 
selected,  he  would  mention  it.  Seymour 
B.  Young  drew  the  slips  without,  of 
course,  giving  any  indication  as  to  the 
name  written  upon  each.  One  slip  was 
drawn.  The  response  from  President 
Joseph  Young  was  "Go  on."  Another 
was  drawn,  with  the  same  response.  A 
third  was  drawn,  and  Brother  Seymour 
B.  Young  was  told  he  need  not  draw 
any  more,  for  that  was  the  right  one. 
An  examination  of  the  paper  disclosed 
the  name  of  Wm.  W.  Taylor,  and  those 
present  agreed  to  his  nomination,  and 
it  was  afterwards  agreed  to  by  all  the 
authorities  and  sustained  at  the  gen- 
eral conference.  Consequently,  Elder 
Taylor  was  ordained  and  set  apart  as 
one  of  the  First  Seven  Presidents  of 
Seventies.  After  the  settlements  of  the 
Saints  had  become  numerous  and  wide- 
spread in  the  mountains,  the  organiza- 
tion of  the  several  quorums  of  Seven- 
ties, which  had  been  effected  when  the 
people    were   living   in   a   limited   area, 


was  felt  to  be  unsuited  to  the  new 
condition  and  circumstances  in  which 
the  Seventies  were  placed.  When  Elder 
Taylor  took  his  place  as  one  of  the 
seven  i)residents  of  that  body,  he  de- 
voted much  thought  to  the  subject,  and 
to  the  best  method  of  correcting  the 
inconveniences  which  arose,  from  hav- 
ing the  members  of  the  different  quo- 
rums li\ing  so  wide  apart  and  scattered 
among  the  different  Stakes.  President 
John  Tayloi-"s  attention  having  al.so 
Ijeen  drawn  to  the  subject,  he  i-eceived 
a  revelation,  in  which  instruction  was 
given  in  regard  to  the  proper  method 
of  reoi-ganizing  the  Seventies.  None 
were  moie  delighted  by  this  wm-d  of  the 
Lord  than  Wm.  W.  Taylor.  He  took 
hold  of  the  labor  with  the  utmost  ear- 
nestness and  zeal,  and  scarcely  a  Sun- 
day passed  after  the  revelation  was 
i-eeeived  that  he  was  not  engaged  in 
some  of  the  Stakes,  giving  the  Seven- 
ties instructions  and  helping  them  to 
pei'fect  the  organization  upon  the  plan 
su.ggested  by  the  I>ord.  The  devotion 
and  wisdom  which  he  exhibited  in  his 
labor  called  forth  the  praise  of  the 
l)residing  authorities  and  the  admira- 
tion of  his  fellow  servants  of  the  Sev- 
enties. At  the  general  election  for 
members  of  the  legislative  assembly  of 
Utah,  in  1SS3,  he  was  elected  a  member 
of  the  council,  and  in  him  his  constitu- 
ents felt  they  had  a  representative  who 
could  be  trusted  to  stand  by  and  de- 
fend their  rights  and  interest  to  the 
utmost  extremity.  He  never  faltered 
in  the  discharge  of  his  duty,  and  was 
inflexible  in  demanding  for  the  people 
every  right  which  belonged  to  free  men. 
In  February.  1884,  he  was  elected  as- 
sessor and  collector  of  taxes  for  Salt 
Lake  City,  to  which  ofl^ce  he  devoted 
himself  with  assiduity  and  energy.  In 
the  evening  of  Saturday,  July  26,  1884, 
he  was  attacked  with  bilious  colic, 
which  caused  his  death  Friday  morn- 
ing, Aug.  1,  1884,  in  Salt  Lake  City.  (See 
also  "Deseret  News,"  Vol.  33  (weekly), 
p.  470.) 

YOUNG,     Seymour  Bicknell,  one   of 

the  First  Seven  Presidents  of  all  the 
Seventies  since  1882,  is  the  son  of  Jo- 
seph Young  and  Jane  A.  Bicknell.  and 
was  born  in  Kirtland,  Geuaga  (now 
Lake)  county,  Ohio,  Oct.  3,  1837.  Ho 
was  carried   through   a   rain   of  bullets 


BIOGRAPHICAL    ENCYCLOPEDIA. 


201 


in  his  mother's  arms  at  the  massacre 
at  Haun's  Mill,  Missouri  in  1838.  He 
came  to  Nauvoo  in  1S39.  and  remained 
in  that  city  until  June,  1846,  when,  with 
his  father's  family,  he  started  for-  the 
West.  Brother  Seymour  well  remem- 
bers being  lifted  up  in  the  arms  of  his 
mother  to  obtain  a  view  of  Joseph  and 
Hyrum  as  they  passed  some  fifty  rods 
away  on  the  road  to  their  martyrdom, 
June  24,  1844.  On  the  morning  of  the 
28th.  at  five  o'clock,  their  neighbor, 
the  late  Pres.  Jacob  Gates,  awakened 
his  mother  and  her  family  of  little 
children,  and  told  them  that  the  Proph- 
et Joseph  Smith  and  his  brother  Hy- 
rum had  been  murdered  the  evening 
before  in  Carthage  jail.  Seymour  well 
remembers  the  sorrow  of  the  Latter- 
day  Saints  at  the  awful  event,  and 
the  scenes  of  grief  at  the  funeral  and 
burial  of  these  two  great  leaders.  Dur- 
ing the  month  of  February,  1846,  Pres- 
idents Brigham  Young  and  Heber  C. 
Kimball  and  others,  with  their  fam- 
ilies, left  the  city  of  Nauvoo,  crossed 
the  Mississippi  river  on  the  ice,  and 
started  west,  bidding  adieu  to  their 
loved  city  and  Temple,  w^ell  knowing 
they  would  never  see  them  again.  As 
soon  as  his  father  could  complete  his 
arrangements,  which  was  not  until  the 
13th  of  June  following,  he,  with  his 
family,  took  up  their  line  of  march  to- 
wards Winter  Quarters,  arriving  tl^.eie 
late  in  the  fall,  and  overtaking  Pres. 
Young  and  brethren  who  had  preced- 
ed them.  Here  the  Saints  remained  un- 
til the  following  spring  (1847),  when 
Pres.  Brigham  Young  and  his  pioneer 
band  went  to  Great  Salt  Lake  valley. 
Seymour  B.  Young's  father  and  family, 
not  having  the  means  necessary  to  em- 
igrate in  1847,  and  not  obtaining  suf- 
ficient until  three  years  later,  remained 
in  ^\'inter  Quarters  until  the  spring  of 
1848,  when,  with  the  rest  of  the  people 
who  were  unable  to  take  up  their  long 
journey  to  the  mountains,  they  re- 
ci-^ssed  the  Missouri  river  into  the 
State  of  Iowa.  AVinter  Quarters  was 
then  in  the  Indian  Territory  and  res- 
ervation, and  hence  the  Saints  were 
compelled  to  vacate  this  temporary 
abiding  place  and  seek  new  homes  in 
the  State  of  Iowa.  During  the  stay 
of  his  father's  family  for  the  three  in- 
tervening years.  Brother  Seymour  was 
baptized  in  1848,  at  Carterville,  Iowa, 
by  Ezekiel  Lee:  he  also  Pinined  his  first 


experience  as  a  cowboy,  and  like  oth- 
ers of  his  brethren  was  exposed  to  the 
raids  of  hostile  Indians  and  white  cat- 
tle thieves.  About  the  middle  of  June 
his  father's  family  bid  good-bye  to 
their  home  in  Pottawattamie  county, 
Iowa,  and  started  for  the  Valley.  Un 
the  Platte  river  the  camp  was  stricken 
with  that  terrible  scourge,  the  Asiatic 
cholera,  and  within  twenty-four  hours 
two  of  the  strongerst  men  lay  dead 
and  a  third  was  down  writhing  and 
screaming  with  pain  from  the  awful 
spasms  and  cramps  of  the  disease.  At 
this  time  was  witnessed  the  power  of 
God  in  restoring  this  third  victim  of 
the  disease,  for  by  his  request  Pres. 
Joseph  Young  administered  to  him,  and 
he    was   instantly   healed.     The   famil> 


arrived  in  Salt  Lake  City,  Sept.  29, 
1:^50,  and  were  \\armly  welcomed  by 
Pres.  Young  and  his  brethren.  In  the 
fall  of  1854  Brother  Seymour  B.  went 
with  a  party  of  men  sent  out  by  Pres. 
Brigham  Young  under  the  direction  of 
Elder  Bryant  Stringham  and  settled 
Cache  valley;  he  helped  to  build  the 
first  house  and  establish  the  first  col- 
ony in  that  region.  He  was  ordained 
a  Seventy  Feb.  18,  1857,  by  Edmund 
Ellsworth.  In  1857  Pres.  Young  calLd 
seventy-two  missionaries  for  Europe, 
the  United  States  and  Canada,  with 
ihe  request  that  this  company  of  mis- 
sionaries should  travel  with  hand  carts 
from  Salt  Lake  City  to  the  Missouri 
river.  This  they  did,  not  having  any 
teams  or  wagons  in   the  company,  but 


202 


LATTER-DAY    SAINT 


drawing    their   carts,    laden    with    their 
provisions,    bedding,      etc.,      over      the 
mountains    and    across    the    plains    to 
Old    Winter    Quarters,    now      Florence. 
Nebraska,   a  distance     of     105a     miles. 
Brother  Seymour  B.   was  one  of  these 
missionaries,  and  the  youngest  menib<^r 
of  the   company.     Brother  Young  pio- 
ceeded    with    others    to    Great    Britain, 
where   he   labored   as   a   missionary   in 
Yorkshire    and    Lincolnshire    until    the 
spring    of    1858,    when    he,    with    other 
missionaries,   was   called   home  on   ac- 
count   of    the    "Utah    war."        In      1862 
Pres.  Abraham  Lincoln  telegraphed   to 
Pres.  Brigham  Young  to  furnish  a  bat- 
talion of  one  hundred  and  five  men  to 
enlist  as  United   States  soldiers  in  the 
service  of  the  United  States,  to  be  sent 
east  on  the  plains  to  protect  the  over- 
land mail  and  telegraph  lines  between 
the  Missouri  river  on  the  east  and  San 
Francisco   on   the   west.     Elder   Young 
was  in  this  battalion  and  remained  in 
the  service  until  March,  186.3,  when  the 
company     was     honorably     discharged 
and   paid   in   greenbacks  at   par,   when 
they    were   only   worth    forty   cents   on 
the  dollar.     When  the  Black  Hewk  war 
broke    out    in    Sanpete   county   and    on 
the    Sevier    river,     Pres.     Young     sent 
many    small    companies    to    assist    the 
brethren    and    protect    them    from    the 
rifle  and  scalping  knife  of  the  Indians. 
The  subject  of  this  sketch  was  in  this 
service  during  1866.    In  1868  he  engaged 
in^  railroad  building,  working  on  a  con- 
tract   of    Brigham    Young,      jun.,    and 
George  Crismon,  in  procuring  ties  and 
bridge    timber    for    the    Union    Pacific 
Railroad    Company.     In     1869    he   con- 
tracted with  the  Utah  Central  Railway 
Company  and  built  a  mile  of  grade  and 
furnished   ties    therefor,    near   the    Hot 
Springs,   north  of   Salt  Lake   City.     In 
1870   he   was   called    by   Pres.    Brigham 
Young    to    take    a    second    mission    tO 
Great  Britain,  this  time  to  accompany 
his  father,  the  late  Pres.  Joseph  Young, 
to    that    field    of    labor,    in    conformity 
with  a  prediction  made  to  him  by  the 
Prophet  Joseph  Smith  at  the  time  that 
Elders   Brigham   Young  and   Heber   C. 
Kimball  were  called  to  their  first  mis- 
sion to  England,  that  at  some  time  in 
the     future      Brother     Joseph     Young 
should  take  a  mission  to  Great  Britain. 
This   visit    to- the    British    Mission    oc- 
cupied  about   six    months,    and   during 
their  absence  the  conferences  through- 


out  England  and   Scotland   were  visit- 
ed, and  visits  were  also  made  through 
portions  of  New  York  State  and  Ohio; 
Brother    Joseph    Young    visiting    rela- 
tives    and     familiar    places     of    n\any 
years   previous.     In   1871,   after    having 
studied  the  theory  and  practice  of  med- 
icine  and    surgery   for   ten   years   with 
Dr.    W.    F.    Anderson    first,    then    with 
the  Doctors  Benedict,   h'^   matriculated 
in  October  of  that  year  at  the  Univei- 
sity  Medical  College  of  New  York,  and 
in  March,  1874,  received  his  diploma  as 
a  medical  and  surgical  graduate  from 
that   famous   institution.     He  returned 
home  early  in  the  spring  of  1874.  hung 
out  his  sign   of  M.   D.    in  front  of   the 
old  Seventies'  Hall  on  State  Street,  on 
the  spot  where  the  new  building  of  the 
Co-op.    Wagon    &    Machine    Company 
now    stands.      Soon   after     he     became 
quarantine  and   city   physician  of  Salt 
Lake  City,   and  a  little  later,   by  invi- 
tation   of    Pres.    Brigham    Young,    be- 
came   his    physician    and    medical    ad- 
viser,   which    position    he      held      unlil 
Pres.    Young's   death,    August   29,    1SV7. 
Elder  Young  continued  in  active  prac- 
tice   as    surgeon    and    physician    until 
1882.     On  October  14th  of  that  year  he 
was  called  by  revelation  through  Pres. 
John    Taylor    to    be    one    of    the    First 
Seven  Presidents  of  Seventies;   and   in 
eleven  years  from  that  time,  by  reason 
of  the  death  or  promotion  to  the  Coun- 
cil   of    the    Apostles    of   his    seniors    in 
that   quorum,   be   became,    in   1893,   the 
senior  president  of  that  council.     Since 
his  call  to  this  responsible  position,  his 
time  has  been  spent  visiting  as  a  teach- 
er and  missonary  nearly  all  the  Stakes 
of    Zon,    generally    in    company      with 
some   of   the    Twelve    and   occasionally 
with   the  First  Presidency,   and   some- 
times alone,  going  far  and  near  to  all 
the  conferences  to  which  he  has  been 
appointed  by  his  presiding  officers;   on 
these  visits  he  has  often  ministered  to 
the  sick,  the  wounded  and  the  afflicted, 
not  only  in  the  ordinances  of  the  gos- 
pel,     but     surgically     and     medically, 
bringing   reliet   to  numerous   sufferers, 
to  which  many  have  testified.     In  con- 
nection with  the  above  named  labors, 
he  was  called  to  be  an  aid  to  the  Des- 
eret  Sunday  School   Union  Board,   and 
finally,    a    few    months    since,    he    was 
chosen  a  member  of  that  Board.     (See 
also   "Juvenile   Instructor,'    Vol.   37,    p. 
225.) 


BIOGRAPHICAL    ENCYCLOPEDIA. 


203 


P.JKIj1>STKD,      <  .iristiaa      Daniel, 

one  of  the  First  Seven  Presidents  of 
Seventies  since  li>S4,  was  born  Feb.  20, 
1829,  in  Sundbyvester,  a  suburb  of 
Copenhagen,  Denmark.  His  parents 
moved  in  the  humbler  walks  of  life, 
and  belonged  to  the  respectable  work- 
ing class.  Thus  the  subject  of  this 
sketch  was  taught  early  in  life  to  work 
for  a  livelihood,  and  he  learned  the 
trade  of  a  moulder.  After  the  death 
of  his  father,  he  was  obliged,  though 
only  ten  years  old,  to  do  all  he  could 
toward  supporting  his  mother.  At  the 
age  of  twenty  he  married  a  wife,  and 
in  1851  he  first  heard  the  glorious  truths 
of  the  gospel  preached;  for  it  had  been 
brought  to  Denmark  the  year  before 
through  the  instrumentality  of  Apoo- 
tle  Erastus  Snow  and  his  fellow-mis- 
sionaries. Brother  Fjeldsted  believed 
and  was  baptized,  together  with  his 
young  wife,  on  February  20,  1852,  by 
Christian  Samuel  Hansen,  and  confirm- 
ed by  Ole  N.  C.  Monster.  Soon  after- 
wards Brother  P^jeldsted  began  to 
preach  and  bear  testimony  to  his  fel- 
low-workmen, as  he  felt  anxious  that 
they  should  enjoy  the  same  blessings 
that  he  had  become  a  partaker  of.  As 
soon  as  his  employer  heard  of  this  he 
dismissed  him  from  his  service  one 
cold  winter  day,  which  virtually  meant 
that  he  was  turned  into  the  street 
without  a  penny  for  the  support  of  him- 
self and  family.  After  a  short  tiuif., 
however,  he  obtained  other  employ- 
ment. Not  long  after  his  baptism  he 
was  ordained  to  the  Priesthood  and 
appointed  to  preside  over  a  district  on 
the  island  of  Amager;  he  then  held 
weekly  meetings  in  his  home.  On  Sun- 
days he  usually  performed  missionaiy 
work  in  the  neighboring  towns  and 
villages.  July  25,  1853,  he  was  ordained 
an  Elder  by  Peter  O.  Hansen,  and  in 
the  fall  of  1855  he  was  called  to  labor 
as  a  traveling  Elder  in  the  Copen- 
hagen conference.  After  working  in 
that  capacity  for  about  one  year  he 
was  appointed  to  preside  over  the  Aal- 
borg  conference.  In  this  calling  he 
was  signally  blessed,  and  hundreds  of 
people  identified  themselves  with  the 
Church  during  his  two  years'  presi- 
dency. In  1858  he  emigrated  wjth  his 
family  to  Utah,  arriving  in  Salt  Lake 
City  in  Octobef-  of  that  year.  He  made 
his  home  in  the  Sugar  House  Ward, 
where  he  took  an  active  part  in  Church 
affairs  and  also  performed  much  haid 


manual  labor  in  order  to  support  himself 
and  family.  He  was  ordained  a  Sev- 
enty, Feb.  5,  1859,  by  Elder  William 
H.  Walker.  In  1867,  he  was  called  on  a 
mission  to  Scandinavia.  Accompanied 
by  other  Elders  he  crossed  the  plains 
in  an  ox  train,  and  reached  Copen- 
hagen, Denmark,  after  eight  weeks' 
travel.  During  the  first  year  of  his 
mission  he  presided  over  the  Aalboig 
conference;  later  he  labored  as  a  trav- 
eling Elder  in  the  Scandinavian  mis- 
sion, and  finally  was  appointed  to  take 
charge  of  the  Christiania  conference, 
Norway.  Being  honorably  rejeased,  he 
leturned  home  in  1870.  Two  years  later 
he  was  called  to  labor  as  a  missionary 


among  the  Scandinavian  Saints  in  the 
northern  counties  of  Utah,  and  he  lo- 
cated at  Logan,  Cache  county,  which  is 
still  his  home..  In  1881  he  was  called 
by  Pres.  John  Taylor  to  take  another 
mission  to  Scandinavia,  this  time  to 
preside  over  the  mission.  He  occupied 
this  position  about  two  years  and  a 
half,  and  after  his  return  home  in  1884, 
he  was  ordained  one  of  the  First  Seven 
Presidents  of  Seventies  by  Pres.  Wil- 
ford  Woodruff.  This  ordination  took 
place  April  28,  1884.  In  1886  he  was 
called  on  another  mission  to  Scandina- 
via, when  he  labored  as  a  traveling  El- 
der in  the  Scandinavian  mission  for 
two  years,  and  then  succeeeded  Elder 
Nils  C.  Flygare,  in  the  presidency  of 
the  mission.  After  an  absence  of  four 
years  he  returned  to  his  mountain 
home  in  1890,  and  resumed  his  laborf 
among   the   Seventies.     In   the      spring 


204 


LATTER-DAY  SAINT 


of  IS'jT  he  was  called  on  a  special  mis- 
sion to  Chicago,  where  he  assisted  in 
the  raising  up  of  a  branch  of  the 
Church,  consisting  largely  of  Scandi- 
navians, lie  returned  to  Utah  in  the 
fall  of  the  same  year.  In  the  begin- 
ning of  AiJril,  lyOl.  he  left  his  home  on 
still  another  mission  to  Scandinavia. 
Fres.  Fjeldsted  is  universally  loved  and 
respected  by  all  who  know  him.  Es- 
pecially is  this  the  case  with  the  Scan- 
dnavian  :?aints,  in  whose  interest  he 
has  devoted  nearly  his  entire  life.  IIis 
affable  manner  and  pleasant,  genial 
nature  has  paved  his  way  to  the  hearts 
of  the  people,  both  Saints  and  stran- 
gers, and  now  toward  the  evening  of 
his  earthly  career  he  certainly  has  the 
satisfaction  of  knowing  that  his  life's 
labor  has  been  a  success,  and  that  his 
efforts  have  been  appreciated.  His  un- 
tiring devotion  to  his  Master's  cause 
has  classed  him  among  God's  noble- 
men, and  as  long  as  the  knowledge 
of  the  great  missionary  work  done  by 
the  Latter-day  Saint  Elders  in  the 
nineteenth  century  shall  be  remem- 
bered and  remain  matters  of  record, 
the  name  of  Elder  Christian  Daniel 
Fjeldsted  will  be  had  in  honorable  re- 
membrance as  one  of  the  most  energet- 
ic and  faithful  among  them. 

MORGAN,  John,    one   of   the     First 
Seven  Presidents  of  Seventies  from  1884 
to   1894,    was   the   son   of   Gerrard   Mor- 
gan and  Ann  Eliza  Hamilton,  and  was 
born  Aug.  8,  1842,  at  Greensburg,  Deca- 
tur county,   Indiana.       During  the  war 
of  the  Rebellion,  which  broke  out  when 
he  was  eighteen  years  of  age,  he  joined 
the  Union  army,  and  served  with  honor 
and  distinction,  participating  in  several 
of  the  most  important  battles.       Com- 
ing  to   Utah  at   the   close   of   the   war, 
he  was  soon  engaged  as  an  instructor 
in    the    University,    when    that    institu- 
tion   was   conducted     in     the     Council 
House,    Salt   Lake   City.     Later,   he  es- 
tablished the  Morgan  Commercial  Col- 
lege on  First  South  street,  in  a  build- 
ing located  where  the  Morgan  hotel  now 
stands.       Having  become  converted   to 
"Mormonism,"     he     was     baptized     by 
Robert  Campbell  Nov.  26,  1867,   in  Salt 
Lc;ke   City,   and   ordained   an   Elder  by 
Wm.   H.   Folsom  Oct.  23,   1868.       In  1875 
he  responded  to  a  call  as  a  missionary 
to  the  Southern  States,  which  he  filled 
with    ability     and     zeal,    and    returned 
home  in  December.  1877.       Prior  to  his 


departure  on  this  mission  he  was  or- 
dained a  Seventy,  Oct.  8,  1875,  by  Jo- 
seph Young.  In  1878  he  was  called  on 
a  second  mission  to  the  Southern 
States,  this  time  to  preside  over  the 
mission.  In  that  capacity  his  devotion 
and  energy  in  spreading  the  gospel 
made  for  him  a  bright  and  lasting  rec- 
ord. While  presiding  in  the  Southern 
Sta'tes,  he  made  frequent  visits  home. 
In  October,  1884  he  was  chosen  and  or- 
dained one  of  the  First  Seven  Presi- 
dents of  Seventies,  to  fill  a  vacancy 
caused  by  the  death  of  Wm.  W.  Taylor. 
In  this  high  and  holy  calling  he  labored 
with  diligence  and  faithfulness  up  to 
ihe  time  of  his  last  sickness,  and  trav- 
eled very  extensively  among  the  Saints 
in     the    different    Stakes  of  Zion.       He 


also  served  as  a  member  of  the  Utah 
legislature  and  held  other-  positions  of 
importance  in  the  community.  He  be- 
came somewhat  involved  financially, 
over  which  he  seemed  to  worry  a  great 
deal,  and  he  was  stricken  with  ty- 
phoid-malaria, which  culminated  in  his 
death  Aug.  14,  1894,  at  Preston,  Oneida 
county,  Idaho.  His  body  was  brought 
to  Salt  Lake  City  for  burial.  "Elder 
Morgan  was  a  man  of  strict  probity 
and  honor,"  writes  the  editor  of  the 
"Deseret  News"  in  an  obituary.  "Pos- 
sessed of  keen  intellectual  power  and 
marked  personal  courage,  he  was  an 
able,  fearless  expounder  of  gospel 
truths;  espsciaKy  were  these  virtues  ex- 
hibited   during   his    long    presidency    of 


BIOGRAPHICAL.    ENCYCLOPEDIA. 


205 


the  Southern  States  Mission,  at  a  time 
when  in  that  section  of  the  country  the 
feeling  was  high  against  the  Latter- 
day  Saints.  His  ministrations  were  at- 
tended with  power  and  to  the  last  his 
energies  were  earnestly  devoted  to  the 
cause  of  truth  which  he  had  expoused. 
He  has  done  much  traveling  and 
preaching  among  the  Saints  during  the 
closing  years  of  his  life.  In  his  death 
a  true  and  good  man  has  been  called 
away,  and  the  hearts  of  all  Israel  will 
be  bowed  in  sorrow  with  his  family 
at  the  departure  from  our  midst  of  a 
beloved  servant  of  God." 

ROBERTS,  Brigham  Henry,  one  of 

the  First  Seven  Presidents  of  Seven- 
ties since  1887,  was  born  March  13,  1857, 
in  Warrington,  a  manufacturing  town 
of  Lancashire.  England,  and  is  a  son  of 
Benjamin  Roberts  and  Ann  Everington. 
He  emigrated  with  his  oldest  sister  to 
L'tah  in  lSfi6  (his  mother  and  a  younger 
sister  having  emigrated  the  year  be- 
fore) and  settled  in  Davis  county.  The 
next  year  (1867)  he  was  baptized  by 
Elder  Seth  Dustin.  He  worked  as  a 
farm  hand  during  boyhood,  and  later 
for  some  years  in  the  mining  camps 
of  the  Territory.  At  seventeen  he  be- 
came an  apprentice  at  the  blacksmitli 
trade  in  Centerville,  his  present  place 
of  residence.  In  his  early  teens  he  at- 
tended the  district  schools  of  Davis 
county,  and  finally  the  Deseret  Uni- 
versity, where  he  graduated  from  the 
normal  department  in  1878.  For  some 
years  he  taught  school  and  worked  at 
his  trade,  and  finally  drifted  into  jour- 
nalism, becoming  associate,  and  for  a 
time  editor-in-chief  of  the  Salt  Lake 
"Herald."  J3ro.  Roberts  was  ordained 
a  Seventy  March  8,  1877,  by  Nathan  T. 
Porter,  one  of  the  presidents  of  the 
19th  quorum  of  Seventy.  In  1880-82 
he  filled  his  first  mission.  The  first 
nine  months  he  traveled  in  Iowa  and 
Nebraska,  the  remainder  of  the  time  he 
served  in  the  Southern  States.  He  la- 
bored principally  in  the  State  of  Ten- 
nessee, and  was  appointed  president 
of  the  Tennessee  conference  Sept.  12. 
1881.  In  his  travels  he  covered  nearly 
the  entire  State.  In  April,  1882,  the 
State  of  Tennessee  was  divided  into  two 
conferences,  East  and  West.  Richard 
R.  Camp  was  appointed  to  preside  over 
the  West  Tennessee  conference,  while 
Elder  Roberts  continued  to  preside  over 
the  East,  until  he  was  released  to  re- 
turn  home   in   June,    1882.       In    1883    he 


was  called  on  his  second  mission  to  the 
Southern  States,  being  appointed  to  the 
presidency  of  the  mission  under  the 
direction  of  Elder  .lohn  Morgan.  He 
labored  in  that  capacity  until  released 
by  a  transfer  to  the  British  Mission 
in  December,  1886.  Meantime,  in  ac- 
cordance with  the  teachings  of  the 
Church,  having  obeyed  the  doctrine  of 
plural  marriage,  in  common  with  his 
brethren,  he  became  subject  to  tho 
anti-polygamy  laws  of  Congress,  and 
in  December,  1886,  was  arrested  upon  a 
charge  of  unlawful  cohabitation,  an'l 
placed  under  bonds  of  $1,000  for  his  ap- 
pearance in  court.  It  was  thought, 
both  by  his  bondsmen  and  friends,  that 
it  would  be  better  to  forfeit  the  bond 
than  to  appear  in  court  under  the  then 
very  severe  regime  that  obtained  in 
the  administration  of  the  anti-poly- 
gamy laws.  The  very  same  day,  there- 


fore, that  he  was  arrested  he  departed 
for  England,  where,  for  nearly  two 
>ears,  he  labored  in  the  ministry,  chief- 
ly in  the  "Millennial  Star"  office  as  as- 
iii.stant'  editor.  At  that  time  thv 
apostate  Jarman  was  rampant  in  the 
conferences  of  the  English  Mission. 
challenging  the  Elders  to  public  dis- 
cussion and  defying  them  to  prove  false 
his  accusations  against  the  Church.  El- 
der Roberts  met  him  in  public  debate, 
twice  in  the  vicinity  of  Sheffield,  twice 
in  London  and  once  in  Swansea,  Wales. 
He  returned  from  his  mission  to  Eng- 
land in  the  fall  of  1888.  On  his  return 
from  England  he  was  chosen  a  mem- 
ber of  the  First  Council  of  Seventy,  t) 
fill  the  vacancy  caused  by  the  death  of 
Elder  Horace  S.  Eldiedge,  and  the  day 


206 


L.ATTER-DAT    SAINT 


following  the  close  of  the  October  con- 
.erence  of  1888,   he   was  ordained     and 
set  apart  by  Pres.  Lorenzo  Snow\     For 
some    months    after     his    return     from 
England,  he  remained  in  retirement, ow- 
ing to  the  indictment  still  hanging  over 
him,  but  in  April.   1889,  he  surrendered 
himself  to  the  court,   and  on  Wednes- 
day, May  1,  1889,   he  was  sentenced  by 
Judge  Anderson    in   the   Third    District 
Court,  sitting  in  Salt  Lake  City,  to  four 
months'    imprisonment,    and    to    pay    a 
fine  of  $200,  on  the  charge  of  unlawful 
cohabitation.       On    Tuesday.    Sept.    10, 
1889,  he  was  discharged  from  the  peni- 
tentiary, having  served  his  time  under 
the   sentence   passed   upon   him.       Pre- 
vious to  1890  Brother  Roberts  had  taken 
considerable   interest   in   Utah   politics, 
and  when  in  that  year  the   purely   lo- 
cal policy  of  the  Territory  was  aban- 
doned and   the  people  of  Utah  divided 
on   national   party   lines,   Brother  Rob- 
erts   aligned    himself    with    the    Demo- 
cratic party,  and  was  an  active  partici- 
pant in  the  campaigns  of  1892  and  1894. 
In  the  latter     year     he     was  elected  a 
member  of  the  Constitutional  Conven- 
tion  which  framed  the  organic  law  of 
the   State.       In  the  first   State  election 
(1895)  he  was  nominated  for  representa- 
tive   to   Congress     on     the   Democratic 
ticket,  but  was  defeated  with  his  party. 
He  was,  however,  elected  to  the  fifty- 
sixth  Congress,  receiving  35,296  votes  to 
29,631  for  Alma     Eldredge,   Republican, 
and  2,878  for  Warren  Foster,  Populist; 
but    by    means    altogether    unconstitu- 
tional and  unprecedented  in  the  annals 
of  the  nation  he  was  not  permitted  to 
take    the    seat   to   which    he   had    been 
duly  elected,  to  the  shame  and  disgrace 
of  the  House  of  Representatives,     who, 
cowering  before  popular  clamor,  robbed 
the  sovereign  State  of  Utah  of  its  rep- 
resentative  in   the     halls   of   Congress. 
Elder  Roberts  is  one  of  the  most  vol- 
uminous  writers   in   the   Church.       His 
works  are  historical,   biographical   and 
doctrinal,  and  consist  of  the  "Gospel,  " 
"Ecclesiastical    History,"      "New    Wit- 
ness for  God,"  "The  Life  of  John  Tay- 
lor,"    "Missouri     Persecutions,"     "The 
Rise  and  Fall  of  Nauvoo,"  "Succession 
in  the  Presidency,"  etc.     (See  also  "Ju- 
venile  Instructor,"    Vol.   34.   p.    354.) 

RKYNOLDS,     George,     one    of  the 

First  Seven  Presidents  of  Seventies 
Fince  1890.  was  born  Jan.  1,  1842,  in 
Marylebone,     London,     England.       His 


father,  George  Reynolds,  belonged  to 
Totnes,  Devonshire;  his  mother,  orig- 
inally Miss  Julia  Ann  Tautz,  was  of 
German  descent.  George's  father  was 
a  master  tailor  in  the  West  End  of 
London,  and  the  first  that  George  heard 
of  'Mormonism"  was  in  a  conversation 
among  the  workmen  who  were  sitting, 
•'tailor  fashion,"  cross  legged,  in  a  cir- 
cle round  a  large,  upright  gas  burner 
on  his  father's  shopboard.  The  men 
were  talking  about  religion,  and  much 
to   George's   disgust,    for   he   was   then 


very  young,  probably  about  seven  years 
old,  he  heard  one  of  the  men  laughingly 
declare  that  his  was  no  every  day  re- 
ligion; he  was  going  up  to  heaven  in 
a  balloon  with  both  ends  on  fire.  This 
sacrilegious  speech  drew  the  child's  at- 
tention and  he  listened  to  what  fol- 
lowed. Soon  he  heard  the  tailors  talk- 
ing of  a  young  man  in  America  who 
had  discovered,  in  the  ground,  some 
plates  which  he  had  translated  by  the 
help  of  the  Urim  and  Thummim.  George 
had  been  told  by  some  one  that  the 
Urim  and  Thummim  mentioned  in  the 
Bible  had  been  carried  from  Jerusalem 
to  Rome  by  the  Roman  soldiery  and 
had  been  lost  in  the  river  Tiber;  and 
he  could  not  understand  how  these  holy 
things  got  to  America.  It  never  en- 
tered his  mind  that  there  could  be 
more  than  one  Urim  and  Thummim. 
George  spent  much  of  the  early  portion 
of  his  life  with  his  maternal  grand- 
mother, that  is  his  mother's  mother. 
When  he  was  nine  years  old  she  lived 
in  a  large  house    in   London,   parts  of 


BIOGRAPHICAL    ENCYCLOPEDIA. 


207 


which   she  rented   to  two  aged   maiden 
ladies.      One  of  these  ladies  had  a  lit- 
tle servant  maid  who  was  called  Mary, 
though    her    real      name      was      Sarah 
White.      She  is  now  the  wife  of  Bishop 
William    Thome,    Seventh    Ward,    Salt 
Lake   City.       Now   George   was  a  very 
timid  little  boy;   he  had  a  terrible  fear 
of  the  darkness,  he  disliked  the  moon- 
light and  was  in  terror  of  ghosts.    One 
day  he   summoned   up   courage   enough 
to   speak   to  Mary,   and  the  first  thing 
he  said  was,   "Mary,  are  you  afraid  of 
ghosts?"       The       acquaintance       thun 
strangely  begun,  ripened  into  intimacy, 
and  George,  who  was  of  a  strongly  re- 
ligious nature,  began  making  enquiries 
as  to  whether     Mary  went   to  church. 
Learning  from  her  that  she  did,  he  ob- 
tained his  grandma's  permission  to  go 
with  her.       She  took  him  to  the  meet- 
ings of   the  Paddington  branch   of  the 
Church  of  Jesus   Christ  of  Latter-day 
Saints,    and   he   no    sooner   heard     the 
principles  of  the  gospel  taught  by  the 
Elders    than   he   was   satisfied   of  their 
truth  and  wished  to  be  baptized.    Then 
war   began.     He   being  so   young,     the 
brethren  would  not  baptize  him  without 
his    parents'      consent;      and     notwith- 
standing all  his  pleadings  and  persua- 
sions  they   remained   firm    in    their   re- 
fusal,   and    George   had   to   remain   un- 
baptized   for     several     years.       In   the 
meantime,    George,    by    many    childish 
artifices,    used    to    evade      his    parents' 
wishes  and  now  and  then    attend     the 
meetings  and  visit  the  Saints  whom  he 
had  met.      As  the  years  rolled  by,  the 
boy,  with  the  feeling  then  so  prevalent 
in  the   Church  that  the  coming  of  the 
Savior    in    glory     was     "nigh,    nigh    at 
hand."  made  an  elaborate  mathematic- 
al calculation  that  before  he  was  twen- 
ty-one   years    old    Christ    would    come. 
Consequently,   if  he   had   to   wait  until 
he   was    that   age   before    he    could   be 
baptized   without   his   parents'    consent 
he  would  be  outside  the  Church  at  the 
time    of    that    glorious     appearing    and 
would  be  damned.       So,  when  fourteen 
years  old  he  went  to  another  branch  of 
the  Church   (the  Somers  Town),  where 
he  was  not  known,  and  asked  for  bap- 
tism.    He    was   baptized   Sunday,    May 
4,  1856,  and  the  next  Sunday  was  con- 
firmed by  Elder  George  Teasdale,  who 
was  then  president  of  the  branch.      The 
Lord  in  His  kindness  had    given  George 
a  testimony  of  the  truth  of  "Mormon- 
ism"  long  before  he  was  baptized,  for  it 


was   not     his     fault     that   he   had   not 
obeyed  this  sacred  ordinance,  or  as  we 
sometimes  say,  the  Lord  "took  the  will 
for  the  deed."       In  the  December     fol- 
ing   his   baptism    George    was   ordained 
a  Deacon,  and  if  you  were  to  ask  him 
he  would   tell    you  he   never   magnified 
any  office  in  the  Church  as  well  as  he 
did  that  one.      He  took  a  pride  in  never 
being  absent  from  meeting,  and  in  be- 
ing   there    the    very    first    to    open    the 
doors   and   prepare     the     rooms.       The 
next  May  he  was  ordained  a  Priest  and 
sent  out,   with  an  older  companion,   to 
preach   in  the  streets  of  London.       He 
was  small  of  his  age,  and  occasionally 
some   youthful   listener   about   his    own 
age  would  advise  him  to  get  a  sheet  of 
brown  paper  to  stand  upon  so  that  the 
people  could   see  him.       The  first  time 
he  went  out,  a  few  days  after  his  or- 
dination as  a  Priest,  his  companion  was 
Elder   Francis   Burrell    (long   since   de- 
ceased),   who     chose     that   well-known 
London   thoroughfare,    the     Tottenham 
Court  Road,  as  the  place  to  hold  forth. 
He  borrowed  a  chair,   mounted  it  and 
began  to  talk  of  the  Kingdom  of  God: 
that   the     kingdom     would   necessarily 
have   a   king,    territory,    laws   and   offi- 
cers.      "And  here  comes  one,"   cried  a 
voice  in  the  crowd.      Then  a  policeman 
appeared  and   ordered   Brother   Burrell 
to    "move    on,"    as    no  -preaching     was 
permitted   at   that     corner.       So     they 
moved  on.      George  was  not  altogether 
sorry.      He  used  in  those  days  to  wear 
a  little  round  jacket  like  those  we  see 
in  the  pictures  of  the  boys  of  Eton  and 
other  English  public  schools.    He  came 
to  the   conclusion  that   if  he   bought  a 
coat,   he   would   look  more   like   a  man 
and  people  would  listen  to  him  better. 
Before  the  next  Sunday  he  did  so,  but 
it  was  not  altogether  a  success — to  use 
an  expression  of  a  facetious  friend,  "it 
fitted   him   like   a   sentry   box,   all   over 
and  touched  nowhere."     In  plain  Eng- 
lish it  was  too  large.      But  it  answered 
its  purpose.    George  felt  more  of  a  man 
in   it,    and    he   took   great    pleasure     in 
bearing  his  testimony  week  after  week, 
year  after   year   at   the   street   corners. 
George's   parents   soon   discovered   thai 
he   had   joined    the    Church,     and    then 
that  he  was  engaged  in  street  preach 
ing.       His   father   used    to    talk    to    hi- 
customers  about  the  matter.      One  ad- 
vised that  he  tie  his  son  up  to  the  bed 
post   and    thrash   "Mormonism"    out   of 
him:   another  that  the  boy  be  confined 


208 


LATTER-DAY    SAINT 


in  a  lunatic  asylum;  a  thiri  that  he  be 
taken  befoie  a  magistrate  and  com- 
mitted to  piison;  but  "in  a  multitude 
of  counselors  there  was  safety"  for 
(leorpe.  for  his  father  never  adopted 
any  of  these  harsh  measures,  and  by 
decrees  became  reconciled  to  the  coursf. 
his  son  was  taking.  George,  notwith- 
standing his  youth,  soon  had  numerous 
duties  conferred  unon  him.  He  was 
made  secretary  of  the  branch  Sunday 
School;  secretary  and  afterwards  presi- 
dent of  its  tract  society;  he  was  ap- 
pointed an  acting  teacher,  and  the  sec- 
retary of  the  branch.  In  August,  1860, 
he  was  ordained  an  Elder,  and  in  May, 
1861,  he  was  called  into  the  traveling 
ministry  and  appointed  to  labor  in  the 
London  conference,  under  the  presiden- 
cy of  the  late  Elder  William  C.  Staines. 
In  1863  he  was  changed  to  the  Liver- 
pool office,  as  emigration  clerk  to  Pres. 
George  Q..  Cannon,  and  later  as  chief 
clerk,  in  which  capacity  he  also  served 
under  Pres.  Daniel  H.  Wells.  During 
this  lime  he  was  made  superintendent 
of  the  Liverpool  branch  Sunday  school 
and  afterward  president  of  the  branch. 
In  May,  1865,  he  was  released  to  emi- 
grate to  Zion,  and  reached  Salt  Lake 
City  July  5th  of  the  same  year.  His 
trip  to  Zion  was  an  unusually  quick 
one  for  that  period,  as  he  did  not  travel 
with  any  regular  company  of  immi- 
grants, but  had  only  two  companions- 
Elders  Wm.  S.  Godbe  and  Wm  H. 
Shearman.  It  was  the  time  of  th-e 
Sioux  war,  the  stage  company  could 
not  take  them,  so  Brother  Godbe  pur- 
chased an  outfit,  and  after  a  few  ad- 
\entures,  such  as  beinfr  chased  by  the 
hostile  Indians,  they  arrived  safe  in 
Salt  Lake  City.  Shortly  after  his  ar- 
rival in  Salt  Lake  City,  Brother  Reyn- 
olds secured  employment  from  Brother 
William  Jennings,  but  before  the  close 
of  the  year  he  went  to  work  in  Pres. 
Young's  office,  and  soon  after  became 
his  secretarv.  His  time  has  been  en- 
gaged, with  brief  exceptions,  in  the 
employ  of  the  Church  from  that  time 
to  the  present.  Soon  after  his  arrival 
in  Utah,  Brother  Reynolds  joined  the 
Territorial  militia — the  old  Nauvoo  Le- 
gion. He  was  a  lieutenant  in  the  thir.i 
regiment  of  infantry,  and  secretary  of 
the  regiment.  In  the  former  capacity 
he  commanded  Company  H  at  thi 
famous  Wooden  Gun  Rebellion,  in  No- 
vember, 1870,  but,  unlike  most  of  the 
other  ofTicers,  he  was  not  arrested  and 


sent  to  Camp  Douglas.  In  February, 
1869.  Elder  Reynolds  was  elected  by 
the  legislative  assembly  of  the  Territory 
a  member  of  the  board  of  regency  of 
the  University  of  Deseret,  and  was 
again  elected  to  that  office  by  the  next 
and  later  legislatures.  In  May,  1871, 
Brother  Reynolds  returned  to  Europe, 
he  having  been  called  to  assist  Elder 
Albert  Carrington  in  the  editorship  of 
the  "Millennial  Star."  In  the  follow- 
ing September  Pres.  Albert  Carrington 
was  called  back  to  Zion  on  account  of 
complications  growing  out  of  legal  per- 
secutions, and  Elder  Reynolds  was  left 
in  charge  of  the  spiritual  concerns  of 
the  European  Mission.  Shortly  be- 
fore this  he  had  suffered  a  severe  at- 
tack of  smallpox,  and  on  Pres.  Car- 
rington's  return  to  Liverpool,  in  May, 
1872,  Brother  Reynolds  was  released  to 
return  home,  as  his  health  remained 
quite  poor.  Soon  after  his  return  he 
was  placed  by  Pres.  Brigham  Young 
first  as  treasurer  and  afterwards  as 
manager  of  the  Salt  Lake  Theatre.  He 
later,  in  connection  with  W.  T.  Harris, 
became  lessee  of  that  well-known  place 
of  amusement.  From  1875  to  July,  1879, 
Brother  Reynolds  sat  as  a  member  of 
the  municipal  council  of  Salt  Lake 
City.  In  the  fall  of  1874,  when  Judge 
McKean  was  chief  justice  of  Utah, 
strong  efforts  were  made  to  find  in- 
dictments, under  the  Congressional  law 
of  1862  against  polygamy,  and  the  ar- 
rest of  a  number  of  the  leading  au- 
thorities of  the  Church  was  theatened. 
The  Latter-day  Saints,  believing  this 
law  to  be  unconstitutional,  and  that  it 
A'ould  be  so  declared  by  the  Supreme 
Court  of  the  United  States,  the  repre- 
sentatives of  the  Church  agreed  to  fur- 
nish a  test  case.  This  idea  the  federal 
officers  readily  accepted  and  agreed  to 
give  the  accused  a  fair  trial  so  that 
the  constitutionality  of  the  law  could 
be  decided.  Brother  Reynolds  was 
chosen  to  stand  in  the  gap.  He  fur- 
ni.shed  the  witnesses  and  testimony  to 
Lhe  grand  jury,and  on  October  23rd,  that 
body  found  a  true  bill  against  him. 
On  March  31,  1875,  his  trial  before  Judge 
Emerson  commenced.  It  lasted  two 
c^ays.  He  was  found  guilty  and  sen- 
tenced to  one  year's  Imprisonment  and 
lo  pay  a  fine  of  three  hundred  dollars. 
He  appealed  to  the  supreme  court  of  the 
Territory,  who  set  the  indictment  aside 
on  the  ground  of  the  illegality  of  the 
grand  jury  who  found  it.      Oct.  30,  1875, 


BIOGRAPHICAL    ENCYCLOPEDIA. 


209 


another  indictment  was  found  against 
him,  and  on  Det.  9,  1875,  his  second 
trial  commenced,  this  time  before  Chief 
Justice  White.  The  jury  returned  a 
verdict  of  guilty,  and  he  was  sentenced 
to  two  years'  imprisonment  w'ith  hard 
labor  and  to  pay  a  fine  of  five  hundred 
dollars.  An  appeal  to  the  Territorial 
supreme  court  was  again  taken.  The 
case  came  up  June  13,  1876,  and  the  de- 
cision of  the  lower  court  was  unani- 
mously sustained.  An  appeal  was 
then  taken  to  the  Supreme  Court  of  the 
United  States,  but  the  case  was  not 
called  up  until  Nov.  14,  1878.  Jan.  6, 
1879,  Chief  Justice  Waite  delivered  the 
decision  of  the  court  confirming  the 
decisions  of  the  lower  courts;  the  hard 
labor  clause  being  eliminated  by  the 
Supreme  Court  as  being  in  excess  of 
the  law.  The  corrected  sentence  was 
pronounced  by  the  district  court  June 
14  1879,  and  on  the  16th  Brother  Rey- 
nolds started,  in  charge  of  two  deputy 
marshals,  for  the  Nebraska  State  peni- 
tentiary at  Lincoln.  There  he  was 
shaved,  had  his  hair  cropped  close,  was 
dressed  in  the  broad  blue  and  white 
stripes,  and  became  known  as  U.  S. 
Prisoner,  No.  14.  He  was  appointed 
bookkeeper  in  the  knitting  department. 
The  Lincoln  penitentiary  was  then  car- 
ried on  under  the  silent  system.  No 
prisoner  was  allowed  to  speak  outside 
the  cells.  There  were  two  prisoners 
in  each  cell:  Brother  Reynolds'  cell 
mate  was  a  party  by  the  name  of 
Johnson,  convicted  of  burglary.  When 
the  prisoners  left  their  Cells  for  the 
work  shops  they  always  walked  in  the 
lock  step.  His  right  hand- used  to  be 
on  the  shoulder  of  a  murderer,  while 
the  burglar  had  his  right  hand  on 
Brother  Reynolds.  He  only  remained 
in  Lincoln  twenty-five  days — very  long 
ones  to  him — when  he  was  brought  back 
to  Utah  and  placed  in  the  Territorial 
penitentiary.  In  those  days  things 
were  pretty  rough  at  that  institution, 
its  regulations  were  very  primitive,  and 
vermin  was  abundant.  There  were  no 
cells.  Brother  Reynolds  was  placed 
in  one  of  the  iron  cages  which  were 
contained  in  a  thin  lumber  building, 
and  had  Brother  Lorenzo  Colton  as  his 
companion.  A  new  bunk  house  was 
shortly  after  built.  Into  it  Brother 
Reynolds  was  transferred.  It  was  made 
of  two-by-four  green  lumber.  There 
was  a  crack  every  two  inches  through 
which  the  winter  winds  blew.      No  fire 


was  permitted  for  fear  the  prisoners 
might  burn  it  down.  The  thermometer 
is  said  to  have  gone  down  to  thirty 
degrees  below  zero,  and  how  some  of 
the  prisoners  who  had  only  one  shoddy 
blanket  to  cover  them  escaped  being 
frozen  to  death  is  a  mystery.  Brother 
Reynolds  was  supplied  with  plenty  of 
bed  clothing  by  his  friends,  but  he  gen- 
erally went  to  bed  with  all  his  clothes 
on  and  a  woolen  comforter  wrapped 
around  his  head.  In  the  morning  his 
beard  would  be  one  solid  mass  of  ice. 
More  bed  clothing  only  added  to  the 
weight,  it  did  not  increase  the  warmth. 
He  was  released  Jan.  20,  1881,  having 
served  his  full  time,  less  his  good  con- 
duct allowance.  While  in  prison  Brother 
Reynolds  did  a  great  deal  of  writing 
in  the  prison  yard,  and  for  some  time 
taught  a  school  composed  of  prisoners. 
Ever  since  his  arrival  in  Utah,  Elder 
Reynolds  has  taken  an  active  interest 
in  Sunday  Schools.  In  1867  he  was  sec- 
retary of  the  Eighth  Ward  (Salt  Lake 
City)  Sunday  Sschool  and  the  teacher 
of  the  boys'  Bible  class.  Having  re- 
moved his  residence  to  the  Twentieth 
Ward,  he  became,  in  1868,  librarian  and 
a  teacher  in  its  Sunday  School,  and  in 
December,  1869,  was  chosen  its  super- 
intendent. This  position  he  retained 
(with  the  exception  of  the  periods  of 
his  absence  on  his  mission  and  during 
his  imprisonment)  unt'il  the  spring  of 
1885.  Brother  Reynolds  is  now  the 
oldest  member  of  the  Board  of  the 
Deseret  Sunday  School  Union.  He  has 
been  the  general  treasurer  of  the  Union 
since  February,  1876— more  than  a  quar- 
ter of  a  century.  At  the  Sunday 
School  Convention  held  in  November, 
1900,  he  was  chosen  second  assistant 
general  superintendent,  and  at  the  re- 
organization of  the  superintendency  a 
few  weeks  ago,  owing  to  the  deaths  of 
Superintendents  Cannon  and  Maeser. 
he  was  appointed  first  assistant  general 
superintendent.  Brother  Reynolds  has 
been  a  very  diligent  and  zealous  worker 
in  the  Sunday  School  Union — especially 
as  the  chairman  of  several  standing 
committees  of  its  Board.  March  18, 
1866,  Elder  Reynolds  was  ordained  a 
Seventy  by  Elder  Israel  Barlow,  and 
received  into  the  sixth  quorum.  In 
December,  1875,  he  was  transferred  to 
the  twenty-fourth  quorum  and  becam  ; 
a  member  of  the  council  of  that  quo- 
rum. At  the  April  conference.  1890,  he 
was  sustained  as  one  of  the  First  Seven 


Vol.  1,  No.  14. 


Apiil    G.    1901. 


210 


LATTER-DAY    SAINT 


Presidents  of  Seventies.  He  was  set 
apart  to  that  position  by  the  Twelve 
Apostles,  Pres.  Lorenzo  Snow  being 
mouth,  on  the  10th  of  the  same  month. 
Brother  Reynolds  has  done  much  lite- 
rary work  in  connection  with  the  pub- 
lications of  the  Church.  At  times  he 
has  acted  as  an  associate  editor  on  the 
"Deseret  News,"  and  also  as  assistant 
to  Pres.  Geo.  Q.  Cannon  on  the  "Ju- 
venile Instructor,"  of  which  latter  peri- 
odical he  is  today  one  of  the  associate 
editors.  He  has  also  written  a  number 
of  books,  of  which  the  best  known  are 
his  "Story"  and  his  "Dictionary  of  the 
Book  of  Mormon."  For  twenty-one 
years  he  has  been  engaged  in  the  prep- 
aration of  a  "Concordance  of  the  Book 
of  Mormon."  This  is  a  work  the  mag- 
nitude of  which  few,  who  have  not  un- 
dertaken something  similar,  can  under- 
stand. Its  publication  has  been  re- 
tarded by  unexpected  difficulties,  but  it 
is  now  in  the  hands  of  the  printer.  Be- 
sides the  callings  he  has  held  in  the 
Church  and  in  connection  with  its  aux- 
iliary organizations,  the  subject  of  thi.s 
sketch  has  occupied  a  number  of  posi- 
tions in  the  busihess  community,  for 
instance,  as  a  director  of  Z.  C.  M.  I.,  of 
Zion's  Savings  Bank,  of  the  Deseret 
Telegraph  Line,  etc.,  etc.  He  is  a  strong 
believer  in  the  divinity  of  the  "CTnited 
Order,  and  at  the  time  Pres.  Brigham 
Young  was  seeking  to  establish  it 
among  the  Saints,  Brother  Reynolds 
was  an  officer  in  the  original  order,  No. 
1,  and  of  the  local  organization  where 
he  resided.  Elder  Reynolds  is  a  mem- 
ber of  the  American  Association  for 
the  Advancement  of  Science. ^T.  Z. 

KIMBALL,   Jonathan   Golden,    one 

of  the  First  Seven  Presidents  of  Sev- 
enties since  1892,  was  born  in  Salt  Lake 
City,  June  9,  1853,  "in  a  palatial  Utah 
home  of  half  a  century  ago — a  residence 
of  his  father's,  erected  in  1848-49,  which 
still  stands  practically  as  it  was  built 
at  that  time."  Elder  Kimball  has 
many  times  stated  publicly  that  he  was 
very  much  pleased  when  -  being  set 
apart  for  a  mission  by  one  of  the  Apos- 
tles to  have  it  said  in  that  blessing 
that  he  was  a  son  of  his  father,  Heber 
t'.  Kimball.  His  mother's  name  was 
t'hristeen  Golden  Kimball,  she  being 
the  only  member  of  her  family  that 
ever  joined  the  Church.  Brother  Kim- 
ball was  carefully  trained  by  his  father, 
as  he  was  li\  ing  in  such  close  proxim- 


ity to  him  that  he  was  ever  under  his 
very  watchful  care.  He  had  the  privi- 
lege in  his  early  years  of  accompany- 
ing his  father  with  Pres.  Brigham 
Young's  large  parties  when  visiting  the 
settlements  of  the  Saints.  He  was  a 
student  of  the  leading  schools  of  Salt 
Lake  City  up  to  1868.  and  had  a  life 
scholarship  paid  in  what  has  now  ter- 
minated in  the  University  of  Utah;  he 
was  also  a  student  of  the  "Morgan 
Commercial  College."  His  father  died 
June  22,  1868,  and  being  the  eldest  child 
of  his  mother's  family,  unfortunately 
and  against  his  mother's  wishes  he  be- 
came attached  to  the  vocation  of  driv- 
ing a  team — hauled  wood  from  the  can- 
yons, ore  from  the  mines,  etc.  To  fol- 
low a  profession  of  any  kind  was  not 
urged  upon  young  people  in  those  days. 


and  notwithstanding  every  effort  was 
made  by  his  mother  to  secure  more  ele- 
vating employment,  it  failed;  and  the 
mother  went  out  the  second  time,  in 
1875,  as  a  pioneer,  and  with  her  family 
located  in  Meadowville,  Rich  county, 
Utah,  where  Brother  Kimball  and  his 
brother  Elias  S.,  who  has  been  his  part- 
ner in  business  ever  since,  purchased 
four  hundred  acres  of  farm  and  mead- 
ow land,  and  in  that  cold,  northern 
clime  established  a  ranch  and  farm", 
and  for  fifteen  years  followed  the  horse 
and  cattle  business.  They  were  suc- 
cessful and  accumulated  considerable 
means.  From  the  time  of  his  father's 
death,  and  up  to  the  fall  of  1881,  he 
was  under  no  restraint  of  any  kind,  but 
was  as  free  as  the  birds  that  fly  in 
the  air;    no  man's   hand   was  stretched 


BIOGRAPHICAL    ENCYCLOPEDIA. 


211 


out  to  guide     him     in   the  footsteps  of 
his  father  until  that  man  of  God,  Elder 
Karl  G.  Maeser,  was  directed     by     the 
Spirit  of  the  Lord  to  the  isolated  little 
settlement,   made  up   largely  of  eleven 
of  Heber    C.   Kimball's   sons  and   their 
families.        This    great    and    good    man 
called    the    people     together     in    a    log 
school  house  and  testified  of  God,   and 
spoke   in   the   interest   of   the   Brigham 
Young   Academy.       The    Spirit   of   God 
awakened  and  aroused  Brother  Kimball 
and  his  brother  Elias,  and  for  the  first 
time  they  realized  there  was  something 
else  to  be  accomplished  in   life  besides 
looking  after  cattle  and  horses.     They 
repented  of  their  weaknesses,  reformed, 
and  after  great  sacrifices  and  the  over- 
coming of  many   difficulties   they   both 
attended  the  Brigham  Young  Academy 
for    two    years,    and    were    guided    and 
tutored  by  Dr.  Maeser  and  his  associate 
teachers.      While  it  is  true  they  did  not 
graduate  or  attempt  to  do  so,  they  re- 
pented, reformed,   and     gained  a  testi- 
mony   that    God    lives,    and    they    have 
been    loyal    and    true   to    the     Brigham 
Young    Academy    ever    since.       At    the 
expiration    of    the    school    term.    Elder 
Kimball   was   called,   April   6,   1883,     by 
Pres.  John  Taylor,  to  fill  a  mission  to 
the  Southern  States.      In  eight  days  af- 
ter reciving  his  call  he  was   set  apart 
by  Brother  Moses  Thatcher.     Together 
with   twenty-four  Elders  he   landed   in 
•Chattanooga,  Tennessee,  and  was     ap- 
pointed  by   Pres.   Brigham   H.   Roberts 
to   labor   in   Virginia,    where    he   joined 
"his    companion    as      a    traveling    Elder 
and  labored  absolutely  without  purse  or 
scrip.      A  fter  laboring,  one  year  he  was 
appointed    to    act    as    secretary    of    the 
Southern  States  Mission  at  Chattanoo- 
ga under  the  direction  of  Pres.  Roberts. 
He  was  very  familiar  with  the  details 
of  the  martyrdom  of  Elders  Gibbs  and 
Berry,    as    well    as    with    the    mobbing, 
shooting    at    and    whipping    of    "Mor- 
mon" Elders  during  the  year  1884.    The 
last  year  of  his  mission  his  health  and 
constitution  were  broken;  he  was  trou- 
bled with  malaria,   which  continued  to 
afflict    him    for    many    years.        In    the 
spring  of  1885  he  received  an  honorable 
release,   and  returned  via  New  Jersey, 
where    he    preached,      and     visited    his 
mother's   relatives.       On  his  return  he 
continued   in    the    ranch    business,    and 
was  ordained  a  Seventy  by  President  C. 
D.  Fjeldsted,  July  21,  1886.     On  his  re- 
turn   to    Bear    Lake    he    traveled    as    a 


home  missionary  in  that  Stake,  and  was 
appointed     to     preside  over  an  Elders" 
quorum,    after   which     he    was    chosen 
and  set  apart  as  superintendent  of  the 
Young  Men's  Mutual  Improvement  As- 
sociations of  the  Bear  Lake  Stake,  and 
visited  the  associations  until  he  moved 
to  Logan  city.       The  Kimball  brothers 
partook  of  the  spirit  that  is  now  run- 
ning rife  in  the  world  and  commenced 
to  worship  the  "Old  Gold  Calf,"  hoping 
to  gain  honor  and  renown  by  becoming 
rich.    Elder  Jonathan  G.,  together  with 
Newel  and  Elias,  entered  into  the  im- 
plement   business    under   the    name    of 
"Kimball  Brothers,"  establishing  places 
of   business   at   Logan   and   Montpelier. 
They  signed  notes  for  the  first  time  for 
over  thirty  thousand  dollars.      They  la- 
bored   hard    for    four    years,    and    lost 
their  investment,  but  saved  their  good 
name    and    paid    their      debts.        Their 
ranch    was    exchanged    for    Cache    val- 
ley property,     and     their    cattle      and 
horses   invested   in   real   estate.       They 
were  not  yet  convinced  of  the  danger 
of  speculation,   but  went  into   the  real 
estate   business   during   the   boom,   and 
bought  everything  almost  that  was  for 
sale,    and    wound   up     their    career    as 
business   men   by   investing   in   a   com- 
pany that  had  purchased  119,000  acres 
of  land  in  Canada.       What  they  failed 
to   lose    their   friends   hei-ped    them   out 
of,   and   they  were  for  the   time   being 
prevented  from   chasing  after  the  gol- 
den  calf.     Moral:    "Don't   go   in   debt.' 
The  Lord   again     came     to  the  rescue, 
and   Brother   Jonathan   G.   was   called 
Aug.  1,  1891,  by  Pres.  Wilford  Woodruff 
to  succeed  Elder  William  Spry     as  the 
president  of  the   Southern   States  Mis- 
sion.     Notwithstanding  his  health  was 
seriously   impaired,    and   he   was   about 
to   graduate    in     a     business    way,    the 
Prophet   of  the  Lord  promised   him  he 
should  regain  his  health  and  be  blessed 
of   the    Lord,    which   was    literally   ful- 
filled.      Brother  Kimball  labored  three 
years   as     president     of     the   Southern 
States  Mission,   and  was   succeeded   by 
his  brother,  Elias  S.  Kimball.     April  6, 
1892,   he   was     chosen   one  of   the   First 
Council    of    the    Seventy,    and    was    or- 
dained by  Apostle  Francis  M.   Lyman, 
two  days  later.       Brother  Kimball  was 
called  to  be  one  of  the  aids  in  the  Gen- 
eral Board  of  the  Young  Men's  Mutual 
Improvement  Associations  in   the  year 
1S96,  and  has  taken  an  active  part  in  fill- 
ing  appointments,    as    directed    by    the 


212 


LATTER-DAY    SAINT 


General  Board,  in  nearly  every  Stake  in 
Zion.  visiting  the  young  men's  confer- 
ences, young  men's  and  young  ladies 
conjoint  conferences,  and  conventions. 
He  has  also  been  one  of  the  chief  work- 
ers for  four  consecutive  years,  as  one  of 
a  committee  in  directing  a  missionary 
work  among  the  young  men,  under  the 
instructions  of  the  General  Board.  In 
the  year  1897  about  eighty-seven  mis- 
sionaries labored  in  the  Stakes  of  Zion, 
visiting  about  t\venty-five  thousand 
young  men  and  urging  upon  them  to 
enroll  their  names  and  become  Mutual 
Improvement  workers.  The  hearts  of 
hundreds  of  young  men  were  softened, 
and  many  repented  and  were  baptized. 
One  Elder  baptized  over  ninety  people 
in  one  Stake,  and  the  young  men  fol- 
lowed this  Elder  from  settlement  to  set- 
tlement to  listen  to  his  preaching  on  the 
principles  of  the  gospel.  There  are 
many  very  interesting  incidents  and 
touching  stories  told  connected  with 
the  successful  labors  of  these  mission- 
ary Elders.  In  the  year  1898  one  hun- 
dred and  fifty  missionaries  were  sent 
out  and  they  visited  sixteen  thousand 
eight  hundred  young  men  and  accom- 
plished great  good.  The  plan  of  mis- 
sionary work  was  somewhat  changed  in 
1899, as  only  thirty-eight  Elders  received 
a  regular  call  (as  all  others  had  been 
called)  by  the  Presidency  of  the  Church, 
and  were  set  apart  as  are  the  Elders 
who  go  on  foreign  missions.  These 
thirty-eight  Elders  were  called  to  Salt 
Lake  City  and  instructed  by  the  lead- 
ing authorities  of  the  Church  for  five 
days:  and  one  Elder  was  sent  to  each 
Stake  as  a  representative  of  the  Gen- 
eral Board,  to  labor  with  the  officers 
of  the  Stakes  and  associations,  and  to 
awaken  an  interest  in  the  work.  In 
the  year  1900  another  change  was 
adopted  and  a  local  missionary  work 
was  introduced,  wherein  local  mission- 
aries were  appointed  in  each  associa- 
tion. These  brethren  went  quietly  to 
work  to  convert  careless  young  men, 
and  it  was  intended  to  have  as  many 
misionaries  in  each  Ward  as  they  had 
young  men  to  labor  with.  The  commit- 
tee this  year  (1901)  intend  to  send  out 
among  the  young  people  another  com- 
pany of  select  and  choice  young  Elders 
as  regularly  called  missionaries,  under 
the  direction  of  the  General  Board,  as 
it  is  believed  there  is  a  great  field  of 
labor  among  the  young  people  for  the 
preaching   of    the    gospel.       There    are 


very  few,  if  any  instances,  where  the 
young  men  have  rejected  these  mission- 
aries in  their  labors  during  the  past 
four  years.  In  January,  1901,  Brother 
Kimball  was  appointed  by  President 
Snow  and  given  the  privilege,  in  com- 
pany with  his  wife  and  Elder  Heber  J. 
Grant  and  family,  to  visit  the  Califor- 
nia Mission,  the  object  of  the  call  be- 
ing chiefly  that  he  might  become  ac- 
quainted with  that  field  of  labor.  He 
had  the  privilege  of  meeting  with  the 
Elders  and  Saints  and  listened  for  the 
first  time  to  the  "Mormon"  Elders 
preach  on  the  street  corners.  Elder 
Kimball  was  very  much  impressed  with 
that  country  and  people  and  believes  a 
Stake  of  Zion  will  yet  be  established 
in  the  State  of  California. 

WELLS,    Rulon    Seymour,      one    of 

the    First   Seven   Presidents   of   Seven- 


ties since  1S93,  was  born  July  7,  1854,  in 
Salt  Lake  City,  Utah,  inside  the  stone 
wall  just  east  of  the  "Deseret  News" 
corner.  He  is  the  son  of  Pres.  Daniel 
H.  Wells  and  Louisa  Free.  In  1861 
that  part  of  Pres.  Wells'  family  of 
which  Rulon  was  a  member  moved 
across  the  street  south,  to  the  Wells 
home  (formerly  occupied  by  Apostle 
Ezra  T.  Benson),  where  Rulon  lived  un- 
til his  marriage  in  1883.  He  was  bap- 
tized by  his  father  when  about  eight 
years  of  age,  and  confirmed  by  Elder 
John  V.  Long.  Brother  Rulon  attend- 
ed the  various  common  schools  of  his 
boyhood.  He  also  attended  the  Mor- 
gan &  Macauley  night  school  for  pen- 
manship, and   finally   the   Deseret  Uni- 


BIOGRAPHICAL    ENCYCLOPEDIA. 


213 


versity,  then  under  the  direction  of  El- 
der David  O.  Calder  as  a  commercial 
college.  He  was  a  student  at  that  in- 
stitution when  Dr.  John  R.  Park  came 
and  inaugurated  the  change  by  which 
the  Commercial  College  was  trans- 
formed into  a  collegiate  institution.  Dr. 
Park  was  ably  assisted  by  Professor 
Bellerive,  Dr.  Benedict,  Professor 
Monc'^  and  later  by  Dr.  Maeser.  Un- 
der the  tuition  of  these  educators  he 
took  a  scientific  and  classical  course, 
such  as  was  at  that  time  being  offered. 
He  was  ordained  an  Elder  by  Elder 
W.  J.  Smith  Aug.  15,  1868,  and  he  left 
school  April  1,  1871,  to  accept  of  his  first 
employment  with  a  party  of  engineers 
who,  with  Jesse  W.  Fox,  sen.,  as  chief 
engineer,  started  from  Salt  Lake  City 
to  locate  and  survey  the  route  of  the 
Utah  Southern  Railroad,  now  a  part  of 
the  Oregon  Short  Line  system.  In  the 
winter  of  1873-4,  Brother  Wells  was 
chosen  by  the  Utah  legislature  as  en- 
grossing clerk.  In  1874  he  was  em- 
ployed by  Elder  John  R.  Winder  in  the 
assesor  and  collector's  office  for  Salt 
Lake  City.  In  1875  he  was  employed 
at  the  saw  mills  "E"  and  "P,"  Big 
Cottonwood  canyon,  belonging  to  his 
father,  in  the  capacity  of  book-keeper. 
It  was  while  in  this  employment  in  Oc- 
tooer,  1875,  that  he  received  the  call  for 
his  first  mission.  The  following  inci- 
dent as  related  by  himself  is  of  inter- 
est: I  was  measuring  lumber  as  it 
came  from  the  mill  and  was  being- 
stacked  near  by,  when  I  was  seized 
with  a  peculiar  feeling  over  which  I 
had  no  control,  and  which  impelled  me 
to  descend  from  the  pile  of  lumber  and 
go  to  the  office,  a  little  board  shanty 
which  served  the  purpose  of  office, store 
and  bed-room  combined.  It  was  situ- 
ated about  300  or  400  feet  from  where 
I  was  working.  After  entering  the 
door  and  locking  it,  I  knelt  down  and 
prayed  to  the  Lord  'to  send  me  where 
He  wanted  me  to  go.'  This  was  the 
whole  burden  of  my  prayer  which  last- 
ed only  about  one  minute.  The  whole 
proceeding  was  to  me  a  very  stranee 
one,  for  I  did  not  understand  the 
meaning  of  it,  and  it  was  so  un- 
usual and  out  of  the  ordinary.  On 
this  very  day,  and  probably  at  the 
same  moment,  my  name  was  being 
called  in  the  Tabernacle  at  Salt  Lake 
City,  where  the  conference  was  then 
being  held,  for  a  mission.  The  first 
intimation  I  had  of  this  call  was  when 
my   mother,    then     fifty-one   years   old. 


rode  on  horseback,  in  company  with 
Archibald  Livingstone,  who  was  super- 
intendent of  the  mills,  on  the  following 
day  to  mill  F  and  apprised  me  of  this 
fact."  Oct.  22,  1875,  Brother  Wells  was 
ordained  a  Seventy,  and  set  apart  for 
his  mission  to  Europe  by  Pres.  Brig- 
ham  Young,  assisted  by  Pres.  Daniel 
H.  Wells.  On  arriving  in  Liverpool 
Brother  Rulon  was  assigned  to  the 
Swiss  and  German  Mission,  whither  he 
journeyed  in  company  with  Elder  Mar- 
tin Lenzi.  In  1876  he  assisted  Elder 
Theodore  Brandley  in  holding  a  public 
meeting  in  the  city  of  Berlin,  which 
was  attended  by  dignitaries  of  the  Ger- 
man empire,  there  being  present  mem- 
bers of  the  reichstag  and  the  royal  po- 
lice and  several  representatives  of  the 
state  church.  Returning  home  again  in 
company  with  Elder  Lenzi,  with  a 
company  of  emigrating  Saints,  Elders 
Lenzi  and  Wells  having  charge  of  the 
Swiss  and  German  branch  of  the  com- 
pany, they  held  meeting  on  board  the 
steamer  "Wisconsin,"  and  arrived  in 
New  York,  July  7,  1877,  where  Elder 
Wells  was  met  by  his  mother  and  his 
sister,  and  after  visiting  with  his  fa- 
ther's relatives  in  the  State  of  New 
York,  he  continued  his  journey  home, 
where  he  arrived  July  23,  1877.  He  was 
afterward  active  as  a  home  missionary 
for  a  number  of  years.  Brother  Wells 
was  in  the  employ  of  Z.  C.  M.  I.  from 
1877  until  1880,  and  for  a  rew  months 
kept  books  for  Mr.  John  Brooks  who 
was  running  the  Chicago  Smelter  at 
Rush  Lake,  Tooele  county.  Ir  1881,  he 
accepted  a  position  from  Hon.  Joiin''W. 
Young,  having  charge  of  his  books  and 
clerks  in  Arizona  on  the  line  of  the  At- 
lantic and  Pacific  Railway  Company, 
where  Brother  Young  had  a  contract 
for  building  one  hundred  miles  of  road. 
besides  getting  out  ties  and  timber. 
Brother  Wells  returned  home  in  De- 
cember, 1882.  Jan.  18,  1883,  he  married 
Miss  Josephine  E.  Beatie,  daughter  of 
Hampton  S.  and  Marion  T.  Beatie,  by 
whom  he  has  had  seven  children,  two 
sons  and  five  daughters.  During  this 
year  he  built  his  present  home  in  the 
Eighteenth  Ward  and  moved  in  on 
Jan.  9,  1884;  here  he  has  resided  ever 
since.  He  at  once  identified  himself 
with  the  Ward,  and  served  in  the  sev- 
eral capacities  of  teacher  in  the  Sun- 
day School,  Ward  teacher,  president  of 
the  Mutual  Improvement  Association 
and  second  assistant  superintendent  of 
the  Sunday  School.      On  returning  from 


214 


LATTER-DAY    SAINT 


Arizona  he  was  again  employed  by  Z.  C 
M.  I.  until  March,  1886,  when  he  accept- 
ed the  secretaryship  of  the  Co-opera- 
tive "Wagon  &  Machine  Company,  then 
known  as  Grant,  Odell  &  Company.  He 
served  as  secretary  and  treasurer,  also 
as  director  of  this  institution  until  1896, 
excepting  for  about  a  year,  1891-2,  dur- 
ing which  time  he  had  charge  of  the 
office  work  of  Heber  J.  Grant  &  Com- 
pany. He  was  secretary  of  Zion's 
Benefit  Building  Society,  and  was  elect- 
ed secretary  of  the  Home  Fire  Insur- 
ance Company  of  Utah;  this  latter  po- 
sition he  also  held  until  1896.  April  5, 
1893,  he  was  chosen  to  fill  the  vacancy 
in  the  First  Council  of  Seventies  caused 
by  the  death  of  Pres.  Jacob  Gates,  and 
was  ordained  on  the  same  day  to  that 
position  by  Pres.  George  Q.  Cannon,  as- 
sisted by  Pres.  Wilford  Woodruff  and 
several  of  the  Apostles.  May  8,  1896,  he 
was  called  on  a  mission  to  Europe, hav- 
ing been  unanimously  chosen  by  the 
First  Presidency  and  Twelve  Apostles 
to  succeed  Apostle  Anthon  H.  Lund 
in  the  presidency  of  the  European  Mis- 
sion. He  departed  for  this  mission  in 
company  with  Elder  Joseph  "W.  Mc- 
Murrin,  June  29,  1896.  During  this  mis- 
sion he  visited  the  various  conferences 
of  Great  Britain  five  or  six  times,  and 
those  of  the  continental  missions  three 
or  four  times,  mostly  in  company  with 
Elder  Joseph  W.  McMurrin,  his  co- 
laborer  in  the  presidency  of  the  mis- 
sion. He  returned  home  on  Christma=! 
eve,  1898,  having  been  met  in  New  York 
by  his  wife  and  eldest  daughter,  and 
accompanied  bv  Pres.  McMurrin.  Soon 
after  he  took  up  the  insurance  busi- 
ness, and  on  Dec.  1,  1899,  was  installed 
as  manager  at  Salt  Lake  Guy  of  the 
Mutual  Life  Insurance  Company  of 
New  York.  Since  returning  from  Eu- 
rope he  has  visited  many  of  the  Stakes 
of  Zion  at  the  quarterly  conferences, 
and  labored  with  his  associates  among 
the  Seventies.  He  is  also  one  of  the 
General  Board  of  the  Y.  M.  M.  I.  A. 
In  November,  1900,  he  was  elected  to 
the  lower  house  of  the  fourth  legisla- 
ture of  the  State  of  Utah,  and  served 
the  term  from  Jan.  14th  to  March  14th, 
1901. — (See  also  Juvenile  Instructor,  Vol. 
34,  p.  481.) 

STEVENSON,     Edward,    one  of  the 

First  Seven  Presidents  of  Seventies, 
was  a  son  of  Joseph  Stevenson  and 
Elizabeth  Stevens,   and  was  born  May 


1,  1820,  at  Gibraltar,  Spain.  In  1827  he 
came  to  America  in  company  with  his 
father's  family,  consisting  of  four  sons 
and  two  daughters,  Edward  being  the 
fourth  son.  When  he  was  but  eleven 
years  of  age  his  father  died,  and  he 
went  to  live  with  a  Dr.  Richardson.  In 
1833,  being  then  thirteen  years  old,  he 
heard  Elders  Jared  Carter  and  Joseph 
Woods  preach  the  gospel  and  believed 
their  testimonies.  He  was  baptized  by 
Japhet  Fosdick  Dec.  20,  1833.  His  moth- 
er and  others  of  the  family  also  joined 
the  Church.  This  was  in  Michigan. 
They  afterwards  joined  the  body  of  the 
Church  and  endured  the  hardships  and 
persecution  incident  to  life  among  the 
Saints  in  those  trying  times.  At  Far 
West,   Mo.,   Edward   became     quite   in- 


timately acquainted  with  the  Prophet 
Joseph  Smith,  whom  he  first  met  in 
Michigan,  and  though  so  young,  took 
an  active  pa,rt'  in  the  defense  of  that 
town.  After  pasing  through  the  per- 
secutions of  Missouri,  he  became  a 
resident  of  Nauvoo,  where  he  was  or- 
dained a  Seventy  May  1,  1845,  under  the 
hands  of  Joseph  Young  and  others. 
Subsequently  he  became  a  president  of 
the  30th  quorum  of  Seventies,  and  was 
for  many  years  its  senior  president. 
Bro.  Stevenson  came  to  Utah  in  1847; 
in  crossing  the  plains  and  mountains 
he  was  a  captain  of  ten  in  Charles  C. 
Rich's  company.  Subsequently,  he 
crossed  the  plains  eighteen  times,  and 
the  Atlantic  ocean  nine  times  as  a 
missionary  for  the  Church.       In  1857-5S 


BIOGRAPHICAL    ENCYCLOPEDIA. 


215 


he  filled  a  mission  to  the  United  States, 
returning  as  leader  of  a  large  company 
of   Saints.       In  1869  he  was  called     on 
another    mission     to     the    States    from 
which  he  returned  in  1870.       In  report- 
ing    his     mission     to     Pres.     Brigham 
Young,  he  spoke  of  Martin  Harris,  one 
of    the     Three   Witnesses   to   the    Book 
of     Mormon,      who     was     still     living 
in    Kirtland,    Ohio,    and    who    had    ex- 
pressed a  desire  to  come  to  Utah.  Con- 
sequently  Elder    Stevenson    was   called 
on   a   special   mission   to   bring   Martin 
Harris   to     the       headquarters     of   the 
Church.       He  responded  willingly,   and 
returned    to    Salt     Lake    City,    accom- 
panied by  Martin  Harris,  Aug.  30,  1870. 
From  1865   to  1877,   when  not   away  on 
distant  missions.  Elder  Stevenson  trav- 
eled   as    a    special      home     missionary 
among  the  Saints  in  the  mountains,dur- 
ing  which  time  he  visited  nearly  all  the 
settlements  of  the  Saints  in  Utah.     In 
1872  he   was   sent  on  a  mission   to   the 
United   States   and   Canada;    in   1877-7S 
he    filled   a   mission     to     the    Southern 
States,   and   in   1883-84  another  mission 
to  the  United  States  and  Canada.      In 
February,    1886,    he    was    set   apart   for 
another   mission   to    the   United    States 
and  Europe,       In  the  course  of  his  ex- 
perience. Elder  Stevenson  made  himself 
familiar   with   many     scenes     of   early 
Church  history,   and  in  his  public  dis- 
courses and  lectures  imparted  much  in- 
formation in  relation  thereto.    Accom- 
panied by  Elders  Andrew  Jenson     and 
Joseph   S.  Black,   he  visited  nearly  all 
the  "waste  places  of  Zion"  in  1888,  ob- 
taining valuable  historical  information. 
Among  those  with  whom  he  discussed 
events  of  vital  importance  were  the  wit- 
nesses to  the  Book  of  Mormon,  and  his 
record  of  what  those  witnesses  testified 
to    him    was    given    wide    publicity,    so 
that  all  might  know  thereof  and  verify 
the  accuracy  of  his  declarations.       He 
says  of  Oliver  Cowdery:   "I  have  often 
heard    him    bear    a    faithful    testimony 
fo  the  restoratiion  of  the  gospel  by  the 
visitation  of  an  angel,   in  whose  pres- 
ence   he    stood    in      company    with    the 
Prophet  Joseph  Smith  and  David  Whit- 
mer.       He  testified   that  he   beheld  the 
plates,  the  leaves  being  turned  over  by 
the   angel,   whose  voice   he   heard,    and 
that  they  were  commanded  as  witness- 
es to  bear  a  faithful  testimony  to  the 
world  of  the  vision  that  they  were  fa- 
vored to  behold,  and  that  the  transla- 
tion   from    the    plates    of    the    Book    of 


Mormon  was  accepted  of  the  Lord,  and 
that   it    would    go    forth    to    the    world, 
and  that  no  power  on  the  earth  should 
stop   its   progress."       Elder     Stevenson 
said   of   David   Whitmer,    in  1886,   after 
recounting  previous  testimonies  he  had 
listened   to   from   him:        'David  Whit- 
mer is  now  just  past  eighty-one  years 
of  age.       In  this  his  last  testimony  he 
said  to  me:   'As  sure  as  the  sun  shines 
and  I  live,  just  so  sure  did  the  angel  ap- 
pear  to   me   and   Joseph    Smith,    and   I 
heard  his  voice,  and  did  see  the  angel 
standing  before  us,  and  on  a  table  were 
the  plates,  the  sword  of  Laban  and  the 
ball   or  compass.'  "       Concerning  Mar- 
tin Harris,  Elder  Stevenson  wrote:     "In 
the  year  1869,   I  was  appointed     on     a 
mission   to  the  United   States.    Having 
visited    several   of   the   Eastern   States, 
I   called  at   Kirtland,   Ohio,   to   see   the 
first  Temple  that  was  built  by  our  peo- 
ple in  this  generation.       While  there  I 
met  Martin  Harris,   soon  after  coming 
out  of  the  Temple.    He  took  from  under 
his  arm  a  copy  of  the  Book  of  Mormon, 
the  first  edition,  I  believe,   and  bore  a 
faithful  testimony,  just  the  same  as  I 
heard   him   bear   thirty-six   years   pre- 
vious.     *      *      *      Aug.  19,  1870,  in  com- 
pany with  Martin  Harris,    I  left  Kirt- 
land for  Utah,- and  on  the  21st  he  was 
with  me  in  Chicago,  and  at  the  Ameri- 
can   Hotel   bore    testimony   to   a   large 
number  of  people  of   the  visitation   of 
an  angel,  etc."  To  fill  a  vacancy  caused 
in     the      First      Council     of    Seventies 
by   the    death    of   Elder    John    Morgan, 
Edward  Stevenson  was  chosen  an«  set 
apart  as  one  of  the  First  Seven  Presi- 
dents of  Seventies  Oct.  9,  1894,  by  Apos- 
tle Brigham  Young.       From  that  time 
until  his  death  he  labored   assiduously 
in  preaching  the  gospel  and  attending 
to  the  duties  of  his  calling.      He  filled 
a   special   mission   to  Mexico,    and  was 
engaged   in   missionary  labors    in     the 
Northwest,    when     he   was   taken   sick, 
Sept.   11,   1896,   at  Walla  Walla,   Wash- 
ington.       After    his    return    home     his 
health  improved  so  much  that  he  was 
enabled    to    resume   his    ministerial   la- 
bors; but  he  received  a  backset  in  De- 
cember, 1896,  after  which  he  was  con- 
fined to  his  house  till  Jan.  27,  1897, when 
he  passed  away.      Elder  Stevenson  was 
the  husband  of  four  wives  and  the  fa- 
ther of  28  children,  namely  20  boys  and 
8    girls.       He    married     his     first    wife 
(Nancy  A.   Porter)    in  Nauvoo  in  1845; 
and   he   also   received   his   endowments 


216 


LATTER-DAY  SAINT 


in  the  Nauvoo  Temple.  He  married  his 
second  wife,  Elizabeth  J.  DuFresne,  a 
native  of  the  Jersey  Islands,  in  1855,  in 
Salt  Lake  City.  He  also  married  Emi- 
ly E.  Williams  in  1S57,  and  Louisa  Yates 
in  1872.  Elder  Stevenson  was  one  of 
God's  noblemen  and  one  of  the  most 
faithful  and  energetic  missionaries  who 
ever  preached  the  gospel  in  this  dis- 
pensation. It  is  believed  that  he  trav- 
eled and  preached  more  on  his  own 
expense  than  any  other  Elder  in  the 
Church.  He  ranked  high  as  a  public 
speaker,  and  in  private  conversation 
he  was  untiring  and  entertaining.  In 
his  public  and  private  life  he  was  very 
exemplary;  he  was  a  strict  observer  of 
the  Word  of  Wisdom,  and  partook  of 
neither  tea  nor  coffee  during  the  last 
thirty  years  of  his  life. 

McMURRIN,  Joseph    AVilliam,    one 

of  the  First  Seven  Presidents  of  Sev- 
enties since  1896,  and  at  present  the 
junior  member  of  that  council,  is  the 
son  of  Joseph  McMurrin  and  Margaret 
Leaing,  and  was  born  Sept.  5,  1858,  in 
Tooele,  Tooele  county,  Utah.  Shortly 
after  his  birth,  his  parents  moved  to 
Salt  Lake  City,  where  he  spent  his  boy- 
hood days.  His  opportunities  for 
scholastic  education  were  but  meager, 
and  while  quite  a  youth  he  was  ap- 
prenticed to  the  stone-cutter's  trade, 
and  worked  for  about  two  years  on  the 
Salt  Lake  Temple.  When  only  sev- 
enteen years  old  he  was  called  upon  a 
colonizing  mission  to  Arizona.  He  left 
his  home  to  fulfill  this  call  Feb.  1,  1876, 
driving  two  yoke  of  cattle  on  the  way. 
After  two  months  of  hard  travel  he, 
with  his  companions,  arrived  near  the 
present  site  of  St.  Joseph,  on  the  Littl'3 
Colorado  river.  He  spent  two  years  in 
assisting  to  establish  that  town.  While 
upon  this  mission  he  gained  consider- 
able valuable  experience  in  construct- 
ing dams  and  canals,  in  getting  out 
timber  from  the  forests,  in  building 
log  houses,  as  well  as  in  plowing  and 
planting,  and  all  such  work  as  is  com- 
mon to  pioneer  life.  A  little  incident 
that  occurred  while  he  was  in  Arizona 
is  worth  relating,  showing,  as  it  does, 
that  he  at  that  time  had  learned  to 
put  his  trust  in  the  Lord  for  guidance. 
It  also  furnishes  an  example  of  the  effi- 
cacy of  prayer.  On  one  occasion,  while 
upon  the  mountains  in  the  midst  of  a 
dense  forest, he  lost  his  bearings  and  was 
unable  to  return  to  the  camp  where  his 


companions  were  located.  He  searched 
for  hours  for  the  camp,  but  all  in  vain. 
His  feelings  at  this  time  were  most  dis- 
tiessing,  as  he  knew  there  was  little 
hope  of  finding  any  human  beings  or 
habitation  within  a  hundred  miles  if 
he  missed  his  companions.  As  the 
shades  of  night  approached  he  knelt 
down  and  sought  the  Lord  in  prayer, 
asking  that  he  might  be  directed  back 
to  the  camp.  Immediat>ely  on  arising 
from  his  knees  he  felt  strongly  im- 
pressed to  go  in  a  direction  exactly  op- 
posite to  the  one  he  had  previously 
supposed  was  the  one  to  take.  He  fol- 
lowed this  impression  and  to  his  great 


joy  was  led  in  a  direct  line  to  the 
camp.  On  being  released  from  this 
Arizona  mission  he  returned  to  his 
home  in  Salt  Lake  City,  and  for  some 
time  afterwards  was  engaged  in  haul- 
ing freight.  Through  this  occupation 
he  became  familiar  with  the  various 
mining  camps  in  the  vicinity  of  Great 
Salt  Lake  valley.  In  1881,  in  connection 
with  some  friends,  he  secured  a  con- 
tract to  build  a  part  of  the  Oregon 
Short  Line  grade  near  Granger,  Wyo- 
ming. While  engaged  in  this  work  he 
received  a  call  to  take  a  mission  to 
Great  Britain,  and  in  October  of  that 
year  he  left  home  in  compliance  with 
that  call.  Upon  his  arrival  in  Liver- 
pool he  was  assigned  to  the  Scottish 
conference.  This  was  much  to  his 
satisfaction,  as  his  parents  were  na- 
tives of  Scotland  and  he  had  a  strong 
desire  to  visit  the  land  of  his  fathers. 
He   labored  for   twenty-five   months  in 


BIOGRAPHICAL    ENCYCLOPEDIA. 


217 


that   lanu,    ihe     last   seven   months   as 
president  of  the  conference.     His  labors 
upon   this   mision   were   very   enjoyable 
as  well  as  profitable  to  him.      He  had 
the  satisfaction  of  baptizing-  fifty  souls, 
and   among   this   number   were   two   of 
his  father's  sisters.      Ever  since  this  his 
first  mission  abroad  Elder  McMurrin  has 
been  an  enthusiastic  advocate  of  mis- 
sionary  work,    and   now,   after  a   lapse 
of  twenty  years,  he  feels  assured  that 
no   other   experience   or   training  could 
have  been  of  so  much  worth  to  him  as 
that  gained  while  a  boy  missionary  in 
Scotland.      After  his  return  from  Great 
Britain  he  was  called  as  a  home  mis- 
sionary,   and    was    also    active    in    the 
Ward  in  which  he  resided.  On  the  night 
of  Nov.   28,   1885,     a     tragedy   occurred 
which,  were  it  not  for  a  miracle,  would 
have  terminated  in  the  death  of  Elder 
McMurrin.      This  was  during  the  period 
known  among  our  people  as  the  "cru- 
sade"— when    )fRcers  of  the  law     were 
raiding  the  settlements  of  the  Saints  in 
search   of  offenders     against     the   Ed- 
munds acts,  and  when  much  unneces- 
sary violence  was  resorted  to  in  order 
to  capture  those  who  were  most  eagerly 
sought.      Elder  McMurrin,  on  the  occa- 
sion above  mentioned,  was  attacked  by 
a  United  States  deputy  marshal,     who 
shot   him    twice   in     the     bowels,      the 
bullets   passing     entirely     through   his 
body.      Being  wounded  in  such  a  vital 
part,  no  hope  could  Jae  entertained  that 
human  skill  would  be  of  any  avail  in 
saving  his  life.      The  most  eminent  doc- 
tors of  the  city  were  positive  in  their 
opinion   that   he   could   not  live.     More 
than  one  of  them  declared  that  no  per- 
son  had    ever    been    known    to   survive 
such  deadly  wounds.      Brother  McMur- 
rin also  felt  that  his  life  was  fast  ebb- 
ing  away,    and    fully   expected    to   die. 
While  in  this  condition — waiting  for  the 
end — and  believing  that  he  had  but    a 
few  hours  at  most  to  live,  he  was  visit- 
ed by  Apostle  John  Henry  Smith.     He 
related  to  the  Apostle  what  the  doctor.s 
had  told  him,  and  expressed     his    own 
belief  in  the  correctness  of  their  views. 
After  hearing  what  Brother  McMurrin 
had  to  say.  Apostle  Smith  took  him  by 
the  hand  and  said:     "Brother    Joseph, 
as    an    Apostle    of    the    Lord    Jesus,  I 
promise  you  in  the  name  of  Jesus  Christ 
that  if  you  desire  to  live  you  shall  live, 
no   matter   what   doctors    may    say    to 
the  contrary."      Elder  McMurrin  had  a 
%vif©  and  two  children  at  this  time,  and 


had  -a  strong  desire  to  live  to  care  for 
them,   and   the   promise  of   the  Apostle 
filled  him  with  hope  and  joy.  But  when 
Apostle   Smith   had   departed   from   the 
house,  and  when  he  looked  at  the  dread- 
ful wounds  in  his  body,  he  could  not  be- 
lieve it  possible  that  the  promise  would 
be    realized.        God,    however,      in    His 
merciful  kindness,  and  in  fulfillment  of 
the    promise    of   His    inspired    servant, 
spared    his     life.       The     wounds    were 
healed,  and  Elder  McMurrin  was  com- 
pletely restored  to  soundness  of  body. 
His  recovery  was  a  miracle  wrought  by 
the   power  of  the  Lord,   and  he  freely 
and   emphatically     acknowledges     that 
such  was  the  case.      In  1886  Elder  .Mc- 
Murrin was  called  a  second  time  to  take 
a  mission  to  Great  Britain.      This  time 
he  labored  in  various  parts  of  the  mis- 
sion.     He  was  absent  from  home  over 
four    years,    and    during   the    last   two 
and  a  half  years  of  this  period  he  pre- 
sided over  the  London  conference.     He 
was   accompanied   on    this   mission    by 
his  wife  and  two  children.       While  in 
London    he   was   suddenly   seized   with 
an  illness  that  caused  him    great  pain 
for  a  considerable  time.       It  appeared 
to    be   appendicitis   that   troubled   hinn. 
His    missionary     companions   adminis- 
tered to  him,   and  through  the  prayer 
of  faith  he  was   instantly  healed,   and 
has   never   since   been   troubled   in   the 
same  way.       Again  he  had  occasion  to 
ackno\\iedge  the  goodness  and  power  of 
God  exercised  in  his  behalf.       In  July, 
1896,    he   again    took   his   leave   of    dear 
ones  at  home  and  started  upon  another 
foreign  mission.      This  time  he  went  as 
first  counselor  to  Elder  Rulon  S.  Wells, 
who   at   the   same   time   was   called    to 
preside  over  the  European  mission.  H«= 
spent  two  and  a  half  years  in  the  min- 
istry  while    filling   this    position.     Dur- 
ing  this    time   he    traveled   extensively 
throughout  Great  Britain,  Holland,  Bel- 
gium,     Scandinavia,        Germany,      and 
Switzerland,    and    also    visited    France, 
Austria     and     Italy.       At     the  general 
conference  of  the  Church  held     in  Oc- 
tober,   1897,      Brother     McMurrin     was 
sustained  as  one  of     the     First  Seven 
Presidents   of   the   Seventies,   and   was 
ordained   to   this  position     by     Apostle 
Anthon    H.    Lund,    in    Liverpool,    Eng- 
land, Jan.  21,  1898.     Brother  Lund  was 
then    on   his   way     to   the   Holy   Land. 
Since  his  return  from  his  last    foreign 
mission,    Pres.      McMurrin     has     been 
chosen  a  member  of  the  General  Board 


218 


LATTER-DAY    SAINT 


of  the  Young  Men's  Mutual  Improve- 
nien  Associations,  and  has  been  active- 
ly engaged  in  the  ministry  in  the  Stakes 
of  Zion,  visiting  the  Mutual  Improve- 
ment Associations,  the  quorums  of  Sev- 
enties, attending  Stake  conferences,  and 
performing  other  such  duties  as  per- 
tain to  his  callings.  In  his  travels  he 
has  visited  nearly  all  the  Stakes  of 
Zion.  In  company  with  Apostle  Abra- 
ham O.  Woodruff  he  made  an  extended 
trip  Into  what  is  known  as  the  Big 
Horn  country,  during  the  summer  of 
1899.  On  this  journey  they  traveled 
with  team  about  twelve  hundred  miles, 
and  in  doing  so  were  occupied  about  six 
weeks.  For  about  three  hundred  miles 
of  the  way  they  journeyed  over  the  old 
"Mormon"  emigrant  road,  which  was 
first  marked  out  by  the  pioneers  of 
1847.  This  to  them  was  quite  an  in- 
teresting feature.  The  country  along 
parts  of  the  Shoshone  river  was  ex- 
amined, and  after  the  return  of  the 
brethren  it  was  decided  to  send  a  colo- 
ny into  the  basin  to  locate  there.  On 
their  journey  these  visiting  brethren 
found  quite  a  number  of  Latter-day 
Saints  located  at  a  town  called  Burling- 
ton. They  had  been  there  for  a  num- 
ber of  years,  and  Elders  Woodruff  an  1 
McMurrin  organized  them  into  a  Ward. 
This  year  (1901)  a  Stake  of  Zion  has 
been  formed  in  the  basin,  and  the  pros- 
pects are  that  many  more  Latter-day 
Saints  will  build  homes  in  that  section 
of  Wyoming.  Brother  McMurrin  has 
already  spent  nearly  ten  years  abroad 
as  a  missionary,  and  has  traveled  sev- 
enty-five thousand  miles  while  engaged 
in  missionary  work.  As  a  minister  of 
the  gospel  he  is  earnest,  active  and  en- 
thusiastic, and  his  extensive  experience 
in  the  ministry  has  made  him  highly 
capable  in  performing  and  directing 
mlsionary  labors.  He  has  a  good  knowl- 
edge of  the  gospel  and  of  Church  gov- 
ernment, is  discerning  and  discreet; 
and  in  his  labors  he  enjoys  to  a  marked 
degree  the  spirit  of  inspiration,  not 
only  in  public  speaking  but  also  in  di- 
recting the  efforts  and  movements  of 
himself  and  others.  His  life  is  an  ex- 
ample of  what  may  be  accomplished 
by  a  willing  obedience  to  those  in  au- 
thority. By  ever  seeking  to  perform 
the  duties  required  of  him,  and  by  his 
studious  habits,  he  has  gained  an  edu- 
cation in  the  practical  matters  of  life 
that  will  serve  him  admirably  in  the 
calling  imposed  upon  him.      The  devel- 


opment and  knowledge  received  through 
his  misionary  labors  make  him  emi- 
nentl"  qualified  for  the  position  he 
holds  as  one  of  the  presidents  in  the 
First  Council  of  Seventies. — Edwin  F. 
Parry. 

PARTRIDGE,  Edward,  the  flwH- 
Presiding  Bishop  of  the  Church,  was  a 
son  of  William  and  Jemima  Partridge 
and  was  born  Aug.  27,  1793,  at  Pittsfield, 
Berkshire  county,  Mass.  His  father's 
ancestor  was  Scotch,  having  emigrated 
from  Berwick,  Scotland,  during  the 
seventeenth  century,  and  settled  at 
Hadley,  Mass.,  on  the  banks  of  the 
Connecticut  river.  His  early  life,  so  far 
as  the  meagre  record  of  it  informs  us. 


was  uneventful  J  tnough,  to  use  the  words 
of  the  Prophet  Joseph  Smith — who 
gives  in  his  own  history  a  brief  bio- 
graphical sketch  of  Bishop  Partridge — 
"he  remembers  ttiat  the  Spirit  of  the 
Lord  strove  with  him  a  number  of 
times,  insomuch  that  his  heart  was 
made  tender  and  he  went  and  wept; 
and  that  sometimes  he  went  silently 
and  poured  the  effusions  of  his  soul  to 
God  in  prayer."  \At  the  age  of  sixteen 
he  was  apprenticed  to  a  hatter,  and 
served  about  four  years  in  acquiring  a 
knowledge  of  that  trade.  During  this 
time  his  mind  was  not  idle  upon  the 
subject  of  religion,  for  "at  the  age  of 
twenty  he  had  become  disgusted  with; 
the  religious  world,!'  and  "saw  no  beau- 
ty, comeliness  or  loveliness  in  the  char- 
acter of  the  God  that  was  preached  up 
by   the    sects."       Still,    he   did   not,    as 


BIOGRAPHICAL.    ENCYCLOPEDIA. 


219 


many  have  done  under  like  circumstan- 
ces, discard  the  Bible  and  lose  faith  in 
the  Supreme     Being,      because     of  the 
shortcomings  of  those  who  professed  to 
worship  Him,  and  their  "private  inter- 
pretations"   of   His   word   and    charac- 
ter.     He  was  satisfied  that  God  lived, 
that  the  Scriptures  were  of  divine  ori- 
gin, and  he  evidently  made  them     the 
touchstone,   so   far   as   he   was  able   in 
the  absence  of  a  better,to  try  the  teach- 
ings  of    the    ministers    and    professors 
with  whom  he  came  in  contact.  I    Once 
he   heard   "a  Universal   Restorationer" 
preach  upon  the  love  of  God.  This  ser- 
mon gave  him  exalted  opinions  of  the 
Deity,  and  he  "concluded  that  universal 
restoration  was  right  according  to  the 
Bible."       He   held   to    this   belief  until 
1828,  and  was  living  in  Painesville,  Ohio, 
when   he   became     a     convert     to    the 
Campbellite  faith;  both  he  and  his  wife 
being   baptized    at    Mentor,    by    Sidney 
Rj"'don,    one    of    the    leading    lights    of 
that  religious  sect.       But  though  con- 
verted,   as   the   term   goes,    to   this   be- 
lief— which  was   probably  nearer  right 
thE'.n    any   other   he    had    heard    of — he 
was    not    without    doubt,    at    times,    of 
its  being  the   true   one,   but   continued 
one   of   the   "disciples"    (as   the   Camp- 
bellites  called  themselves)  until  the  fall 
of  1830,   when   an  event  occurred     that 
changed  the   whole  current  of  his  life 
and    caused   him    to   again    investigate 
with  anxious   mind   the   subject   of  his 
soul's    salvation.       The    event    referred 
to  was  the  arrival  at  Kirtland,     Ohio, 
of  Parley  P.  Pratt,  Oliver  Cowdery,  Pe- 
ter Whitmer,  jun.,  and  Ziba     Peterson, 
Elders  of  the  lately  organized  Church 
of   Jesus   Christ   of   Latter-day    Saints. 
They  had    come     from  Fayette,  Seneca 
county.   New  York,  where  the     Church 
had  been  organized  on   the  6th  of  the 
preceding  April;  having  been  called  by 
revelation   through  Joseph   Smith,     the 
Prophet,  to  take  their  journey  into  the 
western  wilderness,  carrying  with  them 
the  Book  of  Mormon,  to  preach  to  the 
remnants   of   the   land,   the  Lamanites, 
and    inasmuch    as    they    received    their 
teachings   to     establish    the    Church   of 
God    among    them.        (Doc.    and    Cov., 
Sec.  28  and  32.)    They  tarried  some  time 
at   Kirtland   and    the     vicinity,     where 
many   of    the      "Disciples"      dwelt,      of 
which   sect   Parley   P.   Pratt   had   once 
been  a  member.       Among     those     who 
received  their  testimony  and  embraced 
the    gospel    was    Sidney     Rigdon,      the 


Campbellite  preacher,  and  a  portion  of 
the  flock  over  which   he  presided.   Ed- 
ward  Partridge,    one    of   his   congrega- 
tion, also  became  interested  in  the  "new 
religion,"    but   was   not    baptized   until 
the  11th  of  December,  following,  when, 
having    gone    with    Elder      Rigdon      to 
Fayette,  on  a  visit    to    the  Prophet,  he 
was  immersed  by  Joseph  in  the  Seneca 
river.       Of  this  visit   the   latter  writes 
in  his  history:       "It  was  in  December 
that  Elder  Sidney  Rigdon  came  to  in- 
quire of  the  Lord,  and  with  him  came 
that  man   (of   whom   I   hereafter     will 
speak   more   fully)    Edward   Partridge; 
he  was  a  pattern  of  piety,  and  one  of 
the  Lord's   great   men,   known  by     his 
steadfastness  and  patient  endurance  to 
the  end."       Elder  Sidney  Rigdon  hav- 
ing received  what  he  came  for     (Doc. 
and    Cov.,    Sec.    35),    the    word    of   the 
Lord  came  also  to  his  companion,  Ed- 
ward  Partridge,   who   was   commanded 
to  preach  the  gospel.     (Doc.   and  Cov., 
Sec.  36.)     A  few  days  after  his  baptism 
Edward  Partridge  was  ordained  an  El- 
der by  Sidney  Rigdon.  Elders  Partridge 
and  Rigdon  remained  in  the  East  until 
the  latter  part  of  January,  1831,  when 
they   started     back     to   Kirtland,     the 
Prophet   and   his   wife     Emma   accom- 
panying  them.       They     reached     there 
about  the  flfst     of     February.       Three 
days  after  their  arrival  in  that  region 
—to  which  the   Sain-ts  were  now  com- 
manded   to   gather— a     revelation    was 
given    to    the    Church    (Doc.    and    Cov., 
Sec.  41),  in  which  the  following  passage 
occurs:       "And  again,  I  have  called  my 
servant  Edward  Partridge,  and  "give  a 
commandment   that   he   should   be   ap- 
pointed  by   the     voice   of   the   Church, 
and  ordained  a  Bishop  unto  the  Church, 
to  leave  his  merchandise  and  spend  all 
his  time  in  the  labors  of  the  Church; 
to  see  to  all  things  as  it  shall  be  ap- 
pointed unto  him,  in  my  laws     in     the 
day  that  I  shall  give  them.      And  this 
because   his   heart   is    pure    before    me, 
for  he   is   like   unto  Nathaniel   of     old, 
in  whom  there  is  no  guile."      Thus  was 
Edward  Partridge,  in  the  thirty-eighth 
year  of  his  age,  "called  of  God  as  was 
Aaron,"   to     the     Bishopric— a     similar 
calling  in  the  same  Priesthood  held  by. 
and  named  after  the  illustrious  brother 
of  Moses.       He  was  ordained   a     High 
Priest,   June  3,   1831,  by  Lyman  Wight, 
at  a  conference  held  at  Kirtland.  Soon 
afterwards   the   Prophet,   with     Sidney 
Rigdon,     Edward       Partridge,     Martin 


220 


LATTER-DAT    SAINT 


) 


Harris  and  other  Elders,   was  directed 
by  the  Lord  to  journey  to  the  land  of 
Missouri.       They     were    told    that    the 
next   conference   should   be   held   there, 
upon   the  land  which   the  Lord     would 
consecrate   unto      His   people,    it   being 
the    land    of    their    inheritance,      where 
the  city  of  Zion  should  be  built,  but  it 
was  then  in  the  hands  of  their  enemies. 
(Doc.   and   Gov.,     Sec.     52.)     They   left 
Kirtland  on  the  19th  of  June,  and  ar- 
rived at  Independence,  Jackson  county, 
Missouri,    about    the     middle    of    July. 
Here,  in  the  ensuing  August,  in  a  reve- 
lation from  the  Lord,  Bishop  Partridge 
and   his   counselor^,    with   others,    were 
told  that  this  was  the  "land    of    their 
residence,"    and    they    were    instructed 
to  bring  their  families  there  and  settle. 
On   the   third     of     that     month  Bishop 
Partridge,  with  seven  others,  including 
the  Prophet,  were  present  at  the  dedi- 
cation of  the  site  of  the  future  Temple, 
a  spot  a  little  west  of  the  court  house 
in    Independence.       Two     days     after- 
ward he  wrote  a  letter  to  his  wife  in 
Painesville,  Ohio,  in  which  he  says:   "I 
have   a     strong     desire     to     return   to 
Painesville  this  fall,  but  must  not;  you 
know  I  stand  in  an  important  station, 
and   as   I   am   occasionally  chastened   I 
sometimes  feel  as  though  I  must  fall; 
not  to  give  up  the   cause,   but  to  fear 
my   station   is   above   what  I   can   per- 
form to  the  acceptance  of  my  heaven- 
ly Father.      I  hope  that  you  and  I  may 
so  conduct  ourselves  as  to  at  last  land 
our  souls  in  the  haven  of  eternal  rest. 
Pray  for  me  that   I   may  not  fall.       I 
might  write  more,  but  will  not.     Fare- 
well for  the  present."      Here,  then,  he 
continued    to   reside — after   moving    his 
family  from  Ohio— officiating  as  Bishop 
of  Zion,  and  up  to  December,  1831,  was 
the   only  Bishop   in    the   Church.  (     The 
next  time  the  name  of  Bishop  Partridge 
appears  in  the  Prophet's  record,  is  at 
a  general   council   of  the  Church,  held 
at  Independence,  April  26,  1832,  soon  af- 
ter  the   Prophet's  arrival   there   on   his 
second  visit  to  Missouri.      At  this  meet- 
iner  Joseph  was  acknowledged  as  Presi- 
dent  of   the   High   Phiesthood — accord- 
ing to  a  previous  ordination  at  a  con- 
ference  in   Amherst,   Ohio — and   Bishop 
Partridge  in  behalf  of  the  Church,  gave 
to   President   Smith   the   right  hand  of 
fellowship.      The  scene  is  described  as 
"solemn,     impressive     and     delightful. 
During  the  intermission  a  difficulty  or 


P.ishop    Partridge     and     Elder    Rigdon 
was  amicably  settled."      "July  20,  1833," 
writes      Bishop       Partridge,       "George 
Simpson   and   two   other     mobbers   en- 
tered  my     house     (while  I  was  sitting 
with    my    wife,    who    was    quite    fee- 
ble, my  youngest  child  being  then  about 
three  weeks  old)  and  compelled  me  to 
go   with   him.     Soon   after   leaving   my 
house,  I  was  surrounded  by  about  fifty 
mobbers,  who  escorted     me  about  half 
a   mile   to   the   public   square,    where   t 
was  surrounded  by  about  two  or  three 
hundred    more.        Russel     Hicks,    Esq., 
appeared    to   be   the   head   man   of   the 
mob;  he  told  me  that  his  word  was  the 
law    of    the    county,    and    that    I    must 
agree  to  leave  the  county  or  suffer  the 
consequences.       I   answered   that   if     I 
must  suffer  for  my  religion  it  was  no 
more  than  others  had  done  before  me; 
that  I  was  not  conscious  of  having  in- 
jured any  one  in  the  county,  therefore 
I  would  not  consent  to  leave  it.       Mr. 
Hicks   then   proceeded   to   strip   off   my 
clothes  and  was  disposed  to  strip  them 
all   off.       I   strongly   protested   against 
being   stripped     naked     in    the    street, 
when  some,  more  humane  than  the  rest, 
interfered,    and   I     was     permitted     to 
wear   my    shirt   and   pantaloons.       Tar 
and  feathers  were  then  brought,  and  a 
man  by  the  name  of.Davies,  with  the 
help   of  another,    daubed   me   with   tar 
from  the  crown  of  my  head  to  my  feet, 
after  which  feathers  were  thrown  over 
me."      This     dastardly    outrage,     with 
others   of  still   greater  enormity,   com- 
mitted   under    the    broad    sunlight     of 
American  liberty,  with  the  executive  of 
the   State   looking   on     and     in     secret 
league  with  these  mobocratic  wretches, 
was    but   the    "beginning   of   sorrows," 
for   the   persecuted    Saints   of   Jackson 
county.       Their   cruel   expulsion     from 
their    homes    and    their    flight    to    Clay 
county  was  the  next  act  in  the  tragedy. 
There,  in  November,  1833,  we  next  find 
the    subject    of    our    sketch — still      the 
Bishop  and  acknowledged  head  of  the 
Church    in    Zion^faithfully    but    fruit- 
lessly endeavoring  to  obtain  for  his  peo- 
ple a  redress  of  grievances.       He     re- 
sided in  Clay  county  until   the  fall  of 
1836,   but   some   time   during   the   three 
years  went  on  a  mission  to  the  East- 
ern States,  whence  returning  he  visited 
Kirtland  in  the  latter  part  of  October, 
1835.      While  there,  on  Saturday,  Nov. 
7th,  the  word  of  the  Lord  came  to  the 


hardness    which    had    existed    between  Prophet,    saying:      "Behold,   I   am   well 


BIOGRAPHICAL,    ENCYCLOPEDIA. 


221 


pleased  with  my  servant  Isaac  Mor- 
ley,  and  my  servant  Edward  Partridge, 
because  of  the  integrity  of  their  hearts 
in  laboring  in  my  vineyard  for  the  sal- 
vation of  the  souls  of  men.  Verily,  I 
say  unto  you,  their  sins  are  forgiven 
them:  therefore  say  unto  them,  in  my 
name,  that  it  is  my  will  that  they 
should  tarry  for  a  little  season,  and  at- 
tend the  school  and  also  the  solemn 
assembly  for  a  wise  purpose  in  me. 
Even  so.  Amen."  Pursuant  to  the 
divine  instruction,  Bishop  Partridge  re- 
mained, and  was  present  at  the  dedi- 
cation of  the  Kirtland  Temple,  March 
27,  1836,  and  at  subsequent  ceremonies 
in  that  sacred  edifice.  On  the  4th  of 
May,  following,  he  started  back  to 
Clay  county,  where  he  arrived  in  due 
season.  The  mobocratic  spirit,  while 
not  so  rampant  as  before,  was  by  no 
means  extinct.  Threatenings  and  an- 
noyances were  frequent,  in  spite  of  the 
kindness  and  hospitality  of  many  to 
the  'Mormon"  refugees,  and  in  the  fall 
of  1836,  the  main  body  of  them,  at  the 
suggestion  of  the  people  of  Clay  coun- 
ty, who  agreed  to  buy  their  lands, 
moved  eastward  into  a  region  after- 
wards named  Caldwell  county,  where 
the  city  of  Far  "West, laid  out  and  popu- 
lated by  the  Saints,  became  temporari- 
ly, their  central  gathering  point.  Here 
they  were  permitted  for  a  season  to 
have  peace.  But  as  they  increased  in 
numbers  and  made  settlements  in  the 
adjacent  counties  of  Daviess  and  Car- 
roll, the  old  jealousy  was  revived  and 
the  mob  spirit  once  more  began  to 
rage.  The  Daviess  county  election 
riot,  the  battle  of  Crooked  river,  the 
siege,  surrender  and  sacking  of  Far 
West,  with  all  the  attendant  horrors 
of  rapine  and  redhanded  cruelty  per- 
petrated by  the  ruthless  mob  and  sol- 
diery— which  finally  culminated  in  the 
driving  of  thousands  of  people  from 
their  homes  in  the  fall  and  winter  of 
1838 — are  matters  familiar  to  the  reader 
of  Church  history.  Bishop  Partridge 
was  a  participant  in  many  of  the 
heartrending  trials  then  visited  upon 
a  peaceable  and  unoffending  commun- 
ity. He  thus  relates  one  of  the  high- 
handed acts  of  wholesale  robbery  com- 
mitted by  the  mob  militia  of  Missouri: 
"^Yhile  I  was  a  prisoner  confined  to  the 
town  of  Far  West,  I  was,  with  the  rest 
of  the  inhabitants,  collected  within  a 
circle  on  the  public  square,  and  there, 
surrounded  by  a  strong  guard,  we  were 
compelled  to  sign  a  deed  of  trust,  which 


deed  was  designed  to  put  our  property 
into  the  hands  of  a  committee,  to  be 
disposed  of  by  them  to  pay  all  the  debts 
which  had  been  contracted  by  any  and 
all  who  belong  to  the  Church— also  to 
pay  all  damages  which  might  be 
claimed  by  the  people  of  Daviess  coun- 
ty, for  any  damages  they  might  have 
sustained  from  any  person  whatever.  I 
would  remark  that  all  those  who  did 
deny  the  faith  were  exonerated  from 
signing  this  deed  of  trust."  He  also  tells 
how  himself  and  scores  of  his  brethren, 
in  the  bleak  autumn  of  that  year,  were 
driven  off  like  dumb  cattle  to  Rich- 
mond, Ray  county,  a  distance  of  thirty 
miles,  and  there  kept  as  prisoners  for 
three  or  four  weeks,  without  cause,  and 
upon  no  civil  process  whatsoever.  Says 
he,  "We  were  confined  in  a  large  open 
room,  where  the  cold  northern  blast 
penetrated  freely.  Our  fires  were  small 
and  our  allowance  for  wood  and  food 
was  scanty;  they  gave  us  not  even  a 
blanket  to  lie  upon;  our  beds  were  the 
cold  floors.  *  *  *  The  vilest  of 
the  vile  did  guard  us  and  treat  us  like 
dogs:  yet  we  bore  our  oppressions 
without  murmuring;  but  our  souls  were 
vexed  night  and  day  with  their  filthy 
conversation,  for  they  constantly 
blasphemed  God's  holy  name."  During 
the  winter  of  1838-39,  in  conformity 
with  Governor  Bogg's  exterminating 
order — to  massacre  the  "Mormons"  or 
drive  them  from  the  State — and  fear- 
ing the  threats  of  General  Clark  to 
carry  into  effect  that  wicked  and  un- 
heard of  act  of  tyranny,  the  family  of 
Bishop  Partridge  moved  to  Quincy,  111., 
where,  after  his  release  from  prison, 
he  rejoined  them,  and  continued  to 
dwell  until  the  ensuing  summer  or  fall. 
After  the  purchase  of  lands  and  the 
settlement  of  the  Saints  at  Commerce, 
Hancock  county  (afterwards  Nauvoo), 
a  general  conference  of  the  Church  was 
held  there  on  Saturday,  Oct.  5,  1839.  At 
this  meeting  it  was  unanimously  agreed 
that  that  should  be  "a  Stake  and  a 
place  of  gathering  for  the  Saints,"  and 
Bishop  Partridge  was  appointed  to 
preside  as  Bishop  of  the  Upper  Ward, 
while  Bishop  Newel  K.  Whitney  and 
Bishop  Vinson  Knight  were  assigned 
in  like  capacity  to  the  Middle  and 
Lower  Wards,  respectively.  But  the 
career  of  Edward  Partridge  was  draw- 
ing to  a  close.  His  health  was  broken 
and  for  many  months  he  had  been  un- 
fitted for  heavy  or  manual  labor.  The 
persecutions    he    had     passed    through. 


222 


LATTER-DAY    SAINT 


added  to  the  sickly  climate  in  which 
the  Saints  were  now  settling,  finally 
overcome  what  was  left  of  a  healthy, 
but  by  no  means  robust  constitution. 
About  ten  days  prior  to  his  decease,  he 
was  taken  with  pleurisy  in  his  side, 
as  the  result  of  overlifting,  and  pros- 
trated upon  the  bed  from  which  he 
never  again  rose.  He  expired  on 
Wednesday.  May  27,  1840,  at  his  home 
in  Nauvoo,  in  the  forty-seventh  year 
of  his  age.  The  Prophet  Joseph  writes 
in  his  journal,  under  the  same  date, 
this  closing  comment  on  the  death  of 
his  friend:  "He  lost  his  life  in  con- 
sequence of  the  Missouri  persecutions, 
and  he  is  one  of  that  number  whose 
blood  will  be  required  at  their  hands." 
—Orson  F.  Whitney.  (See  also  "Con- 
tributor." Vol.  6,  p.  3.) 

WHITNEY,     Newell    Kimball,    the 

second  presiding  Bishop  of  the  Church, 
was  born  Feb.  5,  1795,  at  Marlborough, 
Windham  county,  Vermont.  Records 
of  recent  appearance  give  April,  1635, 
as  the  time  of  his  earliest  American 
ancestor's  departure  from  England  for 
the  shores  of  the  western  world.  The 
eldest  son  and  second  child  among  nine, 
whose  parents  were  Samuel  and  Su- 
sanna Whitney,  he  was  the  one  destined 
to  distinguish  hiS  family  in  its  relation- 
ship with  the  Latter-day  cause  of 
Christ  and  to  become,  like  Joseph  of  old, 
a  savior  to  his  father's  house.  The  date, 
or  even  the  year,  of  his  removal  from 
his  native  town,  is  uncertain.  Like 
many  another  poor  boy,  with  his  for- 
tune in  the  little  pack  he  carried  on 
his  shoulder,  he  bade  farewell  at  an 
early  day  to  father,  mother,  brothers, 
sisters  and  the  associations  of  boyhood 
At  the  age  of  nineteen,  he  was  engaged 
as  a  sutler,  or  merchant  in  a  small  way, 
at  the  historic  village  of  Plattsburg, 
N.  Y.,  on  the  west  shore  of  Lake  Cham- 
plain.  It  was  in  Plattsburg  bay  that 
the  naval  battle  of  Champlain  was 
fought,  in  which  the  British  flotilla  un- 
der Commodore  Downle  was  defeated 
by  the  American  Commodore  McDon- 
ough,  Sept.  11,  1814;  while  the  land 
forces,  amounting  to  fourteen  thousand 
men,  under  Sir  George  Prevost,  were 
defeated  by  General  Macomb.  The 
writer  had  it  from  the  late  Rev.  Sam- 
uel F.  Whitney,  of  Kirtland,  Ohio,  that 
his  brother.  Newel,  took  part  in  the  en- 
gagement on  land.  Possibly  his  mer- 
cantile   relations   at    this   period     made 


him  acquainted  with  the  traders  and 
trappers  of  Green  Bay,  Lake  Michigan, 
when,  after  losing  his  property  by  the 
war,  he  next  established  himself  as  an 
Indian  trader.  An  incident  occurred 
while  here  that  came  near  costing  his 
life.  A  drunken  savage,  incensed  at 
his  refusal  to  supply  him  with  liquor, 
after  obtaininer  it  elsewhere,  returned 
to  wreak  vengeance  on  the  one  whose 
discretion  he  mistook  for  ill  will.  The 
redskin,  weaijon  in  hand,  was  in  hot 
pursuit,  when  an  Indian  girl  named 
Moudalina  seized  him,  and  at  the  peril 
of  her  own  life  held  on  till  his  in- 
tended victim  was  safe  out  of  the  way. 
Newel  K.  Whitney  never  forgot  the 
timely  service  rendered  him  by  this 
dusky  heroine.  One  of  his  daughters  was 
named  Moudalina     in     memory  of     the 


Lamanite  maid  who  saved  her  father's 
life.  Leaving  Lake  Michigan  he  lo- 
cated at  Panesville,  Ohio,  where  he  fell 
in  with  a  merchant  named  Algernon 
Sidney  Gilbert,  who,  recognizing  his 
business  qualifications,  and  feeling  a 
friendly  interest  in  him,  took  him  into 
his  store  as  clerk  and  gave  him  some 
knowledge  of  bookkeeping.  This  was 
about  the  year  1817.  Several  years 
later  we  hear  of  the  prosperous  mer- 
cantile firm  of  Gilbert  &  Whitney,  with 
headquarters  at  Kirtland,  a  few  miles 
from  Painesville  and  not  far  inland 
from  Lake  Erie.  Newel  had  steadily 
risen  from  the  time  he  entered  the  mer- 
chant's employ  until  now  he  was  junior 
partner  of  the  firm.  One  of  the  reasons 
that  may  have  induced  this  change  oi 


BIOGRAPHICAL   ENCYCLOPEDIA. 


223 


residence  from  Lake  Michigan  to  Ohio, 
Avas  an  acquaintance  he  had  formed 
with  a  young  lady  living  in  Klrtland — 
Miss  Elizabeth  Ann  Smith,  a  native  of 
Connecticut  (where  her  parents  resid- 
ed), who  had  come  out  west  with  a 
maiden  aunt  to  whom  she  was  devot- 
edly attached.  A  mutual  affection 
springing  up  between  her  and  the  young 
merchant,  they  were  married  Oct.  20, 
1822.  "Mother  Whitney,"  as  she  came 
to  be  widely  known,  gives  the  following 
brief  sketch  of  the  man  who  made  her 
his  wife:  "He  was  a  young  man  who 
had  come  out  west  to  seek  his  fortune. 
He  had  thrift  and  energy  and  accu- 
mulated property  faster  than  most  of 
his  associates.  Indeed,  he  became  pro- 
verbial as  being  lucky  in  all  his  under- 
takings. He  had  been  trading  at  Green 
Bay,  buying  furs  and  skins  from  the 
Indians  and  trappers  for  the  eastern 
market,  and  exchanging  them  for  goods 
suitable  to  the  wants  of  the  people  in 
that  locality.  In  his  travels  to  and 
from  New  York  he  passed  through  the 
country  where  we  resided;  we  met  and 
became  attached  to  each  other,  and  my 
aunt  granting  her  full  approval,  we 
were  married.  Our  tastes  and  feelings, 
were  congenial,  and  we  were  a  happy 
couple  with  bright  prospects  in  store. 
We  prospered  in  all  our  efforts  to  ac- 
cumulate wealth;  so  much  so  that 
among  our  friends  it  came  to  be  re- 
marked that  nothing  of  N.K.  Whitney's 
ever  got  lost  on  the  lake,  and  no  pro- 
duct of  his  was  ever  low  in  the  mar- 
ket." Up  to  this  time  neither  had 
made  any  profession  of  religion,  though 
hers  was  eminently  a  spiritual  nature, 
while  he  was  more  of  a  business-like  or 
temporal  turn  of  mind.  Though  cher- 
ishing an  unfaltering  faith  in  a  future 
state,  and  believing  an  honest  straight- 
forward course  to  be  the  only  sure 
passport  to  its  happy  possession,  he  did 
not  as  quickly  as  she  recognize  the 
necessity  of  r^utting  on  the  outward  ar- 
mor of  religion.  His  eyes  were  open 
to  the  hypocrisy  of  the  sectarian  world, 
and  it  was  not  in  his  nature  to  rush 
blindfold  into  anything.  However,  they 
made  up  their  minds  to  join  the  Disci- 
ples, or  "Campbellites"— as  they  were 
commonly  called— the  doctrines  enunci- 
ated by  that  sect  seeming  to  them  to 
be  most  in  accordance  with  the  Scrip- 
tures. Having  joined,  they  remained 
members  of  that  church,  of  which  Sid- 
ney  Rigdon   was   the   local   head,   until 


Parley  P.  Pratt  and  other  "Mormon- 
Elders  preached  in  Klrtland  the  fulness 
of  the  everlasting  gospel.  To  hear  with 
Mother  Whitney  was  to  believe;  and  to 
believe,  to  be  baptized.  Her  husband, 
with  characteristic  caution,  took  time 
to  investigate,  but  entered  .the  fold  a 
few  days  afterwards.  This  was  in  No.- 
vember,  1830.  Some  time  before  they 
HacT  been  praying  earnestly  to  the  Lord 
to  know  how  they  might  obtain  the 
gift  of  the  Holy  Ghost.  The  Campbell- 
ites baptized  for  the  remission  of  sins 
and  believed  also  in  the  laying  on  of 
hands  and  the  gifts  of  the  Spirit,  but 
did  not  claim  authority  to  confer  the 
Holy  Ghost.  "One  night,"  says  Moth- 
er Whitney,  "it  was  midnight— my  hus- 
band and  I  were  in  our  house  at  Klrt- 
land, praying  to  the  Father  to  be 
shown  the  way  when  the  Spirit  rested 
upon  us  and  a  cloud  overshadowed  the 
house.  It  was  as  though  we  were  out 
of  doors.  The  house  passed  away  from 
our  vision.  We  were  not  conscious  of 
anything  but  the  presence  of  the 
spirit  and  the  cloud  that  was 
over  us.  We  were  wrapped  in 
the  cloud.  A  solemn  awe  pervaded 
us.  We  saw  the  cloud  and  felt  the 
Spirit  of  the  Lord.  Then  we  heard  a 
voice  out  of  the -cloud  saying,  'Prepare 
to  receive  the  word  of  the  Lord,  for 
it  is  coming.'  At  this  we  marveled  great- 
ly, but  from  that  moment  we  knew  that 
the  word  of  the  Lord  was  coming  to 
Klrtland."  About  the  first  of  Febru- 
ary, 1831,  a  sleigh  containing  four  per- 
sons, drove  through  the  streets  of  ICirt- 
land  and  drew  up  in  front  of  Gilbert  & 
Whitney's  store.  The  occupants  of  the 
sleigh  were  evenly  divided  as  to  sex. 
One  of  tlje  men,  a  young  and  stalwart 
personage,  alighted,  and  springing  up 
the  steps  walked  into  the  store  and  to 
where  the  junior  partner  was  standing. 
"Newel  K.  Whitney,  thou  art  the  man!" 
he  exclaimed,  extending  his  hand  cor- 
dially, as  if  to  an  old  and  familiar 
acquaintance.  "You  have  the  advan- 
tage of  me,"  replied  the  one  addressed, 
as  he  mechanically  took  the  proffered 
hand.  "I  could  not  call  you  by  name 
as  you  have  me."  "I  am  .Joseph  the 
Prophet."  said  the  stranger,  smiling. 
"You've  prayed  me  here;  now  what  do 
you  want  of  me?"  Mr.  Whitney, 
astonished,  but  no  less  delighted,  con- 
ducted the  party  (who  were  no  other 
than  the  Prophet  Joseph  Smith,  his  wife 
Emma,  and  two  servants,  just  arrived 


224 


LATTER-DAY    SAINT 


from  Fayette,  the  birthplace  of  the 
Church)  across  the  street  to  his  house 
on  the  corner,  where  he  introduced 
them  to  his  wife.  She  shared  fully  his 
surprise  and  pleasure.  Joseph  says  of 
this  episode:  "We  were  kindly  re- 
reived  and  welcomed  into  the  house  of 
Brother  N.  K.  Whitney.  I  and  my 
wife  lived  in  the  family  of  Brother 
Whitney  several  weeks  and  received 
every  kindness  and  attention  that  could 
be  expected,  and  especially  from  Sister 
Whitney."  Says  she:  "I  remarked 
to  my  husband  that  this  was  the  ful- 
filment of  the  vision  we  had  seen  of  a 
cloud,  as  of  .?lory,  resting  upon  our 
house."  To  bring  it  to  pass  yet  more 
literally  during  the  time  the  Prophet 
resided  with  them,  and  under  their  very 
roof,  a  number  of  the  revelations  were 
given,  now  recorded  in  the  Book  of  Doc- 
trine and  Covenants.  The  appointment 
of  Newel  K.  Whitney  as  Bishop  of 
Kirtland  and  the  eastern  branches  of 
the  Church,  was  the  next  important 
event  in  his  history.  Joseph,  who  is 
said  to  have  seen  him  in  vision,  pray- 
ing for  his  coming  to  Kirtland,  recog- 
nized the  part  he  was  destined  to  play 
in  the  great  drama  of  the  latter  days. 
He  was  one  whom  he  trusted  implicit- 
ly, not  only  in  monetary  matters,  in 
which  he  often  consulted  him,  but  with 
many  of  his  most  secret  thoughts, 
which  he  could  confide  but  to  few.  But, 
though  Joseph  loved  him  as  a  bosom 
friend,  he  did  not  fail  to  correct  him 
whenever  occasion  required,  and  the 
candor  of  his  rebuke,  and  the  out- 
spoken nature  of  their  friendship, 
served  only  to  knit  their  souls  more 
closely  together.  Bishop  Partridge  was 
now  presiding  in  Missouri,  the  land  of 
Zion,  and  for  several  months  Elder 
Whitney  had  been  acting  as  his  agent 
in  Dhio.  the  land  of  Shinehah.  The  work 
having  increased,  and  the  importance 
of  Kirtland  as  a  Stake  of  Zion  hav- 
ing grown  correspondingly,  it  had  be- 
come necessary  to  "lengthen  her  cords" 
and  give  her  a  Bishopric  of  her  own. 
The  revelation  signifying  this  to  be  the 
will  of  the  Lord,  was  given  December 
4,  1831.  (Doc.  and  Gov.,  Sec.  72.)  The 
thought  of  assuming  this  important  re- 
sponsibility was  almost  more  than  he 
could  bear.  Though  in  natural  gifts 
few  men  were  better  qualified  for  such 
a  position,  he  nevertheless  distrusted 
his  ability,  and  deemed  himself  incap- 
able of   discharging   the   high   and   holy 


tiust.  In  his  perplexity  he  appealed  to 
the  Prophet:  "I  cannot  see  a  Bishop 
in  myself.  Brother  Joseph;  but  if  you 
say  it's  the  Lord's  will,  I'll  try."  "You 
need  not  take  my  \\ord  alone,"  an- 
swered the  Prophet,  kindly,  "Go  and 
ask  Fatlier  for  yourself."  Newel  felt 
the  foi ce  of  this  mild  rebuke,  but  de- 
termined to  do  as  he  was  advised.  His 
humble,  heartfelt  prayer  was  answered. 
In  the  silence  of  night  and  the  solitud'.- 
of  his  chamber  he  heard  a  voice  from 
heaven:  "Thy  strength  is  in  me."  The 
words  were  few  and  simple,  but  they 
had  a  world  of  meaning.  His  doubts 
were  dispelled  like  the  dew  before  the 
dawn.  He  straightway  sought  the 
Prophet,  told  him  he  was  satisfied,  and 
was  willing  to  accept  the  office  to 
which  he  had  been  called.  On  the  first 
day  of  April,  1832,  Bishop  Whitney 
left  Kirtland.  in  company  with  Presi- 
dent Smith,  on  the  latter's  second  visit 
to  Missouri.  They  arrived,  in  safety  at 
their  destination,  and  having  transact- 
ed the  business  which  took  them  thith- 
er, started  from  Independence  on  their 
return,  the  6th  of  May  ensuin.  Be- 
tween Vincennes.  Indiana,  and  New  Al- 
bany, near  the  falls  of  the  Ohio,  the 
horses  of  the  coach  on  which  they 
were  traveling,  took  fright  and  ran 
away.  While  going  at  full  speed. 
Bishop  Whitney  and  the  Prophet  leaped 
from  the  vehicle.  The  latter  cleared 
the  wheels  and  landed  in  safety,  but  his 
companion,  having  his  coat  fast,  caught 
his  foot  in  the  wheel  and  was  thrown 
to  the  ground  with  violence,  breaking 
his  leg  and  foot  in  several  places.  This 
accident  delayed  them  four  weeks  at  a 
public  house  in  Greenville.  Dr.  Porter, 
the  landlord's  brother,  who  set  the 
broken  limb,  remarked,  little  thinking 
who  the  travelers'  were,  that  it  was  "a 
pity  they  did  not  have  some  'Mormons' 
there,  as  they  could  set  broken  bones 
or  do  anything  else."  Joseph  admin- 
istered to  his  friend,  and  he  recovered 
rapidly.  They  had  fallen,  it  seems,  in- 
to suspicious  if  not  dangerous  hands. 
In  walking  through  the  woods  adjacent 
to  the  tavern,  the  Prophet's  attention 
had  been  attracted  by  several  newly- 
made  graves.  His  suspicion,  though 
not  thoroughly  aroused,  was  brooding 
over  this  circumstance  when  an  inci- 
dent occurred  to  emphasize  it.  After 
dinner,  one  day,  he  was  seized  with  a 
violent  attack  of  vomiting,  accom- 
l)anied   by   profuse     hemorrhage.       His 


BIOGRAPHICAL    ENCYCLOPEDIA. 


225 


jaw  became  dislocated  through  the  vio- 
lence of  his  contortions,  but  he  replaced 
it  with  his  own  hands,  and  making  his 
way  to  the  bedside  of  Bishop  Whitney, 
was  administered  to  by  him,     and     in- 
stantly healed.       The  effect  of  the  poi- 
son,   which    had    been    mixed    with    his 
food,   was     so      powerful     as  to  loosen 
much  of  the  hair  of  his  head.      It    was 
evident  that  they  could  remain  there  no 
longer  in  safety.      The  Bishop  had  not 
set  his  foot  upon  the>  floor  for  nearly  a 
month,    and.    though      much    improved, 
was  far  from  being  in  a  fit  condition  to 
travel.      But  Joseph  promised  him  that 
If  he  would   agree  to  leave   the     house 
next    morning,    they     would     start    for 
Kirtland.  and  would  have  a  prosperous 
.iourney   home.       The     sick     man    con- 
sented, and  they  accordingly  took  leave 
next  day  of  the  place  where  they    be- 
lieved their  murder  had  been     planned. 
They  experienced   the  fulfilment  of  the 
Prophet's  words  most  remarkably,    and 
."fter   a   p'easant   and   prosperous   jour- 
ney,   reached    Kirtland     some     time   in 
June.       In  September  of  that    year,     a 
i-evelation  was  given,  in  which  the  fol- 
lowing     passage       occurs:       "And     the 
Bishop,  Newel  K.  "Whitney,  also,  should 
navel   round  about  and  among  all   the 
Churches,    searching  after  the  poor,   to 
administer  to  their  wants  by  humblina 
the  rich  and  the  proud;   he  should  also 
employ  an  agent  to  take  charge  and  to 
do   his   secular      business,    as   he    shall 
direct:    nevertheless,   let  the  Bishop  go 
unto  the  city  of  New  York,  and  also  to 
the  city  of  Albany,  and  also  to  the  city 
of  Boston,  and  warn  the  people  of  those 
cities  with  the  sound  of  the  gospel,  with 
a  loud  voice,  of  the  desolation  and  ut- 
tei-  abolishment  which   awaits   them   if 
they  do  reject  these  things:  for  if  they 
do  reject  these  things,  the  hour  of  their 
judgment  is  nigh,  and  their  house  shall 
be   left   unto    them    desolate.      Let    him 
trust  in   me   and   he   shall   not  be   con- 
founded, and  an  hair  of  his  head  shall 
not  fall  to  the  ground  unnoticed."  Con- 
cerning one     of       these     missions,    the 
Prophet's  record  says:     "I  continued  the 
translation,   and     ministering       to     the 
Church    through   the   fall,    excepting     a 
rapid  journey  to  Albany,  New  York  and 
Boston,  in  company  with  Bishop  Whit- 
ney, from  which  I  returned  on  the  6th 
of  November   (18.33),    immediately  after 
the  birth  of  my  son  Joseph  Smith,  3rd." 
The  time  had  now  arrived  to  establish 


the    United    Order    in    Kirtland.        The 
firm    of    Gilbert    &   Whitney    had    been 
dissolved,   as  to  Kirtland,   the  business 
they  formerly  carried  on   being  super- 
seded by  that  of  N.  K.  Whitney  &  Co, 
The  Church  had  become  a  large  owner 
in  the  establishment,  as  was  doubtless 
the  case  at  Independence,  Mo.,     where 
a  branch  store,  under  the  old  firm  name, 
was   conducted   by     Bishop     Whitney's 
partner,  A.  S.  Gilbert,  now  also  a  mem- 
ber of  the  Church.  The  Kirtland  Saints 
having  entered   the   Order,    in    the   dis- 
tribution  of  stewardships   which     took 
place,  the  "Ozondah,"  or  mercantile  es- 
tablishment, fell  to  the  lot  of  Newel  K. 
Whitney,   or   as   he   was   named   in    the 
revelation,  "Ahashdah."  (Doc.  and  Cov., 
Sec.  104.)     Among  the  blessings  realized 
by  Bishop  Whitney  was  the  conversion 
of  his  father,  whom  he  brought  to  Kirt- 
land,  where  he  joined  the  Church  and 
died.      His  mother  and  other  near  rela- 
tives also  came  into  the  fold   and   she 
too  died  there.    The  following  is  a  para- 
graph   from      the      Prophet's     autobio- 
graphy:     "Thursday,    January    7,    1836: 
Attended  a  sumptuous  feast  at  Bishop 
N.   K.  Whitney's.     The  feast  was  after 
the  order  of  the  Son  of  God — the  lame, 
the    halt   and    blind    were    invited,     ac- 
cording  to  the   instiuction   of   the     Sa- 
^•ior.  Our  meeting  was  opened  by  sing- 
ing, and  prayer  by  Father  Smith:  after 
which    Bishop    "^A'hitney's     father     and 
mother,  and  a  number  of    others,  were 
blessed  with  a  patriarchal  blessing.  "V\^e 
then  received  a  bountiful  refreshment, 
furnished  by     the       liberality       of     the 
Bishop.       The  company  was  large,  and 
before  we  partook  we  had  some  of  the 
songs    of    Zion    sung,      and    our    hearts 
were  made  glad  while  partaking  of  an 
antepast    of    those     joys    that    will     be 
poured  out  upon  the  h^ads  of  the  Sain*^s 
when    they    are    gathered    together    on 
Mount  Zion.  to  enjoy  each  other's     so- 
ciety  forevermore.    when   there   will   be 
none  to  molest  or  make  us  afraid."  This 
Feast  for  the  Poor,  says  Mother  Whit- 
ney,   "lasted   three  days,    during  which 
all    in   the  vicinity     of     Kirtland     who 
would   come    were   invited   and     enter- 
tained.     The  Prophet  Joseph     and    his 
counselors  were  present  each  day.  talk- 
ing,  blessing  and   comforting   the   poor 
by   \vords   of  encouragement  and   their 
most  welcome  presence.       He  often  re- 
ferred to  it  afterwards  and  testified  of 
the  great  blessing  he  felt  in  associatin,^? 
with   the  meek  and   humble   whom   the 


Vol.   1     No.   15. 


April  13.  1901. 


226 


LATTER-DAY    SAINT 


Lord  "delights  to  own  and  bless.'  He 
said  it  was  preferable  and  far  superior 
to  the  elegant  and  select  parties  he 
afterwards  attended,  and  afforded  him 
much  more  satisfaction."  Among  those 
who  stood  true  to  the  Prophet  during 
the  troubleous  times,  of  the  apostasy  at 
Kirtland,  from  which  place  Joseph  and 
other  leaders  were  finally  compelled  to 
flee,  was  Bishop  Newel  K.  Whitney.  He 
also  left  Kirtland  in  the  fall  of  1838,  for 
Missouri,  whither  the  great  body  of  the 
Church  had  preceded  him.  His  desti- 
nation was  Adam-ondi-Ahman,  where 
many  of  the  Saints  were  settling,  and 
where  he  had  been  summoned  by  reve- 
lation to  preside.  Before  he  could  reach 
there  the  mob  troubles  in  Caldwell 
county  arose.  Far  West  fell  a  prey  to 
their  fury,  and  the  Saints,  numbering 
fifteen  thousand  men,  women  and  child- 
ren, were  driven  from  the  State.  The 
Bishop  and  his  family  continued  on 
their  way  as  far  as  St.  Louis,  where 
the  terrfble  reports  of  these  outrages 
were  confirmed.  They  returned  north- 
ward to  Carrollton,  Greene  county, 
Illinois,  where  the  Bishop  settled  his 
family  temporarily,  and  then  went  back 
to  Kirtland  to  wind  up  some  business 
for  the  Church  and  await  further  in- 
structions from  the  Prophet,  who  with 
other  leading  Elders  had  been  thrown 
into  prison.  Bishop  Whitney  returned 
to  Carrollton  in  the  spring  of  1839,  and 
was  just  in  time  to  join  his  family  in 
their. flight  across  the  Mississippi,  an 
anti-"Mormon"  mob,  headed  by  a  man 
named  Bellows,  who  had  known  them 
in  Kirtland,  having  formed  against 
them.  Aided  by  kind  friends,  they 
made  their  escape  in  the  night  time. 
We  next  hear  of  them  at  Quincy,  in 
the  same  State,  at  which  place  and  in 
its  vicinity,  the  main  portion  of  the 
scattered  Saints  had  congregated. 
Agreeable  to  an  appointment  made  at 
a  conference  held  there  May  6,  1839, 
Bishop  Whitney  arrived  at  Commerce 
(afterwards  Nauvoo)  on  the  seven- 
teenth of  June.  His  mission  was  to 
act  in  unison  with  the  other  Bishops 
in  locating  and  settling  the  Saints  upon 
the  lands  purchased  by  them  in  that 
locality.  On  the  fifth  of  October  of 
that  year,  he  was  appointed  Bishop  of 
the  Middle  Ward,  and  officiated  in  that 
capacity  until  called  to  be  the  Presid- 
ing Bishop  of  the  Church.  A  prophecy 
of  Joseph's  in  relation  to  the  Whitney 
familv.  uttered  in  Kirtland,  nine  years 


before,  was  fulfilled  soon  after  th6y  re- 
moved  from   Quincy  to  Commerce,     in 
the  spring  of  1840.       They  at  first   re- 
sided   in    a    very    unhealthy    neighbor- 
hood, and  all  fell  sick  with  chills  and 
fever.      Joseph,  on  visiting  them     and 
witnessing  their  condition,  was  touched 
with  compassion.  He  remembered  how 
kindly  they  had  received  him  and  his 
family,  when  they  were  homeless,  and 
at  once  urged  them  to  come  and  occupy 
a    comfortable    cottage     on     his     own 
premises,  in  a  much  healthier  locality. 
His  eenerous  offer  was   accepted,   and 
the  change  soon  restored  them  to  wont- 
ed health.      Joseph  had  said  to  Sister 
Whitney,  at  Kirtland,  that  even  as  she 
had  opened  her  house  to  him,  he  would 
do  a  similar  act  in  her  behalf  in  a  day 
when    circumstances   would    require   it. 
The  friendship  and     intimacy  existing 
between  the  Prophet  and  Bishop  Whit- 
ney  was    strengthened   and   intensified 
by  the  giving  in  mariage  to  the  former 
of  the  latter's  eldest  daughter,     Sarah, 
in  obedience  to  a  revelation  from  God. 
This  girl   was   but   seventeen   years   of 
age,   but  she  had  implicit  faith.       She 
was  the  first  woman,  in  this  dispensa- 
tion, given  in  plural  marriage  by  and 
with  the  consent  of  both  parents.    Her 
father   himself  officiated     in   the   cere- 
mony. The  revelation  commanding  and 
consecrating  this  union    is  in  existence, 
though  it  has  never  been  published.  It 
bears  the  date    July  27,  1842,  and  was 
given    through      the    Prophet    to    the 
writer's  grandfather,   Newel   K.   Whit- 
nev.  whose  daughter  Sarah  became  the 
wife  of  Joseph  Smith  for  time  and  all 
eternity.       The  ceremony  preceded     by 
nearly  a  year  the  written  document  of 
the  revelation     on     celestial  marriage, 
first  committed  to  paper  July  12,  1843. 
But  the  principle  itself  was  made  known 
to  Joseph  some  years  earlier.     Among 
the  secrets  confided  by  him     to  Bishop 
Whitney  in  Kirtland,  was  a  knowledge 
of  this   self-same   principle,   which     he 
declared    would    yet   be     received    and 
practiced  by  the  Church;  a  doctrine  so 
far  in  advance  of  the  ideas  and  tradi- 
tions of  the  Saints  themselves,   to  say 
nothing  of  the   Gentile  world,   that  he 
was  obliged  to  use  the  utmost  caution, 
lest  some  of  his  best  and  dearest  friends 
should  impute  to  him  improper  motives. 
The  original  manuscript  of  the  revela- 
tion on  plural  marriage,  as  taken  down 
by      William      Clayton,    the    Prophet's 
scribe,  was  given  by  Joseph  to  Bishop 


BIOGRAPHICAL    ENCYCLOPEDIA. 


227 


Whitney  for  safe  keeping-.    He  retained 
possession  of  it  until  the  Prophet's  wife 
Emma,  having-  persuaded  her  husband 
to  let  her  see  it,  on  receiving  it  from  his 
hands,  threw  it    into    the  fire  and  Jes- 
troyed  it.      Bishop  AVhltney,  foreseeing 
the   probable   fate     of   the  manuscript, 
had   taken   the   precaution   before     de- 
livering it  up,  to  have  it  copied  by  his 
clerk,   the   late     Joseph   C.    Kingsbury, 
who  executed  the  task  under  his  per- 
sonal  supervision.       It  was   this   same 
copy  of  the  original  that  Bishop  Whit- 
ney surrendered  to  President  Brigham 
Young  at  Winter  Quarters  in  1846-7,  and 
from  that  document  "polygamy"     was 
published  to  the  world  in  the  year  1852. 
Passing  by  the  terrible  tragedy  which 
deprived  the  Church  of  its  Prophet  and 
its  Partiarch,  and  the  almost  incessant 
storm   of  persecution   that  raged  until 
it  culminated     in     the     exodus  of   the 
Saints  from  Nauvoo  across  the  frozen 
Mississippi,    in    the   winter  of   1846,    we 
next   find    the   subject   of   this   memoir 
at  Winter  Quarters,   oflSciating  as  pre- 
siding Bishoo  and  Trustee-in-Trust  for 
the  Church.      To  the  latter  of  these  offi- 
ces,   he,    in     conjunction     with    Bishop 
George  Miller,   had   succeeded     at     the 
death       of     President     Joseph     Smith. 
Bishop  Miller  apostatizing,     the     office 
continued  with     Bishop  Whitney  until 
his  death.       From  Winter  Quarters  in 
the  spring  of  1847,     two     of     his  sons, 
Horace  K.   and  Orson   K.,   went     west 
with  the  Pioneers.  He  himself  remained 
where  his   services   were  most  needed, 
having  charge      in     conjunction     with 
Isaac  Morley,  of  emigrational  matters 
on  the  frontier.     The-  year  following  he 
led   a   company   of   Saints   across     the 
plains  to  Salt  Lake  valley,  arriving  on 
the  eighth  of  October.     As  his  wagons 
rolled  into  the  settlement,  the    general 
conference  of  the  Church  was  just  clos- 
ing.      But  one   more  incident  remains 
untold.      It  is  the  morning  of  Monday, 
September  23,  18-50.      An  anxious  group 
is   gathered   about   the   doorway   of   an 
unpretentiou  J  abode  on  City  Creek,  in 
what  is  still  known  as  the  Eighteenth 
Ward.  Presidents  Brigham  Young,  He- 
ber  C.   Kimball   and   others  are   there, 
exerting  their  faith  that  God  will  spare 
the     life      of     one     who     lies      within 
stretched  upon  a  bed  of  suffering.  Two 
days  before  he  had  returned  from  the 
Temple  Block,  where  the  labors    of    the 
Bishopric  occupied  much  of  his  atten- 
tion,   complaining   of  a   severe   pain   in 


his  left  side.  It  was  pronounced  bil- 
ious pleurisy.  He  never  recovered,  but 
grew  rapidly  worse  during  the  remain- 
ing thirty-six  hours  of  his  mortal  ex- 
istence. Eleven  o'clock  came,  and  as 
the  final  sands  of  the  hour  passed,  the 
immortal  spirit  of  Newel  K.  Whitney, 
freed  from  its  coil  of  clay,  soared  up- 
ward to  the  regions  of  the  blest.  A 
post  mortem  tribute  in  the  "Deseret 
Weekly  News"  of  Sept.  28,  1850,  says: 
"Thus  in  full  strength  and  mature 
years,  has  one  of  the  oldest,  most  ex- 
emplary, and  most  useful  members  of 
the  Church  fallen  suddenly  by  the  cruel 
agency  of  the  King  of  Terrors.  In  him, 
the  Church  suffers  the  loss  of  a  wise 
and  able  counselor  and  a  thorough  and 
straightforward  business  man.  It  was 
ever  more  gratifying  to  him  to  pay  a 
debt  than  to  contract  one,  and  when  all 
his  debts  were  '^aidhe  wasahappy  man, 
though  he  had  nothing  left  but  his  own 
moral  and  muscular  energy.  He  has 
gone  down  to  the  grave,  leaving  a  spot- 
less name  behind  him,  and  thousands 
to  mourn  the  loss  of  such  a  valuable 
man."— Orson  P.  Whitney. 

HUNTER,  Edward,  the  third  pre- 
siding Bishop  of  the  Church,  was  the 
second  son  and'  seventh  child  of  Ed- 
ward and  Hannah  Hunter,  and  was 
born  June  22,  1793,  in  Newtown  town- 
ship, Deleware  county,  Penn.  His  pa- 
ternal ancestors  were  from  the  north  of 
England,  and  on  his  mother's  side  he 
was  of  Welsh  extraction.  The  original 
of  the  Hunter  family  is  supposed  to 
have  been  "William  the  hunter,"  from 
whom  came  the  Hunters  of  Medomsley 
Hall,  near  Newcastle-on-Tyne,  the  vil- 
lage of  Medomsley  existing  as  early  as 
A.  D.  1183.  John  Hunter,  the  great- 
grandfather of  the  Bishop,  passed  over 
to  Ireland  some  time  in  the  seventeenth 
century,  and  served  as  a  lieutenant  of 
cavalry  under  William  of  Orange,  at  the 
battle  of  the  Boyne,  where  he  was 
wounded.  He  afterwards  came  to 
America,  and  settled  in  Delaware  coun- 
ty, Penn.,  about  twelve  miles  from 
Philadelphia.  Edward  Hunter,  Esquire, 
the  Bishop's  father,  was  justice  of  the 
peace  of  Delaware  county  for  fortjr 
years.  On  his  mother's  side,  three 
generations  back,  was  Robert  Owen,  of 
North  Wales,  a  man  of  wealth  and 
character,  and  a  firm  sympathizer  with 
Cromwell  and  the  Protectorate.  On  the 
restoration  of  Charles  II  he  refused  to 


228 


LATTER-DAY    SAINT 


take  the  oath  of  allegiance  and  was 
Imprisoned  for  five  years.  The  Bishop 
was  fond  of  referring  to  this  incident 
in  the  life  of  his  ancestor.  He  would 
relate  the  circumstance  in  his  quaint, 
desultory  way,  and  coming  to  the  close, 
repeat  the  words:  "Oath  of  allegiance- 
yes,  yes— refused  to  take  it— imprisoned 
for  five  years"— and  then,  lifting  up  his 
hands,  throwing  back  his  head,  and 
half  shutting  his  eyes  in  a  sort  of 
dreamy  ecstacy  would  exclaim :  "Beauti- 
ful: beautiful!"  Robert  Owen,  after  his 
release  from  prison,  emigrated  to 
America  and  purchased  property  in 
the  neighboihood  of  the  "City  of  Broth- 
erly Love."  Like  its  founder,  William 
Penn,  he  was  himself  a  Quaker.  His 
son  Tteorge  sat  in  the  State  legislature. 


-4, 


and  held  various  offices  of  public  trust. 
Such  in  brief  is  the  lineage  of  the  third 
presiding  Bishop.  It  was  the  intention 
of  his  father  to  give  him  a  thorough 
scholastic  training.  He,  however,  ex- 
pressed a  preference  for  agricultural 
pursuits.  His  choice  was  humored,  but 
he  was  prevailed  upon  to  acquire  a 
trade,  and  became  proficient  as  a  tan- 
ner and  currier.  He  subsequently  at- 
tended school  and  mastered  the  art  of 
surveyine,  and  finally  went  into  busi- 
ness in  Philadelphia  with  a  merchant 
named  Bomount.  He  had  previously 
n)ade  a  trip  to  the  west  as  far  as 
Louisville,  Kentucky,  intending  to  go 
on  to  St.  Louis,  but  was  diverted  from 
his  purpose  and  returned  home  via 
the  Southern  and  Atlantic  States.  When 
Rdward   was   twenty-two  years  of  age 


his   father  died.       He   was  offered     his 
position    as   justice    of    the    peace,    but 
declined    it    on    account    of    his    youth. 
He  was  also  tendered  the  Federal  can- 
didacy and  certain  election  to  the  Penn- 
sylvania legislature,  but  would  not  ac- 
cept   it    as    he    was     a     Democrat    and 
chose  to  remain  one.      He  served  seven 
years  as  a  cavalry  volunteer,  and  three 
years  as  county  commissioner  of  Dela- 
ware county,   receiving  at   the  election 
a  higher  vote  than  any  other  offlcer  on 
the  ticket.      After  farming  in  Delaware 
county   for    four   or    five    years,    he    re- 
moved to  Chester  county,  where  he  pur- 
chased    a     fine     farm     of  five  hundred 
acres,   well   stocked  and   cultivated.   He 
there   married   Ann     Standly,   youngest 
daughter  of  Jacob  and   Martha  Stajid- 
ly.   an   honest,   capable   family  of     that 
vicinity.        He    was      then    about    forty 
years   of  age.       Let   the  Bishop's     own 
record  now  speak  for  him:       "I  always 
had  an  inquiry  of  the  Lord  as  to  how 
I  could  worship  Him  acceptably.       My 
father  told  me  to  belong  to  no  religious 
sect,    but   to   keep  sacred   that   all   men 
have  the  right  to  worship  God  accord- 
ing to  the  dictates  of  their  consciences. 
He   said    our   form    of   government    was 
too  good  for  a  wicked  world,  and  that 
its  blessings  of  liberty  would  not  be  ap- 
preciated  and   respected.       I   succeeded 
in   business  beyond  my  expectation.     I 
attended  different  places  of  worship  and 
sustained  all  sects  in  the  right  to  wor- 
ship God   in   their  own  way,  but  could 
not   connect  myself  with  any.       I   was 
called  on  to  give  the  privilege  to  have 
erected   on  my  land,   on   the   site  of  an 
old    school    house     which     had    burned 
down,  a  house  for  educational  purposes 
and  also  for  holding  meetings.  I  agreed 
to  give  the  land   for  ninety-nine  years 
and  help  build  the  house,  if  they  would 
allow    all    persons     and    persuasions   to 
meet  in  it  to  worship  God.       This  was 
particularly   stated  in   the     articles     of 
agreement,    and    a      good      house    was 
built  called  the  West  Nantmeal     Semi- 
nary.      My  sister,  living  in  my  family, 
was   a    great    reader   of    the    Scriptures 
and  would  often  say,  'how  is  it  we  can- 
not join   any  of  the  professions  of  the 
day.'      I  would  tell  her  they  were  hew- 
ing  out    cisterns    that    would    not   hold 
water:  that  the  history  of  sectarianism 
was  one  scene  of  bloodshed  and  strife, 
but  we  would  look  on  and  see  if  they 
could    make    anything   else   out   of   it." 
Such  was  the  state  of  his  mind  on  the 


BIOGRAPHICAL    ENCYCLOPEDIA. 


229 


subject  of  religion,  when,  in  ine  spring 
of  1839,  he  heard  of  a  strange  sect  called 
"Mormons,"  some  of  whose  preachers, 
traveling  through  that  region,  had 
learned  of  the  West  Nantmeal  Semi- 
nary and  taken  steps  to  procure  the 
hall  for  the  purpose  of  holding  meet- 
ings. Immediately  a  tumult  was  raised, 
and  it  was  declared  by  some  of  the 
leading  residents  that  it  would  not  do 
to  have  the  "Mormons"  tliere.  "Why?" 
inquired  Mr.  Hunter.  "Oh,  they  are 
such  a  terrible  people,"  was  the  reply. 
"Why  are  they  terrible?"  he  asked. 
"WTiy — why" — stammered  the  accusers 
—"Dr.  Davis  says  they  are  a  very  dan- 
gerous people,  and  it  will  not  do  to  let 
them  preach  here."  "Oh,  that's  it?" 
said  the  honest,  independent  farmer, 
his  democratic  blood  beginning  to  boil. 
"When  I  grave  the  lease  for  that  land 
and  helped  to  build  that  house,  it  was 
partitiularly  agreed  and  stated  in  the 
lease  that  people  of  every  religion 
should  have  the  privilege  of  meeting 
there  to  worship  God.  Now,  those 
Mormons  are  going  to  have  their  rights, 
or  else  the  lease  is  out  and  I'll  take  the 
Seminary."  This  determined  speech 
brought  the  bigots  to  their  senses,  and 
no  further  objection  was  raised.  Soon 
after  that  Mr.  Hunter,  hearing  that  a 
"Mormon"  Elder  was  going  to  preach 
at  a  place  called  Locust  Grove,  a  few^ 
miles  away,  and  that  he  was  liable  to 
be  badly  treated,  mounted  his  horse  and 
rode  over  to  the  meeting  for  the  ex- 
press purpose  of  seeing  that  the  stran- 
ger was  not  imposed  upon.  The  El- 
der's name  was  Elijah  H.  Davis.  "He 
was  a  humble  young  man,"  says  the 
Bishop,  "the  first  one  that  I  was  im- 
I,'ressed  was  sent  of  God.  I  was  sit- 
tiner  by  Dr.  Griffith,  our  representative. 
Robert  Johnson,  one  of  the  trustees, 
addressing  the  Elder,  said:  'I  wish 
you  would  say  something  about  the 
Atonement.'  He  spoke  w^ell  on  the 
subject,  but  before  he  was  through 
Johnson  interrupted  him  and  ordered 
him  to  quit  preaching.  I  sprang  up  and 
said:  'He  is  a  stranger  and  shall  have 
justice  shown  him  and  be  respected; 
we  will  hear  him  and  then  hear  you 
speak.'  I  was  informed  that  there 
were  many  present  opposed  to  the 
'Mormons,'  but  I  resolved  as  I  lived 
that  Mr.  Davis  should  be  protected,  if 
I  had  to  meet  the  rabble  on  their  own 
ground.  I  kept  my  eye  on  them  and 
determined  to  stand  by  him  at  the  risk 


of  person  and  property.  I  had  friends, 
though  Mr.  Davis  had  none.  Mr.  J. 
Johnson,  brother  to  Robert  Johnson, 
came  to  me  as  I  was  going  out  and 
apologized  for  his  brother's  conduct.  I 
walked  out  of  the  crowd,  got  on  my 
horse  and  rode  home  alone.  "  On  reach- 
ing home  and  retiring  for  the  night,  he 
lav  awake  for  some  time  meditating  on 
what  had  taken  place.  "My  reflections 
were,"  says  he,  "why  have  I  taken 
such  a  decided  stand  for  those  stran- 
gers, and  I  asked  the  Lord:  'Are  those 
Mormons  thy  servants?'  Instantly,  a 
light  came  in  the  room  at  the  top  of 
the  door,  so  great  that  I  coul'd  not  en- 
dure it.  I  covered  my  head  with  the 
bed-clothes  and  turned  over  to  the  wall. 
I  had  exerted  mv  mind  and  body  much 
that  day  and  soon  fell  asleep  "  Mr. 
Hunter's  house,  from  that  time  forth, 
was  a  home  for  all  "Mormon"  Elders 
traveling  in  that  vicinity.  During  the 
winter  of  1839-40,  he  was  honored  by 
a  personal  visit  from  the  Prophet  Jo- 
seph Smith,  who  was  on  his  way  back 
from  Washington,  after  presenting  to 
Pres.  Van  Buren  the  memorial  of  his 
people's  grievances,  and  invoking,  in 
vain,  governmental  protection  for  the 
Latter-day  Saints,  recently  driven  out 
of  Missouri.  Joseph  preached  at  the 
Seminary  and  spent  several  days  with 
Mr.  Hunter  before  proceeding  west- 
ward. Oct.  8,  1840,  Edward  Hunter  was 
baptized  by  Elder  Orson  Hyde,  then  on 
his  way  to  Palestine,  and  soon  after  re- 
ceived a  visit  from  Elder  Hyrum 
Smith,  the  Prophet's  brother.  He  at- 
tended conference  at  Philadelphia,  and 
subscribed  liberally  to  the  building  of 
the  Nauvoo  House  and  the  Temple.  At 
a  subsequent  visit  of  Brother  Hyrum 
Smith,  as  they  were  walking  along  the 
banks  of  the  Brandywine,  the  conversa- 
tion turned  upon  the  subject  of  the  de- 
parted: and  Brother  Hunter  was  con- 
strained to  inquire  about  his  children 
whom  he  had  lost,  particularly  a  little 
boy,  George  Washington  by  name,  an 
excellent  child  to  whom  he  was  devot- 
edly attached.  "It  is  pretty  strong 
doctrine,"  said  Elder  Smith,  "but  I  be- 
lieve I  will  tell  it.  Your  son  will  act 
as  an  angel  to  you;  not  your  guardian 
angel,  but  an  auxiliary  angel,  to  assist 
you  in  extreme  trials."  The  truth  of 
this  was  manifested  to  him  about  a 
year  and  a  half  later,  when,  in  an  hour 
of  deep  depression,  the  little  boy  ap- 
peared to  him  in  vision.      Brother  Hun- 


230 


LATTER-DAY    SAINT 


ter  says:   "In  appearance  he  was  more 
perfect   than  In  natural  life — the  same 
blue  eyes,  curly  hair,   fair  complexion, 
and    a   most   beautiful   appearance.       1 
felt  disposed  to  keep  him,   and  offered 
Inducements   for   him    to   remain.       He 
then   said,    in   his   own   familiar  voice: 
George  has  many  friends  in  heaven.'  " 
In  September,  1841,  he  visited  Nauvoo, 
the   headquarters     of     the   Saints,   and 
purchased    a    farm     and   several    town 
lots,  deciding  to  make  it  his  permanent 
place   of  abode.       Returning  to   Penn- 
sylvania,   he    disposed    of    two    of    his 
farms,  and  invested  considerable  means 
in   merchandise,     and    in     June,     1842, 
moved  with  his  family  to  the  bosom  of 
the  Church.      He  took  with  him  seven 
thousand  dollars  in  money  and  four  or 
five   thousand   dollars  in  goods  of  dif- 
ferent kinds,  all  of  which  he  placed  in 
the  hands  of   the  Prophet,   to  be  used 
for   the    general     advancement    of   the 
work  of  God.      He  paid  out  thousands 
of  dollars  in  improving  his  property  in 
and   about     Nauvoo,     and     furnishing 
many    hands   with    employment.       Ac- 
cording to  Joseph's  own  words,  Brother 
Hunter  assisted  him,  in  one  year,  to  the 
extent  of  fifteen  thousand   dollars.     It 
was  given  cheerfully,   for  his  soul  na- 
turally liberal,  was  wrapped  up  in  his 
religion,    for   which   he   felt   willing   to 
make   any  sacrifice.       Indeed,     he  had 
given  so  much  to  the  Church,    that  Jo- 
seph    finally     told     him     he  had  done 
■enough,  and  to  reserve  the  rest  of  his 
property   for  his  own  use.     He   was  a 
patient  sharer  in   the  persecutions     to 


should  not  be  tormented  any  longer  by 
such  vexatious    prosecutions.      During 
those  troubled  times  the  Prophet,  whose 
life  was  constantly  being  sought,   was 
hid  up  for  long  periods  in  the  house  of 
Brother  Hunter,  who  enjoyed  his  con- 
fidence and  had  been  chosen  one  of  his 
life  guards.      Under  his  roof,  during  one 
of  these  seasons  of  retirement,  was  re- 
vealed the  latter  part  of  the  revelation 
concerning  baptism  for  the  dead.      He 
received  from  the  Prophet  during  this 
period  many     precious     blessings     and 
promises,   in  recognition  of  his  friend- 
ship and  fidelity.     Edward  Hunter  was 
one    of    the    City    Council     of   Nauvoo 
which  authorized  the  abatement  of  the 
"Expositor,"   a     libelous     sheet   estab- 
lished  by   apostates,   bitter  enemies  of 
the  Saints,  for  the  purpose  of  stirring 
up   mob   violence   against   them.       The 
act  of  abatement,  which  was  peaceably 
but  thoroughly  executed,  was  magnified 
by   the  anti-"Mormons"     and  invested 
with  all  the  sensation  of  which  it  was 
capable,   and  the  brunt  of  censure,   as 
usual,   fell   upon     the     leaders     of   the 
Church.       Brother  Hunter,  at  Joseph's 
request,  visited  Springfield  to  interview 
Governor  Ford   and   represent  matters 
in   their  proper  light,   and  ask  him   to 
use   his   influence   to   allay   the   excite- 
ment and  hostility'  which  had  now  set 
in  like  a  flood  in  the  direction  of  Nau- 
voo   and      the    "Mormons."       Joseph's 
parting  words  to  him  were:  "You  hiave 
known  me  for  several  years;  say  to  the* 
governor,  under  oath,  everything  good 
and  bad  you   know  of  me."       Brother 


which  the  Church  and  its  principal  men     Hunter  was  accompanied  on  his  errand 


were  continually  subjected.  About 
twelve  months  after  taking  up  his  resi- 
dence in  Nauvoo,  he  was  arrested  with 
several  others  on  a  charge  of  treason 
and  taken  to  Carthage  for  trial.  How 
this  must  have  incensed  his  patriotic 
soul,  which  had  tenaciously  observed 
the  laws  of  his  country  from  childhood, 
and  regarded  his  native  land  with 'all 
the  love  and  reverence  which  high  and 
noble  natures  alone  can  feel,  is  left  to 
the  imagination  of  those  who  knew  him. 
Suffice  it,  that  no  one  appeared  against 
them  at  the  trial;  and  the  trumped-up 


by  J.  Bills  and  P.  Lewis.  They  were 
followed  for  miles  by  officers  whose  in- 
tention was  to  arrest  them,  but  hav- 
ing the  promise  of  God's  Prophet  that 
they  should  ,  accomplish  their  journey 
and  return  in  safety,  they  were  not 
overtaken,  and  in  due  time  arrived  at 
their  destination.  Governor  Ford  had 
gone  to  Carthage,  but  his  wife  assured 
the  messengers  that  His  Excellency 
would  not  take  any  action,  pro  or  con, 
until  he  had  seen  "Mr.  Smith."  On 
their  return,  the  whole  country  was  in 
an  uproar  and  they  learned  that  Joseph 


charge  being  dismissed,   they  were  set    and   Hyrum   had   given   themselves   up 

and  gone  to  Carthage.  Threats  were 
made  on  all  sides  that  the  "Mormon" 
leaders  would  never  get  away  alive,  and 
the  bloody  sequel  showed  that  such  was 
indeed  the  purpose  of  those  who  had 
induced  them  to  surrender     their  per- 


at  liberty.  He  was  at  the  trial  of  the 
Prophet,  in  Springfield,  the  capital  of 
Illinois,  when  Judge  Pope,  after  the 
verdict  of  acquittal  had  been  rendered, 
ordered  the  clerk  of  the  court  to  put  it 
on   record   that   the     "Mormon"   leader 


BIOGRAPHICAL    ENCYCLOPEDIA. 


231 


sons,  though  they  had  done  so  on  the 
pledged  word  of  the  governor  of  the 
State  that  they  should  be  protected. 
Brother  Hunter  and  his  companions 
reached  Nauvoo  June  27,  1844,  the  very 
day  and  about  the  same  hour  that  Jo- 
seph and  Hyrum  Smith  were  murdered 
in  Carthage  jail.  "Next  day,"  says  his 
narrative,  "their  bodies  were  brought 
from  Carthage  to  Nauvoo.  We  formed 
two  lines  to  receive  them;  I  was  placed 
at  the  extreme  right,  to  wheel  in  after 
the  bodies,  and  march  to  the  Mansion. 
As  we  passed  the  Temple,  there  ,  were 
crowds  of  mourners  there,  lamenting 
the  great  loss  of  our  Prophet  and  Pa- 
triarch. The  scene  was  enough  to  al- 
most melt  the  soul  of  man.  Mr.  Brewer, 
myself  and  others  took  Brother  Jo- 
seph's body  into  the  Mansion  House. 
When  we  went  to  the  wagon  to  get  the 
corpse,  Colonel  Brewer,  a  U.  S.  officer, 
taking  up  the  Prophet's  coat  and  hat. 
which  were  covered  with  blood  and 
dirt,  said,  'Mr.  Hunter,  look  here;  ven- 
geance and  death  await  the  perpetra- 
tors of  this  deed.'  At  midnight  Broth- 
ers Dimick  B.  Huntington,  G.  Gold- 
smith, William  Huntington  and  myself 
carried  the  body  of  Joseph  from  the 
Mansion  House  to  the  Nauvoo  House, 
and  put  him  and  Hyrum  in  one  grave. 
Their  death  was  hard  to  bear.  Our 
hope  was  almost  gone,  not  knowing 
then  that  Joseph  had  prepared  for  the 
Kingdom  to  go  on,  by  delivering  the 
keys  to  the  Twelve  and  rolling  off  the 
burden  from  his  shoulders  on  to  theirs. 
Oreat  sorrow  prevailed  in  the  hearts  of 
the  people.  Pres.  Brigham  Young  and 
most  of  the  Twelve  were  away."  Nov. 
23,  1844,  Elder  Huriter  was  ordained  a 
High  Priest  and  Bishop  and  set  apart 
to  preside  over  the  Fifth  Ward  of 
Nauvoo.  He  was  ordained  by  Pres. 
Brigham  Young,  Apostle  Heber  C. 
Kimball  and  Presiding  Bishop  Newel 
K.  Whitney,  the  first  named  being 
mouth.  Among  the  promises  made  to 
Jiim,  and  one  that  was  impressed  deep- 
ly upon  his  mind,  was  that  he  should 
"have  power  to  raise  up  the  drooping 
spirit,"  and  simultaneously  with  its 
utterance  a  remarkable  sensation 
thrilled  through  his  being,  confirming 
the  truth  of  the  speaker's  words.  He 
was  Bishop  of  the  Fifth  Ward  for  about 
two  years,  until  he  left  Nauvoo  in  the 
spring  or  summer  of  1846,  and  joined 
the  main  body  of  the  exiled  Saints  at 
AVinter  Quarters.  He  had  been  delayed 


by  sickness  for  several  weeks  in  Iowa. 
Bishop  Hunter  sutsained  a  loss  in  prop- 
erty, by  the  exodus,  of  about  fifty 
thousand  dollars.  He  spent  the  winter 
of  1846-7  at  Winter  Quarters,  where  he 
acted  as  Bishop  of  the  Seventh  Ward. 
While  there,  preparing  and  fitting  out 
for  the  West,  he  suffered  much  from 
sickness  in  his  family.  He  was  ap- 
pointed captain  of  one  hundred  wagons, 
and  folowed  in  the  wake  of  the  Pio- 
neers six  or  eight  week's  after  their 
departure.  Pursuing  a  trackless  course, 
but  meeting  with  something  new  and 
interesting  every  day  to  relieve  the 
otherwise  toilsome  and  dreary  journey, 
he  and  his  company  arrived  in  Great 
Salt  Lake  valley  Sept.  29,  1847.  Saj^s 
the  Bishop:  "We  were  all  well,  but  our 
teams  were  worn  down.  We  had  an 
open  winter  and  our  stock  recruited. 
Our  breadstuffs  were  very  limited  and 
we  used  to  get  roots  from  the  Indians 
and  dig  them  ourselves.  The  Mormon 
Battalion  came,  bringing  gold,  but  no 
flour.  Flour  sold  at  fifty  cents  per 
pound."  Elder  Hunter  was  appointed 
Bishop  of  the  South  Fort,  and  in  Feb- 
ruary, 1849,  he  was  chosen  Bishop  of 
the  13th  Ward,  Salt  Lake  City.  In  the 
fall  of  1849,  he  was  sent  back  by  the 
First  Presidency  to  the  Missouri  river, 
to  superintend  the  emigration  of  the 
poor  Saints  to  the  Valley.  He  took 
with  him  funds  for  this  purpose 
amounting  to  five  thousand  dollars,  and 
thus  set  in  motion  the  vast  emigrating 
enterprise  which  has  peopled  with  souls 
from  two  hemispheres  the  moujptain 
vales  of  Utah.  He  returned  to  the 
Valley  Oct.  10,'  1850.  During  his  ab- 
sence the  death  of  one  of  his  dearest 
friends  took  place— Presiding  Bishop 
Newel  K.  Whitney,  who  expired  Sept. 
23,  1850.  Bishop  Hunter  was  chosen  to 
succeed  Bishop  Whitney  in  the  presi- 
dency of  the  Aaronic  Priesthood,  April 
7,  1851.  His  counselors,  for  a  year  or 
more,  were  Presidents  Brigham  Young 
and  Heber  C.  Kimball;  afterwards 
Bishops  Leonard  W.  Hardy  and  Jesse 
C.  Little  were  appointed  to  fill  those 
positions,  and  later  on  Bishop  Robert 
T.  Burton  took  the  place  vacated  by 
Bishop  Little.  April  6,  1853,  during  the 
general  conference  of  the  Church, 
Bishop  Hunter  and  others  laid  the 
southwest  cornerstone  of  the  Salt  Lake 
Temple,  and  he  delivered  the  oration. 
In  closing  his  record  the  Bishop  says: 
"I  have  acted  in  the  Priesthood  and  th« 


232 


LATTER-DAY    SAINT 


part  allotted  me.  with  the  love  and  fear 
of  God   before  my   eyes,    by   the  aid   of 
His  Spirit  to  the  best  of  my  ability,  and 
I   hope  acceptably   in   the  sight  of  God 
and  those  who  preside  over  me  in  this 
Latter-day  work."      It  would  require  a 
volume    to    tell    all    that    could    be    told, 
even   briefly,   of   the   life  and   character 
of  this  good  and   noble  man.       Honest, 
straightforward     in     his     dealings,  and 
candid  even  to  bluntness  in  his  speech, 
his  heart  overflowed  with  kindness  and 
he  enjoyed    the   love  and   confidence  of 
all.        Childlike    and    humble,      he    was 
nevertheless  shrewd  and  discerning.  He 
was  charitable  and  open-handed  to  all, 
even    to    tramps    and      vagrants.        He 
would    sometimes   ouote     thein     in    hi^ 
humorous  way:    "Hunting  work,   hunt- 
ing work,  yes.  yes.  but  they  don't  want 
to  find  it  very  bad.     Feed  them,  breth- 
ren,    feed     them— mustn't       let       them 
starve."       He    was   not   only     quick    to 
perceive,  but  ready  and  witty  at  retoit, 
and   had  an  eccentric   way  of     turning 
a  conversation   suddenly     .sprung  upon 
him.   into  a   channel   utterly   foreign   to 
the    purpose    of    the    other    party,    and 
then,   as     the     visitor     aro.se     to  leave 
thinking     he     had  come  on  a  fruitless 
errand,    would    suddenly    revert    to    th- 
original    theme   and     give     the   answer 
which  he  had  all  along  been  cogitating 
while  his  speech  was  pursuing  a  differ- 
ent course.       He  was  a  great  exhorter 
to  faithfulness,  narticularly  in  the  pay- 
ment of  tithes  and  offerings.     His   fa- 
miliar speech  at  the  Bishop's  meetings: 
"Pay  your  tithing  and  be  bles.sed,  "  has 
passed   into  a  proverb.       The  death  of 
Bishop   Hunter   occurred     on    Tuesday 
Oct.    16.    1883.  r     The     immediate    cause 
was  internal  inflammation,  an  ailment 
from  which  he  had  suffered  for  years, 
and  which  he  anticipated  would  ttnally 
prove  fatal.      His  health  had  been  fee- 
ble  for  a   long    time,    though    his   mind 
was  unimpaired,  and  for  the  last  month 
he  had  frequently  been  absent  from  his 
office.       Among   those   who   visited   his 
bedside  during  his  illness     were  Presi- 
dent John  Taylor  and  Apostle  Erastus 
Snow.    /  So  passed  from  this  stage     of 
action,  where  for  over  ninety  years  he 
had  acted  well  and  faithfully  every  part 
assigned  him,  a  man  of  God  as  noted 
for  his  uprightness  and  integrity,  as  for 
his  genial  nature  and  overflowing  kind- 
ness of  heart.       His  memory   will   live 
as  long  as  the  great  work  with  which 


he  was  identified,  and  which  he  laborel 
so  long  and  faithfully  to  establish. — 
Orson  F.  Whitney. 

PRESTON,     Willlani     Bowker,    the 

fourth  presiding  Bishop  of  the  Church, 
and  the  present  incumbent  of  that  of- 
fice, is  by  birth  an  American,  a  native 
of  Franklin  county.  Vii;ginia.  where  he 
was  born  Nov.  24,  1830.  The  name  of 
Pieston  «as  known  in  the  annals  of 
history,  as  early  as  Malcolm  1st,  of 
Scotland,  who  reigned  from  A.  D.  944 
to  953.  Leolphus  De  Preston  was  the 
first  of  that  name,  of  whom  there  is 
any  recoi'd.  It  is  supposed  that  the 
town  of  Preston,  famous  in  the  Church 


annals  as  the  place  where  the  first  go.s- 
pel  sermon  was  preached  by  Latter- 
day  Saint  Polders  in  Europe  in  this 
dispensation,  took  its  name  from  that 
of  the  Bishop's  family.  During  the 
Catholic  persecutions  which  marked  the 
reign  of  Queeh  Mary,  called  "bloody 
Mary"  for  her  crimes,  the  Prestons. 
who  were  stout  Protestants,  fled  to  Ire- 
land, and  during  subsequent  persecu- 
tions by  the  Catholics  in  the  "green 
isle,"  several  members  of  the  family 
emigrated  to  America  and  settled  in  the 
Old  Dominion.  The  Bishop's  father 
was  Christopher  Preston,  a  cousin  of 
William  Ballard  Preston,  of  Virginia, 
and  W.  C.  Preston,  of  North  Carolina, 
both  members  of  Congress  from  their 
respective  States.  His  mother's  maiden 
name  was  Martha  Mitchell  Claytor.  He 
was  the  third  son  and  child  in  a  fami- 


BIOGRAPHICAL    ENCYCLOPEDIA. 


233 


ly  of  seven.  Christopher  Preston  was 
a  well-to-do  farmer,  and,  naturally 
enough,  his  son  William's  earliest  recol- 
lections are  those  of  the  harvest  field, 
where  he  doubtless  acquired  something 
of  that  knowledge  of  subduing  and  cul- 
tivating the  earth  which  in  after  years 
fitted  him  for  his  career  as  a  pioneer, 
farmer  and  colonizer.  At  the  age  of 
nineteen  he  changed  his  avocation  as  a 
tiller  of  the  soil  for  that  of  clerk  in 
a  store,  first  in  the  immediate  vicinity 
of  his  home  and  afterwards  at  Lynch- 
burg, forty-five  miles  from  where  he 
was  born.  He  continued  in  that  occu- 
pation until  the  year  1852,  when,  as 
a  youth  in  his  twenty-second  year,  he 
left  home  and  his  native  State  to  see 
and  battle  with  the  world.  He  had 
often  heard  of  the  wonderful  land  of 
California — the  golden  magnet  of  the 
great  west,  and  with  the  motive  of  the 
sight-seer  rather  than  the  placer  hunt- 
er, he  was  drawn  thither  to  behold  that 
marvelous  amalgamation  of  men  of  all 
characters  and  nations,  which  the  gold- 
thirsty  stream  of  emigration  was  pour- 
ing down  the  Pacific  slope  into  the  lap 
of  the  new  Eldorado.  Caring  little  or 
nothing  for  the  life  of  a  gold  hunter, 
and  having  gratified  the  original  desire 
which  impelled  him  westward,  he  set- 
tled down  as  a  farmer  and  stock  raiser 
in  Yolo  county,  California.  He  had  for 
his  neighbors  the  Thatcher  family,  who 
were  "Mormons,"  and  it  was  through 
them  that  he  became  acquainted  with 
the  history  and  religion  of  the  Latter- 
day  Saints,  of  whom  till  then  he  had 
scarcely  heard.  vWilliam  B.  Preston 
was  baptized  into  the  Church  of 
Jesus  Christ  of  "Latter-day  Saints  by 
Elder  Henry  G.  Boyle,  in  the  month  of 
February,  1857i,  Immediately  after- 
wards, he  was  called  into  the  ministry 
by  Pres.  George  Q.  Cannon,  then  in 
charge  of  the  Pacific  Coast  Mission, 
and,  being  ordained  an  Elder  by  Geo. 
Q.  Cannon,  traveled  in  Upper  Califor- 
nia, and  the  regions  round  about.  He 
labored  in  that  capacity  until  Pres. 
Young,  in  the  fall  of  1857,  called  home 
all  the  Elders  and  Saints,  in  conse- 
quence of  the  invasion  of  Johnston's 
army.  The  company  in  which  Elder 
Preston  traveled  to  Utah,  included  Mo- 
ses Thatcher,  his  future  brother-in- 
law.  Henry  G.-  Boyle  was  captain  of 
the  company,  he  being  one  of  the  "Mor- 
mon Battalion  and  familiar  with  the 
route.      It  being  too  late  in  the  season 


to  cross  the  plains,  they  traveled  south 
from  Sacramento  along  the  coast,  and 
by  way  of  Los  Angeles  and  San  Bernar- 
dino into  southern  Utah,  thence  north 
to  Salt  Lake  City,  where  they  arrived 
on  New  Year's  day,  1858.  The  ac- 
quaintance of  Elder  Preston  with  the 
Thatcher  family,  and  their  subsequent 
friendship,  had  ripened  into  a  fonder 
feeling  for  one  of  its  members,  and  on 
Feb.  24,  1858,  the  second  month  after 
their  arrival  in  this  city,  he  took  to 
wife  Miss  Harriet  A.  Thatcher.  The 
organization  of  "Minute  Men,"  one 
thousand  strong,  by  Pres.  Young,  to 
meet  the  exigencies  of  those  stirring 
times,  included  William  B.  Preston, 
who  was  also  in  the  Utah  exodus  or 
"move,"  and  went  south  as  far  as  Pay- 
son.  Early  in  the  spring  of  1858,  he 
went  back  to  the  Platte  bridge,  with 
twenty-two  others,  to  bring  to  Utah  a 
lot  of  goods  and  merchandise,  cashed 
there  by  the  "Y.  X.  Company,"  at  the 
outbreak  of  the  troubles  between  the 
people  of  Utah  and  the  government. 
This  expedition  involved  considerable 
risk,  as  the  "Utah  war"  w^as  hardly 
over,  and  the  troops  at  Fort  Bridger 
were  still  watching  "Mormon"  move- 
ments with  suspicious  eyes.  After  some 
narrow  escapes,  the  mission  of  the  bold 
and  trusty  twenty-three  was  success- 
fully accomplished,^  and  they  returned 
in  safety  to  their  homes.  Brother 
Preston  prepared  to  settle  at  Payson. 
and  with  this  object  in  view  built  him- 
self a  house,  making  the  adobies  and 
shingles  with  his  own  hands.  The  win- 
ter following,  he  went  with  a  company 
of  others  to  California,  to  purchase 
clothing  and  merchandise  for  Father 
Thatcher's  store,  returning,  after  an 
eventful  experience  both  ways,  in  the 
spring  of  1859,  with  two  wagon-loads 
of  merchant  freight,  of  which  the  peo- 
ple in  those  early  times  stood  much  in 
need.  He  now-  reconsidered  his  intention 
of  locating  permanently  at  Payson,  and. 
recognizing  in  the  settling  of  the  vir- 
gin valley  of  Cache,  opportunities  for 
growih  and  enterprise  which  the  more 
thickly  settled  locality  he  was  then  in 
did  not  present,  he,  in  connection  with 
Father  Thatcher  and  his  family  re- 
solved to  move  north  and  assist  in 
colonizing  Cache  valley.  Their  inten- 
tion was  carried  into  effect  in  August, 
1859,  when  William  B.  Preston,  with 
his  wife  and  two  of  his  brothers-in-law, 
John  B.  and  Aaron  Thatcher,  left  Pay- 


234 


LATTER-DAY  SAINT 


son  and  journeyed  to  Cache  valley, 
then  a  region  of  grass  and  sage-brush. 
They  camped  and  prepared  to  locate 
on  the  present  site  of  the  city  of  Logan, 
of  which  they  were  among  the  principal 
founders.  "This  is  good  enough  for 
me," — the  laconic  speech  of  William  B. 
Preston,  as  he  halted  and  staked  out 
his  horses  on  the  grassy  banks  of  Logan 
river,  has  almost  become  a  proverb  with 
the  inhabitants  of  the  flourishing  vale 
now  known  as  "Utah's  Granary."  They 
were  busy  at  work  erecting  their  house, 
when.  In  November  of  that  year.  Apos- 
tles Orson  Hyde  and  Ezra  T.  Benson 
were  sent  by  Pres.  Young  to  organize 
the  settlements  of  Cache  valley,  which 
had  been  located  under  the  direction 
of  the  veteran  pioneer,  Peter  Maughan. 
"WTio  are  you  going  to  have  for 
Bishop  of  Logan?"  inquired  Apostle 
Hyde  of  Bishop  Maughan.  The  latter, 
pointing  out  Preston's  house,  said: 
"There  is  a  young  man  living  in  that 
house,  who  seems  to  be  a  very  enter- 
prising, go-ahead  man,  who,  I  think, 
will  make  a  good  Bishop.  He  and  the 
Thatcher  boys  have  done  the  most  in 
the  shape  of  building  and  improving 
during  the  time  they  have  been  here. 
They  have  worked  day  and  night."  The 
Apostles  seemed  satisfied  with  this  hon- 
est, plain-spoken  recommend,  and  ac- 
cordingly, on  Nov.  14,  1859,  "William  B. 
,  Preston  was  chosen,  ordained  and  set 
apart  as  Bishop  of  Logan,  under  the 
hands  of  Orson  Hyde,  Ezra  T.  Benson 
and  Peter  Maughan.  At  that  time  the 
population  of  Logan  was  made  up  of 
seventeen  families.  The  next  enter- 
prise in  which  the  young  Bishop  took 
a  leading  and  active  part  was  the  con- 
struction of  the  Logan  and  Hyde  Park 
canal,  and  its  successful  accomplish- 
ment with  the  beneficent  results  that 
have  followed  are  due  in  no  small  de- 
gree to  the  native  energy  and  character 
force  of  William  B.  Preston.  Early,  in 
the  year  1860,  while  two  feet  of  snow 
yet  "lingered  in  the  lap  of  spring,"  he 
assisted  Surveyor  Jesse  W.  Fox  to  lay 
off  the  city  of  Logan,  and  during  that 
year  spent  much  of  his  time  in  re- 
ceiving new-comers,  who  now  began  to 
immigrate  thither  in  great  numbers, 
and  apportioning  off  and  selecting  for 
them  homes.  In  1860-61,  a  new  ap- 
portionment of  representation  having 
been  made,  by  which  Cache  county  was 
given  two  representatives  and  onp 
counselor  in   the   Territorial   assembly. 


at  the  ensuing  election  Bishop  Preston 
was  chosen  a  representative  and  spent 
the  winter  of  1862-63  in  the  legislature. 
Having  made  two  trips  to  the  Missouri 
river  with  ox  teams  to  immigrate  the 
poor,  in  the  years  1863  and  1864,  he 
spent  the  winters  of  those  years  as  a 
member  of  the  legislative  assembly.  At 
the  April  conference  of  the  Church  in 
1865,  he  was  called  with  forty-six  oth- 
ers on  a  mission  to  Europe,  and  was 
given  charge  of  the  company  as  far  as 
New  York.  In  those  days  of  ox  teams 
and  stage  coaches,  such  a  trust  meant 
much  more  than  it  possibly  could  mea-n 
nowadays.  They  left  Salt  Lake  City 
May  10,1865.  On  arriving  at  New  York  the 
Bishop  decided,  before  sailing,  to  visit 
his  parents  in  Virginia,  whom  he  had 
not  seen  for  thirteen  years,  and  of 
whom  he  had  heard  nothing  during  the 
civil  war.  He  found  them  broken  up 
and  ruined  in  property  by  the  war,  but 
enjoyed  a  very  pleasant  visit  with  them, 
and  after  a  brief  stay  among  his  rela- 
tives, returned  to  New  York  and  sailed 
for  Liverpool.  Arriving  at  that  port, 
the  headquarters  of  the  European  Mis- 
sion, on  Wednesday,  Aug.  23,  1865,  he 
was  assigned  to  the  Newcastle  and 
Durham  conference  as  its  president, 
where  he  labored  until  January,  1866, 
when,  at  a  conference  held  in  Birming- 
ham, he  was  called  by  the  presidency 
of  the  mission  to  the  Liverpool  office, 
to  take  charge  of  the  business  depart- 
ment. Here  he  labored  three  years, 
during  which  time  he  visited  the  Paris 
Exposition  in  August,  1867.  Released 
from  his  mission  at  the  expiration  of 
three  and  a  half  years,  he  sailed  from 
Liverpool  for  home  July  14,  1868,  on  the 
steamship  "Colorado,"  in  charge  of  a 
company  of  six  hundred  Saints,  and 
reached  Salt  Lalje  City  early  in  the 
following  September.  The  advent  of 
the  great  railroad,  which  was  then  be- 
ing pushed  ahead,  gave  him  a  new 
field  in  which  to  operate,  and  in  the 
winter  of  1868-69,  we  find  him  in  Echo 
canyon,  a  sub-contractor  under  Pres. 
Brigham  Young,  engaged  in  construct- 
ing the  Union  Pacific  railroad.  Re- 
turning to  Logan,  he  resumed  his  du- 
ties as  Bishop,  and  at  the  next  elec- 
tion was  again  sent  to  represent  Cache 
county  in  the  legislature  of  1872.  He 
also  served  as  a  member  of  that  body 
in  1876,  1878,  1880  and  1882.  After  the 
death  of  Bishop  Peter  Maughan,  April 
24,   1871,   Bishop  Preston  was  called   to 


BIOGRAPHICAL    ENCYCLOPEDIA. 


235 


act  as  presiding  Bishop  in  Cache  val- 
lev.  The  Utah  and  Northern  railroad 
was  projected  in  the  month  of  August, 
1871.  Bishop  Preston  was  one  of  the 
leading  spirits  in  the  enterprise,  and 
xinder  the  advice  and  direction  of  Pres. 
Young,  perhaps  did  more  than  any  one 
else  in  uniting  the  people  of  Cache 
valley  upon  the  execution  of  the  pro- 
ject. A  company  was  organized  for 
this  purpose  in  1871,  with  John  W. 
Young  as  president,  and  William  B. 
Preston  as  vice-president  and  assist- 
ant superintendent.  The  road  was  com- 
pleted to  Franklin  in  May,  1874.  Bishop 
Preston  was  its  vice-president  until  the 
property  passed  into  the  possession  of 
the  Union  Pacific  Company.  In  the 
month  of  May,  1877,  the  Cache  Stake  of 
Zion  was  re-organized  by  Pres.  Young, 
and  Moses  Thatcher  appointed  presi- 
dent, with  William  B.  Preston  as  his 
-first  counselor.  This  position  he  held 
\intil  Pres.  Thatcher  was  called  into 
the  quorum  of  the  Tweive,  April,  1879, 
"When  he  succeeded  the  latter  as  presi- 
dent of  the  Cache  Stake.  The  death 
of  Presiding  Bishop  Edward  Hunter 
Oct.  16,  1883,  left  that  office  vacant  un- 
til the  following  spring,  when,  in  gen- 
eral conference,  April  6,  1884,  William  B. 
Preston  was  called  to  the  high  and  re- 
sponsible position  which  he  now  occu- 
pies. Thoroughly  practical  in  his 
views  and  methods,  he  combines  the 
intelligence  of  the  progressive  business 
man  with  the  energy  and  ability  to 
put  his  ideas  into  execution — a  man 
more  of  deeds  than  of  words,  though 
not  lacking  in  either  when  occasion 
for  their  use  arises.  Bishop  Preston 
has  made  his  presence  and  influence 
felt  in  the  sacred  and  important  call- 
ing, for  which  he  was  evidently  by  na- 
ture and  Deity  designed. — Orson  F. 
Whitney. 

MORLEY,  Isaac,  first  counselor  to 
Bishop  Edward  Partridge  from  1831  to 
1840,  was  the  son  of  Thos.  E.  Morley, 
and  was  born  March  11,  1786,  at  Mon- 
tague, Hampshire  county,  Mass.  He 
Avas  an  early  settler  in  the  so-called 
Western  Reserve,  being  one  of  the  men 
that  cut  down  the  woods  and  intro- 
duced agriculture  in  northern  Ohio.  He 
served  his  country  in  the  war  with 
Great  Britain  in  1812-15,  and  also  held 
the  position  of  captain  in  the  Ohio 
militia.  In  June,  1812,  he  married  Lucy 
Gunn  in  Massachusetts.      When  Oliver 


Cowdery  and  missionary  companions 
passed  through  Ohio  in  the  latter  part 
of  1830,  Isaac  Morley  was  among  the 
first  converts.  At  that  time  he  was 
the  owner  of  a  good  farm  and  consid- 
erable pro-perty,  which  he  devoted  to 
the  establishment  of  the  latter-day 
work.  He  was  ordained  a  High  Priest 
June  3,  1831,  by  Lyman  Wight,  and  on 
the  same  day  set  apart  as  a  counselor 
to  Bishop  Edward  Partridge.  This  of- 
fice he  filled  until  the  demise  of  Bishop 
Partridge  in  1840.  In  June,  1831,  he  was 
also  appointed  by  revelation  to  travel  to 
Missouri  in  company  with  Ezra  Booth, 
preaching  by  the  way.  (Doc.  and  Gov., 
52:  23,)  During  the  month  of  July, 
1833,  and  while  in  their  heated  frenzy, 
the  Jackson  county  mob  had  demol- 
ished or  razed  to  the  ground  the  print- 
ing office  and  dwelling  house  of  Wm. 
W.  Phelps  &  Co.,  at  Independence,  and 
tarred  and  feathered  Bishop  Edward 
Partridge,  Iscaac  Morley  and  five  oth- 
ers stepped  forward  and  offered  them- 
selves as  a  ransom  for  their  brethren, 
willing  to  be  scourged  or  die,  if  that 
would  appease  the  anggr  of  the  mobo- 
crats,  who  on  that  occasion  were  gath- 
ered together  to  the  number  of  five 
hundred  men,  armed  with  rifles,  dirks, 
pistols,  clubs  and  whips.  In  1835.  El- 
der Morley  visited  the  Eastern  States 
on  a  mission,  in  company  with  Bishop 
Partridge.  On  their  return  to  Kirt- 
land,  in  November,  Joseph  the  Prophet 
wrote:  The  word  of  the  Lord  came  to 
me,  saying:  "Behold  I  am  well  pleased 
with  my  servant  Isaac  Morley  and  my 
servant  Edward  Partridge,  because  of 
the  integrity  of  their  hearts  in  laboring 
in  my  vineyard,  for  the  salvation  of 
the  souls  of  men."  He  attended  the 
dedication  of  the  Kirtland  Temple  in 
March,  1836,  and  received  his  blessings 
in  the  same,  after  which  he  returned 
to  Missouri  and  helped  to  locate  the 
city  of  Far  West,  where  he  settled 
his  family.  At  a  general  assembly  of 
the  Church  held  Nov.  7,  1837,  he  was 
chosen  Patriarch  of  Far  West,  and  or- 
dained to  that  office  under  the  hands  of 
Joseph  Smith,  Sidney  Rigdon  and  Hy- 
rum  Smith  He  remained  at  Far  West 
until  the  arrival  of  General  John  Clark 
and  army  with  the  exterminating  order 
of  Governor  Lilburn  W.  Boggs,  and  was 
one  of  the  fiftv-six  citizens  taken  by 
the  military  and  marched  to  Richmond, 
Ray  county,  to  await  trial;  he  was 
turned  oyer  to  the  civil  authorities  at 


236 


LATTER-DAY    SAINT 


that  place,  where  he,  after  the  famous 
mock-trial,  together  with  others,  was 
discharged  by  Judge  Austin  A.  King. 
Nov.  24.  1838.  Upon  the  final  expulsion 
of  the  Saints  from  Missouri,  he  located 
In  Illinois,  near  Lima,  Hancock  county; 
the  settlement  made  by  him  and  others 
was  named  Yelrome.  Here  he  began 
to  gather  round  him  the  comforts  of 
life  by  his  industry,  being  engaged 
principally  in  the  coopering  business. 
In  the  fall  of  1845  his  houses,  cooper's 
shop,  property  and  grain  were  burned 
by  a  mob,  and  he  was  driven  from  the 
ashes  by  his  hard-earned  home  to  Nau- 
voo,  where  he  remained  until  the  ex- 
pulsion of  the  Saints  from  Illinois.  He 
removed  to  Winter  Quarters,  where  he 
buried  his  wife,  and  emigrated  to  Great 
Salt  Lake  valley  in  1848.  In  the  fall  of 
1849  he  took  charge  of  the  company 
which  settled  Sanpete  valley.  The  win- 
ter which  followed  was  very  severe, 
and  notwithstanding  the  supplies  of  the 
settlers  were  barely  sufficient  to  sub- 
sist upon,  the  Indians  were  not  allowed 
to  starve:  some  of  the  settlers  had  to 
shovel  the  snow  from  the  grass  that 
their  animals  might  have  something  to 
eat.  These  things  nearly  disheartened 
most  of  the  settlers,  yet  "Father  Mor- 
Jey,"  as  he  was  familiaiiy  called,  was 
never  discourap'ed,  but  exhorted  his 
brethren  to  diligence,  faithfulness  and 
good  works,  and  encouraged  them  by 
telling  them  that  it  would  be  one  of  the 
best  settlements  in  the  mountains.  He 
lived  to  see  Sanpete  valley  dotted  with 
thriving  villages  and  termed  the  grana- 
ry of  Utah.  Elder  Morley  served  as  a 
senator  in  the  general  assembly  of  the 
provisional  State  of  Deseret.  In  1851 
he  held  a  seat  in  the  legislative  coun- 
cil of  Utah  Territory,  as  a  councilor 
from  Sanpete  county,  to  which  office  he 
was  re-elected  in  1853  and  1855.  During 
the  last  ten  years  of  his  life  he  devoted 
himself  exclusively  to  the  duties  of  his 
calling  as  a  Patriarch,  conferring  bless- 
ings upon  thousands  of  the  Saints.  He 
died  at  Fairview,  Sanpete  county,  Utah, 
June  24,  1865.  Isaac  Morley  was  of  a 
kind  and  gentle  disposition,  unassum- 
ing in  his  manner:  and  his  public 
preaching  and  that  of  his  fellow-la- 
borer. Bishop  Partridge,  was  spoken  of 
by  the  Prophet  Joseph,  in  the  following 
characteristic  terms:  "Their  discourses 
were  all  adapted  to  the  times  in  which 
we    live   and    the   circumstances    under 


which  we  are  placed.  Their  words  are 
words  of  wisdom,  like  apples  of  gold 
In  pictures  of  silver,  spoken  in  the  sim- 
ple accents  of  a  child,  yet  sublime  as 
the  voice  of  an  angel."  (See  also  "Des- 
eret News"  (weekly).  Vol.  14,  p.  313.) 

HARDY,  Leonard  Wllford.  first 
counselor  to  Bishop  Edward  Hunter 
from  1856  to  1883.  and  to  Wm.  B.  Pres- 
ton in  1884,  was  born  Dec.  31,  1805,  in 
Bradford,  Essex  county,  Mass.,  and  was 
baptized  Dec.  2.  1832,  by  Orson  Hyde. 
He  was  soon  afterwards  ordained  an 
Elder  and  labored  faithfully  in  the  min- 
istry   so    far    as    he    had    opportunity. 


Dec.  6.  1844,  in  company  with  Apostle 
Wilford  Woodruff  and  wife.  Milton 
Holmes,  Dan  Jones  and  wife  and  Hiram 
Clark  and  wife.  Brother  Hardy  went  on 
board  the  "John  R.  Skiddey."  W^illiam 
Skiddey.  captain,  for  Liverpool,  to  fill 
a  mission  in  England.  They  had  a 
very  rough  passage,  but  arrived  in  safe- 
ty Jan.  4,  1845,  being  26  days  on  the 
voyage.  After  landing  and  holding 
a  conference  in  Liverpool,  Elders  Hardy 
and  Holmes  labored  awhile  in  the  Man- 
chester conference,  after  which  Elder 
Hardy  took  charge  of  the  Preston  con- 
ference, being  appointed  to  preside 
March  9,  1845.  On  his  arrival  there  he 
was  placed  the  first  night  in  a  bed, 
where  a  person  had  just  died  of  the 
smallpox,  and  the  linen  of  which  had 
not  been  changed.  The  result  was  an  at- 
tack of  the  disease,  and  he  passed 
through   a   severe     stage     of   sickness. 


BIOGRAPHICAL    ENCYCLOPEDIA. 


237 


Throug'h  the  administration  of  the  El- 
ders his  life  -was  preserved.  He 
attended  the  various  conferences 
in  England  with  Apostle  Woodruff 
and  the  other  brethren  during 
the  time  he  spent  In  England, 
and  labored  faithfully,  baptizing  many 
into  the  Church.  He  presided  over  the 
Preston  conference  until  the  31st  of 
August,  after  which  he  labored  in  vari- 
ous conferences  in  England  until  Oct. 
19,  1845.  when  he  and  Elder  Holmes  took 
passage  for  the  return  to  New  York. 
Before  he  left.  Elder  Hardy  requested 
Elder  Woodruff  to  lay  his  hands  upon 
his  head  and  give  him  a  blessing.  El- 
der Woodruff  consented,  and  in  the 
blessing  told  him  that  he  should  arrive 
home  to  his  family  and  friends  in  safe- 
ty, and  be  gathered  to  Zion.  He  told 
him  also  he  should  spend  his  last  days 
as  one  of  the  leading  Bishops  in  the 
land  of  Zion.  At  the  close  of  the  bless- 
ing iiilder  Hardy  remarked:  "Brother 
Woodruff,  I  always  thought  you  were 
a  man  of  truth.  I  can  comprehend  ar- 
riving home  in  safety,  but  I  cannot 
comprehend  being  a  leading  Bishop  in 
Zion."  And  he  says  it  came  nearer  try- 
ing his  faith  than  anything  that  ever 
happened  to  him  in  the  flesh.  Elder 
AVoodruff  told  him  to  wait  and  see,  and 
if  it  did  not  come  to  pass,  he  would 
acknowledge  that  the  spirit  that  dic- 
tated it  wafc  not  the  spirit  of  truth. 
The  future  events  of  his  life  showed 
that  it  was  correct.  On  the  return  of 
the  Pioneers  from  the  Valley  in  1847, 
Brother  Woodruff  was  sent  in  the 
spring  of  1848  to  Boston  to  gather  up 
the  Saints,  who  still  remained  in  the 
East.  Elder  Woodruff,  leading  the 
last  company  himself  toward  the  Rocky 
Mountains,  was  joined  by  Elder  Hardy 
and  his  family  at  Boston,  who  left 
there  April  9.  1850,  with  a  hundred 
Saints.  In  the  organization  of  the  com- 
pany on  the  frontiers  for  crossing  the 
plains.  Elder  Hardy  was  appointed  cap- 
tain of  the  first  fifty.  The  cholera 
visited  all  the  traveling  camps  that 
season,  and  their  camp  did  not  escape. 
Eleven  members  of  the  company  died: 
Elder  Hardy  was  attacked  by  the  dis- 
ease, and  the  day  that  he  was  in  his 
lowest  condition  the  camp  had  a  severe 
stampede,  the  excitement  attending 
which  was  so  great  that  it  came  near 
cn«tin°-  his  life.  The  administration  of 
the    Elders,    however,    again    preserved 


him.  He  passed  through  all  the  labors, 
cares  and  vicissitudes  of  the  camp  from 
Boston  to  Salt  Lake  City,  arriving  on 
Oct.  14th.  having  been  on  the  road  188 
days.  After  his  arrival  in  the  Valley. 
Elder  Hardy  was  ordained  a  Bishop 
Anril  6,  1856,  and  called  to  preside  over 
the  12th  Ward,  Salt  Lake  City:  and  on 
the  21st  of  June  he  was  also  appointed 
by  Pres.  Young  to  preside  pro  tem. 
over  the  11th  Ward.  He  was  afterwards 
, called  to  be  Presiding  Bishop  Hunter's 
first  counselor,  being  set  apart  Oct.  12, 
1856,  and  officiated  as  such  up  to  the 
death  of  Bishop  Hunter,  when  he  was 
annointed  first  counselor  to  Bishop 
Wm.  B.  Preston,  and  acted  in  that  ca- 
pacity  up   to   his   own   death.     Nov.   20, 

1869.  he  started  on  a  short  mission  to 
the  East.  He  spent  most  of  his  time 
on  this  mission  in  Massachusetts,  his 
native    State     and    returned    in    March, 

1870.  having  held  a  number  of  meetings 
and  baptized  two  persons.  Almost  his 
entire  life  after  he  joined  the  Church 
was  one  continuous  mission  of  unceas- 
ing activity.  Even  after  the  destroyei 
laid  his  ruthless  hand  upon  him  and  the 
dread  warning  was  given  that  death 
would  shortly  claim  his  own.  the  en- 
ergetic spirit  of  the  man  would  allow 
him  no  peace  unless  he  was  at  his  post 
in  the  Bishop's  office;  and  there  he 
might  have  been  seen  every  day  when 
he  was  really  unfit"  to  leave  his  cham- 
ber. Bishop  Hardy  died  in  Salt  Lake 
City  July  31,  1884.  In  his  obituary, 
published  in  the  "Deseret  News,"  the 
following  occurs:  "Three  ini^portant 
virtues  have  characterized  the  life  of 
Bishop  Leonard  W.  Hardy,  and  these 
are  honesty,  truthfulness,  and  virtue. 
That  he  was  also  a  strictly  temperate 
man  his  wonderful  preservation  and 
hale  appearance,  notwithstanding  his 
great  age.  amply  testify.  Of  the  honest, 
noble  qualities  of  his  heart  little  need 
here  be  said.  His  name  is  known 
throughout  the  land  as  a  synonym  for 
kindness,  benevolence  and  charity.  His 
cheering  tones  will  live  long  in  the 
memory  of  the  poor  and  low-spirited, 
and  his  readiness  to  extend  assistance 
to  the  needy  will  never  be  forgotten  by 
the  host  of  Saints  who  learned  to  love 
him  as  a  father.  His  long  life  has  been 
wisely  and  well  spent,  and  the  peaceful 
slumber  of  his  weary  body  is  but  a 
fitting  preparation  for  his  glorious 
awakening  on   the   resurrection   morn." 


238 


LATTER-DAY    SAINT 


BURTON,  Robert  Taylor,  second 
counselor  to  Bishop  Edward  Hunter 
from  1875  to  1883,  and  first  counselor  to 
Bishop  Wm.  B.  Preston  since  1884,  is 
the  son  of  Samuel  Burton  and  Hannah 
Shipley,  and  was  born  Oct.  25,  1821,  at 
Amersberg,  Canada  West.  He  was  th^ 
tenth  in  a  family  of  fourteen  children 
seven  of  whom  were  born  in  England 
and  the  rest  in  America.  His  parents 
cmig-iated  to  America  in  1817,  and  after 
residing  two  or  three  years  in  New 
York  State  they  removed  to  western 
Canada.  Some  time  in  the  autumn  of 
1837  two  "Mormon"  missionaries  came 
into  the  neighborhood  where  the  Bur- 
ton family  resided.  Robert  T.  Burton, 
then  only  sixteen  years  of  age,  persuad- 
ed his  father  to  entertain  the  Elders 
and  provide  a  place  in  which  they  could 
expound  their  views.  Soon  after  this 
the  youth  visited  some  relatives  in  the 
State  of  Ohio,  spending  the  winter  at 
school  and  the  next  summer  in  helping 
his  widowed  sister,  Mrs.  Jane  Lay- 
borne,  upon  her  farm.  During  his  ab- 
sence from  home  his  father's  family 
was  converted  to  "Mormonism."  He 
was  informed  of  this  fact  by  his  moth- 
er, who  in  September  visited  him  and 
her  kindred  in  Ohio,  and  requested  him 
to  accompany  them  in  their  proposed 
migration  to  the  far  west.  This  meant 
at  that  time  the  State  of  Missouri, 
where  the  Latter-day  Saints  were  gath- 
ering in  large  numbers.  He  consented 
to  do  so,  though  not  without  some  re- 
luctance, the  result  of  certain  rumors 
unfavorable  to  the  Saints  that  were 
afloat  concerning  them  in  Ohio.  Re- 
turning to  Canada  he  was  himself  con- 
verted to  the  faith  which  his  parents 
had  espoused,  and  was  baptized  by  El- 
der Henry  Cook,  October  23,  1838.  In  the 
latter  part  of  that  month  he  left  Cana- 
da, with  his  father's  family,  for  Far 
West,  Caldwell  county,  Missouri,  and 
had  gone  as  far  as  Walnut  Grove, Knox 
county,  Illinois,  when  he  learned  of  the 
terrible  persecutions  of  the  Saints  in 
the  adjoining  State.  He  therefore  con- 
cluded, with  others,  to  remaih  at  Wal- 
nut Grove,  where  a  branch  of  the 
Church  was  organized,  and  there  the 
Burton  family  resided  for  about  two 
years.  They  then  removed  to  Nau- 
voo.  From  June,  1843,  to  1844,  Robert 
T.  Burton,  who  had  been  ordained  an 
Elder,  was  absent  from  Nauvoo  on  a 
mission  in  Illinois,  Michigan  and  Ohio, 
in    company    with    Elder    Nathaniel    V. 


Jones.  Having  baptized  a  goodly  num- 
ber and  organized  branches  in  the  two 
latter  States,  they  returned  home.  El- 
der Burton's  arrival  being  just  two 
weeks  before  the  martyrdom  of  the 
Prophet  and  Patriarch.  Right  at  this 
time  he  performed  his  first,  military 
duty,  enlisting  in  Captain  Gleason's 
cavalry  company,  Nauvoo  Legion.  He 
was  on  guard  duty  in  Nauvoo  at  the 
lime  of  the  Carthage  jail  tragedy  and 
for  some  time  afterwards  was  constant- 
ly on  duty  there  and  in  the  vicinity, 
endeavoring  to    protect    the    lives  and 


property  of  his  persecuted  people  from 
rapine  and  robbery.  A  lover  of  music 
and  possessing  talent  in  that  line,  he 
became  a  member  of  the  Nauvoo  Brass 
Band,  and  also  connected  himself  with 
the  Nauvoo  Choir,  besides  performing 
other  public  dutleg.  In  January,  1845, 
he  was  called  on  a.  special  mission,  with 
Elder  Samuel  W.  Richards,  to  travel 
through  some  of  the  central  counties 
of  Illinois  for  the  purpose  of  allaying 
prejudice  in  the  minds  of  the  people, 
the  result  of  falsehoods  circulated  by 
apostates  and  others  in  the  vicinity  of 
Nauvoo.  He  returned  in  time  to  be 
married  on  the  18th  of  December,  to 
Miss  Maria  S.  Haven,  the  ceremony 
uniting  the  young  couple  being  per- 
formed by  President  Brigham  Young  at 
the  home  of  the  Havens  in  Nauvoo. 
The  nearest  approach  to  a  wedding  tour 
experienced  by  Bro.  and  Sister  Burton 
was  the  tragic  exodus  of  the  ensuing 
spring,  when  the  Saints  began  to  leave 


BIOGRAPHICAL    ENCYCLOPEDIA. 


239 


Nauvoo  upon  their  long  and  toilsome 
pilgrimage  into  the  unknown  West.  The 
Burtons  were  in  one  of  the  first  com- 
panies that  started,  crossing  the  Missis- 
sippi on  the  ice,  February  11,  1846^  and 
encamping  on  the  western  bank.  The 
snow  was  about  eighteen  inches  deep 
and  the  weather  intensely  cold — so  cold 
that  many  of  the  homeless  pilgrims 
were  compelled  to  cross  and  recross  the 
frozen  river  several  times,  with  teams 
and  wagons,  for  additional  supplies  of 
clothing,  bedding  and  provisions.  The 
Burtons  left  Sugar  Creek  in  the  general 
move  westward.  Progress  was  slow 
and  difficult,  owing  to  the  absence  of 
roads  and  the  prevailing  wet  weather, 
the  country  being  covered  with  water 
and  mud  almost  the  entire  distance  to 
the  Missouri  river,  where  they  arrived 
about  the  middle  of  June.  The  main 
camp  was  at  Council  Bluffs,  but  Bro. 
Burton  with  his  wife  and  his  aged 
parents  made  a  temporary  home  at  a 
point  lower  down  the  river.  There  his 
mother  died,  a  victim  to  the  hardships 
and  exposures  of  the  enforced  exodus, 
and  was  buried  in  a  lonely  grave  on  the 
banks  of  the  Missouri.  The  survivors 
of  the  family,  after  accumulating  the 
necessary  teams  and  supplies  for  the 
.iourne:s  across  the  plains,  left  their 
Missouri  home,  and  on  May  20,  1848, 
rejoined  the  main  body  of  the  Saints  at 
Winter  Quarters.  By  .this  time  the 
Pioneers  had  been  to  the  Rocky  Moun- 
tains and  returned,  and  President 
Young  and  his  associates  were  now 
organizing  the  main  emigration.  Robert 
T.  Burton  and  his  family  were  in  the 
company  led  by  Pres.  Brigham  Young, 
with  whom  they  came  to  Salt  Lake  val- 
ley, arriving  there  in  the  latter  part  of 
September.  During  the  journey  Bro. 
Burton  acted  as  bugler  for  the  camp. 
He  and  his  family  lived  in  the  Old  Fort 
until  January,  1849,  when,  Salt  Lake 
City  having  been  laid  out  and  divided 
into  ecclesiastical  Wards,  they  moved 
iijto  the  Fifteenth  Ward.  Elder  Burton 
first  lived  with  his  brother-in-law,  Wil- 
liam Coray,  but  on  the  15th  of  August 
removed  to  the  corner  of  Second  West 
and  First  South  streets,  where  he  still 
resides.  In  the  fall  of  that  year  the 
local  militia  was  organized,  under  the 
reminiscent  title  of  "Nauvoo  Legion." 
In  the  first  company  of  cavalry  that 
was  formed — the  one  commanded  by 
Captain  George  D.  Grant— Robert  T. 
Burton  was  appointed  bugler.  Early  in 


1850  this  company  was  called  into  ac- 
tive service  to  defend  the  settlers  in 
Utah  county  against  hostile  Indians 
Leaving  Salt  Lake  City  on  the  evening 
of  February  7th,  they  traveled  all  night, 
and  arriving  at  Provo  early  on  the 
morning  of  the  8th,  found  the  Ind'ians 
strongly  fortified  on  the  south  banK 
of  Provo  river,  where  they  stoutly  de- 
fended themselves  for  three  days 
against  the  attack  of  Captain  Grant's 
"Minute  Men"  and  others  of  the  mili- 
tia. On  the  third  day  a  little  com- 
pany of  cavalry  made  a  determined  as- 
sault upon  the  enemy's  position,  and 
after  receiving  the  Indian  fire,  which 
momentarily  checked  their  charge,  raN 
lied,  swept  on  and  captured  a  barricade 
formed  by  a  double  log  house,  from 
which  the  savages  fled  precipitately  af- 
ter defending  it  as  long  as  possible. 
In  the  very  thick  of  the  fray,  two  of 
the  cavalry  men— Robert  T.  Burton  and 
Lot  Smith— heedless  of  the  bullets  that 
whistled  past  their  ears  and  splintered 
the  wood-work  in  every  direction,  rode 
round  to  the  front  of  the  house  and 
spurred  their  horses  into  the  passage 
way  between  the  log  buildings.  They 
were  the  first  of  the  troopers  inside  the 
house,  most  of  their  comrades  entering 
by  sawing  throtagh  the  logs  at  the  rear. 
The  campaign  was  quite  successful,  ihe 
Indians  being  driven  from  the  valley 
into  the  mountains.  in  September  of 
the  same  year  Elder  Burton  was  one  of 
a  company  ordered  north  against  the 
Shoshone  Indians,  and  in  November  he 
and  his  comrades  again  went  to  Wtah 
county  against  a  remnant  of  the  tribe 
they  had  fought  there  the  previous 
spring.  While  on  this  campaign  he  was 
elected  lieutenant.  In  December  he  was 
ordered  to  Tooele  county  in  pursuit  of 
marauding  savages.  This  trip  was  a 
very  trying  one,  the  company  having 
no  tents  or  other  shelter,  and  being 
without  sufficient  bedding  or  clothing. 
After  a  hard  experience  they  returned 
to  Salt  Lake  City,  having  accom- 
plished very  little.  In  June,  1851,  he  ac- 
companied another  expedition  against 
the  Indians  on  the  western  desert,  and 
though  the  men  suffered  much  for  want 
of  water,  they  were  entirely  successfu4, 
killing,  in  a  battle  fought  at  the  edge 
of  the  desert  west  of  Skull  valley,  near- 
ly all  the  members  of  this  hostile  tribe. 
In  the  spring  of  1852  Tie  took  a  small 
company  of  men  to  Green  river  to 
serve   papers   issued   from   the   District 


240 


LATTER-DAY    SAINT 


court   and   protect    the   settlers   in   that 
section   from     Indians       and     renegade 
wTiite  men.      The  following  year  he  was 
elected   captain   of     company    "A"'— the 
original    cavalry   corps— and   on    March 
1st,  1855.  he  received  his  commission  as 
major.  His  commission  as  colonel  came 
on  June  12th,   two  years  later.     In  Oc- 
tober.  1856,   he  accompanied   the     relief 
corps   that   went  out  to  meet  and   help 
in     the     belated     handcart     companies, 
struggling  through  the  snow  five  or  six 
hundred   miles  east  of  Salt  Lake   City. 
The   weather   was  extremely   cold,   and 
not  only  the  immigrants  but  their  res- 
cuers ran  short  of  provisions  and  were 
reduced  to  one-fourth  rations,  until  the 
arrival  of  further  relief.  After  the  com- 
panies  had   been    provided    for   as    well 
as   possible    under    the     circumstances. 
Major  Burton   was  placed  in  charge  of 
the  train  and  conducted  it  to  Salt  Lake 
(Mty.  arriving  there  on  the  last  day  of 
November.       "This."  says  he.  "was  the 
hardest  trip  of  my  life.       Many  of  the 
immigrants  died  from  cold  and  hunger 
and  were  buried  by  the  wayside."     The 
next  fall  found  him  in  the  midst  of  the 
trouble  known     as     the   "Echo  Canyon 
War."        On    the   15th    of   August,    pur- 
.-juant   to   orders   previously    issued,     he 
started  eastward  at  the  head  of  a  small 
company   of   mounted   men.    numbering 
about  eighty  in  all,  to  assist  the  immi- 
gration then  en  route  to  the  Valley,  take 
observations    as    to    the    movements    of 
the   United    States   troops  also   on     the 
way  to  Utah,  and  report  the  informa- 
tion to  headquarters.  He  faithfully  car- 
ried out  his  instructions.       Meeting,  at 
Devirs  Gate,  on  the  21st  of  September, 
the  vanguard  of  Johnston's  army,  com- 
manded by  Colonel  Alexander.    Colonel 
Burton  and  his  scouts  hovered     in    the 
vicinity     of     the       advancing       troops, 
watching   and     reporting     their  move- 
ments   until    they     arrived      on    Ham's 
Fork,    twenty   miles   northeast    of   Fort 
Bridger.       At   the  latter   point.   Colonel 
Burton  joined  General  Wells,  the  com- 
mander  of   the   Legion,    now    opposing, 
by  order  of  Governor  Brigham  Young, 
the    further    advance    of    the    invading 
army.       Abouth   the  middle  of  October 
Colonel   Burton,   with  a  heavy  force  of 
cavalry,  intercepted  Colonel  Alexander, 
who.    finding   his     way     through    Echo 
Canyon  blocked  by  ice,  snow  and  hos- 
tile  militia,    was   supposed    to     be     at- 
tempting  a   detour     to   the   northward, 
thinking  to  enter  Salt  Lake  valley  by 


the  Fort  Hall  route.       Alexander     was 
compelled    to      return      southward    and 
camp  on   Black's  Fork,   where  he     was 
joined  in  November  by  General  Johns- 
ton.      The  Federal  army  having     gone 
into    winter   quarters   at    Fort    Bridger, 
Colonel   Burton  rejoined  General  Weils 
in   Echo  Canyon.       He  remained  there 
until    the    5th    of    December,    and    then 
returned    to   Salt    Lake   City.       In     th'i 
spring  of  1858,  when  the  people  in  gen- 
eral   moved    south    to   avoid   a   possible 
collision    with    the    government    troops, 
who    were     making       preparations      to 
march  thiough  Salt  Lake  City,  Colonel 
Burton   was   left   with  a   force  of  mili- 
tia to  guard  the  property  of  the  absent 
community.       In  1862,  by  order  of  Act- 
ing-Governor Fuller,  he  proceeded  with 
a  company  of  picked  men  as  far  east  as 
the  Platte  river,  for  the  purpose  of  pro- 
tecting the  mails  from  Indians  and  law- 
less white  men,  who,  taking  advantage 
of  the  outbreak  of  the  Civil  War,  were 
attacking  and    burning     mail   stations, 
driving     off     stock,     way-laying     stage 
coaches,     killing      passengers,     cutting 
open  mail     sacks     and     scattering     the 
contents,  and  committing  various  other 
depradations.      This  duty  he  performed 
to  the  entire  satisfaction  of  the  gover- 
nor and  other  authorities.      In  June  of 
the  same  year  occurred  the  "Morrisite 
\Var,"  in  which  Colonel  Burton  played 
a  very  prominent  part,  commanding,  as 
deputy  of  the  Territorial  marshal,     the 
posse    sent    against    the    Morrisites    by 
order  of  Chief  Justice  Kinney     of     the 
Third  District  Court,   whose  writs     the 
Morrisite  leaders  had  treated  with  con- 
tempt, and  with  their  followers  were  in 
armed    rebellion   against    the   execution 
of  the  laws.      The  details  of  this  affair, 
including   General    Burton's   trial   on   a 
trumped-up  charge  of  murder — a  vexa- 
tious proceeding  instituted  many  years 
afterwards — with    his      triumphant    ac- 
<iuittal  (March  7th,  1879)  by  a  jury  com- 
posed equally  of  "Mormons"  and    non- 
"Mormons,"  are  related  in  Volumes  two 
and  three  of  Whitney's  History  of  Utah. 
Robert  T.  Burton  received  his  commis- 
sion  as  major-general     from   Governor 
Durkee  in  1868.      In  all  the  military  his- 
tory of  Utah  up  to  the  disbandment  of 
the  Nauvoo  Legion  in  1870.  General  Bur- 
ton,   under  Lieutenant-General     Wells, 
was  one  of   the   principal    men   in    per- 
fecting the   organization   and   directing 
the   operations  of  the   Territorial   mili- 
tia.     In  addition  to  his  military  offices, 


BIOGRAPHICAL    ENCYCLOPEDIA. 


241 


he  has  held  civic  positions  as  follows: 
Constable  of  Salt  Lake  City  in  1852;  U. 
S.  Deputy  marshal  in  1853  and  for  many 
years  thereafter;  sheriff,  assessor  and 
collector  of  Salt  Lake  county  from  1854 
to  1874;  deputy  Territorial  marshal  from 
1861  until  several  years  later;  collec- 
tor of  internal  revenue  for  the  District 
of  Utah,  by  appointment  of  President 
Lincoln,  from  1862  to  1869;  assessor  of 
Salt  Lake  county  in  1880;  a  member  of 
the  Salt  Lake  City  Council  from  1856 
to  1873;  and  a  member  of  the  Legisla- 
tive Council  from  1855  to  1887.  While 
serving  in  the  legislature,  he  was  ap- 
pointed in  1876  one  of  the  committee  of 
three  to  arrange,  compile  and  publish 
all  the  laws  of  the  Territory  of  Utah 
then  in  force,  his  associates  in  this  im- 
portant labor  being  Hon.  Abraham  O. 
Smoot  and  Hon.  Silas  S.  Smith.  From 
1880  to  1884  Hon.  Robert  T.  Burton  was 
a  member  of  the  Board  of  Regents  of  the 
University  of  Deseret.  His  ecclesiastical 
record  since  coming  to  Utah  is  as  fol- 
lows: In  1859  he  was  appointed  coun- 
selor to  Bishop  Andrew  Cunningham  of 
the  Fifteenth  Ward,  and  in  1867  he  be- 
came the  Bishop  of  that  Ward.  In 
November,  1869,  he  went  upon  a  mission 
to  the  Eastern  States,  and  during  his 
absence  spent  some  time  in  the  city  of 
Washington,  assisting  Utah's  delegate, 
Hon.  William  H.  Hooper,  in  the  inter- 
ests of  his  constituency.  In  May,  1873, 
he  left  for  Europe,  to  fill  a  mission 
placed  upon  him  at  the  previous  April 
conference.  He  visited  various  parts 
of  Great  Britain  and  the  neighboring 
continent,  spending  some  time  in  the 
principal  cities  of  Germany,  Austria, 
Italy,  France  and 'Switzerland.  On  re- 
turning to  England  he  was  appointed 
president  of  the  London  conference. 
July,  1875,  found  him  again  in  Utah. 
While  in  England  in  1875  he  was  chosen 
second  counselor  to  Edward  Hunter, 
the  presidiner  Bishop  of  the  Church,  but 
continued  to  act  as  Bishop  of  the  Fif- 
teenth Ward  until  1877.  After  the  death 
of  Bishop  Hunter,  he  became  First 
Counselor  to  his  successor.  Bishop 
William  B.  Preston.  The  date  of  this 
appointment  was  July  31,  1884.  Since 
that  time  he  has  acted  continuously  in 
this  capacity.  Bishop  Burton  was  one 
of  the  first  of  our  citizens  to  engage  in 
home  manufacturing.  Associated  with 
A.  O.  Smoot  and  John  Sharp,  he  built 
the  Wasatch  Woollen  Mills  on  Parley's 
Canyon  creek,     near     the  southeastern 

Vol.  1,   No.  16. 


part  of  Salt  Lake  City.  He  has  a  fine 
farm  on  State  street,  below  the  south- 
ern suburbs  and  for  many  years  has 
been  engaged  in  farming  and  stockrais- 
ing.  He  has  been  thrice  married  and 
is  the  father  of  a  numerous  family  of 
children,  mostly  sons.  In  his  seventy- 
ninth  year,  Bishop  Burton  is  still  active 
in  his  labors,  and  may  be  seen  daily  at 
his  post  of  duty  in  the  presiding 
Bishop's  office.— Orson  F.  Whitney. 

CORRIIili,  John,  second  counselor 
to  Bishop  Edward  Partridge  from  1831 
to  1837,  was  born  Sept.  17,  1794,  in  Wor- 
cester county,  Mass.  He  resided  in 
Ashtabula,  Ohio,  in  the  fall  of  1530, 
when  Oliver  Cowdery  and  fellow-mis- 
sionaries passed  through  that  part  of 
the  country  on  their  way  to  Missouri. 
Mr.  Corrill  became  a  convert  a  little 
later,  being  baptized  Jan.  10,  1831.  A 
few  days  later,  he  was  ordained  an 
Elder,  and  soon  afterwards  called  on  a 
mission,  with  Solomon  Hancock  as  his 
misionary  companion.  They  went  to 
New  London,  about  one  hundred  miles 
from  Kirtland,  where  they  built  up  a 
branch  of  the  Church  of  thirty-six 
members,  in  the  face  of  bitter  opposi- 
tion. June  3,  1831,  after  his  return  to 
Kirtland,  he  was  ordained  a  High 
Priest,  and  at  the  same  time  blessed 
and  set  apart  as  second  counselor  to 
Bishop  Edward  Partridge,  under  the 
hands  of  Lyman  Wight.  Soon  after- 
wards he  was  called  by  revelation  to  go 
to  Missouri  and  preach  the  gospel  by 
the  way  (Doc.  and  Cov.,  52:  7).  ^  After 
his  arrival  in  Missouri  he  became  an 
important  factor  in  the  affairs  of  the 
Church  in  that  land,  and  he  was  one 
of  the  High  Priests  who  were  appointed 
to  watch  over  the  several  branches  of 
the  Church  in  Jackson  county.  In  the 
famous  agreement,  signed  by  the  Jack- 
son county  mob  leaders  and  some  of 
the  brethren,  in  July,  1833,  John  Cor- 
rlU  and  Sidney  Gilbert  were  allowed  to 
remain  awhile  at  Independence  to  wind 
up  the  business  of  the  Saints.  During 
the  persecutions  which  took  place  early 
in  November,  1833.  John  Corrill  and 
other  brethren  were  imprisoned  in  the 
Jackson  county  jail;  but  were  soon  af- 
ter liberated.  After  the  expulsion  of 
the  Saints  from  Jackson  county.  Elder 
Corrill,  as  one  of  the  leading  men  of  the 
Church  in  Missouri,  took  an  active  part 
in  public  affairs,  and  his  name  is  at- 
tached to  nearly  all  the  correspon- 
dence which  passed  between  the  Saints. 

April   20,    1901. 


242 


LATTER-DAY    SAINT 


Governor  Daniel  Dunklin  and  other 
officials,  as  well  as  the  leaders  of  the 
mob.  When  Joseph  the  Prophet  with 
Zions  Camp  visited  Missouri  in  1834, 
John  Corrill  (together  with  others),  was 
chosen  to  go  to  Kirtland  to  receive  his 
blessings  in  the  Temple,  which  at  that 
time  was  in  course  of  construction  at 
that  place.  After  his  arrival  in  Ohio, 
he  was  appointed  to  take  charge  of  the 
finishing  of  the  Kirtland  Temple  and 
was  subsequently  present  at  its  dedi- 
cation in  March,  1836.  Not  long  after 
this  event,  he  returned  to  Missouri, 
where  he  became  one  of  the  founders 
of  Far  West,  in  Caldwell  county,  and 
was  trusted  with  many  responsibilities 
both  of  a  spiritual  and  a  temporal  na- 
ture. At  a  meeting  held  at  Far  West 
Aug.  1,  1837,  Titus  Billings  was  appoint- 
ed to  succeed  John  Corrill  as  a  coun- 
selor to  Bishop  Partridge.  At  a  con- 
ference held  at  Far  West  Nov.  7,  1837, 
"John  Corrill  was  chosen  to  be  keeper 
of  the  Lord's  Store  House,"  and  at  a 
meeting  held  at  the  same  place  April 
6,  1838,  John  Corrill  and  Elias  Higbee 
were  appointed  Church  historians,  "to 
write  and  keep  the  Church  history;" 
but  as  Bro.  Corrill  soon  afterwards 
apostatized,  he  is  not  known  to  have 
magnified  his  calling  as  a  historian. 
Jo.seph  the  Prophet,  in  his  history  of 
Auer.  31,  1838.  writes  as  follows:  "I 
spent  considerable  time  this  day  in 
conversation  with  Bro.  John  Corrill,  in 
consequence  of  some  expressions  made 
bv  him,  in  presence  of  several  brethren 
who  had  not  been  long  in  the  place 
(Far  West).  Bro.  Corrill's  conduct  for 
some  time  had  been  very  unbecoming, 
especially  in  a  man  in  whom  so  much 
confidence  had  been  placed.  He  said 
he  would  not  yield  his  judgment  to 
anything  proposed  by  the  Church,  or 
any  individuals  of  the  Church,  or  even 
the  Great  I  Am  given  through  the  ap- 
pointed organ,  but  would  always  act 
upon  his  own  judgment,  let  him  believe 
in  whatever  religion  he  might."  At  the 
trial  of  prominent  Elders  of  the  Church 
at  Richmond,  Mo.,  in  November,  183<^. 
John  Corrill  testified  with  much  bitter- 
ness against  his  former  friends  and  as- 
sociates in  the  Priesthood.  He  was 
finally  excommunicated  from  the 
Church  at  a  conference  held  at  Quincy, 
111.,  March  17,  1839.  In  that  year  (1839j 
John  ("orrill  served  as  a  member  of  the 
Mis.souri  legislature,  and  published  a 
pamphlet    of    fifty    pages,     entitled    "A 


brief  history  of  the  Church  of  Latter- 
day  Saints  (commonly  called  Mormons), 
including  an  account  of  their  doctrine 
and  discipline,  with  the  reasons  of  the 
author  for  leaving  the  Church." 

BILLINGS,  Titus,  second  counselor 
to  Bishop  Edward  Partridge  from  1837 
to  1840,  was  born  March  25,  1793,  at 
Greenfield,  Franklin  county,  Mass.  He 
was  the  second  person  baptized  in  Kirt- 
land, Ohio,  in  November,  1830,  and  in 
the  spring  of  1832  he  left  Kirtland,  and 
moved  to  Jackson  county.  Mo.,  where 
he  passed  through  the  terrible  persecu- 
tions of  1833.  On  the  night  "the  stars 
fell"  (Nov.  13,  1838),  he  was  engaged  in 
helping  the  Saints  to  move,  and  the  fol- 
lowing day  he  moved  his  family  across 
the  Missouri  river  to  Clay  county.  He 
was  ordained  a  High  Priest  and  coun- 
selor to  Bishop  Edward  Partridge  Aug. 
1,  1837,  under  the  hands  of  Edward 
Partridge  and  Isaac  Morley.  He  par- 
ticipated in  the  Crooked  river  battle 
and  afterwards  laid  down  his  arms  in 
Far  West  after  taking  an  active  part 
in  its  defense.  In  company  with  other 
brethren,  whose  lives  were  sought  by 
the  mobbers,  he  left  Far  West  in  the 
night  to  escape  mob  violence.  In  trav- 
eling northward  through  the  wilder- 
ness, he  wj^s  three  days  without  food 
but  finally  reached  Qviincy,  111.  Sub- 
sequently he  located  at  Lima,  Adams 
county.  111.,  and  at  the  time  of  the 
"house  burnings"  in  1845  removed  to 
Nauvoo.  ,  In  common  with  the  Saints 
generally  he  was  forced  into  exile,  and 
after  passing  through  untold  sufferings 
on  the  journey,  he  reached  Great  Salt 
Lake  valley  in  1848,  crossing  the  plains 
as  captain  of  the  first  fifty  in  Heber  C. 
Kimball's  company.  In  the  fall  of 
1849,  together  with  others,  he  was  called 
by  the  presidency  of  the  Church  to  set- 
tle Sanpete  valley;  in  compliance  with 
which  he  became  one  of  the  first  set- 
tlers of  Manti.  Subsequently  he  locat- 
ed in  Provo  Utah  county,  where  he 
resided  until  his  death,  which  occurred 
at  that  place  Feb.  6,  1866. 

LITTLE,  Jesse  Carter,  second  coun- 
selor to  Bishop  Edward  Hunter  from 
1856  to  1874,  was  the  son  of  Thomas 
and  Relief  Little  and  was  born  Sept. 
26,  1815,  at  Belmont,  Waldo  county, 
Maine.  His  parents  were  of  Scotch- 
Irish  extraction.  He  joined  the  Church 
in  the  Eastern  States,  and  was  ordained 


BIOGRAPHICAL    ENCYCLOPEDIA. 


243 


a  High  Priest  April  17,  1845,  by  Parley 
P.  Pratt.      In  1846  Elder  Little  acted  as 
president   of   the   mission   in   the     New 
England  and  Middle  States.      On  a  visit 
to  Washington,  D.  C,  he  learned  from 
President  Polk  the  intention  of  the  gov- 
ernment to  raise  a  battalion  of  men  to 
march  to  California.     On  hearing  this, 
Elder    Little    started    immediately     for 
the    camps    of   the    Saints    by    way    of 
Nauvoo,  to  consult  with  the  authorities 
of   the   Church.       Previous   to   this     he 
had  been  very  active  in  his  labors  in 
the  East  and  had  done  all  in  his  power 
to  create  a  sympathy  in  behalf  of  his 
people.       After  assisting  in  organizing 
the  battalion  and  accompanying  the  en- 
listed brethren  as  far  as  Fort  Leaven- 
worth,   Elder   Little     returned     to    the 
East  to  resume  his  mission.      Respond- 
ing   to    a    call     from     Pres.      Brigham 
Young,  he  left  a  wife  and  two  children 
at   Petersboro,   New   Hampshire,    early 
in    1847,    and    traveled    three    thousand 
miles    to   join    the    Pioneers,    whom    he 
overtook  April  19,  1847,  at  a  point  about 
seventy  miles  west  of  Winter  Quarters. 
When  the  company  was  organized  as  a 
military  command,  Jesse  C.  Little  was 
appointed  adjutant.       After     returning 
from   his  pioneer  journey  he   was     in- 
structed to  resume  his  presidency  over 
the  branches  of     the     Church     in   the 
Eastern  States,  which  he  did.      He  ar- 
rived in  Great  Salt  Lake  valley  the  sec- 
ond  time   in  1852,   and   from   that   time 
until  the  day  of  his  death  he  was  a  resi- 
dent  of   the   Territory   of   Utah.       For 
many  years  he  was  prominent  in     ec- 
clesiastical, civil  and  military     affairs, 
and  filled  many  important  positions  of 
honor  and  trust  in  the  community.    In 
the  early     fifties     he     opened     a     hotel 
at  the  Warm  Springs,  Salt  Lake  City, 
and  did  a  good  business  there  for  many 
years.       When  an  ordinance   providing 
for  the  organization  of  a  Fire  Depart- 
ment in  Salt  Lake  City  was  passed.Oct. 
17,  1856,   Jesse  C.  Little  was  appointed 
chief  engineer.  In  1856  he  was  ordained 
to  the  office  of  a  Bishop  and  set  apart 
as  second  counselor  to  Bishop  Edward 
Hunter;   and  he  occupied  that  import- 
ant position  till  1874,  when  he  resigned. 
Subsequently    he    removed    to    Morgan 


a  short  obituary  published  in  the 
"Deseret  News"  at  the  time  of  his  death 
the  following  occurs:  "Col.  Jesse  C. 
Little  is  dead.  The  announcement  will 
bring  into  the  minds  of  thousands  in 
Utah,  particularly  the  early  settlers, 
memories  of  stirring  events,  whose  im- 
portance has  become  more  thoroughly 
understood  through  the  lapse  of  time, 
in  which  Col.  Little  was  a  prominent 
participator." 


CANNON,      John      Quayle,      second 
counselor    to    Bishop    Wm.    B.    Preston 
from   1884   to  1886,   is   the  eldest   son   of 
George  Q.  Cannon  and  Elizabeth  Hoag- 
land,  and  was  born  in   San  Francisco, 
Cal.,   April   19,   1857,   his   father  at   that 
time  being  on  a  mission  to  California, 
accompanied    by    his    wife.        They    re- 
turned   the     following     winter    to    Salt 
Lake  City,  where  John  Q.  was  baptized 
by  his  father,  April  19,  1865.       In  July, 
1873,    he   was   ordained   to  the   office   of 
an  Elder;   learned  the  trade  of  a  prin- 
ter at  the   "Deseret  News"   Oflace,   and 
being  called  to  take  a  mission  to  Eu- 
rope,   he    left    home    Aug.    9,    1881,    and 
arrived  in  Liverpool,   England,   on    the 
27th.        After    laboring    in    the    London 
conference  for  about  seven  months,  he 
was   called   to   the    Swiss    and   German 
Mission,  where  he  labored  a  short  time 
in  the  North  German  conference;  after- 
wards he  was  secretary  of  the  mission, 
with    headquarters   at   Berne,    Switzer- 
land, and  finally  succeeded  P.  F.  Goss 
in   the  presidency  of   the   mission.     He 
occupied   the   latter   position   for   about 
ten  months.      Before  returning  home  he 
visited   the  principal  cities  on  the  Eu- 
ropean  Continent,   having  been  joined 
by  his  wife,  in  whose  company  he  re- 
turned  home   June   25,   1882.     after     an 
absence  of  about  three  years.      In  the 
following   October   conference     he   was 
appointed  to  act  as  second  counselor  to 
Presiding   Bishop  Wm.    B.    Preston,     a 
position  which   he   occupied   until   Sep- 
tember, 1886.      From  1889  to  1892  he  was 
editor   of   the  Ogden   "Standard."     and 
from   October.   1892,   until   the   breaking 
out  of  the  war  with   Spain.  April  1898, 
he  was  editor  in  chief  of  the   "Deseret 
News."      Having  been  since  1894  promi- 


county.  and  resided  for  a  long  time  at  nently  connected  with  military    affairs 

Littleton,  in  said  county.       He  died  in  in  Utah,  he  enlisted  as  a  volunteer  for 

Salt  Lake  City.  Dec.  26.  1893.      The  im-  the  war.  and  in  May.  1898.  was  commis- 

mediate  cause  of  his     demise     was     a  sioned     lieutenant-colonel    of     cavalry, 

complication  of  ailments,  and  his  last  serving  as  such  in  Florida  until  mus- 

Ulness  was  somewhat  protracted.       In  tered  out  at  the  close  of  hostilities.    He 


244 


LATTER-DAY    SAINT 


is  now  president  of  the  Geo.  Q.  Cannon 
Association,  and  resides  in  Salt  Lake 
City. 

"WINDER,  John  Rex,  second  coun- 
selor to  Presiding  Bishiop  Wm.  B.  Pres- 
ton since  1886,  was  born  at  Biddenden, 
county  of  Kent,  England,  Dec.  11,  1820. 
He  received  a  very  limited  education, 
and  when  about  twenty  years  of  age, 
he  went  to  London,  where  he  obtained 
a  situation  in  a  "West  End  shoe  store; 
he  married  Ellen  "^''alters  Nov.  24,  1845. 
Nearly  two  years  later  he  went  to  Liv- 
erpool, where  he  resided  the  next  Ave 
years.  One  day  in  July,  1848,  while  in 
the  store,  he  picked  up  a  small  piece 
of  paper,  a  fragment  of  a  torn-up  let- 
ter, on  which  were  written  the  words 
"Latter-day  Saints."  He  wondered 
what  it  meant,  for  he  had  never  seen 
or  heard  the  name  before.  He  asked 
one    of    the    clerks    about    it,    and    was 


told  that  there  was  a  church  in  America 
by  that  name,  that  they  were  called 
Mormons,  that  they  had  a  Prophet 
named  Joseph  Smith  and  that  there 
was  a  branch  of  the  Church  that  held 
meetings  in  the  Music  Hall,  Bold  Street, 
Liverpool.  "This,"  says  Bishop  "Win- 
der, "was  the  first  I  ever  heard  of  the 
Latter-day  Saints  or  Mormons.  I  went 
to  their  meeting,  crept  up  a  back  stairs 
and  peeped  through  the  bani- 
sters. Elder  Orson  Spencer  was 
preaching  on  the  first  principles 
of  the  gospel.  I  thought  he 
knew  I  was  there,  for  every  word  he 
said,   seemed   to   be   expressly     for   my 


benefit.       I  began  to  examine  into  the 
principles   taught,     soon     became   con- 
vinced of  their  truth  and  was  baptized 
Sept.    20,    1848,   by     Elder     Thomas   D. 
Brown.     On   the   15th   of   the   following 
month  my  wife  was  baptized  by  Apos- 
tle  Orson   Pratt.     "We   were  associated 
with  the  Liverpool  branch  until  Febru- 
ary,  1853,   when   we  left   for  Salt   Lake 
City,  sailing  on  the  ship  'Elvira  Owen.' 
"We  had  three  children  living  and  one 
dead,    two   of   the   former   being     twin 
daughters,  then  about  four  months  old. 
"U^hen  about  ten  days  out  from  Liver- 
pool, I  was  taken  down  with  the  small- 
pox, having  caught  it  from  a  child  who 
brought  it  on  board  at  starting  and  was 
in   the  next  apartment  of  the  ship.     I 
was  the  first  to  discover  it.      Soon,  how- 
ever, five  others  were  found  to  have  the 
disease.       A  small  house  was  built  on 
deck  and  we  were  all  quarantined.  Thus 
my  wife  was  left  with  her  twin  babes 
to  care  for,  without  my  assistance,  and 
this  was  no  small  task  on  ship-board.  A 
few    days   later,    in   the   evening   about 
nine  o'clock,  Brother  "'tV^'illiam  Jones,  a 
young  man  lying  next  to  me,  died,  and 
in   a   short   time   the   sailors   took  him 
out  and  cast  him  into  the  sea.       As  I 
lay  there  pondering  over  the  situation. 
I  heard  the  sailors  say,  'we  will     have 
him  next.'  meaning  me.     I  did  not  be- 
lieve what  they   said.       I  had  a  living 
faith   that  I  would  recover  and  get  to 
Zion.       There   were   only   five   cases  on 
board    and    only   one   death."     Arriving 
at  Keokuk,  Iowa    via  New  Orleans  and 
St.  Louis.  Elder  "V\''inder,  who  had  fully 
recovered  his  health,  joined  Joseph  "W. 
Young's  company,  and  with  his  family 
crossed  the  plains,  arri\nng  at  Salt  Lake 
City  on  the  10th  of  October,  1853.     Soon 
after  his  arrival   there  he  engaged    in 
business  with   Samuel   Mulliner  in   the 
manufacture     of     saddles,     boots   and 
shoes,  and    also    in    conducting    a  tan- 
nery. In  1855  he  entered  into  partnership 
with  "William     Jennings,     proprietor  of 
the   Meat  Market  Tannery  and  manu- 
facturer of  boots,  shoes,   saddles,   har- 
ness, etc.       He  continued  in  this  busi- 
ness until    after  the  return  from  "The 
Move,"    in    July,   1858.       Prior     to   this 
he  had  become  prominent  as  a  military 
man,  having  joined  the  Nauvoo  Legion 
in   1855.       He   was  captain   of  a     com- 
pany of  lancers,  and  was  in  Echo  Can- 
you  during  the  fall  and  winter  of  1857- 
58,   being  left  with   fifty  men  to  guard 
the  canyon  and     its     approaches  after 


BIOGRAPHICAL    ENCYCLOPEDIA. 


245 


Johnston's  army  had  gone  into  winter 
quarters  at  Fort  Bridger  and  General 
Wells  and  Colonel  Burton  had  returned 
to  the  city.  Matters  having  quieted 
down,  he  was  relieved  of  vidette  duty 
about  Christmas  time,  Major  H.  S. 
Beatie  taking  his  place  at  "Camp  We- 
ber." Soon  again,  however,  he  was  in 
the  saddle.  On  the  8th  of  March,  1858,  he 
raised  eighty-five  mounted  men  and 
accomjjanied  General  George  D.  Grant 
through  Tooele  county  and  on  to  the 
Great  Desert,  in  pursuit  of  a  band  of 
Indians,  who  had  stolen  a  large  num- 
ber of  horses  from  settlers  in  Tooele. 
The  pursuing  party  was  caught  in  a 
storm  on  the  desert,  lost  the  trail  of 
the  Indians  and  returned  to  Salt  Lake 
City,  soon  after  which  Captain  Winder 
was  called  with  a  company  of  men  to 
take  charge  of  the  defenses  in  Echo 
canyon.  He  remained  there  until  peace 
was  declared.  Having  dissolved  part- 
nership with  William  Jennings,  Mr. 
Winder  formed  another  partnership 
with  President  Brigham  Young  and 
Feramorz  Little,  and  built  a  tannery 
on  Parley's  Canyon  creek.  While  en- 
gaged in  this  business,  he  purchased  his 
present  home,  Poplar  Farm,  and  com- 
menced farming  and  stock  raising,  pur- 
suits in  which  he  has  always  taken 
great  delight.  When  the  native  bark 
for  tanning  became  scarce,  and  they 
were  unable  to  compete  with  importa- 
tions, the  tanning  business  was  sus- 
pended. During  the  three  years — 1865-6- 
7 — Captain  Winder  was  engaged  i.n  the 
Blackhawk  Indian  war  in  Sanpete 
county,  part  of  the  time  as  aid  to  Gen- 
eral Wells,  and  in  1868  he  collected  and 
made  up  the  accounts  of  the  expenses 
of  the  war,  amounting  to  $1,100,000.  This 
claim  was  submitted  to  Congress  by 
Delegate  William  H.  Hooper,  but  has 
never  yet  been  paid.  In  1870,  John  R. 
Winder  was  appointed  assessor  and  col- 
lector of  Salt  Lake  City,  which  position 
he  held  for  fourteen  consecutive  years. 
He  served  three  terms  in  the  city  coun- 
cil, from  1872  to  1878.  In  1884  he  re- 
signed as  assessor  and  collector  and 
w^as  appointed  water  master  of  the  city, 
occupying  that  position  until  April, 
1877,  when  he  retired  from  it  to  enter 
upon  his  labors  as  second  counselor  to 
Presiding  Bishop  Wm.  B.  Preston,  to 
which  office  he  was  set  apart  on  the 
25th  of  that  month,  by  President  George 
Q.  Cannon  and  Apostle  Franklin  D. 
Richards.       In   April,     1892,     when   the 


great  Salt  Lake  Temple  was  approach- 
ing completion  (the  design  being  to  fin- 
ish the  structure  and  have  it  ready 
for  dedication  in  April,  1893,  forty  years 
from  the  time  of  its  inception).  Bishop 
Winder  was  given  special  charge  of  the 
work  of  completion,  and  discharged 
that  duty  with  characteristic  energy 
and  zeal.  He  was  a  liberal  donor  to 
the  fund  which  met  the  heavy  expenses 
entailed  by  the  work,  and  after  the 
dedication  was  appointed  and  set  apart, 
in  May  1893,  as  first  assistant  to  Pres. 
Lorenzo  Snow,  in  charge  of  the  Tem- 
ple That  position  he  still  holds. 
During  the  dedication  ceremonies  Presi- 
dent Joseph  F.  smith  referred  m  term, 
of  great  commendation  to  the  faithful, 
persistent  and  efficient  labors  of  Bishop 
Winder  in  his  superintendency  of  the 
sacred  edifice,  and  P^°"°""f"'^„%''''"': 
ing  upon  him  for  time  and  ^1  eterm 
ty  For  many  years  prior  to  these 
later  appointments.  Bishop  Winder  he  d 
important  ecclesiastical  positions.  In 
1854  he  was  ordained  a  Seventy  and 
in  1855  became  one  of  the  Presidents  of 
the  12th  quorum  of  Seventy.  Ma  ch 
4th  1872,  he  was  ordained  a  High 
Priest  by  Presiding  Bishop  Edward 
Hunter  and  was  set  apart  to 
Jlke  charee  of  the  Fourteenth 
ward  salt  Lake  City,  during 
^e  'absence  of  Bishop  Thoma^ 
,  o  rr,i<5<?ion       He  subsequently 

l:!:\Z  I  Tear  as  B..hop  Taylor 

ET=e/:irH.r^9 

dition  to  tn  following 

mentioned,   he   has   nem 
nositions-       Lieutenant-Colonel.      First 
Reg  men      Cavalry,      Nauvoo    Legion 
Snued   States   Ganger   in  the   ^n-- 
Revenue  Department,     and    a  director 
Tee  1856  in    the    Deseret  AgricuU-al 
and  Manufacturing  So-ty^      He  -s^a 
;member  of  one  of    the    eariy 
Stional     conventions     '^^^'''^^'^^ 
During      the      old      political      regime. 
During      X  ^^^ir- 

"""      IT  the     TerritoriJl     and   County 
rtr"  committees  Of  the  people's  par 

t  He   was   a   director   m   the   Utah 

Iron  Manufacturing  Company,  and  is 
now  a  Director  in  the  Utah  Sugar  Com- 
pany; also  in  the  more  recently  estab 
fished  Ogden  sugar  company.  He 
president  of  the  Deseret  Investment 
company,  a  director  in  Z.  C.  M.  I.,  m 
the  Deseret  National  Bank  and  in    the 


246 


LATTER-DAT    SAINT 


Deseret  Savings  Bank.  He  was  vice- 
president  of  the  Pioneer  Electric  Com- 
pany, and  is  now  president  and  director 
in  the  Union  Light  and  Power  Com- 
pany. As  may  well  be  imagined^  Colo- 
nel Winder's  life  has  been  a  most  busy 
and  withal  a  very  useful  one.  lie  is 
a  walking  encyclopedia  of  general  in- 
formation on  Utah  affairs,  much  of 
which  pertains  to  times  fast  passing 
beyond  the  memory  of  the  oldest  in- 
habitant. In  business  he  is  known  as 
a  "rustler."  He  is  sensitive,  quick  to 
think,  speak  and  act,  but  when  not 
burdened  with  care  is  full  of  jovial 
good  nature.  Honorable  in  his  deal- 
ings, successful  in  his  undertakings,  he 
is  eminently  a  good  citizen,  devoted  to 
his  religion  and  to  the  general  inter- 
ests of  the  people  of  the  State.  His 
first  wife,  Mrs.  Ellen  Walters  Winder, 
a  faithful  and  amiable  companion, 
died  November  7,  1892.  She  was  the 
mother  of  ten  children,  six  of  w^hom  are 
living.  On  the  28th  of  October,  1893. 
Bishop  Winder  married  his  present 
wife,  also  an  estimable  lady,  who  was 
Miss  Maria  Burnham,  of  Fruitland, 
New  Mexico.  By  a  former  wife,  now 
dead,  to  whom  he  was  united  in  mar- 
riage in  1856.  he  is  the  father  of  ten 
children,  all  living.  At  the  advanced 
age  of  eighty  years.  Bishop  Win- 
der  is     in     good   health,    active   in   the 


Prophet),  who  was  one  of  those  who 
sent  children  to  the  school,  and  Oliver 
went  to  board  awhile  at  his  house.  Dur- 
ing that  time  the  family  related  to  him 
the  circumstances  of  young  Joseph  hav- 
ing received  the  plates  of  the  Book  of 
Mormon.  Oliver  became  deeply  inter- 
ested and  determined  to  find  out  the 
particulars  about  this  womierful  event. 
He  also  prayed  to  the  Lord  to  enlighten 
his  mind,  and  one  night,  after  he  had 
retired  to  rest,  the  Lord  manifested  to 
him,  that  he  had  been  told  the  truth 
in  relation  to  the  finding  of  the  plates. 
He  then  concluded  to  pay  Joseph  Smith 
a  visit,  in  order  to  learn  more  about 
it,  which  he  did,  and  on  April  5,  1829, 
he  first  met  the  Prophet  at  his  tem- 
porary home  in  Harmony.  Penn., 
whither  he  had  removed  because  of  the 
persecutions  to  which  he  had  been  sub- 
jected in  the  State  of  New  York.  This 
meeting  of  Joseph  and  Oliver  w'as  not 
only  providential  for  the  latter,  but  also 
for  the  Prophet  himself,  who  had  al- 
ready been  the  custodian  of  the  plates 
of  the  Book  of  ^Mormon  for  some  time, 
but  had  been  unable  to  proceed  with 
the  translation  for  the  want  of  a  scribe. 
In  Oliver  he  saw  the  proper  person  to 
assist  him  in  his  work,  and  two  days 
after  his  arrival.  Joseph  Smith  "com- 
menced to  translate  the  Book  of  Mor- 
mon,"  with   Oliver   Cowdery  as   scribe. 


performance  of  his  duties,     and  seems  ^  few  days  later  a  revelation  was  given 
to  enjoy  life  as  much  as  he  did  in  the 
clays  of  his  youth  and  prime.— Orson  F. 
Whitney. 


COWDERY,    Oliver,      ohe     of     the 

Three  Witnesses  to  the  Book  of  Mor- 
mon and  the  first  General  Church  Re- 
corder, was  born  Oct.  3,  1806,  in  the 
town  of  Wells,  Rutland  county,  Ver- 
mont. He  was  principally  raised  in  the 
town  of  Poultney,  Rutland  county, 
whence  his  father  removed  when  Oliver 
was  only  three  years  old.  About  the 
year  1825,  Oliver  removed  to  the  State 
of  New  York,  where  his  elder  brothers 
were  married  and  settled,  and  about 
two  years  later  his  father  also  moved 
to  that  State.  Oliver  was  employed 
as  clerk  in  a  store  until  the  winter  of 
1828-29,  when  he  taught  the  district 
school  in  the  town  of  Manchester,  On- 
tario county,  N.  Y.,  nine  miles  from  his 
father's  house.  There  he  first  be- 
came acquainted  with  the  family  of 
Joseph     Smith,     sen.      (father     of   the 


to  Oliver  Cowdery  through  Joseph 
Smith.  (Doc.  and  Cov.,  Sec.  6.)  While 
engaged  in  the  work  of  translating, 
Oliver  became  exceedingly  anxious  to 
have  the  power  to  translate  bestowed 
upon  him,  and  in  relation  to  his  desire 
two  revelations  were  given  to  him 
through  the  Prophet  Joseph  (Doc.  and 
Cov.,  Sec.  8  and  9).  On  various  other 
occasions  he  was  favored  with  the 
words  of  the  Almighty  direct  through 
the  Prophet,  with  whom  he  for  a  num- 
ber of  years  afterwards  was  very 
closely  connected  in  his  administrations 
in  the  Priesthood  and  official  duties 
generally.  (See  Doc.  ^nd  Cov.,  Sec.  7, 
13,  17.  18,  23,  110,  etc.)  May  15,  1829,  Jo- 
seph Smith  and  Oliver  Cowdery  went 
into  the  woods  to  pray  and  inquire  of 
the  Lord  respecting  baptism  for  the 
remission  of  sins,  which  they  found 
mentioned  in  the  record.  While  engaged 
in  prayer,  a  messenger  from  heaven 
descended  in  a  cloud  of  light,  and  lay- 
ing his  hands  upon  them,  he  ordained 


BIOGRAPHICAL    ENCYCLOPEDIA. 


247 


them,  saying:  "Upon  you,  my  fellow- 
servants,  in  the  name  of  Messiah,  I 
confer  the  Priesthood  of  Aaron,  which 
holds  the  keys  of  the  ministering  of 
angels  and  of  the  gospel  of  repentance, 
and  of  baptism  by  immersion  for  the 
remission  of  sins;  and  this  shall  never 
be  taken  again  from  the  earth,  until 
the  sons  of  Levi  do  offer  again  an 
offering  unto  the  Lord  in  righteous- 
ness." This  heavenly  messenger  said 
that  this  Aaronic  Priesthood  had  not 
the  power  of  laying  on  of  hands  for  the 
gift  of  the  Holy  Ghost.  He  also  told 
them  that  his  name  was  John,  the  same 
that   is  called  John   the  Baptist  in  the 


jMew  Testament,  and  that  he  acted  un- 
der the  direction  of  Peter,  James  and 
John,  who  held  the  keys  of  the  Priest- 
hood of  Melchisedek,  which  Priesthood 
he  said  would  in  due  time  be  conferred 
on  them,  when  Joseph  should  be  the 
first  and  Oliver  the  second  Elder  in  the 
Church.  The  messenger  also  com- 
manded them  to  go  and  be  baptized 
and  ordain  each  other,  and  directed 
that  Joseph  should  first  baptize  Oliver, 
and  then  Oliver  baptize  Joseph.  This 
they  did,  after  which  Joseph  laid  his 
hands  on  Oliver's  head  and  ordained 
him  to  the  Aaronic  Priesthood.  Oliver 
then  laid  his  hands  on  Joseph  and  or- 
dained him  to  the  same  Priesthood, 
"•^arly  in  June  Joseph  Smith  and  wife 
and  Oliver  Co\At3ery  removed  to  Fayette. 
Seneca  county,  N.  Y.,  where  the  trans- 


lation of  the  Book  of  Mormon  was  con- 
tinued and  finished.  John  Whitmer,one 
of  the  sons  of  Peter  Whitmer,  sen.,  as- 
sisted considerably  in  the  writing.  It 
was  some  time  during  the  month  of 
June  of  this  year  (1829)  that  the  plates 
were  shown  to  the  three  witnesses;  and 
not  long  afterwards  Joseph  Smith  and 
Oliver  Cowdery  were  ordained  to  the 
Melchisedek  Priesthood  by  Peter, 
James  and  John.  A  revelation  directed 
principally  to  Oliver  Cowdery  was  also 
given,  making  known  the  calling  of 
Twelve  Apostles  in  the  last  days.  (Doc. 
and  Cov.,  Sec.  18.)  TVhen  the  Church 
was  organized  in  Fayette,  April  6,  1830, 
Oliver  Cowdery  was  one  of  the  original 
six  members,  and  was  on  that  occasion 
ordained  by  Joseph  Smith  to  be  the 
second  Elder  in  the  Church.  April  11th, 
Oliver  preached  the  first  public  dis- 
course delivered  by  any  Elder  in  this 
dispensation.  The  meeting  in  which 
this  took  place  was  held  in  Mr.  Whit- 
mer's  house,  in  Fayette.  In  the  follow- 
ing June,  Oliver  accompanied  the 
Prophet  to  Colesville,  Broome  county, 
where  a  large  branch  of  the  Church 
subsequently  was  raised  up,  amidst 
considerable  persecution.  In  October.* 
1830,  Oliver  Cowdery,  Parley  P.  Pratt, 
Peter  Whitmer,  jun.,  and  Ziba  Peter- 
son were  called  to  go  on  a  mission  to 
the  Laraanites  in  the  wilderness!  These 
missionaries  took  leave  of  their  friends 
late  in  October  of  the  same  year,  and 
started  on  foot.  '  After  traveling  for 
some  days,  they  stopped  and  preached 
to  an  Indian  nation  near  Buffalo,  N.  Y., 
and  subsequently  raised  up  a  large 
branch  of  the  Church  in  Kirtland,  Ohio. 
Among  the  converts  at  the  latter  place 
was  the  famous  Sidney  Rigdon,  who 
afterwards  became  so  prominent  in  the 
Church.  In  the  begii^ning  of  1831,  af- 
ter a  very  hard  and  toilsome  journey 
in  the  dead  of  winter,  the  missionaries 
finally  arrived  in  Independence,  Jack- 
son county,  Missouri,  about  fifteen  hun- 
dred miles  from  where  they  started. 
This  was  the  first  mission  performed  by 
the  Elders  of  the  Church  in  any  of  the 
States  west  of  New  York.  Oliver  Cow- 
dery and  Parley  P.  Pratt  commenced  a 
prosperous  mission  among  the  Dela- 
ware Indians  across  the  frontier  line, 
but  they  were  finally  ordered  out  by 
the  Indian  agents,  accused  of  being 
disturbers  of  the  peace.  Being  thus 
compelled   to   cease    their   work   among 


248 


LATTER-DAY    SAINT 


the  Lamanites  for  the   time   being,   the     an    ensign    unto    the    nations.      Behold, 
Elders   commenced     preaching     to    the     he  is  blessed  of  the  Lord  for  his    con- 
whites  in  Jackson  county,  with  consid-     stancy   and   steadfastness   in   the  work 
erable  success.  In  February,  1831,  Elder     of   the   Lord:     wherefore,     he   shall   be 
Pratt  was  sent  back  to  the  East,  while     blessed  in  his  generation,  and  they  shall 
ElderCowdery  and  his  other  companions    never  be  cut  off,  and  he  shall  be  helped 
remained  In  Missouri  until  the  arrival     out  of  many  troubles;    and  if  he  keeps 
of  the  Prophet  Joseph  and  many  other     the  commandments,  and  hearkens  unto 
Elders  from  the  East,  in  July  following,     the  counsel  of  the  Lord,  his  rest  shall 
when   Jackson    county   was    designated     be  glorious."       At  the   organization   of 
as  a  gathering  place  of  the  Saints  and     the   first   High   Council   in   the   Church, 
dedicated  for  that  purpose.     When  the     at   Kirtland,   Feb.   17,   1834.   Elder  Cow- 
Temple    site    was     dedicated,      Aug.    J.     dery  was  elected  a  member.      He  acted 
1831,    Elder   Cowdery     was     one  of   the     as   clerk   of   the   Council   for  a   number 
eight    men    present.       He    subsequently     of    years,    and    subsequently    acted    as 
returned    to    Kirtland,    Ohio,    with    the     president   of    the   Council.       When    the 
Prophet,  where  they  arrived  Aug.  27th.     Prophet,  with  Zion's  Camp,  started  for 
.-^he  next  day   (Aug.  28,   1831)     he     was     Missouri  in  May  following,  Oliver,     to- 
ordained  a  High  Priest  by  Sidney  Rig-     gether    with    Sidney    Rigdon,    was    left 
don.     \  In    the    following   November    he     in  charge  of  the  Church  in  Kirtland.<In 
and  John  Whitmer  were   sent  back  to     the   evening  of     Nov.     29,   1834,   Joseph  ^ 
-    Missouri    with    the    revelations,    which     Smith    and    Oliver    Cowdery   united    in 
were   to   be   printed   there   by  Wm.   W.     solemn    prayer    and    made    a    covenant 
Phelps.    Jan.  22,  1832,  in  KaW  township,     with   the  Lord,   that  if  he  would  pros- 
Jackson   county.    Mo.,    Oliver   Cowdery    per  them  in  certain  things,  they  would 
married    Elizabeth    Ann  ""^liTtmer ,      a    give  a  "tenth  to  be  bestowed  upon  the 
daughter  of  Pet'er^WTiItmer,   sen.;    she    poor  of  his  Church,  or  as  he  shall  com- 
was    born    in    Fayette,    Seneca    county,     mand."       This   was   the   first   introduc- 
"^N.  Y.,  Jan.  22,  1815.       On  the  Prophet's    tion  of  the  paying  of  tithing  among  the  I 
second  visit  to  Missouri,  in  1832,  Oliver    Latter-day  Saints.      In  February.    1835,    \ 
Cowdery  was  appointed  one  of    a  com-     the   Three   Witnesses,    Oliver   Cowdery, 
mittee  of  three  to  review  and  prepare    David   Whitmer   and     Martin     Harris,     ' 
such  revelations  as  were  deemed  neces-     chose   twelve   men   from   the   Elders   of 
sary  for  publication.      He  was  also  one    the  Church,  to  officiate  as  the    Twelve- 
of  the  High  Priests  appointed  to  stand    Apostles.      In  blessing  them  and  giving 
at   the   head   of  affairs   relating  to   the    them  instructions  Oliver  Cowdery  took 
Church  in  Missouri.  After  the  destruc-     a  prominent  part.      He  was  also  one  of 
tion  of  the  printing  press  and  the  trou-     the  trustees  of  the  school  in  Kirtland, 
bles   in   Jackson   county,    in   July,    1833,     where    he    studied     Hebrew    and    other 
Oliver  Cowdery   was  sent  as  a  special    languages,    in      connection      with    the 
mesenger  from  the  Saints  to  Kirtland,     Prophet  and   other  Elders.       Sept.     14, 
Ohio,   to   confer   with   the   First   Presi-    1835,  he  was  appointed  to  act  as  Church 
dency.      He  arrived  there  in.  the  latter    Recorder.      He  had  previously  acted  in 
part  of  August.       At  a  council  held  in    the  same  capacity  from  April,   1830,   to 
Kirtland,  Sept.  11.  1833,     he      was     ap-    June,   1831.       Elder  Cowdery  was  pres- 
pointed  to  take  charge  of  the  printing    ent    at    the    dedication    of    the   Temple 
office   to   be   established   at   that   place,    in  Kirtland,  and  took  an  active  part  in 
and     there     he      subsequently     recom-    giving     the     assembled     Elders     their 
menced  the  publication  of   the  "Evening    washings     and     anointings.       April    3, 
and   Morning   Star."     When   the   press    1836,  together  with  the  Prophet  Joseph, 
was   dedicated,     Dec.       18,       1833,     the    he  saw  and  heard  the  Savior,  and  also 
Prophet  records  the  following  concern-    Moses,   Elias  and  Elijah  the     Prophet, 
ing  Elder  Cowdery:     "Blessed     of    the    who   committed     unto     them   the   keys 
Lord    is    Brother   Oliver;      nevertheless    necessary    for    the    furtherance    of    the 
there  are  two  evils  in  him  that  he  must    work  of  the  great  latter-day  dispensa- 
needs  forsake,  or  he  cannot  altogether    tion.       (Doc.  and  Cov.,  Sec.  110.)     Sept. 
forsake  the  buffetings  of  the  adversary.     3,    1837.    at   a   conference   held   in    Kirt- 
!f   he   forsake   these   evils,    he   shall   be    land,  Elder  Cowdery  was  appointed  as- 
forgiven,  and  he  shall  be  made  like  un-    sistant  counselor  to  the  First  Presiden- 
to  the  bow  which  the  Lord  hath  set  in    cy.     Some  time  during  that  year  he  re- 
the   heavens;    he   shall    be   a   sign   and     moved   to  Far  West,   Caldwell   county. 


BIOGRAPHICAL    ENCYCLOPEDIA. 


249 


Mo.,  where  he  acted  as  clerk  of  the 
High  Council  and  Church  Recorder.  He 
was  also  a  member  of  a  committee  ap- 
pointed to  select  locations  for  the  gath- 
ering of  the  Saints.  JApril  11,  183S.  El- 
der Seymour  Brunson  preferred  thg  fol- 
lowing charges  against  Oliver  Cowdery 
before  the  High  Council  of  Far  West: 
'•1st.  For  persecuting  the  brethren  by 
urging  on  vexatious  lawsuits  against 
them,  and  thus  distressing  the  inno- 
cent. 2nd.  For  seeking  to  destroy 
the  character  of  President  Joseph 
Smith  jun.,  by  falsely  insinuating  that 
he  was  guilty  of  adultery,  etc.  3rd. 
For  treating  the  Church  with  contempt 
by  not  attending  meeting.  4th.  For 
virtually  denying  the  faith  by  declar- 
ing that  he  would  not  be  governed  by 
any  ecclesiastical  authority  or  revela- 
tions w'hatever,  in  his  temporal  affairs. 
5th.  For  selling  his  lands  in  Jackson 
county,  contrary  to  the  revelations.  6th. 
For  writing  and  sending  an  insulting 
letter  to  President  Thomas  B.  Marsh, 
while  on  the  High  Council,  attending 
to  the  duties  of  his  office  as  president 
of  the  Council,  and  by  insulting  the 
High  Council  w-ith  the  contents  of  said 
letter.  7th.  For  leaving  his  calling, 
in  which  God  had  appointed  him  by 
revelation,  for  the  sake  of  filthy  lucre, 
and  turning  to  the  practice  of  law.  8th. 
For  disgracing  the  Church  by  being 
connected  in  the  bogus  business,  as 
common  report  says.  9th.  For  dishon- 
estly retaining  notes,  after  they  have 
been  paid;  and,  finally,  for  leaving  or 
forsaking  the  cause  of  God,  and  return- 
ing to  the  beggarly  elements  of  the 
world,  and  neglecting  his  high  and  holy 
calling  , according  to  his  profession." 
-«-The  following  day  (April  12th)  the 
Bishop  of  Far  West  and  High  Council 
examined  his  case.  "The  1st,  2nd,  3rd, 
7th,  8th  and  9th  charges  were  sustained. 
The  4th  and  5th  charges  were  rejected, 
and  the  6th  was  withdrawn.  Conse- 
quently he  (Oliver  Cowdery)  was  con- 
sidered no  longer  a  "member  of  the 
Church  of  Jesus  Christ  of  Latter-day 
Saints.  After  his  excommunication, 
jf  Oliver  Cowdery  engaged  In  law  busi- 
ness and  practiced  for  some  years  as 
a  law-yer  in  Michigan,  but  he  never  de- 
nied the  truth  of  the  Book  of  Mormon. 
On  the  contrary  he  seems  to  have  used 
every  opportunity  to  bear  testimony  of 
its  divine  origin.  While  practicing 
law  in  Michigan,  a  gentleman,  on  a  cer- 
tain occasion,  addressed  him  as  follows: 


"Mr.  Cowdery,  I  see  your  namt-  at- 
tached to  this  book  (Book  of  Mormon). 
If  you  believe  it  to  be  true,  why  are 
you  in  Michigan?"  The  gentleman 
then  read  the  names  of  the  Three  Wit- 
nesses and  asked.  "Mr.  Cowdery,  do  you 
believe  this  book?"  "No,  sir,"  was  the 
reply.  "Very  well,"  continued  the  gen- 
tleman, "but  your  name  is  attached  to 
it,  and  you  declare  here  (pointing  to 
the  book)  that  you  saw  an  angel,  and 
also  the  plates,  from  which  the  book 
purports  to  be  translated;  and  now  you 
say  you  don't  believe  it.  "V\'hich  time 
did  you  tell  the  truth?"  Oliver  Cow- 
dery replied  with  emphasis,  "My  name 
is  attached  to  that  book,  and  what  I 
there  have  said  is  true.  I  did  see  this; 
I  know  I  saw  it,  and  faith  has  nothing 
to  do  with  it,  as  a  perfect  knowledge 
has  swallowed  up  the  faith  which  I 
had  in  the  work  know-ing,  as  I  do.  that 
it  is  true."  I  At  a  special  conference  held 
at  Kanesv/lle,  Iowa,  Oct.  21,  1848,  and 
presided  over  by  Apostle  Orson  Hyde. 
Oliver  Cowdery  was  present  and  made 
the  following  remarks:  "Friends  and 
Brethren, — My  name  is  Cowdery,  Oliver 
Cowdery.  In  the  early  history  of  this 
Church  I  stood  identified  with  her.  and 
one  in  her  councils.  True  it  is  that  the 
gifts  and  callings  of  God  are  without 
repentance;  not  because  I  was  better 
than  the  rest  of  mankind  was  I  called; 
but,  to  fulfill  the  purposes  of  God.  He 
called  me  to  a  high  and  holy  calling. 
I  wrote,  with  my  own  pen,  the  entire 
Book  of  Mormon  (save  a  few  pages)  as 
it  fell  from  the  lips  of  the  Prophet  Jo- 
seph Smith,  as  he  translated  it  by  the 
gift  and  power  of  God,  by  the  means 
of  the  Urim  and  Thummim,  or,  as  it  is 
called  by  that  book,  'holy  interpreters.' 
I  behei'"  with  my  eyes,  and  handled 
with  my  hands,  the  gold  plates  from 
which  it  was  transcribed.  I  also  saw 
with  my  eyes  and  handled  with  my 
hands  the  'holy  interpreters.'  That  book 
is  true.  Sidney  Rigdon  did  not  write 
it;  Mr.  Spaulding  did  not  write  it:  I 
wrote  it  myself  as  it  fell  from  the  lips 
of  the  Prophet.  It  contains  the  ever- 
lasting gospel,  and  came  forth  to  the 
children  of  men  in  fulfilment  of  the 
revelations  of  John,  where  he  says  he 
saw  an  angel  come  with  the  everlast- 
ing gospel  to  preach  to  every  nation, 
kindred,  tongue  and  people.  It  con- 
tains principles  of  salvation;  and  if 
you,  my  hearers,  will  walk  by  its  light 
and  obey  its  precepts,     you       will     be 


250 


LATTER-DAT   SAINT 


saved  with  an  everlasting  salvation  In 
the  kingdom  of  God  on  high.  Brother 
Hyde  has  just  said  that  it  is  very  im- 
portant that  we  keep  and  walk  in  the 
true  channel,  In  order  to  avoid  the 
sand-bars.  This  is  true.  The  channel 
is  here.  The  holy  Priesthood  is  here. 
I  was  present  with  Joseph  when  an 
holy  angel  from  God  came  down  from 
heaven  and  conferred  on  us,  or  restored, 
the  lesser  or  Aaronic  Priesthood,  anl 
said  to  us,  at  the  same  time,  that  it 
should  remain  upon  the  earth  while  the 
earth  stands.  I  was  also  present  with 
Joseph  when  the  higher  or  Melchisedek 
Priesthood  was  conferred  by  holy  an- 
gels from  on  high.  This  Priesthood 
we  then  conferred  on  each  other,  by  the 
will  and  commandment  of  God.  This 
Priesthood,  as  was  then  declared,  is  al- 
so to  remain  upon  the  earth  until  the 
last  remnant  of  time.  This  holy  Priest- 
hood, or  authority,  we  then  conferred 
upon  man>',  and  is  just  as  good  and 
valid  as  though  God  had  done  it  in  per- 
son. I  laid  my  hands  upon  that  man 
— yes.  I  laid  my  right  hand  upon  his 
head  (pointing  to  Brother  Hyde),  and 
I  conferred  upon  him  this  Priesthood, 
and  he  holds  that  Priesthood  now.  He 
was  also  called  through  me,  by  the 
prayer  of  faith,  an  Apostle  of  the  Lord 
Jesus  Christ."  ^  In  the  early  part  of 
November  following  Elder  Hyde  called 
a  High  Council  in  the  Log  Tabernacle, 
to  consider  the  case  of  Oliver  Cowdery. 
Having  been  cut  off  by  the  voice  of  a 
High  Council,  it  was  thought  that,  if  he 
was  restored,  he  should  be  restored  by 
the  voice  of  a  similar  body.  Before 
this  body  Brother  Cowdery  said: 
"Brethren,  for  a  number  of  years  I  have 
been  separated  from  you.  I  now  de- 
sire to  come  back.  I  wish  to  come 
humbly  and  to  be  one  in  your  midst. 
I  seek  no  station.  I  only  wish  to  be 
identified  with  you.  I  am  out  of  the 
Church.  I  am  not  a  member  of  the 
Church,  but  I  wish  to  become  a  mem- 
ber of  it.  I  wish  to  come  in  at  the 
door.  I  know  the  door.  I  have  not 
come  here  to  seek  precedence.  I  come 
humbly  and  throw  myself  upon  the  de- 
cisions of  this  body,  knowing,  as  I  do. 
that  its  decisions  are  right,  and  should 
be  obeyed."  Brother  George  W.  Har- 
ris, president  of  the  Council,  moved 
that  Brother  Cowdery  be  received.  Con- 
siderable discussion  took  pl^ce  in  re- 
lation to  a  certain  letter  which,  it  was 
alleged,   Brother  Cowdery   had   written 


to  David  Whitmer.  Brother  Cowdery 
again  rose  and  said:  "If  there  be  any 
person  that  has  aught  against  me,  let 
him  declare  it  My  coming  back  aiid 
humbly  asking  to  become  a  member 
through  the  door,  covers  the  whole 
ground.  I  acknowledge  this  authori- 
ty." Brother  Hyde  moved  that  Brother 
Oliver  Cowdery  be  received  into  the 
Church  by  baptism,  and  that  all  old 
things  be  dropped  and  forgotten,  which 
was  seconded  and  carried  unanimously. 
Soon  afterwards  he  was  re-baptized. 
fElder  Samuel  W.  Richards  relates  the 
following:  "The  arrival  of  Oliver 
Cowdery  and  his  family  at  Council 
Bluffs  from  the  east  in  the  winter  of 
1848-49  was  an  interesting  event  in  the 
history  of  the  Church.  With  his  fami- 
Iv,  he  was  on  his  way  to  the  body  of 
the  Church  located  in  Utah,  but  as  some 
time  must  elapse  before  emigrant 
trains  could  venture  upon  the  plains, 
he  determined  to  visit  his  wife's  friends, 
the    Whitmers,    in    Missouri.  While 

making  that  journey,  a  severe  snow 
storm  made  it  convenient  for  his  fami- 
ly to  spend  several  days  with  Elder 
Samuel  W.  Richards  and  family,  who 
were  temporarily  residing  in  upper 
Missouri,  awaiting  the  opening  of  the 
emigration  season.  That  favorable  op- 
portunity was  made  the  most  of  to  dis- 
cuss all  matters  of  interest  connected 
with  the  early  history  of  the  Church, 
with  which  Elder  Cowdery  was  person- 
ally acquainted  and  Elder  Richards  was 
not.  His  relation  of  events  was  of  no 
ordinary  character,  maintaining  un- 
equivocally all  those  written  testi- 
monies he  had  furnished  to  the  Church 
and  world  in  earlier  days.  Moroni, 
Peter,  James  and  John,  and  other  heav- 
enly messengers,  who  had  ministered  to 
him  in  connection  with  the  Prophet  Jo- 
seph Smith,  were  familiarly  but  sa- 
credly spoken  of,  and  all  seemed  fresh 
upon  the  memory  as  though  but  events 
of  yesterday.  His  language  was  con- 
siderate, precise  and  forcible — entirely 
free  from  lightness  or  frivolity— such  as 
might  be  expected  from  one  who  had 
been  schooled  with  angels  and  taught 
by  Prophets;  more  of  the  heavenly  than 
the  earthly.  His  only  ambition  seemed 
to  be  to  give  himself  and  the  remain- 
der of  his  life  to  the  Church;  declared 
he  was  ready  and  willing,  if  desired, 
to  go  to  the  nations  of  the  earth  and 
bear  his  testimony  of  that  which  God 
and  angels   had   revealed — a  testimony 


BIOGRAPHICAL   ENCYCLOPEDIA. 


251 


in  his    personal     experience    of    many 
thing's    which    no    other    living    person 
could  bear.       His  hopes  were  buoyant 
that   such   might   be   his   future   lot  as 
cast   with   the   Church,   in   the   body   of 
which  he  declared  the  Priesthood  and 
its  authority  were  and  must  continue  to 
be.      An  overruling  Providence  saw  fit 
to  order  otherwise.  Soon  after  arriving 
among  his  relatives  in  Missouri,  he  was 
taken  sick  and  died,   in  full  faith  and 
fellowship  of  the  latter-day  work,   de- 
siring the  world   might  know  that  his 
testimony  was  of  God."  ("Contributor," 
Vol.  5,  page  446.)     Oliver  Cowdery  died 
March  3,  1850,  at_^1chmond,  Ray  couh- 
ty.  Mo.    Elder  Phineas  H.  Toung,  who 
w^as  present  at  his  death,   says:      "His 
last   moments   were   spent     in   bearing 
testimony    of    the    truth    of    the    gospel 
revealed  through  Joseph  Smith,  and  the 
power  of  the  holy  Priesthood  which  he 
had    received   through    his    administra- 
tions."    Oliver     Cowdery's    half-sister, 
Lucy  P.   Young    a  widow  of  the     late 
Phineas  H.  Young,  relates  that  Oliver 
Cowdery  just  before  breathing  his  last, 
asked   his   attendants   to   raise   him   up 
in  bed,  that  he  might  talk  to  the  fami- 
ly and   his  friends,   who   were   present. 
He  then  told  them  to  live  according  to 
the    teachings    contained    in    the    Book 
of  Mormon,  and  promised  them,  if  they 
would    do    this,    that    they   would    meet 
him   in   heaven.       He   then   said,    "Lay^ 
me  down  and  let  me  fall  asleep."       A 
few   moments  later  he   died  without   a 
struggle.       David  Whitmer  testified  to 
Apostles    Orson    Pratt    and   Joseph     F. 
Smith  in  1878,  as  follows:     "Oliver  died 
the   happiest  man  I   ever  saw.       After 
shaking    hands    with      the    family    and 
kissing  his  wife  and  daughter,  he  said, 
'Now' I  lay  me  down  for  the  last  time: 
I  am  going  to  my  Savior;'  and  he  died 
immediately    with  a  smile  on  his  face." 
("Millennial  Star."  Vol.  40,  p.  774.)     In 
an  article  published  in  the  "Millennial 
Star,"  Vol.  48,  page  420,   Elder  Edward 
Stevenson    gives     the    following    testi- 
mony   in    relation    to    Oliver    Cowdery: 
"I  have  often  heard  him  bear  a  faith- 
ful testimony  to  the  restoration  of  the 
gospel  by  the  visitation  of  an  angel,  in 
whose    presence   he    stood    in    company 
with    the    Prophet    Joseph    Smith     and 
David  Whitmer.       He  testified  that  he 
beheld    the    plates,      the     leaves    being 
turned  over  by  the  angel,  whose  voice 
he    heard,    and    that     they    were    com- 
manded as  witnesses  to  bear  a  faithful 


testimony  to  the  world  of  the  vision 
that  they  were  favored  to  behold,  and 
that  the  translation  from  the  plates  in 
the  Book  of  Mormon  was  accepted  of 
the  Lord,  and  that  it  should  "go  forth 
to  the  world,  and  no  power  on  earth 
should  stop  its  progress.  Although  for 
a  time  Oliver  Cowdery  absented  him- 
self from  the  body  of  the  Church,  I 
never  have  known  a  time  when  he  fal- 
tered or  was  recreant  to  the  trust  so 
sacredly  entrusted  to  him  by  an  an- 
gel from  heaven." 

WHITMER,  John,  the  first  regular- 
ly appointed  Church  Historian,  was  the 
third  son  of  Peter  Whitmer,   sen.,  and 
Mary  Musselman,   and  was  born   Aug. 
27,   18*^2.       He   was   baptized   by   Oliver 
Cowdery  in  Seneca  lake  in  June,   1829, 
soon    after    Joseph    Smith's    arrival    in 
Seneca  county  from  Pennsylvania.  His 
brothers  David  and  Peter  were  baptized 
about  the  same  time.       John  Whitmer 
assisted  Joseph  Smith  and  Oliver  Cow- 
dery considerably  in  writing  while  they 
were  translating  the  latter  part  of  the 
Book  of  Mormon  in  his  father's  house. 
In  the  meantime  he  became  very  zeal- 
ous in  the  work,  and,  according  to  his 
earnest    desire,    Joseph     inquired     con- 
cerning him  through     the     Urim     and 
Thummim,  and  received  a  revelation  in 
which    he   was    commanded    to    declare 
repentance  and  bring  souls  unto  Christ. 
(Doc.    and    Cov.,    Sec.    15.)       He     was 
closely  associated  with  the  Prophet  in 
his  early   administrations,   and  accom- 
panied   him     on     his    first   missionary 
trips  to  Colesville.Broome  county,  N.Y., 
where   a  large  branch     of  the   Church 
was  built  up  in  the  midst  of  consider- 
able persecution.      He  was  also  present 
at  the  little  meeting  held  at  Harmony, 
Penn.,  in  August,  1830,  w^hen  the  reve- 
lation  concerning   the    Sacrament   was 
given.      (Doc.   and   Cov.,   Sec.   27.)       In 
September,  1830,  he  was  called  by  reve- 
lation to  preach  the  gospel  and  to  la- 
bor continuously  in  the  interest  of  Zion 
(Doc.  and  Cov..  Sec.  30),  and  on  March 
8,  1831,  he  was  chosen  by  revelation  to 
labor   as   a   historian   for     the   Church. 
(Doc.  and  Cov.,   Sec.  47.)     June  3,  1831, 
he  was  ordained  a  High  Priest  by  Ly- 
man Wight,  at  Kirtland,  Ohio.      In  No- 
vember, 1831,  he  was  called  by  revela- 
tion   (Doc.    and    Cov..    Sec.    69)      to   ac- 
company   Oliver    Cowdery     to   Jackson 
county,    Missouri,   with   the   revelations 
which  he  previously  had  assisted     Jo- 


252 


LATTER-DAY  SAINT 


seph  in  copying  and  preparing  for 
printing.  He  was  also  one  of  the 
■seven  High  Priests  sent  up  from  Klrt- 
land  to  build  up  Zion,"  to  stand  at  the 
head  of  the  Church  in  Jackson  county, 
Missouri,  and  at  the  time  of  the  perse- 
cutions was  a  member  of  the  commit- 
tee who  negotiated  with  the  mob  and 
agreed  that  the  Saints  should  leave 
Jackson  county.  Later  we  find  his 
name  attached  to  petitions  addressed 
to  Governor  Dunklin,  of  Missouri,  pray- 
ing for  redress  and  protection  against 
mob  violence.  In  Clay  county  he  was 
again  quite  active  and  his  name  ap- 
pears in  connection  with  several  im- 
portant documents  and  correspond- 
ences of  the  Church  at  that  time.  Next 
his  brother  David,  John  was  the  most 
prominent  and  able  man  among  the 
Whitmers,  and  rendered  efficient  ser- 
vice to  the  Church  in  various  ways,  as 
long  as  he  remained  faithful.  July  3, 
1834,  he  was  ordained  one  of  the  as- 
sistant presidents  of  the  Church  in  Clay 
county,  his  brother  David  being  or- 
dained president  on  the  same  occasion. 
Some  time  afterwards  John  paid  a  visit 
to  Kirtland,  Ohio,  where  he  acted  as 
a  High  Counselor  and  took  an  active 
part  in  the  affairs  of  the  Church  as  one 
of  the  presiding  officers  from  Missou- 
ri. He  was  present  at  the  dedication 
of  the  Kirtland  Temple,  and  received 
his  blessings  and  anointings  under  the 
hands  of  the  First  Presidency,  after 
which  he  returned  to  Missouri.  At  a 
meeting  of  High  Priests  held  at  Far 
West,  Missouri,  April  7,  1837,  he  was 
appointed  to  act  as  a  member  of  a 
committee  for  the  sale  of  town  lots  in 
Far  West.  At  a  conference  held  at 
Far  West,  Nov.  7,  1837,  objections  were 
made  to  John  Whitmer  as  one  of  the 
assistant  presidents  of  the  Church  in 
Missouri,  but  after  he  had  made  con- 
fessions he  w-as  temporarily  sustained 
in  his  position.  He  was  finally  reject- 
ed, however,  together  with  David 
Whitmer  and  Wm.  W.  Phelps,  the 
other  two  presidents  of  the  Church  in 
Missouri,  Feb.  5,  1838.  John  Whitmer 
was  excommunicated  from  the  Church 
by  the  Hifrh  Council  at  Far  West, 
March  10,  1838.  "for  persisting  in  un- 
christian-like conduct,"  for  (in  con- 
nection with  David  Whitmer  and  Wm. 
W.  Phelps)  having  kept  $2,000  of 
Church  funds,  which  had  been  sub- 
scribed and  paid  in  by  members  of  the 
Church  for  building  the  Lord's  House 
in  Far  West.  etc.      After  his  excommu- 


nication from  the  Church,  John  Whit- 
mer refused  to  deliver  up  the  Church 
documents  in  his  possession  to  the 
proper  authorities  which  gave  occasion 
for  quite  a  severe  letter  from  Joseph 
Smith  and  Sidney  Rigdon.  The  records, 
however,  have  never  been  obtained; 
they  are  still  in  the  custody  of  the 
Whitmers  or  their  relatives,  who  re- 
side in  Richmond,  Ray  county.  Mo. 
But  Elder  Andrew  Jenson,  while  on  a 
visit  to  Richmond  in  1893,  succeeded  in 
getting  an  exact  copy  of  the  "Old 
Whitmer  Church  Record,"  which  is 
now  at  the  Historian's  Office.  After 
the  fall  of  Far  West,  in  1838-39,  John 
Whitmer  took  advantage  of  the  cheap 
rates  at  which  the  lands  which  the 
Saints  were  compelled  to  leave  could  be 
bought,  and  he  succeeded  in  purchasing 
the  principal  part  of  the  old  town- 
site.  "UTien  he  died  at  his  residence 
at  Far  West,  July  11,  1878,  he  was 
known  as  an  extensive  farmer  and 
stock-raiser.  Although  he  never  joined 
the  Church  again  after  his  excommuni- 
cation in  1838,  he  was  always  true  to 
his  testimony  in  regard  to  the  Book 
of  Mormon.  Even  in  his  darkest  days, 
and  at  the  time  he  first  turned  his 
back  upon  the  Church  and  the  Prophet 
Joseph,  he  declared  in  the  presence  of 
a  number  of  Missourians — enemies  to 
the  work  of  God — that  he  knew  the 
Book  of  Mormon  was  true.  His  nephew 
John  C.  Whitmer,  of  Richmond.  Ray 
county.  Mo.,  who  was  with  him  a  few 
days  before  his  death,  testified  to  El- 
der Andrew  Jenson  in  1888  that  John 
Whitmer  bore  testimony  to  the  truth, 
of  the  Book  of  Mormon  until  the  last. 
This  statement  is  corroborated  by  many 
others  who  visited  him  on  various  oc- 
casions previous  to  1888.  John  Whitmer 
was  the  father  of  four  children,  three 
sons  and  one  daughter.  One  of  his 
sons  died  when  about  ten  years  old 
and  another  was  killed  in  the  late  civil 
war.  His  only  remaining  son,  Jacob 
D.  Whitmer,  lived  in  1888  on  the  old 
Far  West  site,  and  owned  one  of  the 
best  farms  in  that  part  of  the  country, 
including  the  Temple  Block,  which  he 
inherited  from  his  father.  John's  only 
daughter  also  lived  in  Far  West  in. 
1888,  on  the  old  homestead,  a  short 
distance  east  of  Jacob  D.  WTiitmer's 
residence. 

ROBINSON,  George  W.,  general 
Church  recorder  from  1837  to  1840,  was- 
born  May  14.   1814.  in  Pawlet,  Rutland 


BIOGRAPHICAL    ENCYCLOPEDIA. 


253 


county,  Vermont.      He  married  Athalia 
Rig-don,   the  eldest  daughter  of  Sidney 
Rig-don,    and     is     first     mentioned     in 
Church    history    in    connection    with    a 
conference      held      at      Kirtland,    Ohio, 
Sept.  3,  1837,  at  which  he  acted  as  clerk. 
At  a  meeting  held   at   the   same   place 
Sept.   17,   1837,    Geo.   W.   Robinson     was 
unanimously  elected     General     Church 
Recorder   in    place    of   Oliver   Cowdery, 
who  had  removed  to  Missouri.       Early 
in  1838  Elder  Robinso;;i  also  removed  to 
Missouri,   arriving  in  Far  West  March 
28.  1838,  and  at  a  meeting  held  at  that 
place   April   6,    1838,    he   was   again   ap- 
pointed "General  Church  Recorder  and 
clerk    to    the    First    Presidency."        In 
June,  1S??S    he  accompanied  the  Prophet 
to  Daviess  county  and  assisted   in   or- 
ganizing the   Stake   of   Adam-ondi-Ah- 
man   in   that  part  of  the  country.       In 
the    evening   of   Oct.    31,    1838,    together 
with  the  Prophet  Joseph  and  others,  he 
was   betrayed   into   the   hands     of     the 
mob  militia  by  Geo.  M.  Hinkle.  Escap- 
ing death  by  the  court  martial,  he  was 
tried   before   Judge  Austin   A.   King  at 
Richmond   in   November,    1838,   and  ac- 
quitted.      During  the  following  winter 
he   removed    to    Quincy,    111.,    where    he 
busied    himself   in    taking   affidavits   of 
those   who   had     suffered     during     the 
Missouri  persecutions.      He  was  one  of 
the    first    "Mormon"    settlers   of     Com- 
merce   (afterwards    Nauvoo)    and    was 
appointed   postmaster  at   that  place  in 
April,  1840.      Six  months  later  (October, 
1840)  he  was  released  from  his  position 
as  Church  Recorder,  as  he  intended  to 
remove  to  Iowa.       He  was  one  of     the 
original    incorporators    of    the    Nauvoo 
Ae-ricultural  and  Manufacturing  Asso- 
ciation,   organized   in   Nauvoo     in   1841. 
Soon    afterwards    he    denied    the   faith, 
and  at  a  meeting  held  at  Nauvoo  Aug. 
29,    1842,    he     was     denounced     by     the 
.    Prophet  Joseph.       It  appeared  that  he 
associated    himself   with    the    notorious 
John  C.  Bennett,  and  left  Nauvoo  about 
1843.      In  1846  he  was  living  on  a  farm 
in   Cuba,    Allegany   county,    N.    Y.,   but 
later  he  resided  in  Friendship,     in     the 
same  county,   where     he     died     several 
years  ago      His  father-in-law,  the  late 
Sidney  Rigdon,  also  died  at  Friendship, 
at  the  house  of  Geo.  W.  Robinson. 

HIGBEE,  Elias,  Church  Recorder 
from  1838  to  1843,  was  the  son  of  Isaac 
and  Sophie  Higbee  and  was  born  Oct. 
23.  179.5,   in   Galloway.  Gloucester  coun- 


ty,   New  Jersey.       In   1803   he   removed 
with   his   parents   to    Clermont   county, 
Ohio.       At   the   age   of   twenty-two,    he 
married   Sarah  Ward,  and   removed   to 
Cincinnati.       He  received  the  gospel  in 
the  spring  of  1832,  and  in  the  summer 
of  the     same    year    went      to  Jackson 
county,    Missouri,    where   he   was   bap- 
tized and  then  returned  to  Cincinnati. 
He   was   ordained   an   Elder  under   the 
hands    of   his    brother,      Isaac    Higbee, 
Feb.    20,    1833,    and   arrived   in   Jackson 
county  with  his  family  in  March.       In 
the   fall   of   1833   he  was   driven  by  the 
mob  to  Clay  county.      He  was  ordained 
a  High  Priest  by  Orson  Pratt,  Aug.  7, 
1834,   by   order  of  the  High   Council   in 
Clay  county.      March  26,  1835,  he  start- 
ed on  a  mission,   preaching  the  gospel 
through  the  States  of  Missouri,  Illinois, 
Indiana  and  Ohio.       Arriving  at  Kirt- 
land,   he   labored   on    the   Temple   until 
1t  was  finished,   and  received     his     en- 
dowments   therein.       In    the    spring   of 
1836,  he  returned  to  his  family  in  Mis- 
souri  and    removed    them    to    Caldwell 
county,  where  he  was  appointed  county 
judge.       At  a  general  conference   held 
at  Far  West,  Mo.,  April  6,  1838,  he  and 
John   Corrill     were     appointed   Church 
Historians,   "to  write  and  keep  Church 
history."       In   1839   he   was   driven  out 
of    Missouri    by    the    mob,    and    subse- 
quently settled  at  Commerce,  111.     Oct. 
6,    1840,    he    was    appointed    one    of    the 
committee  to  build  the  Nauvoo  Temple, 
which   office    he   maintained   until     his 
death,  which  occurred  at  Nauvoo  June 
8,  1843.      He  endured  much  persecution 
for  the  gospel's  sake,  both  in  Missouri 
and    other   places.       In   his   official   ca- 
pacities he  was  always  just  and  trust- 
worthy and   manifested   great  zeal   for 
the  prosperity  of  the  latter-day  work. 
He  left  a  large  family. 

THOMPSON,  Robert  Blashel,  Gen- 
eral Church  Recorder  from  1840  to 
1841,  was  born  Oct.  1,  1811,  in  Great 
Driffield,  Yorkshire,  England,  and  was 
educated  at  Dunnington,  in  the  same 
county.  He  united  with  the  Method- 
ists at  an  early  age,  and  preached 
what  he  believed  to  be  the  gospel,  in 
connection  with  that  sect  for  a  number 
of  years;  emigrated  to  Upper  Canada 
in  1834,  and  embraced  the  gospel  there, 
being  baptized  and  confirmed  by  Elder 
Parley  P.  Pratt  in  May,  1836.  He  was 
ordained  an  Elder  by  Elder  John  Tay- 
lor,   at    a    conference      held      in    Upper 


254 


LATTER-DAY    SAINT 


Canada,  July  22,  1S36,  removed  to  Kirt- 
land   in   May,    1837.    where   he     married 
Mercy     Rachel   Fielding-,     June  4,   1837, 
and  being  appointed  to  take  a  mission 
to  Upper  Canada,  he  returned     in     the 
same   month,    and   commenced    preach- 
ing in  Churchville  and  the  villages  ad- 
jacent.      He    baptized     a    considerable 
number,  and  continued  his  labors  there 
until  he  was  called  upon  to  remove  to 
Missouri.       He  arrived  in  Kirtland     in 
March,    and    starting     from     there     in 
company  with  Hyrum  Smith  and  fami- 
ly, he  arrived    in     Far  West,  June  3rd, 
where    his    daughter    Mary    Jane      was 
born    on    the    14th    of    June.        He      re- 
mained there  until  November,  when  he, 
with  many  of  the  brethren,  were  forced 
to  flee  into  the  wilderness  to  escape  the 
fury    of    the    mob,      who     swore      they 
would    kill   every   man   who    had     been 
engaged     in     the     Crooked  river  battie. 
He  stood  near  David  W.   Patten  wnen 
he  fell.      Together  with  ihe  rest  of  thd 
brethren    he    suffered    mucn    trom     ex- 
posure   and    lack    of    lood.       Alter    his 
arrival   in   Qumcy,    111.,   he   engaged  as 
clerk  in  the  court  house,  and  remained 
there    until    the    liberation     of     Joseph 
and   Hyrum    from    prison.        When    tut; 
Saints    settled    at    Commerce,      he      re- 
moved there,  and  engaged  as  scribe  to 
Joseph   the   Prophet.       At    the    general 
conference  of  the  Church  held  at  Nau- 
voo,    Oct.    3,    1S40,      he      was    appointed 
•'General   Church     Clerk,"     in   place  ol 
Geo.    W.    Robinson,    who    intended      to 
remove  to  Iowa.      Elder  Thompson  en- 
tered upon  the  duties  of  his  office  with 
energy   and   zeal.       When    the    Nauvoo 
Legion  was  formed,  he  received  the  of- 
fice of  colonel,     and     also  aid-de-camp. 
In  May,     1841,     he     became     associated 
with   Don   Carlos   Smith   in  the  editing 
of   "The  Times  and  Seasons."     On  the 
16th  of  August  he  was  seized  with  the 
same  disease   of  which  Don  Carlos  had 
died  on  the  7th.      The  attachment  be- 
tween  them   was  so  strong,  it  seemed, 
as  though  they  could  not  long  be  sep- 
arated.     He  died  Aug.  27,  1841.  leaving 
one  child.       By  his  special  request  no 
military  procession  was  formed  at  his 
funeral,  which  took  place  on  the  29th. 

SLOAN,  James,  General  Church  Re- 
corder from  1841  to  1843,  was  a  son  of 
Alexander  and  Anna  Sloan,  and  was 
born  Oct.  28,  1792,  in  the  county  of 
Tyrone,  Ireland.  He  joined  the  Church 
at  an  early  day,  and  received  a  patri- 


archal blessing  Feb.  6.  1838,  at  Portage, 
Medina  county.  Ohio,  under  the  hands 
of  Joseph  Smith,  sen.,  by  whom  he  was 
also  ordained  a  High  Priest  Feb.  18, 1838. 
During  the  winter  of  1838-39  he  visited 
Joseph  Smith  and  fellow-prisoners  in 
Liberty  jail,  Mo.,  several  times.  He 
passed  through  the  Missouri  persecu- 
tions and  testified  under  oath  at  Quincy, 
111.,  in  1840.  that  his  life  had  been 
threatened  by  the  Missourians,  that  his 
property  had  been  taken  by  them,  and 
that  he  was  obliged  to  "flee  from  the 
State  with  his  family,  greatly  to  his 
disadvantage."  He  was  one  of  the  ear- 
ly "Mormon"  settlers  of  Nauvoo,  where 
he  was  appointed  the  first  city  recorder, 
Feb.  1,  1840,  and  later  secretary  of  the 
Nauvoo  Legion.  In  September,  1842, 
when  the  office  of  notary  public  was 
created  by  the  city  council  of  Nauvoo, 
James  Sloan  was  elected  to  fill  the  po- 
sition. Under  date  of  Feb.  10,  1843, 
Joseph  Smith  records  in  his  history:  "I 
prophesied  to  James  Sloan,  city  recor- 
der, that  it  would  be  better  for  him  ten 
years  hence,  not  to  say  anything  more 
about  fees."  In  May  following  he  was 
called  on  a  mission  to  Ireland,  on 
which  he  started  about  two  months 
later.  Accompanied  by  his  wife  he 
arrived  in  Liverpool,  England,  Sept.  30, 
1843,  together  with  Reuben  Hedlock  and 
other  missionaries.  At  a  general  con- 
ference of  the  British  mission  held  in 
Liverpool,  April  6,  1844,  Elder  Sloan 
represented  52  members  of  the  Church 
in  Ireland;  he  was  now  appointed  to 
preside  over  the  Bradford  conference. 
After  his  return  to  America  he  figured 
prominently  among  the  Saints  in  Iowa, 
and  when  the  first  selection  of  officers 
for  Pottawattamie  county  took  place  in 
March,  1848,  he  was  appointed  district 
clerk.  He  subsequently  migrated  to 
the  Valley  and  died  a  faithful  member 
of  the  Church. 

JAQUJES,  John,  assistant  Church 
Historian  from  1889  to  1900,  was  the  son 
of  Thomas  Jaques  and  Mary  Ann 
Heighington,  and  was  born  Jan.  7,  1827, 
at  Market  Bosworth,  Leicestershire, 
England.  At  the  age  of  seven  years 
he  entered  the  Market  Bosworth  gram- 
mar school,  and  became  at  once  a 
bright  and  diligent  student.  When 
about  fourteen  years  old  he  was  ap- 
prenticed to  learn  the  trade  of  a  cabi- 
net maker.  Becoming  a  convert  to 
"Mormonism,"    he    was      baptized      by 


BIOGRAPHICAL    ENCYCLOPEDIA. 


255 


Thomas  Brown  Ward,  in  the  fall  of 
1845,  aL  Gresley,  Derbyshire.  He  was 
ordained  an  Elder  at  Whitwich,  Lei- 
cestershire, Sunday,  Jan.  9,  1848,  under 
the  hands  of  John  Fidoe,  Thos.  Steven- 
son and  Wm.  Cartwright.  At  the  time 
of  his  baptism  he  became  a  member  of 
the  Branstone  branch,  but  was  later 
identified  with  the  Stratford-on-Avon 
branch,  of  the  Warwickshire  confer- 
ence, in  which  conference  he  labored  as 
a  traveling  Elder.  Subsequently,  he 
was  appointed  to  labor  in  the  mission 
office  at  Liverpool.  While  thus  en- 
gaged, he  married  Miss  Zilpah  Loader, 


of  Oxfordshire,  England,  Oct.  31,  1853, 
at  Liverpool.  Having  received  an 
honorable  release  from  his  missionary 
labors  in  Great  Britain  he  emigrated 
with  his  family  to  America,  sailing  from 
Liverpool  May  22,  1856,  on  the  packet 
ship  "Horizon,"  which  arrived  in  Bos- 
ton, Mass.,  June  30,  1856.  Reaching 
the  frontiers.  Elder  Jaques  made  the 
necessary  arrangements  for  crossing 
the  plains  in  Captain  Martin's  handcart 
company.  This  was  one  of  the  com- 
panies that  suffered  so  much  in  the 
snow  storms  on  the  mountains,  and  in 
which  many  emigrants  lost  their  lives; 
among  those  who  succumbed  to  the 
hardships  of  that  memorable  journey 
w^as  Bro.  Jaques'.  eldest  child,  a  daugh- 
ter, who  died  near  Green  river  Nov.  23, 
1856.  Elder  Jaques,  with  family,  ar- 
rived in  Salt  Lake  City  Nov.  31,  1856; 


and  he  soon  afterwards  found  employ- 
ment on  the  public  works.  He  wa3 
ordained  a  Seventy  Feb.  2,  1857,  by 
Wm.  Burgess,  and  became  a  member 
of  the  9th  quorum  of  Seventy.  When 
Johnston's  army  approached  Salt  Lake 
City  in  1858,  Bro.  Jaques  and  family, 
together  with  many  others,  moved  to 
Spring-\'ille,  Utah  county,  but  returned 
to  the  city  the  same  year.  In  the 
latter  part  of  1859  he  was  called  by 
Pres.  Brigham  Young  to  labor  as  a 
clerk  in  the  Historian's  Office,  where  he 
was  employed  until  September,  1863. 
Next,  by  the  consent  of  Pres.  Young, 
he  associated  himself  with  Thos.  B.  H. 
Stenhouse  and  became  assistant  editor 
of  the  "Daily  Telegraph,"  a  newspaper 
published  in  Salt  Lake  City.  Subse- 
quently he  located  temporarily  in  Og- 
den,  where  the  "Telegraph"  was  con- 
tinued in  1869;  and  Elder  Jaques  re- 
mained with  the  paper  until  he  was 
called  on  a  mission  to  Great  Britain. 
During  this  mission,  which  lasted  from 
1869  to  187],  he  labored  principally  in 
the  Liverpool  office  as  assistant  editor 
of  the  "Millennial  Star."  After  his  re- 
turn from  his  mission  he  entered  the 
"Destret  News"  Office,  where  he  was 
employed  about  eight  years,  or  until  he 
became  permanently  associated  with 
the  Historian's  Office,  where  he  now 
labored  the  remainder  of  his  days.  From 
1889  till  his  death  he  was  sustained  as 
assistant  Church  historian.  Besides  the 
numerous  ecclesiastical  positions  held 
by  him  both  at  home  and  abroad,  he 
served  two  terms  in  the  Utah  legis- 
lature, was  a  commissioned  captain  of 
topographical  engineers  of  the  Nau- 
voo  Legion,  and  was  twice  elected 
school  trustee  in  the  12th  Ward,  Salt 
Lake  Citv.  where  he  resided.  For  many 
years  he  acted  as  private  secretary  to 
Pres.  AVilford  Woodruff,  and  was  also 
secretary  of  the  Genealogical  Society  of 
Utah.  In  his  younger  days  he  was  a 
ready  writer,  and  became  the  author 
of  several  books  and  pamphlets  treat- 
ing upon  gospel  principles.  Among 
those  may  be  mentioned  his  "Cathe- 
chism  for  Children,"  which  passed 
through  a  number  of  editions  and  was 
for  many  years  used  as  a  text  book 
in  Latter-day  Saints  schools.  It  has 
also  been  translated  into  several  for- 
eign languages.  His  pamphlet  en- 
titled "Church  of  Jesus  Christ  of  Lat- 
ter-day Saints"  became  very  popular 
among     both     Saints       and     strangers. 


256 


LATTER-DAY    SAINT 


Among  the  authors  of  Latter-day  Saint 
hymns,  his  name  also  appears,  and  the 
beautiful  production,  "O  say  what  1? 
truth,"  etc.,  together  with  other  soul- 
inspiring  productions  from  his  pen, 
which  are  published  in  the  Latter-day 
Saints  hvmn  books,  will  perpetuate  his 
memory  for  many  generations  to  come. 
In  1872  he  yielded  obedience  to  the 
law  of  plural  marriage  by  talking  to 
lylfe  Miss  Marv  Ann  Amott.  who  bore 
him  two  sons.  (She  died  April  24,  1901, 
in  Salt  Lake  City.)  He  was  the  father 
of  eleven  children,  seven  sons  and  four 
daughters,  of  whom  six  sons  and  on^ 
daughter  survived  him.  His  oldest 
son  was  born  on  the  journey  across  the 
plains,  near  Florence,  Neb.,  in  1856.  El- 
der Jaques  was  set  apart  as  a  president 
in  the  Sth  quorum  of  Seventy,  April  19, 
1876,  and  in  December,  1893,  he  became 
senior  president  of  said  quorum,  which 
position  he  held  till  Dec.  31,  1898,  when 
he  was  ordained  a  High  Priest  by  An- 
^us  M.  Cannon.  After  seven  weeks' 
illness.  Elder  Jaques  died  of  Bright's 
disease  at  his  home  in  Salt  Lake  City, 
June  1.  1900.  In  speaking  of  his  life's 
labor  the  "Deseret  News"  said:  "John 
Jaques  was  a  strong  man,  his  abilities 
rising  high  above  the  average.  He  was 
useful  wherever  he  was  placed.  *  *  * 
He  was  not  a  demonstrative  man,  and 
every  one  did  not  gain  access  into  the 
inner  circles  of  his  life,  but  those  who 
did  enjoy  his  confidence  and  who  knew 
his  heart  knew  him  to  be  genuine— a 
man  of  strong  character  and  one  who 
would  lay  his  head  on  the  block  for  a 
conviction.  *  *  •  He  did  not  shine  among 
his  fellows  with  that  glitter  that  is 
sometimes  taken  for  brilliant  mentality. 
He  was  retiring  in  manner  and  not  for- 
ward in  speech.  He  made  no  special 
effort  at  oratory.  Even  in  conversa- 
tion his  words  were  few  and  sometimes 
brusque,  though  not  antagonistic.  He 
had  opinions  of  his  own  which  he -was 
not  afraid  to  express  whatever  might 
be  the  views  of  those  who  surrounded 
him.  Yet  he  was  not  offensive  in  his 
language.  He  was  for  many  years  a 
great  worker.  For  full  half  a  century 
he  labored  incessantly  in  that  which  he 
firmly  believed  was  the  cause  of  hu- 
man redemption.  His  first  literary  ef- 
forts were  known  throueh  the  "Millen- 
nial Star."  The  brightness  of  that  lum- 
inary received  much  of  its  lustre  for  a 
considerable  period  from  his  active 
mind  and  facile  pen.      In  poetry  and  in 


prose  he  reflected  the  light  of  truth  for 
the  benefit  of  his  fellows,  and  his  log- 
ical thoughts  and  spiritual  sentiments 
were  a  comfort  and  a  strength  to  many 
honest  souls." 

PEXROSK,  Charles  William,  as- 
sistant Church  Historian  from  1896  to 
1899,  was  born  Feb.  4,  1832,  at  Camber- 
well,  London,  England.  Being  natural- 
ly of  a  studious  and  inquiring  turn  of 
mind,  with  quick  perception  and  re- 
markable memory,  he  speedily  mas- 
tered at  school  the  common  rudiments 
of  education.  He  read  the  Scriptures 
when  only  four  years  old,  and  was  well 
versed  in  the  doctrines  of  the  Bible,  the 
wonderful  sayings  and  predictions  of 
the  Savior,  and  the  ancient  Prophets 
and  Apostles.  This  paved  the  way  for 
his  acquaintance  with,  and  his  subse- 
quent acceptance  of,Mormonism,  which, 
from  its  Scriptural  character,  its  rea- 
sonable and  substantial  doctrines,  fea- 
sible theories,  and  sound,  practical  re- 
sults, attracted  his  attention  while  a 
mere  lad,  and,  in  due  time,  after  he  had 
thoroughly  investigated  and  compared 
its  teachings  with  the  Bible,  numbered 
him  among  its  converts.  He  joined 
the  Church  of  Jesus  Christ  of  Latter- 
day  Saints  in  London,  May  14,  1850,  and 
is  the  only  member  of  his  father's  fami- 
ly who  has  ever  embraced  the  faith.  His 
scriptural  attainments  and  spiritual 
inclinations  soon  brought  him  under 
notice  of  the  presiding  authorities  of 
the  London  conference,  and  in  January, 
1851.  when  not  yet  nineteen  years  old, 
he  was  ordained  an  Elder,  and  two 
months  later  was  sent  on  a  mission  to 
Maldon,  in  Essex,  to  preach  the  gospel, 
"break  new  ground,"  and  build  up 
branches  of  the  Church.  This  move- 
ment was  tnuch  in  opposition  to  the 
wishes  of  his  friends,  and  to  his  own 
pecuniary  interests,  as  he  had  been 
offered,  on  condition  of  his  remaining 
home,  a  life  situation  in  a  government 
office.  Shutting  his  eyes  to  the  gilded 
bait  of  temptation,  he  took  up  the  cross 
of  the  Master,  and  literally  "without 
purse  or  scrip,"  taking  not  a  penny  in 
his  pocket,  nor  evgn  a  change  of  dress, 
started  out  afoot  upon  his  mission  a* 
a  servant  of  the  Lord.  With  bleeding 
feet  but  undaunted  heart,  he  reached 
the  town  of  Maldon,  having  slept  out 
of  doors  for  the  first  time  in  his  life 
the  chilly  night  previous.  He  was  an 
utter    stranger    in    the    place,    and    the 


i 


BIOGRAPHICAL    ENCYCLOPEDIA. 


257 


first  "Mormon"  Elder  to  visit  that  re- 
grlon  of  the  country.  He  met  with 
much  opposition,  but  steadily  worked 
his  way  in  the  town  of  Maldon,  and 
the  country  round  about,  and  succeeded 
in  raising-  up  branches  of  the  Church  in 
Maldon,  Danbury,  Chelmsford,  Col- 
chester and  other  places,  baptizing  a 
great  number  of  persons  of  both  sexes, 
many  of  whom  are  now  in  Utah,  and 
being  instrumental,  by  the  laying  on  of 
hands,  in  the  restoration  to  health  of 
many  persons  afflicted  with  disease.  He 
possessed   the  gift  of  healing  to  a   re- 


markable degree,  and  several  of  the 
cures  performed  were  of  a  miraculous 
order.  He  labored  for  seven  years  in 
poor  agricultural  districts,  opening  new 
missionary  fields,  building  up  branches, 
suffering  many  hardships  and  trudg^ing 
on  foot  between  three  and  four  thou- 
sand miles  every  year.  It  was  during 
this  period,  on  Jan.  21,  1855,  that  he 
married  Miss  Lucetta  Stratford,  of  Mal- 
don, sister  of  the  late  Bishop  Edward 
Stratford,  of  Ogden,  who  with  all  the 
family  he  had  was  brought  into  the 
Church.  Elder  Penrose  was  next  called 
to  preside  over  the  London  conference, 
and  subsequently  over  the  Cheltenham 
pastorate, consisting  of  the  Cheltenham, 
Worcestershire,  Monmouthshire  and 
Herefordshire  conferences;  and  later 
over  the  Birmingham  pastorate,  con- 
sisting of  the  Birmingham,  Warwick- 
shire, Staffordshire  and  Shropshire  con- 
ferences. His  pen,  ever  brilliant  and 
keen,  at  this  time  was  almost  as  busy 


as  his  ready  tongue.  He  wrote  many 
theological  articles  for  the  "Millennial 
Star,"  the  principal  Church  organ  of 
the  European  mission,  and  out  of  the 
silken  and  g-olden  threads  of  his  poet- 
ical thoughts  and  emotions,  wove  the 
fabric  of  those  beautiful  songs  of  Zion 
which  have  cheered  the  hearts  and  fired 
with  patriotism  and  holy  zeal  the 
drooping  souls  of  thousands.  In  the 
year  1861,  after  over  ten  years  of 
gratuitous  and  successful  service  in  the 
ministry,  he  was  released  from  his  la- 
bors and  emigrated  to  America.  He 
crossed  the  sea  in  the  sailing  ship  "Un- 
derwriter," assisting  in  the  charge  of 
620  passenger,  and  living  with  them  in 
the  steerage  during  the  thirty  days 
from  Liverpool  to  New  York.  He  also 
hel^^d  to  care  for  them  during  the 
journey  throug-h  the  States  and  up  the 
Missouri  river.  He  crossed  the  plains, 
driving  his  own  ox  team,  with  his  fami- 
ly and  his  wife's  relatives,  and  was 
eleven  weeks  on  the  toilsome  way.  Ar- 
riving in  Utah  he  settled  in  Farming- 
ton,  Davis  .  county,  and  for  the  first 
time  in  his  life  went  to  work  in  the 
fields,  climbing  the  mountains  for  fire- 
wood, and  laboring-  at  the  hardest  kind 
of  physical  work,  for  which  he  was 
naturally  unfit,  and  teaching  school  in 
the  winter.  He  made  headway,  how- 
ever, and  acquired  a  small  home.  Dur- 
ing- his  three  years'  residence  there,  he 
was  ordained  one  of  the  presidents  of 
the  56th  quorum  of  Seventy.  In  the 
fall  of  1864,  at  the  solicitation  of  Apos- 
tle Ezra  T.  Benson,  he  removed  to 
Cache  valley  and  ag-ain  labored  for  a 
home,  teaching  school  in  the  winter, 
He  had  scarcely  more  than  secured 
some  land,  a  log  cabin  and  lot,  when 
he  was  called,  in  April,  1865,  to  go  to 
England  on  a  mission,  and  was  notified 
to  be  in  Salt  Lake  City  by  the  first 
of  May,  prepared  with  means  to  carry 
him  on  his  journey.  In  company  with 
forty  other  missionaries,  in  charge  of 
Captain  Wm.  B.  Preston,  Elder  Pen- 
rose set  out  upon  his  second  journey 
across  the  plains,  with  mule  teams,  but 
walking-  most  of  the  way.  They  were 
thirty-six  days  in  reaching  Omaha.  The 
Indians  were  very  hostile  at  the  time, 
and  people  were  killed  before  and  be- 
hind the  little  band  of  missionaries,  but 
they  got  through  in  safety,  despite 
many  fears  and  predictions  to  the  con- 
trary, and  reaching-  New  York,  sailed 
for  Liverpool.       Elder  Penrose  arrived 


A''ol.  1,  No.  17. 


April  27,  1901. 


258 


LATTER-DAY    SAINT 


in  England,  labored  first  among  the 
colliers  in  Lancashire,  with  success,  and 
on  the  first  of  February.  1866,  was  sent 
to  preside  over  the  Essex  conference, 
which  he  had  built  up  several  years 
before.  On  the  6th  of  June  following 
he  was  appointed  to  preside  over  th'^ 
London  conference.  He  traveled  all 
over  the  British  isles  and  visited  Paris 
during  the  great  exposition.  The  last 
two  years  of  his  mission  he  assisted  to 
edit  the  "Millennial  Star."  under  Pres. 
Franklin  D.  Richards:  also  preaching 
on  Sundays  in  different  places,  baptiz- 
ing many  in  Liverpool,  and  helping  to 
ship  many  companies  of  emigrating 
Saints.  At  the  close  of  the  emigration 
season  of  1?68.  he  was  released  from 
his  mission  and  sailed  for  home;  taking 
rail  from  New  York  to  Point  of  Rocks, 
and  thence  by  stage  lin^  to  Salt  Lake 
City,  arriving  in  Utah  after  an  absence 
of  three  and  a  half  years.  He  next 
engaged  in  mercantile  pursuits,  with 
^\'m.  H.  Shearman,  in  Logan,  under  the 
firm  name  of  Shearman  and  Penrose, 
and  did  a  fine  business  until  the  co- 
operative movement  was  instituted, 
when  the  whole  stock  was  turned  over 
to  the  new  institution.  May  1,  1869, 
Elder  Penrose  became  secretary  and 
treasurer  of  the  Logan  Co-operative  In- 
stitution, and  bookkeeper  for  the  store. 
He  acted  as  a  home  missionary,  trav- 
eling and  preaching  on  Sundays,  often 
in  company  with  Apostle  Benson:  was 
a  member  of  the  High  Council,  and  took 
an  active  part  in  all  Church  movements 
in  the  county.  In  January,  1870,  he 
resigned  his  position  in  the  Co-opera- 
tive Institution,  bade  adieu  to  Logan 
and  took  up  his  residence  in  Ogden. 
having  been  invited  by  Apostle  Frank- 
lin D.  Richards  to  take  editorial  charge, 
under  his  supervision,  of  the  "Ogden 
Junction,"  which  had  just  been  started 
as  a  semi-weekly.  This  was  an  occu- 
pation for  which  he  was  peculiarly  well 
fitted,  not  only  by  nature  which  un- 
doubtedly designed  him  for  a  journal- 
ist, but  by  education  and  experience: 
and  the  paper  which  he  did  so  much  to 
build  up  and  render  popular,  anrl  which 
lived  and  prospered  as  long  as  he  was 
connected  with  it,  will  be  long  remem- 
bered for  the  interest  and  pointed  vigor, 
the  "snap  and  ginger"  of  his  pungent 
writings.  He  was  assistant  editor  one 
year,  and  was  then  made  editor-in- 
chief,  and  afterwards  business  manager 
as  well.       He  started  the  "Daily  Junc- 


tion" in  September,  1872,  and  much  of 
the  time  was  its  editor,  local  business 
manager,  and  traveling  agent,  and — to 
use  his  own  terse  expression — was 
"worked  half  to  death."  Having  pre- 
viously become  naturalized,  he  was 
elected,  Feb.  13,  1871,  a  member  of  the 
Ogden  City  council.  He  took  active 
part  in  all  the  affairs  and  improve- 
ments of  the  municipality  as  long  as  he 
remained  in  Ogden.  and  he  was  re-elect- 
ed to  the  council  every  term:  his  name 
was  found  on  both  tickets  whenever 
there  were  two  parties  in  the  field.  He 
served,  in  all,  four  terms,  and  before 
the  expiration  of  the  last  one  had  re- 
moved to  Salt  Lake  City.  At  the  or- 
ganization of  the  Weber  Stake  of  Zion 
he  was  ordained  a  High  Priest  and 
made  a  member  of  the  High  Council, 
and  remained  so  for  a  long  time  after 
his  removal  from  Ogden.  He  also 
acted  as  a  home  missionary  both  in  a 
Stake  and  Territorial  capacity.  His 
political  record  in  the  municipality 
having  won  him  influence  and  the  con  • 
fidence  of  his  associates  and  the  people 
generally,  he  was  chosen  delegate  from 
Weber  county  to  the  constitutional  con- 
vention of  1872,  being  elected  by  the 
popular  vote  Feb.  5th,  of  that  year.  He 
helped  to  frame  the  constitution  of  the 
State  of  Deseret  and  the  memorial  to 
Congress,  being  on  the  committees  hav- 
ing that  work  in  hand.  The  same  year 
he  represented  Weber  county  in  the 
Democratic  Territorial  convention, 
which  was  composed  of  both  "Mor- 
mons" and  Gentiles,  and  nominated  for 
his  wing  of  the  party,  Hon.  George  Q. 
Cannon  as  delegate  to  Congress,  mak- 
ing a  pointed  speech  in  the  conven- 
tion. He  was  a  member  and  secre- 
tary of  the  People's  County  Central 
Committee,  and  a  live  worker  in  all 
political  movements,  making  speeches 
and  using  his  influence  in  every  way 
for  the  success  of  the  People's  party. 
During  the  same  period,  he  was  busi- 
ly engaged  in  ecclesiastical  affairs  un- 
der Pres.  Franklin  D.  Richards.  In 
August,  1874,  he  was  elected  a  mem- 
ber of  the  legislature,  representing 
Weber  county  in  the  Territorial  as- 
sembly. He  took  an  active  part  in 
all  general  measures,  introduced  a 
number  of  bills,  drafted  public  docu- 
ments, and  rendered  other  valuable 
service  for  which  his  literary  ability 
and  native  legal  acumen  well  qualified 
him.       At   the  same   time  he  wrote  all 


BIOGRAPHICAL    ENCYCLOPEDIA. 


259 


the  editorials  and  reports  of  the  legis- 
lature for  the  "Ogden  Junction."  In 
1875  he  found  himself  so  overworked 
that  he  resigned  the  business  man- 
agement of  the  "Junction,"  but  con- 
tinued as  editor,  and  did  all  the  lite- 
rary work,  local  and  telegraph  in- 
cluded for  both  the  daily  and  semi- 
weekly  issues.  He  also  continued  ac- 
tive in  municipal  and  Church  affairs. 
In  the  fall  of  1876,  Elder  Penrose  went 
to  California  to  represent  Thomas  and 
Esther  Duce,  mother  and  son,  in  the 
adjustment  of  a  pecuniary  issue.  In 
September  of  that  year  the  Duces  had 
been  shot  by  a  Wells,  Fargo  and  Co.'s 
guard,  who  dropped  his  gun,  a  double- 
barrelled  weapon  loaded  with  slugs, 
the  whole  contents  being  fired  into 
them.  Thomas  was  literally  riddled, 
and  his  mother  was  shot  through  the 
windpipe.  Elder  Penrose,  assisted  the 
doctor  to  dress  the  wounds;  both  pa- 
tients recovered.  The  company  dis- 
claimed responsibility  for  the  accident, 
but  Elder  Penrose  met  with  the  man- 
agers in  San  Francisco,  prevailed  on 
them  and  obtained  five  thousand  dol- 
lars' compensation  for  the  Duces.  In 
June,  1877,  by  request  of  Pres.  Brigham 
Young,  he  came  to  Salt  Lake  City  and 
became  connected  with  the  "Deseret 
News,"  under  the  general  editorial 
management  of  Hons.  Geo.  Q.  Cannon 
and  Brigham  Young,  jun.,  the  "Junc- 
tion" Company  keenly  felt  his  loss,  and 
offered  to  give  him  the  paper  entire- 
ly. On  the  organization  of  the  "Des- 
eret News"  company,  at  the  first  meet- 
ing of  the  Board  of  Directors  held 
Sept.  3,  1880,  Charles  W.  Penrose  was' 
made  editor-in-chief  of  that  veteran 
journal  and  remained  so  for  years.  He 
became  a  home  missionary  of  the  Salt 
Lake  Stake,  and  traveled  and  preached 
in  many  places.  At  a  special  election 
in  1879,  held  for  the  purpose  of  filling 
the  vacancy  caused  by  the  death  of 
Hon.  Albert  P.  Rockwood,  member- 
elect  of  the  legislature  for  Salt  Lake 
county,  Charles  W.  Penrose  was  the 
people's  choice  for  that  office,  which  he 
filled  with  credit  to  himself  and  to  the 
satisfaction  of  his  constituents.  He 
served  during  the  session  of  ISSO  on 
various  important  committees,  includ- 
ing the  judiciary,  and  introduced  many 
bills,  among  them  a  bill  to  take  away 
all  political  disabilities  from  women. 
The  bill  created  no  end  of  discussion, 
comment  and  debate,   its  author  mak- 


ing able  and  pithy  speeches  in  its  fa- 
vor, and  finally  it  passed  both  houses, 
but  was  vetoed  by  the  Governor.  El- 
der Penrose  was  re-elected  and  served 
in  the  legislative  session  of  1882;  he  was 
chairman  of  the  committee  on  claims, 
and  did  a  great  deal  of  work  on  vari- 
ous committees;  being  particularly 
useful  in  drafting  public  documents 
and  correcting  errors  in  the  framing  of 
bills.  He  was  elected  to  the  constitu- 
tional convention  and  helped  to  frame 
the  constitution  of  the  State  of  Utah, 
which  was  making  another  effort  under 
a  change  of  name  from  "Deseret,"  for 
its  long  withheld  right  of  admission  in- 
to the  Union.  He  also  assisted  to  pre- 
pare the  memorial  to  Congress.  All 
this  time  he  was  performing  editorial 
work  for  the  "Deseret  News."  The 
death  of  David  O.  Calder,  in  the  sum- 
mer of  1884,  caused  a  vacancy  in  the 
presidency  of  the  Salt  Lake  Stake  of 
Zion  which  was  filled  Aug.  2,  1884,  El- 
der Penrose  being  then  appointed,  at 
the  quarterly  Stake  conference,  second 
counselor  to  President  Angus  M.  Can- 
non, a  position  which  he  still  holds. 
Since  that  time  his  voice  has  often  been 
heard  in  the  Tabernacle  and  in  other 
congregations  of  the  Saints;  he  is  an 
ever  ready  and  apparently  unfailing 
fountain  of  instruction.  As  one  of  the 
presidency  of  the  Salt  Lake  Stake  of 
Zion  it  is  also  a  part  of  his  duty  and 
labors  to  sit  in  the  High  Council  in 
judgment  upon  all  matters  before  that 
tribunal.  In  the  fall  of  1883,  in  order 
to  recuperate  his  energies,  which  were 
sorely  taxed  by  overwork,  he  took  a  trip 
in  company  with  Charles  R.  Savage, 
Esq.,  over  the  D.  and  R.  G.  Railway 
to  Denver,  thence  through  Colorado, 
south  to  New  Mexico,  Arizona  and  Cali- 
fornia, returning  to  Utah  via  the  Cen- 
tral Pacific  route.  On  his  return  he 
resumed  his  manifold  duties.  He  had 
previously  written  a  valuable  work  en- 
titled "Mormon  Doctrine."  In  the  fall 
of  1884  he  delivered  several  Sunday 
evening  lectures  in  the  Twelfth  Ward 
Assembly  Hall,  answering  anti-Mormon 
objections  and  charges  against  the  faith 
and  practice  of  the  Latter-day  Saints. 
Chief  of  these  lectures  \\'ere  those  on 
"Blood  Atonement"  and  the  "Mountain 
Meadows  Massacre,"  completely  refut- 
ing the  common  stories  in  relation 
thereto.  Both  lectures  were  published 
at  the  "Juvenile  Instructor"  office.  He 
continued     to      defend     the     'Mormon" 


260 


LATTER-DAT    SAINT 


cause  politically  and  religiously,  by 
press  discussions  as  ^vell  as  public 
speeches  and  private  interviews  with 
strangers.  These  vigorous  labors  ex- 
cited the  hostility  of  the  anti-Mormon 
ring,  and  he  was  singled  out,  in  the 
crusade  under  the  Edmunds  law,  as  a 
conspicuous  target  for  their  animosity. 
In  the  beginning  of  January.  1885,  hfc 
was  sent  on  a  brief  mission  to  the 
States,  and  during  his  absence  his  legal 
wife  and  family,  down  to  a  boy  eight 
vears  old,  were  compelled  to  go  before 
the  grand  jury.  The  wife  refused  to 
testify  against  her  husband,  but  the 
evidence  desired  was  extorted  from  the 
children.  While  in  the  States  Elder 
Penrose  was  appointed  on  a  mission 
to  England,  and  forthwith  bade  fare- 
well, by  letter,  to  those  he  held  most 
dear  this  side  of  the  water,  and  once 
more  crossed  the  bosom  of  the  mighty 
deep.  After  a  rough  passage  and  safo 
landing  at  Liverpool,  he  was  appointed 
by  Pres.  Daniel  H.  Wells  to  preside  over 
the  London  conference,  and  assist  edi- 
torially on  the  "Millennial  Star."  He 
revived  the  work  in  London,  his  old 
field  of  labor,  was  gladly  hailed  by  for- 
mer acquaintances,  wrote  several  ar- 
ticles for  London  papers,  helped  to 
ship  emigrants  of  every  company  from 
Liverpool,  and  attended  conferences 
with  Pres.  Wells  all  over  England. 
Scotland  and  Wales.  He  also  visited 
Ireland  and  preached  in  the  open  air 
in  the  city  of  Belfast  to  three  thousand 
people.  A  great  uproar  ensued,  fol- 
lowed by  a  spirited  discussion  in  the 
Belfast  papers.  He  visited  Dublin  and 
the  l6le  of  Man,  and  from  there  went 
to  the  Lake  District  of  England.  He 
accompanied  Pres.  Wells  on  his  conti- 
nental tour  through  Denmark,  Sweden, 
Norway,  Germany  and  Switzerland, 
preaching  in  Copenhagen,  Christiania. 
Stockholm,  Berlin  and  Berne,  returning 
to  England  by  way  of  Paris.  He  made 
a  stir  in  several  English  towns  and 
brought  many  persons  into  the  Church, 
besides  writing  articles  for  the  "Star"' 
and  also  for  the  "Deseret  News."  He 
returned  home  from  this  mission  by  call 
from  Pres.  John  Taylor,  and  resumed 
active  work  as  editor  of  the  "Deseret 
News."  He  then  went  to  New  York 
and  Washington,  D.  C,  and  wrote  a 
number  of  articles  for  several  newspa- 
pers, defending  the  Church  from  at- 
tacks of  enemies.  Together  with  Frank- 
lin   S.    Richards    he    visited    personally 


nearly  every  member  of  Congress,  and 
also  President  Cleveland  and  cabinet, 
explaining  the  situation  in  Utah.  He 
also  wrote  articles  for  the  "Deseret 
News."  He  spent  two  winters  in 
Washington  in  this  missionary  work, 
wrote  articles  for  the  "Forum"  and 
other  magazines  on  the  "Mormon" 
question,  and  interviewed  prominent 
newspaper  men.  Having  been  indicted 
under  the  Edmunds  act  and  been  sought 
for  by  Federal  officers  in  Utah,  Pres. 
Cleveland,  at  the  request  of  a  few  in- 
fluential friends,  issued  a  full  amnesty 
to  Elder  Penrose,  just  before  retiring 
from  the  presidency.  Elder  Penrose 
then  returned  to  Salt  Lake  City  and 
took  up  his  daily  labors  on  the  "News." 
He  also  traveled  much  in  the  Territory 
in  company  with  leaders  of  the  Church. 
Nov.  16,  1890,  Elder  Penrose  was  called 
to  testify  as  an  expert  in  "Mormon" 
theology  before  Judge  Thos.  J.  Ander- 
son in  the  Third  District  Court  as  to 
the  loyalty  of  "Mormons"  and  their 
doctrines.  An  endeavor  was  made  at 
that  time  to  refuse  naturalization  to 
"Mormons"  because  they  belonged  to 
a  "treasonable  organization."  After  a 
long  examination,  Elder  Penrose  was 
cross-examined  and  refused  to  answer 
a  certain  question  as  to  his  marital  re- 
lations, as  that  subject  was  not  in  the 
examination  direct.  After  a  long  dis- 
cussion by  lawyers,  Judge  Anderson  de- 
cided that  he  must  answer  the  ques- 
tion, and  as  he  still  refused,  he  was 
committed  to  the  penitentiary  until  he 
would  answer,  no  matter  how  long  his 
refusal  might  last.  He  was  according- 
ly incarcerated  Nov.  20,  1890,  and  treat- 
ed as  a  criminal  for  five  days,  when  the 
case  before  the  court  was  submitted, 
and  as  no  further  testimony  could  be 
presented,  he  was  reluctantly  released. 
When  the  "Deseret  News"  was  leased 
by  the  Cannons,  Oct.  1,  1892  Elder  Pen- 
rose was  secured  by  the  "Salt  Lake 
Herald"  on  its  editorial  staff,  and  made 
a  remarkable  and  rapid  journey  down 
through  the  settlements  to  St.  George, 
making  several  speeches  a  day  and  re- 
plying through  the  "Herald"  to  political 
arguments.  In  1893  he  became  editor- 
in-chief  of  the  "Herald"  and  continued 
in  that  capacity  until  the  fall  of  1895 
when  he  was  appointed  by  the  First 
Presidency  to  assist  in  the  Historian's 
Office.  At  the  general  conference,  April 
4,  1896,  he  was  sustained  as  assistant 
Church  Historian.      In  addition  to  com- 


BIOGRAPHICAL    ENCYCLOPEDIA. 


261 


piling  matter  for  current  history,  he 
wrote  many  articles  on  "Mormonism" 
for  eastern  publications  and  a  series  of 
twelve  tracts  called  "Rays  of  Living 
Light;"  also  "Priesthood  and  Presiden- 
cy," and  articles  for  the  "Improvement 
Era."  His  reply  to  IngersoU  in  that 
magazine  attracted  wide  attention.  Jan. 
1,  1899,  by  appointment  of  Pres.  Lorenzo 
Snow,  he  resumed  his  labors  as  editor- 
in-chief  of  the  "Deseret  News,"  which 
rapidly  sprang  into  new  life  and  has 
since  increased  in  circulation  and  in- 
fluence until  it  is  now  read  in  every 
settlement  of  Utah  and  surrounding 
regions.  Elder  Penrose  is  still  en- 
gaged in  laboring  and  writing  for  the 
cause  to  which  he  has  consecrated  his 
time  and  talents  for  so  many  years. 
He  has  a  firm  and  thorough  belief  in 
the  truth  and  triumph  of  "Mormon- 
ism." At  the  age  of  sixty-nine  he  re- 
tains apparently  all  his  original  activity 
of  mind  and  physical  energies.  Time 
and  toil  have  made  but  moderate  in- 
roads upon  his  extraordinary  vitality. 
This  is  all  the  more  remarkable  from 
his  not  being  of  a  robust  constitution, 
though  of  healthy  physique  and  strictly 
temperate  habits,  and  his  persistent  and 
almost  incessant  mental  activity.  It 
exemplifies  anew  the  truth  of  the  pro- 
verb that  it  is  better  to  wear  out, 
than  to  rust  away.  Elder  Penrose  is 
of  a  highly  sensitive  and  sanguine  tem- 
perament, quick  to  think,  speak  and 
act.  His  talents  are  so  versatile  it  is 
almost  a  question  as  to  "wherein  kind 
nature  meant  him  to  excel."  He  is 
poetical,  musical,  has  fine  spiritual  per- 
ceptions, and  also  leans  to  science  and 
law.  His  forte  is  generally  thought  to 
be  journalism,  in  which  he  shines  with 
lustre,  while  as  a  preacher  and  polem- 
ical writer  and  debater  he  has  but  few 
equals.  His  talents  and  energy  fit  hixn 
eminently  for  a  missionary,  in  which 
important  calling  he  meets  invariably 
with  success.  His  practical  experience 
in  various  walks  of  life  gives  him  an 
insight  into  the  thoughts  and  workings 
of  all  classes  of  society;  his  advice  i? 
sought  in  difficulty  and  doubt,  and  he 
wins  his  way  easily  to  the  hearts  of 
his  fellow-men.  Charles  W.  Penrose  is 
a  remarkable  man.  Nature  stamped 
him  as  such,  and  his  life  work,  thus 
far,  confirms  the  truth  of  her  decree. 
(See  also  TuUidge's  History  of  Salt 
Lake  City,  Bio.,  p.  140.) 


JEXSOX,  Andrew,  Assistant  Church 
Historian,  is  the  son  of  Christian  Jen- 
son  and  Kirsten  Andersen,  and  was 
born  Dec.  11,  1850,  in  Torslev  parish. 
Hjorring  amt,  Denmark.  His  parents 
were  among  the  first  converts  to  "Mor- 
monism" in  that  part  of  Denmark,  be- 
ing baptized  in  18.54.  Andrew  was 
therefore  taught  the  principles  of  the 
gospel  in  his  early  youth,  and  was 
baptized  Feb.  2,  1859,  by  Elder  Carl  W. 
J.  Hecker.  He  received  a  good  com- 
mon school  education,  and  at  the  age 
of  fourteen  he  was  successfully  en- 
gaged in  a  small  business  enterprise, 
earning  thereby  enough  money  to  pay 
his  own  passage  to  Wyoming,  Neb.,  U. 
S.  A.      With  his  parents  and  a  younger 


artfcfc 


brother,  he  "bade  his  native  land  fare- 
well," in  May,  1866,  and  crossed  the 
Atlantic  in  the  ship  "Kenilworth," 
which  arrived  in  New  York  July  17, 
1866.  He  crossed  the  plains  in  Capt. 
Andrew  H.  Scott's  ox  train,  which  ar- 
rived in  Salt  Lake  City  Oct.  8,  1866.  The 
family  located  in  Pleasant  Grove,  Utah 
county,  where  Andrew  also  made  his 
home  for  sixteen  years.  Nearly  seven 
years  of  his  life  were  spent  at  hard 
manual  labor,  working  on  farms,  on 
railways,  and  in  other  avocations.  Dur- 
ing these  years  his  natural  inclination 
led  him  to  spend  most  of  his  spare 
time  in  home  study  and  in  going  to 
school.  In  1870,  he  went  to  the  "States" 


262 


LATTER-DAY    SAINT 


in  search  of  experience;  loaded  with 
what  he  sought,  he  returned  to  Utah 
the  following  year,  crossing  the  plains 
and  mountains  with  a  drove  of  Texan 
cattle,  which  were  being  taken  to  the 
Pacific  coast.  He  was  ordained  an  El- 
der, April  10,  1873,  by  Wm.  H.  Folsom, 
and  received  his  endowments  on  the 
same  day  in  Salt  Lake  City.  Being 
called  on  a  mission  to  Scandinavia,  he 
was  ordained  a  Seventy  May  4,  187.3, 
by  Pres.  Geo.  Q.  Cannon,  and,  together 
with  other  missionaries,  departed 
shortly  thereafter  for  his  native  land, 
where  he  labored  as  a  traveling  Elder  in 
the  Aalborg  conference  over  two  years. 
Soon  after  his  return  home,  in  1875,  he 
married  Kirsten  Marie  Pedersen,  who 
subsequently  bore  him  four  children. 
Later  he  married  Miss  Emma  Howell 
(who  has  borne  him  three  children)  and 
Miss  Bertha  Howell.  His  first  wife  diad 
Jan.  3,  1887.  In  1876,  he  began  the  com- 
pilation and  translation  of  the  history 
of  Joseph  Smith  the  Prophet  into  the 
Danish  language,  entering  the  follow- 
ing year  into  partnership  with  Johan  A. 
Bruun,  a  young  Norwegian  Elder,  who 
had  recently  emigrated  to  Utah  and 
who  joined  the  work  of  translation. 
Prior  to  publishing  the  work.  Elder  Jen- 
son  visited  Pres.  Brigham  Young  in 
St.  George,  and  readily  obtained  his 
indorsement  to  the  contemplated  trans- 
lation. At  the  same  time  the  Presi- 
dent appointed  Apostle  Erastus  Snow 
to  supervise  their  labors.  The  book 
was  completed  in  three  years,  and  2,0C0 
copies  thereof  were  published  in  1879. 
Elder  Jenson  had  personally  visited 
nearly  every  settlement  of  the  Saints, 
where  Scandinavians  resided,  and  taken 
subscriptions      beforehand.  "Joseph 

Smith's  Levnetslob,"  the  Danish-Nor- 
wegian title  of  the  work,  was  the  first 
book  published  in  the  interest  of  the 
Church  in  Utah  in  a  foreign  language. 
In  1879-81  Elder  Jenson  filled  a  second 
mission  to  his  native  land,  during  which 
he  labored  most  of  the  time  as  transla- 
tor and  assistant  editor  of  "Skandina- 
viens  Stjerne."  Under  the  direction  of 
Niels  Wilhelmsen,  president  of  the 
Scandinavian  Mission,  at  that  time,  he 
commenced  a  monthly  periodical  in  the 
interest  of  the  young  Saints  in  Scandi- 
navia entitled  "Ungdommens  Raad- 
giver,"  which  subsequently  was  pub- 
lished regularly  for  eight  years.  He 
also  compiled  a  new  work  of  Bible 
references,  of  which  16,000  copies  were 


printed  and  sold  In  a  remarkably  short 
time.  Together  with  Pres.  Wilhelmsen 
he  revised  the  Book  of  Mormon  and 
nearly  all  the  smaller  books  and  pub- 
lications previously  circulated  in  the 
mission,  which  were  all  republished  at 
the  time.  Pres.  Wilhelmsen  took  sick 
and  died  at  Copenhagen,  Aug.  1,  1881, 
after  which  Elder  Jenson  took  tempo- 
rary charge  of  the  mission  until  the 
arrival  of  Pres.  Christian  D.  Fjeldsted, 
in  September  following.  He  returned 
home  late  in  1881,  and  the  next  year 
("1882)  removed  to  Salt  Lake  City.  He 
erected  a  home  in  the  Seventeenth 
Ward,  where  he  still  resides.  Early 
in  1882,  he  commenced  the  publication 
of  "Morgenstjernen,"  a  monthly  his- 
torical periodical  in  the  Danish  lan- 
guage. After  publishing  four  volumes, 
he  changed  the  name  to  the  "Historical 
Record,"  of  which  he  published  five 
volumes.  In  1888,  he  filled  a  short 
mission  to  the  United  States,  and  in 
company  with  Elders  Edward  Steven- 
son and  Joseph  S.  Black  visited  nearly 
all  the  "waste  places  of  Zion"  in  Mis- 
souri, Illinois.  Ohio  and  New  York  in 
the  interest  of  Church  history.  A  de- 
tailed account  of  that  interesting  mis- 
sion was  published  by  Elders  Jenson 
and  Stevenson  in  a  pamphlet,  entitled 
"Infancy  of  the  Church."  In  1891,  his 
services  were  engaged  by  the  First 
Presidency,  and  he  was  blessed  and  set 
apart  by  Apostle  Franklin  D.  Richards 
April  16,  1891,  as  "an  historian"  in  the 
Church.  In  that  capacity,  during  the 
following  four  years,  he  visited  almost 
every  settlement  of  the  Saints  in  the 
Rocky  Mountains,  from  Mexico  in  the 
South  to  Canada  in  the  North,  gather- 
ing important  historical  information.  In 
1893,  he  filled  a  second  mission  to  the 
States,  during  which  he  visited  places 
of  historical  importance  in  Missouri, 
Iowa  and  Nebraska,  and  also  succeeded, 
while  visiting  Richmond,  Ray  county. 
Mo.,  in  obtaining  a  copy  of  John  Whit- 
mer's  history  of  the  Church  from  1831 
to  1838,  embodying  important  docu- 
ments which  Mr.  Whitmer  refused  to 
deliver  to  the  Church  during  his  life- 
time. From  1882  to  1895  Elder  Jenson 
also  labored  as  a  home  missionary  in 
the  Salt  Lake  Stake  of  Zion.  In  1895- 
97  he  filled  a  special  mission  to  the 
several  Latter-day  Saint  missionary 
fields  throughout  the  world.  On  his 
return  in  June,  1897,  he  reported  that 
he    had    visited    all    the    missions    and 


BIOGRAPHICAL,    ENCYCLOPEDIA. 


263 


conferences  and  nearly  every  important 
branch   of    the     Church     in    the   entire! 
world,  outside  of  the  United  States,  and 
traveled    neaily   60.000     miles,    obtained 
valuable     historical     information     and 
forwarded   to   Utah   about   fifteen   hun- 
dred  old   and   valuable     record     books, 
which  he  gathered  in  the  different  con- 
ferences.      On   this   special   mission   ho 
visited  British  Columbia,  Hawaii,   Fiji, 
Samoa,    Tonga,    New    Zealand,      Cook's 
Islands,     Society       Islands,       Tuamotu 
Islands,   Australia,    Ceylon,   Egypt,   Sy- 
ria,   Palestine,     Italy,     France,      Great 
Britain,    Denmark,     Norway,      Sweden 
Germany,     Switzerland,     Holland,     etc. 
Descriptive  of  his  journeyings  he  wro'.e 
about  eighty  letters,   which   were   pub- 
lished in  the  "Deseret  News"  under  the 
caption   "Jenson's  Travels."     Since   his 
return  from  this  mission  he  has  spent 
most  of  his  time  performing  historical 
labors  at  the  Historian's  Office,  and  has 
also     traveled      considerably,      visiting 
many  of  the  Stakes  of  Zion  on  special 
appointments.      In  order  to  raise  means 
for   the   erection   of   a   new   Historian's 
Office  he  °-ave  to  the  Church  the  result 
of  many  years'  extra  labor  and  research 
in  his   "Church  Chronology,"   of  which 
an    edition    of   25,000    copies    was    pub- 
lished in  1899.      Elder  Jenson's  historical 
notes,    gathered   principally   during  the 
past   ten    years    and    now    at    the    His- 
torian's  Office,    contain   the  foundation 
for   histories    of   every     Stake,      Ward, 
quorum   and   auxiliary   organization   in 
the  entire  Church,  from  1830  to  the  close 
of  the  year  1900,   or  detailed  annals  of 
the  Church  of  Jesus  Christ  of  Latter- 
day  Saints  for  the  Nineteenth  Century. 
His  historical  and  descriptive    articles, 
which   have   appeared    in    the    "Deseret 
News,"     "Contributor,"     "Improvement 
Era"  and  other  publications,  are  indica- 
tions of  the  nature  of     Elder  Jenson's 
historical  compilations  in  general.  Aside 
I  from  his  historical  and  missionary  la- 
bors,  Elder  Jenson   has  been  active  in 
Church  matters  generally,  having  found 
time  to    labor    as    "Ward     Teacher  and 
Sunday  School  Teacher  and  superinten- 
dent.     He  presided  over  the  first  Y.  M. 
M.   I.   A.    organized   in  Pleasant  Grove, 
Utah,  in  1S75,  and  over  the  first  associa- 
tion of  a  similar  kind  organized  in  Co- 
penhagen,  Denmark,   in  1879.       In  civil 
positions,    he    has   served    as   a     school 
trustee,  city  councilman,  justice  of  the 
peace  and  member  of  the  constitutionl 


convention  of  18.S7.— Edward  H.  Ander- 
son. 

AVHITMKK,  David,  one  of  the  Three 
Witnesses  to  the  Book  of  Mormon,  was 
born  Jan.  7,  1805,  at  a  small  trading 
post,  near  Harrisburg,  Pennsylvania. 
While  yet  an  infant  his  father,  who 
served  his  country  through  the  revolu- 
tionary war,  removed  with  his  family 
to  western  New  York  and  settled  on  a 
farm  ir.  Ontario  county,  near  Watkin's 
Glen— at  a  point  midway  between  the 
northern  extremities  of  Cayuga  and 
Seneca  lakes,  two  miles  from  Water- 
loo, seven  from  Geneva,  and  twenty- 
five  from  Palmyra— where  David  lived 
until    the  year  1831.       The  father,    who 


was  a  hard-working.  God-fearing  man, 
was  a  strict  Presbyterian  and  brought 
his  children  up  with  rigid  sectarian 
discipline.  Besides  a  daughter  who 
married  Oliver  Cowdery,  there  were  five 
sons— Peter,  Jacob,  John,  David  and 
Christian— who  helped  their  father  on 
his  farm  until  they  had  arrived  at  the 
age  of  manhood.  The  following  is  Da- 
vid Whitmer's  own  statement  to  a  re- 
porter of  the  Kansas  City  "Journal;" 
published  June  5,  1881:  "I  first  heard 
of  what  is  now  termed  Mormonism,  in 
the  year  1828.  I  made  a  business  trip 
to  Palmyra,  N.  Y.,  and  while  there 
stopped  with  one  Oliver  Cowdery.  A 
great  many  people  in  the  neighborhood 
were  talking  about   the  finding  of  cer- 


264 


LATTER-DAT    SAINT 


tain  solden  plates  by  one  Joseph  Smith, 
jun.,  a  young  man  of  the  neighborhood. 
Cowdery  and  I,  as  well  as  many  oth- 
ers,   talked    about    the    matter,    but   at 
that  time  I  paid  but  little  attention  to 
it,  supposing  it  to  be  only  the  idle  gos- 
sip of  the  neighborhood.      Mr.  Cowdery 
said  he  was  acquainted  with  the  Smith 
taniily.  and  he  believed  there  must  h*^ 
some  truth  in  the  story  of  the  plates, 
and  that  he  intended  to  investigate  the 
matter.       I  had  conversation  with  sev- 
eral young  men,  who  said  that  Joseph 
Smith  had  certainly  golden  plates,  and 
that   before   he   had   obtained   them   he 
had   promised  to  share  with   them,  but 
had  not  done  so,   and  they  were     very 
much  incensed  with  him.     Said  I,  'How 
do   you   know   that   Joe   Smith   has   the 
plates?'       They   replied,    'We   saw     the 
plates    in    the    hill    that    he    took   them 
out   of,   just   as   he   described   it   to   us 
before  he  had  obtained  them.'       These 
parties  were  so  positive  in  their  state- 
ments   that   I   began   to   believe     there 
must  be  some  foundation  for  the  stories 
then    in   circulation   all    over   that   part 
of  the  country.      I  had  never  seen  any 
of   the   Smith    family   up   to   that   time, 
and  I  began  to  enquire  of  the  people  in 
regard  to  them,  and  learned  that    one 
night   during     the     year     1823,    Joseph 
Smith,  jun.,  had  a  vision,  and  an  angel 
of  God  appeared   to  him  and  told  him 
^where  certain  plates  were  to  be  found, 
and   pointed   out   the   spot  to   him,   and 
that  shortly  afterward  he  went  to  that 
place  and  found  the  plates,  which  were 
still  in  his  possession.      After  thinking 
over  the  matter    for    a  long  time,  and 
talking   with   Cowdery,   who  also   gave 
me  a  history  of  the  finding  of  the  plates. 
I  went  home,  and  after  several  months. 
Cowdery  told  me  he  was  going  to  Har- 
mony. Penn.,  whither  Joseph  Smith  had 
gone  with  the  plates,  on  account  of  th<' 
persecutions  of  his  neighbors,   and  see 
him  about  the  matter.      He  did  go,  and 
on  his  way  he  stopped  at  my  father's 
house  and  told  me  that  as  soon  as  he 
found  out  anything,  either  truth  or  un- 
truth, he  would  let  me  know.      After  he 
got   there  he  became     acquainted  with 
Joseph  Smith,  and  shortly  after    wrote 
to  me.  telling  me  that  he  was  convinced 
that  Smith   had   the  records,   and   that 
he    (Smith)    had    told   him    that   it   was 
the  will  of  heaven   that  he    (Cowdery) 
should   be  his  scribe   to  assist     in     the 
translation  of  the  plates.      He  went  on 
and  Joseph  translated  from  the  plates. 


and  he  wrote  it  down.       Shortly  after 
this  Mr.  Cowdery  wrote  me  another  let- 
ter, in  which  he  gave  me  a  few     lines 
of  what  they  had   translated,   and     he 
assured  me  that  he  knew  of  a  certainty 
that  he  had  a  record  of  a  people  that 
inhabited   this  continent,   and   that   the 
plates  they  were  translating  from  gave 
a  complete     history     of     these   people. 
When  Cowdery  wrote  me  these  things, 
and    told    me    that    he    had    revealed 
knowledge      concerning      the    truth    of 
them,    I   showed   these  letters     to     my 
parents,  and  brothers  and  sisters.  Soon 
after    I    received    another    letter     from 
Cowdery,    telling  me   to  come   down   to 
Pennsylvania,   and   bring  him   and  Jo- 
seph to  my  father's  house,  giving  as  a 
reason  therefor  that  they  had  received 
a  commandment  from  God  to  that  ef- 
fect.      I  went  down     to     Harmony  and 
found  everything  just  as  they  had  writ- 
ten me.      The  next  day  after  I  got  there 
they  packed  up  the  plates  and  we  pro- 
ceeded  on  our  journey  to  my  father's 
house,    where  we   arrived   in   due   time, 
and  the  day  after  we  commenced  upon 
the  translation  of  the  remainder  of  the 
plates,  k   I,  as  well  as  all  of  my  father's 
family.   Smith's  wife,     Oliver  Cowdery 
and  Martin  Harris,  were  present  during 
the  translation.       The  translation   was 
by  Smith,   and  the  manner  as  follows: 
fne  had  two  small  stones  of  a  chocolate 
color,  nearly  egg  shape,     and  perfectly 
smooth,  but  not  transparent,  called  in- 
terpreters, which  were  given  him  with 
the  plates.      He  did  not  use  the  plates 
in  the  translation,  but  would  hold  the 
interpreters   to  his  eyes  and   cover  his 
face   with   a     hat.   excluding   all   light, 
and  before  his  eyes  would  appear  what 
seemed   to     be     parchment,     on     which 
would  appear     the     characters     of  the 
plates  in  a  line  at  the  top,  and  immedi- 
ately below  would  appear  the  transla- 
tion,  in  English,     which     Smith  would 
read  to  his  scribe,   who  wrote  it  down 
exactly  as   it  fell   from  his  lips.       The 
scribe    would    then    read    the    sentence 
written,  and   if  any  mistake  had  been 
made,  the  characters  would  remain  vis- 
ible to  Smith  until  corrected,  when  they 
faded  from  sight  to  be  replaced  by  an- 
other   line!     The     translation    at    my 
father's  ocrrbpied  about  one  month,  that 
is  from  June  1  to  July  1,  1829."       (See 
"Millennial  Star,  Vol.  43,  page  421,  etc.) 
Joseph  Smith,  in  his  history,  writes  as 
follows:      "Shortly  after  commencing  to 
translate,  I  became  acquainted  with  Mr. 


BIOGRAPHICAL    ENCYCLOPEDIA. 


265 


Peter  Whitmer,  of  Fayette,  Seneca 
county,  N.  Y.,  and  also  with  some  of 
his  family.  In  the  beginning-  of  the 
month  of  June  (1829),  his  son  David 
Whitmer  came  to  the  place  (Harmony), 
where  we  were  residing,  and  brought 
with  him  a  two-horse  wagon,  for  the 
purpose  of  having  us  (Joseph  Smith  and 
his  wife  and  Oliver  Cowdery)  accompa- 
ny him  to  his  father's  place,  and  there 
remain  until  we  should  finish  the  work. 
He  proposed  that  we  should  have  our 
board  free  of  charge,  and  the  assistance 
of  one  of  his  brothers  to  write  for  me, 
a?  also  his  own  assistance  when  con- 
venient. Having  much  need  of  such 
timely  aid  in  an  undertaking  so  ardu- 
ous, and  being-  informed  that  the  people 
of  the  neighborhood  were  anxiously 
aw'aiting  the  opportunity  to  enquire 
into  these  things,  we  accepted  the  in- 
vitation and  accompanied  Mr.  Whitmer 
to  his  father's  house,  and  there  resided 
until  the  translation  was  finished  and 
the  copyright  secured.  Upon  our  ar- 
rival, we  found  Mr.  Whitmer's  family 
very  anxious  concerning  the  work,  and 
very  friendly  toward  ourselves.  They 
continued  so.  boarded  and  lodged  us  ac- 
cording to  proposal,  and  John  Whitmer, 
in  particular,  assisted  us  very  much  in 
writing  during  the  remainder  of  the 
■work."  In  the  meantime  David,  John 
and  Peter  Whitmer,  jun.,  became  the* 
Prophet's  zealous  friends  and  assistants 
in  the  work,  and  being  anxious  to  know 
their  respective  duties,  and  having  de- 
sired with  much  earnestness  that  Jo- 
seph should  enquire  of  the  Lord  con- 
cerning them,  Joseph  did  so,  through 
the  means  of  the  Urim  and  Thummim, 
and  obtained  for  them  in  succession 
three  revelations^  (Doc.  and  Cov.,  Sec. 
14,  15  and  16.)  ^^  June,  1829,  David 
Whitmer  was  baptized  by  Joseph  Smith, 
in  Seneca  lake,  and  was  soon  afterward 
privileged  to  behold  the  plates  of  the 
Book  of  Mormon  as  one  of  the  Three 
Witnesses.  After  the  organization  of 
the  Church  with  six  members,  of  which 
David  was  one,  he  commenced  to 
preach  and  accompanied  the  Prophet 
on  several  of  his  missionary  trips  to 
Colesville  and  other  places.  He  also 
baptized  quite  a  number  of  those  who 
joined  the  Church  at  that  early  day?\ 
After  the  Prophet  had  moved  back  to 
Harmony,  Hiram  Page,one  of  the  Eight 
Witnesses,  got  in  possession  of  a  stone, 
by  which  he  received  certain  revelations 
that  conflicted   -with     the  order  of  the 


Church.  The  Whitmer  family,  Oliver 
Cowdery  and  others  believed  in  these 
spurious  revelations,  for  which  the 
Lord,  through  the  Prophet,  reprimand- 
ed David  Whitmer  and  instructed  him 
not  to  give  "heed  to  those  whom  He 
had  not  appointed."  (Doc.  and  Cov., 
Sec.  30.)  Joseph  Smith  succeeded  in 
.'netting  matters  right  after  his  return 
lo  Fayette  in  August,  1830,  and  from 
that  time  until  his  removal  to  Ohio  in 
the  beginning  of  1831,  Joseph  Smith 
resided  with  thi  Whitmer  family.  The 
Whitmers  removed  to  Ohio  about  the 
same  time.  At  a  conference  held  at 
Orange,  Cuyahogo  county,  Ohio,r'Oct. 
25,  1831,  David  Whitmer  was  ordained 
a  High  Priest  by  Oliver  Cowdery.  Soon 
after  this  he  removed  to  Jackson  coun- 
ty. Mo.,  and  located  on  the  Big  Blue 
river,  at  a  point  three  miles  east  of 
the  present  town  of  Westport.  Prior 
to  this  (in  1830)  he  had  married  Julia 
A.  Jolly  at  Fayette,  N.  Y.  David  Whit- 
mer and  his  young  wife  shared  in  the 
persecutions  heaped  upon  the  Saints 
in  Jackson  county.  In  the  fall  of  1833 
he  was  finally  driven  out  of  that  coun- 
ty by  the  mob,  together  with  the  rest 
of  the  Saints.  Next  he  located  in  Clay 
county,  where  he,  July  3,  1834,  was  ap- 
pointed president  of  the  High  Council, 
organized  tliere  by  the  Prophet.  For 
nearly  four  years  after  this  he  acted 
as  one  of  the  leading  Elders  of  the 
Church  in  Missouri,  and  after  the  loca- 
tion at  Far  "\;\^est,  in  Caldwell  county, 
Mo.,  he  was  sustained  as  president  of 
the  Saints  there;  but  falling  into  trans- 
gression, he  was  rejected  as  such,  in  a_ 
general  conference  held  in  Far  West, 
Feb.  5,  1838,  and  finally  he  -wras  ejteom- 
municated  from  the  Church  by  the 
High  Council,  at  Far  West,  April  13, 
1S38,  the  following  charges  having  been 
sustained  against  him:  "1st.  For  not 
observing  the  Word  of  Wisdom.  2nd. 
For  unchristianlike  conduct  in  neglect- 
ing to  attend  meetings,  in  uniting  with 
and  possessing  the  same  spirit  as  the 
dissenters.  3rd.  In  writing  letters  to 
the  dissenters  in  Kirtland,  unfavorable 
to  the  cause,  and  to  the  character  of 
Joseph  Smith,  jun.  4th.  In  neglecting 
the  duties  of  his  calling,  and  separat- 
ing himself  from  the  Church,  while  he 
had  a  name  among  us.  5th.  For  sign- 
ing himself  President  of  the  Church  of 
Christ,  after  he  had  been  cut  off  from 
the  Presidency,  in  an  insulting  letter  to 
the  High  Council."")  Shortly  after  his 


■^ 


266 


LATTER-DAY    SAINT 


excommunication  David  Whitmer  left 
Far  West  and  removed  to  Clay  county, 
and  in  the  latter  part  of  1838  located  in 
Richmond,  Ray  county,  where  he  resid- 
ed until  his  death.  In  1878, he  was  visite  I 
by  Apostles  Orson  Pratt  and  Joseph  F. 
Smith,  who  in  their  report  about  said 
visit  wiote  as  follows:  "On  Satur- 
day morning,  Sept.  7  (1S78),  we  met  Mr. 
David  Whitmer  (at  Richmond,  Ray 
county.  Mo.),  the  last  remaining  one 
of  the  Three  Witnesses  of  the  Book  of 
Mormon.  He  is  a  good-sized  man,  73 
years  of  age  last  January,  and  well 
preserved.  He  is  close  shaven,  his 
hair  perfectly  white,  and  rather  thin: 
he  has  a  large  head  and  a  very  pleas- 
ant, manly  countenance  that  one  wouM 
readily  perceive  to  be  an  index  to  a 
conscientious,  honest  heart.  He  seemed 
wonderfully  pleased,  as  well  as  sur- 
prised, at  seeing  Elder  Orson  Pratt,  and 
said  he  would  not  have  known  him  as 
he  had  grown  so  fat  and  stout;  he  re- 
membered him  as  a  slender,  bashful, 
timid  boy.  After  a  few  moments'  con- 
versation he  excused  himself,  saying  he 
would  return  again  to  see  us.  This 
meeting  was  in  the  bar-room  of  the  ho- 
tel. When  he  called  again  he  was  in 
company  with  Col.  Childs,  a  middle 
aged  man.  and  a  resident  of  the  place. 
By  invitation  we  accompanied  them  to 
Mr.  Whitmer" s  office,  where  we  were 
introduced  to  Mr.  David  J.  Whitmer 
(eldest  son  of  David),  Mr.  George 
Schweich  (grand.son  of  the  old  gentle- 
man), Mr.  John  C.  ^Vhitmer  (son  of 
Jacob  Whitmer),  Col.  James  W.  Black, 
of  Richmond,  and  several  others.  A 
couple  of  hours  were  very  pleasantly 
passed  in  conversation,  principally  on 
Utah  matters,  when  we  parted  for  din- 
ner, agreeing  to  meet  Mr.  Whitmer 
again  at  his  office,  at  4:30  p.  m.  Agree- 
able to  apr)ointment  we  met  Mr.  Whit- 
mer and  his  friends,  at  his  office,  but 
as  the  place  was  too  public  for  private 
conversation  and  as  it  seemed  impos- 
sible to  obtain  a  private  personal  in- 
terview with  David  Whitmer.  by  him- 
self, we  invited  him  and  such  of  his 
friends  as  he  saw  proper  to  fetch  alonj? 
to  our  room  in  the  hotel.  Mi-.  Whitmei- 
apologized  for  not  inviting  us  to  hi.s 
house,  as  it  was  'wash  day,'  and  he 
and  his  wife  were  'worn  out'  with  thi; 
extra  labor,  exposure,  etc.,  etc.,  conse- 
quent on  rebuilding  since  the  cyclone. 
He  accepted  oui-  invitation  to  our  room 
and  brought     with     him     James     R.  B. 


Vancleave,  a  fine  looking,  intelligent, 
young  newspaper  man,  of  Chicago, 
George  Schweich,  John  C.  Whitmer,  W. 
W.  Warner  and  another  person  whose 
name  we  did  not  learn.  In  the  pres- 
ence of  these  the  following,  in  sub- 
stance, as  noticed  in  Brother  Joseph  F. 
Smith's  journal,  is  the  account  of  the 
interview:  *  *  *  Elder  Orson  Pratt  to 
David  Whitmer:  Do  you  remember 
what  time  you  saw  the  plates?  David 
Whitmer:  ^t  was  in  June,  182"J,  the  lat- 
ter part  of  the  month,  and  the  Eight 
Witnesses  saw  them,  I  think,  the  next 
day  or  the  day  after  (i.  e.  one  or  two 
days  after).  Joseph  showed  them  the 
plates  himself,  but  the  angel  showed  us 
(the  Three  Witnesses)  the  plates,  as  I 
suppose  to  fulfill  the  words  of  the  book 
itself.  Martin  Harris  was  not  with  us 
at  this  time;  he  obtained  a  view  of 
them  afterwards  (the  same  day*.  Jo- 
seph, Oliver  and  myself  were  together 
when  I  saw  them.  We  not  only  saw 
the  plates  of  the  Book  of  Mormon, 
but  also  the  brass  plates,  the  plates 
of  the  Book  of  Ether,  the  plates  con- 
taining the  records  of  the  wickedness 
and  secret  combinations  of  the  people 
of  the  world  down  to  the  time  of  their 
being  engraved,  and  many  other  plates. 
The  fact  is,  it  was  just  as  though  Jo- 
seph, Oliver  and  I  were  sitting  just  here 
on  a  log,  when  we  were  overshadowed 
by  a  light.  It  was  not  like  the  light  of 
the  sun,  nor  like  that  of  a  fire,  but 
more  glorious  and  beautiful.  It  extend- 
ed away  round  us,  I  cannot  tell  how 
far,  but  in  the  midst  of  this  light  about 
as  far  off  as  he  sits  (pointing  to  John 
C.  Whitmer,  sitting  a  few  feet  from 
him),  there  appeared,  as  it  were,  a  ta- 
ble with  many  records  or  plates  upon 
it,  besides  the  plates  of  the  Book  of 
]Mormon,  also  the  sword  of  Laban,  the 
directors  (i.  e.,  the  ball  which  Lehi 
had)  and  the  Interpreters.  I  sav/  them 
just  as  plain  as  I  see  this  bed  (strik- 
ing the  bed  beside  him  with  his  hand), 
and  I  heard  the  voice  of  the  Lord,  as 
distinctly  as  I  ever  heard  anything  in 
my  life,  declaring  that  the  records  of 
the  plates  of  the  Book  of  Mormon  were 
translated  by  the  gift  and  power  of 
God."  Pratt:  Did  you  see  the  angel 
at  this  time?"  Whitmer:  "Yes;  he 
stood  before  us.  Our  testimony  as  re- 
corded in  the  Book  of  Moimon  is 
strictly  and  absolutely  true.  ju!=t  as  it 
is  there  writterO  Before  I  knew  Jo- 
seph, I  had  heai^  about  him  and     the 


BIOGRAPHICAL.   ENCYCLOPEDIA. 


267 


plates  from  persons  who  declared  they 
knew  he  had  them,  and  swore  they 
would  get  them  from  him.  When  Oliver 
Cowdery  went  to  Pennsylvania,  he 
promised  to  write  me  what  he  should 
learn  about  these  matters,  Avhich  he 
did.  He  v/rote  me  that  Joseph  had 
told  him  his  (Oliver's)  secret  thoughts, 
and  all  he  had  meditated  about  going 
to  see  him,  which  no  man  on  earth 
knew,  as  he  supposed,  but  himself, 
and  so  he  stopped  to  write  for  Joseph. 
Soon  after  this,  Joseph  sent  for  me 
(Whitmer)  to  come  to  Harmony  to  get 
him  and  Oliver  and  bring  them  to  my 
father's  house.  I  did  not  know  what 
to  do,  I  was  pressed  with  my  work.  I 
had  some  twenty  acres  to  plow,  so  I 
concluded  I  would  finish  plowing  and 
then  go.  .j.  got  up  one  morning  to  go 
to  work  as  usual,  and  on  going  to  th'3 
field,  found  between  five  and  seven 
acres  of  my  ground  had  been  plowed 
during  the  night.  I  don't  know  who 
did  it;  but  it  was  done  just  as  I  would 
have  done  it  myself,  and  the  plow  was 
left  standing  in  the  furrow.  This  en- 
abled me  to  start  sooner.  When  I 
arrived  at  Harmony,  Joseph  and  Oliver 
were  coming  toward  me,  and  met  me 
some  distance  from  the  house.  Oliver 
told  me  that  Joseph  had  informed  him 
when  I  started  from  home,  where  I  had 
stopped  the  first  night,  how  I  read  the 
sign  at  the  tavern,  where  I  stopped 
the  next  night,  etc.,  and  that  I  would  be 
there  that  day  before  dinner,  and  this 
was  why  they  had  come  out  to  meet 
me;  all  of  which  was  exactly  as  Joseph 
had  told  Oliver,  at  which  I  was  greatly 
astonished.  When  I  was  returning  to 
Fayette,  with  Joseph  and  Oliver,  all  of 
us  riding  In  the  wagon,  Oliver  and  I 
on  an  old-fashioned  wooden  spring  seat 
and  Joseph  behind  us — when  traveling 
along  in  a  clear  open  place,  a  very 
pleasant,  nice-looking  old  man  sudden- 
ly appeared  by  the  side  of  our  wagon 
and  saluted"  us  with,  'good  morning,  it 
is  very  warm,'  at  the  same  time  wip- 
ing his  face  or  forehead  with  his  hand. 
We  returned  the  salutation,  and,  by  a 
sign  from  Joseph,  I  invited  him  to  ride 
if  he  was  going  our  way.  But  he  said 
very  pleasantly,  'No,  I  am  going  to 
Cumorah.'  This  name  was  something 
new  to  me,  I  did  not  know  what  Cu- 
morah meant.  We  all  gazed  at  him 
and  at  each  other,  and  as  I  looked 
around  enquiringly  of  Joseph,  the  old 
man  instantly   disappeared,   so   that     I 


did  not  see  him  again.  Joseph  F. 
Smith:  Did  you  notice  his  appear- 
ance? Whitmer:  I  should  think  I  did. 
He  was,  I  should  think,  about  five  feet 
eight  or  nine  inches  tall  and  heavy 
set,  about  such  a  man  as  James  Van- 
cleave  there,  but  heavier;  his  face  was 
as  large;  he  was  dressed  in  a  suit  of 
brown  woolen  clothes,  his  hair  and 
beard  were  white,  like  Brother  Pratt's, 
but  his  beard  was  not  so  heavy.  I  also 
remember  that  he  had  on  his  back  a 
sort  of  knapsack  with  something  in, 
shaped  like  a  book.  It  was  the  mes- 
senger who  had  the  plates,  who  had 
taken  them  from  Joseph  just  prior  to 
^ur  starting  from  Harmony.  Soon  af- 
ter our  arrival  home,  I  saw  sometWng 
which  led  me  to  the  belief  that  the 
plates  were  placed  or  concealed  in  my 
father's  barn.  I  frankly  asked  Jo- 
seph if  my  supposition  was  right,  and 
he  told  me  it  was.  Some  time  after 
this,  my  mother  was  going  to  milk  the 
cows,  when  she  was  met  out  near  the 
yard  by  the  same  old  man  (judging  by 
her  description  of  him),  who  said  to 
her:  'You  have  been  very  faithful  and 
diligent  in  your  labors, but  you  are  tired 
because  of  the  increase  in  your  toil;  it 
is  proper,  therefore,  that  you  should  re 
ceive  a  witness  that  your  faith  may 
be  strengthened.'  Thereupon  he  showed 
her  the  plates.  My  father  and  mother 
had  a  large  family^  of  their  own,  the 
addition  to  it,  therefore,  of  Joseph,  his 
wife  Emma  and  Oliver  very  greatly  in- 
creased the  toil  and  anxiety  of  my 
mother.  And  although  she  had  never 
complained  she  had  sometimes  f*lt  that 
her  labor  was  too  much,  or  at  least  she 
was  perhaps  beginning  to  feel  so.  This 
circumstance,  however,  completely  re- 
moved all  such  feelings  and  nerved  her 
up  for  her  increased  responsibilities. 
*  *  *  Pratt:  Have  you  in  your  posses- 
sion the  original  manuscript  of  the 
Book  of  Mormon?  Whitmer:  I  have; 
they  are  in  Oliver  Cowdery's  hand- 
writing. He  placed  them  in  my  care  at 
his  death,  and  charged  me  to  preserve 
them  as  long  as  I  lived;  they  are  safe 
and  well  preserved.  Joseph  F.  Smith: 
What  will  be  done  with  them  at  your 
death?  Whitmer:  I  will  leave  them 
to  my  nephew,  David  Whitmer,  son  of 
my  brother  Jacob,  and  my  name-sake. 
Pratt:  Would  you  not  part  with  them 
to  a  purchaser?  Whitmer:  No.  Oliver 
charged  me  to  keep  them,  and  Joseph 
said  my  father's  house  should  keep  the 


268 


LATTER-DAY  SAINT 


lecords.    I  consider  these  things  sacred, 
and    would    not    part    with    nor    barter 
them  for  money.    Joseph  F.  Smith:  We 
would  not  offer  you  money  in  the  light 
of    bartering    for    the    manuscript,    but 
we   would   like   to   see   them    preserved 
in  some  manner  where  they  would  be 
safe  from  casualties  and  from  the  ca- 
prices of  men,  in  some  institution  that 
will  not  die  as  man  does.       Whitmer: 
That      is      all      right.      While    camping 
around   here   in   a   tent,   all   my   effects 
exposed  to  the   weather,  everything  in 
the  trunk  where  the  manuscripts  were 
kept   became     mouldy,     etc.,    but   they 
were  preserved,  not  even  being  discol- 
ored.      (We  supposed  his  camping  in  a 
tent,  etc.,  had  reference  to  his  circum- 
stances after  the  cyclone,  in  June  last.^ 
The    room    in    which    the    manuscripts 
were   kept,    was   the   only   part   of   the 
house   which   was  not  demolished,   and 
even  the  ceiling  of  that  room  was  but 
little   impaired.     'Do   you   think,'     said 
Phil.   Page,  a  son  of  Hiram  Page,   one 
of  the   Eight  Witnesses,   'that   the  Al- 
mighty cannot  take  care  of  His  own!' 
Next  day  (Sunday,  Sept.  8th)  Mr.  Whit- 
mer  invited  us  to  his  house,  where,  in 
the   presence   of   David   Whitmer,    Esq. 
(son  of  Jacob),  Philander  Page,    James 
R.    B.    Vancleave,    David     J.    Whitmer 
(son   of   David   the     Witness),     George 
Schweich  (grandson  of  David),    Colonel 
Childs     and     others,     David    Whitmer 
brought   out   the     manuscripts     of   the 
Book  of  Mormon.      We  examined  them 
closely  and  those  who  knew  the  hand- 
writing pronounced  the  whole  of  them, 
excepting   comparatively   a   few   pages, 
to    be    in    the    handwriting    of     Oliver 
Cowdery.       It   was   thought   that   these 
few  pages  were  in  the  handwriting  of 
Emma   Smith  and  John  and  Christian 
Whitmer.       We  found  that  the  names 
of   the   eleven   Witnesses     were,     how- 
ever, subscribed  in  the  handwriting  of 
Oliver   Cowdery.       When   the   question 
was  asked  Mr.  Whitmer  if  he  and  the 
ether  witnesses  did  or  did  not  sign  the 
testimonies    themselves,    Mr.    Whitmer 
replied  that  each  signed  his  own  name. 
'Then    where   are    the    original      signa- 
tures?' David  Whitmer:   'I  don't  know, 
I  suppose  Oliver  copied  them,  but  this 
I  know  is  an  exact  copy.'  *  •  •  Joseph 
F.  Smith  suggested  that  perhaps  there 
were    two    copies    of    the    manuscripts. 
but  Mr.  Whitmer  replied  that,  accord- 
ing to  the  best  of  his  knowledge,  there 
never  was  but  the  one  copy.      Herein, 


of  course,   he  is  evidently  uninformed. 
Elder    Orson    Pratt    again    felt    closely 
after     the     subject     of      procuring  the 
manuscript,   but   we   found   that   noth- 
ing  would     move     him   on   this   point. 
The  whole  Whitmer  family  are  deeply 
impressed   with  the  sacredness  of  this 
relic.     And   so   thoroughly   imbued   are 
they  with  the  idea  and  faith  that  it  is 
under  the  immediate  protection  of  the 
Almighty,  that  in  their  estimation,  not 
only   are   the   manuscripts     themselves 
safe  from  all  possible  contingencies,  but 
that  they  are  a  source  of  protection  to 
the  place  or  house  in  which  they  may 
be  kept,   and,   it  may  be  to  those  who 
have  possession  of  them.      Another  rea- 
son why  they  cling  to  this  relic  is  that 
David   Whitmer     has     reorganized   the 
'Church  of  Christ'  with  six  Elders  and 
two   priests,    after   the   pattern   of   the 
first   organization,    the   two   priests,   as 
we    suppose,    representing   Joseph    and 
Oliver   as   holding  the   Aaronic  Priest- 
hood from  the  hand  of  John  the  Baptist. 
David  and  John  Whitmer  were  two  of 
these  six  Elders,  four  others,  viz,  John 
C.  Whitmer,  W.  W.  Warren,  Philander 
Page  and  John  Short,  having  been  or- 
dained  by   David    and   John.       And   as 
the  recent  death  of  John  has  diminished 
the  number  to  five  Elders  it  would  be 
interesting    to    know    if,    according    to 
their   strict   construction,    the   vacancy 
can    be    filled.        Their      creed      is      to 
preach  nothing  but    the    Bible  and  the 
Book  of  Mormon."      The  following  was 
published  in  the  Richmond  (Mo.)  "Con- 
servator" of  March  25,  1881: 
"Unto  all   Nations,   Kindreds,   Tongues 
and  People,  unto  whom  these  pres- 
ents shall  come: 
"It  having-   been   represented   by   one 
John  Murphy,  of  Polo,  Caldwell  county, 
Missouri,  that  I,  in  a  conversation  with 
him  last  summer,  denied  my  testimony 
as  one  of  the  Three  Witnesses  of  the 
Book  of  Mormon. 

r — "^  the  end,  therefore,  that  he  may 
nmderstand  me  now,  if  he  did  not  then; 
and  that  the  world  may  know  the  truth, 
I  wish  now,  standing  as  it  were,  in  the 
very  sunset  of  life,  and  in  the  fear  of 
God,  once  for  all  to  make  this  public 
statement: 

"That  I  have  never  at  any  time  de- 
nied that  testimony  or  any  part  thereof, 
which  has  so  long  since  been  published 
with  that  book,  as  one  of  the  Three 
Witnesses.  Those  who  know  me  best 
well  know  that  I  have  always  adhered 


BIOGRAPHICAL    ENCYCLOPEDIA. 


269 


to  that  testimony.  And  that  no  man 
may  be  misled  or  doubt  my  present 
views  in  regard  to  the  same,  I  do  again 
affirm  the  truth  of  all  my  statements 
as  then  made  and  published. 

"  'He  that  hath  an  ear  to  hear,  let 
him  hear;'  it  was  no  delusion;  what  is 
written  is  written,  and  he  that  readeth 
let  him  understandTH  *      •      * 

"  'And  if  any  man  doubt,  should  he 
not  carefully  and  honestly  read  and  un- 
derstand the  same  before  presuming  to 
sit  in  judgment  and  condemning  the 
light,  which  shineth  in  darkness,  and 
showeth  the  way  of  eternal  life  as 
pointed  out  by  the  unerring  hand  of 
God?' 

"In  the  Spirit  of  Christ,  who  hath 
said:  'Follow  thou  me,  for  I  am  the 
life,  the  light  and  the  way,'  I  submit 
this  statement  to  the  world;  God  in 
whom  I  trust  being  my  judge  as  to  the 
sincerity  of  my  motives  and  the  faith 
and  hope  that  is  in  me  of  eternal  life. 

"My  sincere  desire  is  that  the  world 
may  be  benefited  by  this  plain  and  sim- 
ple statement  of  the  truth. 

"And  all  the  honor  to  the  Father,  the 
Son,  and  the  Holy  Ghost,  which  is  one 
God.    Amen! 

"DAVID  WHITMER  SEN. 

"Richmond,  Mo.,  March  19,  1881. 

"We,  the  undersigned  citizens  of 
Richmond,  Ray  county.  Mo.,  where  Da- 
vid Whitmer,  sen.,  has  resided  since  the 
year  A.  D.  1838,  certify  that  we  have 
been  long  and  intimately  acquainted 
with  him  and  know  him  to  be  a  man 
of  the  highest  integrity,  and  of  un- 
doubted truth  and  veracity. 

"Given  at  Richmond,  Mo.,  this  March 
20,  A.   D.   1881. 

"A.  W.  Doniphan. 

"Geo.  W.  Dunn,  Judge  of  the  Fifth 
Judicial  Circuit. 

"T.  D.  Woodson,  President  of  Ray  Co. 
Savings  Bank. 

"J.  T.  Child,  Editor  of  'Conservator.' 

"H.  C.  Garner,  Cashier  of  Ray  Co. 
Savings  Bank. 

"W.  A.  Holman,  County  Treasurer. 

"J.  S.  Hughes,  Banker,  Richmond. 

"D.  P.  Whitmer,  Attorney-at-law. 

"J.  W.  Black,  Attorney-at-law. 

"L.  C.  Cantwell,  Postmaster,  Rich- 
mond. 

"Geo.  I.  Wasson,  Mayor. 

"James  A.  Davis,  County  Collector. 

"C.  J.  Hughes,  Probate  Judge  and 
Presiding  Judge  of  Ray  County  Court. 

"Geo.  W.  Trigg,   County  Clerk. 


"W.  W.  Mosby,  M.  D. 

"Thos.  McGinnis,  ex-Sheriff,  Ray 
County. 

"J.   P.  Quessenberry,   Merchant. 

"W.  R.  Holman,  Furniture  Merchant. 

"Lewis  Slaughter,  Recorder  of  Deeds. 

"Geo.   W.   Buchanan,    M.   D. 

"A.  K.  Reyburn." 

The  "Conservator"  made  the  follow- 
ing editorial  comments  on  the  "no- 
tice:" "Elsewhere  we  publish  a  letter 
from  David  Whitmer,  sen.,  an  old  and 
well  known  citizen  of  Ray,  as  well  as 
an  endorsement  of  his  standing  as  a 
man,  signed  by  a  number  of  the  lead- 
ing citizens  of  this  community,  in  reply 
to  some  unwarranted  aspersions  made 
upon  him.  There  is  no  doubt  that  Mr. 
Whitmer,  who  was  one  of  the  Three 
Witnesses  of  the  authenticity  of  the 
gold  plates,  from  which  he  asserts  that 
Joe  Smith  translated  the  Book  of  Mor- 
mon (a  fac  simile  of  the  characters  he 
now  has  in  his  possession  with  the 
original  records),  is  firmly  convinced  of 
its  divine  origin,  and  while  he  makes 
no  efforts  to  obtrude  his  views  or  be- 
lief, he  simply  wants  the  world  to 
know  that  so  far  as  he  is  concerned 
there  is  no  'variableness  or  shadow  of 
turning.'  Having  resided  here  for 
near  a  half  of  a  century,  it  is  with 
no  little  pride  that  he  points  to  his 
past  record,  with  the  consciousness 
that  he  has  done  nothing  derogatory 
to  his  character  as  a  citizen  and  a  be- 
liever in  the  Son  of  Mary  to  warrant 
such  an  attack  on  him,  come  from 
what  source  it  may,  and  now,  with  the 
lilies  of  seventy-five  winters  crowning 
him  like  an  aureole,  and  his  pilgrimage 
on  earth  well  nigh  ended,  he  reiterates 
his  former  statements  and  will  leave 
futurity  to  solve  the  problem  that  he 
was  but  a  passing  witness  of  its  ful- 
fillment.'" Elder  Edward  Stevenson  in 
a  letter  dated  Feb.  16,  1886,  and  ad- 
dressed to  Pres.  Daniel  H.  "V^ells, 
writes:  "After  my  visit  to  Indepen- 
dence I  took  a  run  down  to  Lexington 
Junction,  42  miles  from  Kansas  City, 
and  up  the  Lexington  railroad  five 
miles  to  Richmond,  Ray  county,  Mo., 
and  called  on  David  Whitmer,  desiring 
to  see  once  more  the  only  surviving 
witness  of  the  visitation  of  the  angel 
who  commanded  him  with  others  to 
bear  record  of  the  truth  of  the  com- 
ing forth  of  the  Book  of  Mormon  and 
this  gospel  dispensation  of  the  nine- 
teenth   century.        Eight    years    ago      I 


270 


LATTER-DAY    SAINT 


visited  him,  and  52  years  a?o  I  heard 
him  bear  his  testimony,  as  also  Oliver 
Cowdery  and  Martin  Harris,  when  I 
was  only  a  boy  fourteen  years  of  age. 
and  I  am  a  witness  that  each  time 
their  testimony  has  been  by  the  power 
of  God.  that  thrills  through  the  whole 
system  like  a  two-edged  sword.  Da- 
vid Whitmer  is  now  just  past  81  years 
of  age;  and  only  by  a  hair's  breadth 
has  escaped  from  a  death  bed.  He  is 
very  feeble,  his  frame  weighing  less 
than  one  hundred  pounds.  In  this  his 
last  testimony  he  said  to  me,  'As  sure 
as  the  sun  shines  and  I  live,  just  so 
sure  did  the  angel  appear  unto  me  and 
Joseph  Smith,  and  I  heard  his  voice, 
and  did  see  the  angel  standing  before 
us.  and  on  a  table  were  the  plates,  the 
sword  of  Laban.  and  the  ball  or  com- 
pass.' Although  so  weak  and  feeble, 
yet  he  fired  up,  so  that  after  a  time  J 
was  necessarily  obliged  to  check  him 
and  let  him  rest,  while  in  turn  I  talked 
to  him."  In  April,  1887,  David  Whil- 
mer  and  his  family  and  friends  pub- 
lished a  pamphlet  of  75  pages,  with  the 
following  title:  "An  address  to  All 
Believers  in  Christ,  by  a  Witness  to  the 
Divine  Authenticity  of  the  Book  of 
Mormon."  In  this  pamphlet  David 
Whitmer  explained  at  considerable 
length  wherein  he  differed  in  his  re- 
ligious belief  with  the  Saints  in  Utah. 
He  denounces  polygamy  and  other  ad- 
vanced doctrines.  David  Whitmer  died 
at  his  residence  in  Richmond,  Ray 
county.  Mo.,  Jan.  25,  1888,  aged  83 
years  and  18  days.  From  the  "Rich- 
mond Democrat"  (of  Feb.  2,  1888),  a 
weekly  paper  published  at  Richmond, 
the  following  is  culled:  "David  Whit- 
mer bore  his  long  illness  with  great 
patience  and  fortitude,  his  faith  never 
for  a  moment  wavering,  and  when  the 
summons  came  he  sank  peacefully  to 
rest,  with  a  smile  on  his  countenance, 
just  as  if  he  was  being  lulled  to  sle?p 
by  sweet  music.  Just  before  the 
breath  left  the  body,  he  opened  his 
eyes,  which  glistened  with  the  bright- 
ness of  his  early  manhood.  He  then 
turned  them  toward  heaven,  and  a 
wonderful  light  came  over  his  coun- 
tenance, which  remained  several  mo- 
ments, when  the  eyes  gradually  closed 
and  David  Whitmer  was  gone  to  rest. 
On  Monday  last  (Jan.  2.3,  1888),  at  10 
o'clock  a.  m.,  after  awakening  from  a 
short  slumber,  he  said  he  had  seen  be- 
yond   the   veil    and    saw    Christ   on    the 


other  side.  His  friends,  who  were  con- 
stantly at  his  bedside,  claim  that  he 
had  many  manifestations  of  the  truths 
of  the  great  beyond,  and  which  con- 
firms their  faith  beyond  all  shadow  of 
doubt.  On  Sunday  evening,  at  5:30 
(Jan.  22,  1888),  Mr.  Whitmer  called  his 
family  and  some  friends  to  his  bedside, 
and  addressing  himself  to  the  attending 
physician,  said:  'Dr.  Buchanan,  I 
want  you  to  say  whether  or  not  I  am 
in  my  right  mind,  before  J  give  my  dy- 
ing testimony.'  The  doctor  answered: 
'Yes,  you  are  in  your  right  mind,  for  I 
have  just  had  a  conversation  with 
you.'  He  then  addressed  himself  to  all 
around  his  bedside  in  these  words: 
'Now  you  must  all  be  faithful  in  Christ. 
I  want  to  say  to  you  all,  the  Bible  and 
the  record  of  the  Nephites  (Book  of 
Mormon)  is  true,  so  you  can  say  that 
you  have  heard  me  bear  my  testimony 
on  my  death-bed.  All  be  faithful  in 
Christ,  and  your  reward  will  be  ac- 
cording to  your  works.  God  bless  you 
all.  My  trust  is  in  Christ  forever, 
worlds  without  end.  Amen.'  •  *  *  On 
Friday  morning  last  (Jan.  27,  1888),  at 
10:30,  a  number  of  the  friends  of  the 
deceased  assembled  at  his  late  resi- 
dence, to  pay  a  last  tribute  of  respect 
to  the  worthy  dead.  Mr.  John  J.  Sny- 
der arose  and  read  the  first  fourteen 
verses  of  the  22nd  chapter  of  Revela- 
tions, and  stated  that  the  deceased  had 
selected  the  14th  verse,  to  be  read  at 
the  funeral  service  over  his  remains. 
It  reads  as  follows:  'Blessed  are  they 
that  do  His  commandments,  that  they 
may  have  right  to  the  tree  of  life,  and 
may  enter  in  through  the  gates  into  the 
city.'  After  the  reading,  an  appropri- 
ate eulogy  was  pronounced  by  Mr. 
John  C.  Whitmer,  a  relative  and  in- 
timate associate  of  the  deceased.  It 
was  then  announced  that  all  present 
who  desired  to  take  a  last  look  at  th'? 
remains  would  be  given  an  opportunity 
to  do  so  at  the  house,  as  the  coffin 
would  not  be  opened  at  the  grave.  All 
present  took  advantage  of  this  oppor- 
tunity to  once  more  look  upon  the  fea- 
tures of  the  dead.  The  following  old 
and  well-known  citizens  of  Richmond 
acted  as  pall-bearers:  Joseph  S. 
Hughes,  Thomas  D.  Woodson.  Dr.  H. 
('.  Garner,  George  L.  Wasson.  John  P. 
Quessenberry  and  Col.  J.  W.  Black,  who 
then  took  charge  of  the  remains  and 
bore  it  to  the  hearse.  Notwithstanding 
the  cold,  damn  weather,  a  large  num- 


BIOGRAPHICAL    ENCYCLOPEDIA. 


271 


ber  of  friends  and  acquaintances  fol- 
lowed the  hearse  and  mourning  fami- 
ly to  the  new  cemetery,  west  of  the 
city,  where  the  body  was  laid  to  rest, 
and  all  that  was  mortal  of  one  of  the 
most  remarkable  men,  ever  connected 
with  the  history  of  Ray  county,  was 
forever  hidden  from  view.  *  *  *  David 
Whitmer  lived  in  Richmond  about  half 
a  century,  and  we  can  say  that  no  man 
ever  lived  here  who  had  among  our 
people  more  friends  and  fewer  enemies. 
Honest,  conscientious  and  upright  in 
all  his  dealings,  just  in  his  estimate  of 
men,  and  open,  manly  and  frank  in 
his  treatment  of  all,  he  made  lasting 
friends  who  loved  him  to  the  end.  *  *  * 
He  leaves  a  wife  and  two  children,  two 
grandchildren  and  several  great-grand- 
children." (See  also  "Millennial  Star," 
Vol.  45,  p.  538;  Vol.  48,  pp.  35,  341,  420. 
436,  etc.;  "Historical  Record,"  Vol.  7, 
p.   622.) 

HARRIS,  Martin,  one  of  the  Three 
"Witnesses  to  the  Book  of  Mormon,  was 
born  May  18,  1783,  in  Easttown,  Sarato- 
ga county.  New  York,  and  moved  with 
his  father's  family  in  his  ninth  year  to 
the  town  of  Palmyra,  Wayne  county. 
In  the  fall  of  1827  he  made  the  ac- 
aualntance  of  the  Prophet  Joseph 
Smith,  who  at  that  time  was  severely 
persecuted  by  his  enemies,  he  having 
received  from  the  angel  Moroni  the  ho- 
ly plates,  from  which  the  Book  of  Mor- 
mon afterwards  was  translated.  Mar- 
tin Harris  made  Joseph  a  present  of 
fifty  dollars,  which  enabled  the  latter 
to  remove  from  Manchester,  N.  Y.,  to 
Pennsylvania.  In  February,  1828,  Mar- 
tin Harris  visited  Joseph  Smith  at  his 
temporary  home  in  Harmony,  Penn. 
The  latter  had  copied  some  of  the  an- 
cient characters  from  the  plates  and 
translated  them,  which  he  gave  to  Mar- 
tin Harris,  who  made  a  visit  to  New 
York  city  and  showed  the  characters 
with  their  translation  to  the  celebrated 
Professor  Charles  Anthon,  skilled  in  an- 
cient and  modern  languages.  The 
learned  professor,  after  examination, 
spoke  favorably  of  the  characters  and 
of  the  translation  and  proffered  his  as- 
sistance; but  on  learning  from  Mr.  Har- 
ris that  the  book  was  given  to  Joseph 
Smith  bv  an  angel  and  that  a  part  of 
the  book  was  sealed,  etc.,  he  sarcastic- 
ally remarked  that  "he  could  not  read 
a  sealed  book,"  and  then  demanded 
back  a  certificate,  which  he  had  given  to 


Mr.  Harris,  testifying  to  the  correct- 
ness of  the  translation.  After  getting 
it  back  he  tore  it  to  pieces.  Mr.  Harris 
then  went  to  Dr.  Mitchell,  another  man 
of  learning,  who  sanctioned  what  Pro- 
fessor Anthon  had  said  respecting  both 
the  characters  and  the  translation. 
Martin  Harris  having  returned  from  his 
tour  to  New  York  city  and  reported  the 
incidents  of  his  journey  to  the  Proph?t, 
went  home  to  Palmyra,  arranged  his 
affairs  and  returned  again  to  Joseph  in 
Pennsylvania  about  the  12th  of  April, 
1828.  Immediately  after  his  arrival  he 
commenced  to  write  for  the  Prophet, 
thus  becoming  his  first  scribe.  Joseph 
translated  from  the  plates  and  Martin 


Harris  wrote  after  his  dictation,  which 
work  they  continued  until  the  14th  of 
June  following,  by  which  time  116 
pages  of  manuscript  were  written  on 
foolscap  paper.  The  Prophet  writes; 
"Some  time  after  Mr.  Harris  had  begun 
to  write  for  me,  he  began  to  tease  me 
to  give  him  liberty  to  carry  the  writ- 
ings home  and  show  them;  and  desired 
of  me  that  I  would  inquire  of  the  Lord, 
through  the  Urim  and  Thummim,  if  he 
might  not  do  so.  I  did  inquire,  and 
the  answer  was  that  he  must  not.  How- 
ever, he  was  not  satisfied  with  this  an- 
swer, and  desirp'"  -»iat  I  should  inquire 
again.  I  did  so,  and  the  answer  was 
as  before.  Still  he  could  not  be  con- 
tented, but  insisted  that  I  should  in- 
quire once  more.  After  much  solicita- 
tion I  again  inquired  of  the  Lord,  and 


272 


LATTER-DAY    SAINT 


permission  was  granted  him  to  have 
th<^  writings  on  certain  conditions, 
which  were,  that  he  show  them  only 
to  his  brother  Preserved  Harris,  his 
own  wife,  his  father  and  his  mother, 
and  a  Mrs.  Cobb,  a  sister  to  his  wife. 
In  accordance  with  this  last  answer,  I 
required  of  him  that  he  should  bind 
himself  in  a  covenant  to  me  in  the 
most  solemn  manner,  that  he  would  not 
do  otherwise  than  he  had  been  directed. 
He  did  so.  He  bound  himself  as  I  re- 
quired of  him,  took  the  writings,  and 
went  his  way.  Notwithstanding,  how- 
ever, the  great  restrictions  which  h'3 
had  been  laid  under,  and  the  solemnity 
of  the  covenant  which  he  had  made 
with  me,  he  did  shew  them  to  others, 
and  bv  stratagem  they  got  them  away 
from  him,  and  they  never  have  been 
recovered  nor  obtained  back  again  unto 
this  day."  For  these  doings  Martin 
Harris  was  severely  censured  and  called 
a  "wicked  man"  in  a  revelation  given 
through  the  Prophet  shortly  afterwards 
(Doc.  and  Gov.  Sec.  3);  and  the  Lord 
would  not  permit  Joseph  Smith  to 
translate  that  part  of  the  record  again, 
because  of  the  cunning  and  evil  designs 
of  wicked  men.  (Doc.  and  Gov.,  Sec. 
10.)  After  the  Prophet's  removal  to 
Fayette  in  the  summer  of  1829,  Martin 
Harris  again  visited  him  and  was  per- 
mitted to  be  one  of  the  Three  Witness- 
es. Subsequently,  he  furnished  $3,000 
toward  the  expenses  of  printing  the 
first  edition  of  the  book.  He  was  bap- 
tized shortly  after  the  organization  of 
the  Ghurch,  and  is  mentioned  as  a 
Priest  in  the  Church  records  as  early 
as  June,  1830.  He  was  ordained  a 
High  Priest  by  Lyman  Wight,  June  3, 
1831,  at  Kirtland,  Ohio,  whence  he  had 
removed  from  the  State  of  New  York. 
In  that  same  month  (June,  1831)  he  was 
called  by  revelation  to  accompany  the 
Prophet  Joseph  and  other  Elders  to 
Missouri.  (Doc.  and  Gov.,  Sec.  52.)  He 
started  on  this  journey  on  the  19th  of 
June,  and  when  Jackson  county.  Mo., 
two  months  later,  was  designated  by 
the  mouth  of  the  Lord  as  a  gathering 
place  for  the  Saints— as  the  land  upon 
which  the  new  Jerusalem  should  be 
built,  and  where  a  full  consecration  of 
all  properties  should  be  required  and 
the  holy  United  Order  of  God  estab- 
lished— Martin  Harris  was  the  first  one 
called  of  God  by  name  to  set  an  ex- 
ample before  the  Church  in  laying  his 
money    before   the   Bishop.      (Doc.    and 


Gov.,  Sec.  58,  Verse  35.)  He  was  a 
member  of  the  first  High  Council  of 
the  Church,  which  was  organized  in 
Kirtland,  Ohio,  Feb.  17,  1834,  and  in 
1835  he  assisted  in  electing,  ordaining 
and  instructing  the  twelve  Elders,  who 
were  called  to  constitute  the  first  quo- 
rum of  Twelve  Apostles  in  this  dis- 
pensation. As  long  as  the'  Saints  re- 
mained in  Kirtland,  Martin  Harris  con- 
tinued active  and  assisted  in  the  public 
labors  of  the  Church,  but  when  the 
Saints  vacated  that  place  and  removed 
to  Missouri,  Martin  Harris  remained  in 
Ohio.  This  gave  rise  to  many  conjec- 
tures that  he  had  apostatized.  But 
notwithstanding  his  long  absence  from 
the  head-quarters  of  the  Church,  he 
never  faltered  nor  swerved  in  the  least 
degree  from  the  great  testimony  given 
in  the  Book  of  Mormon.  It  is  trus 
that  he  went  to  England  in  1846,  while 
under  the  influence  of  the  apostate 
James  J.  Strang,  ostensibly  for  the 
purpose  of  opposing  the  Elders  labor- 
ing there,  but  he  returned  to  America 
without  doing  any  harm  to  anybody, 
except,  perhaps,  to  himself.  ("Millen- 
nial Star,"  Vol.  8,  pages  124  and  128.) 
After  residing  for  many  years  in  Kirt- 
land, Ohio,  he  emigrated  to  Utah,  ar- 
riving in  Salt  Lake  City  Aug.  30,  1870, 
in  care  of  Elder  Edward  Stevenson, 
who  gives  the  following  account: 
"While  I  was  living  in  Michigan,  then 
a  Territory,  in  1833,  near  the  town  of 
Pontiac,  Oakland  county,  Martin  Har- 
ris came  there,  and  in  a  meeting,  where 
I  was  present,  bore  testimony  of  the 
appearance  of  an  angel  exhibiting  the 
golden  plates,  and  commanding  him  to 
bear  a  testimony  of  these  things  to  all 
people  whenever  opportunity  was  af- 
forded him  to  do  so;  and  I  can  say 
that  his  testimony  had  great  effect  in 
that  vicinity.  Martin  had  a  sister  liv- 
ing in  our  neighborhood.  About  this 
time,  Oliver  Cowdery,  another  of  the 
Three  Witnesses,  also,  in  company  with 
Joseph  Smith,  the  Prophet,  bore  the 
same  testimony,  and  further,  Joseph 
the  Prophet  omised  those  who  with 
honest  hearts  ojeyed  the  gospel  should 
receive  the  Holy  Ghost,  and  signs 
would  follow  them.  As  a  proof  of  their 
testimony,  several  of  that  branch  of 
the  Church  enjoyed  various  gifts;  one, 
Elijah  Fordham,  who  recently  died  in 
this  Territory,  spoke  in  tongues,  ani 
as  two  French  travelers  were  passing 
they  heard   him   speaking  and   said   to 


BIOGRAPHICAL   ENCYCLOPEDIA. 


273 


a  boy  outside  the  house,  where  they 
were,  that  he  was  speaking^  in  French, 
bearing  testimony  to  the  gospel,  he 
having  no  knowledge  of  that  lan- 
guage. Martin  often  bore  his  testi- 
mony while  in  that  neighborhood.  In 
the  year  1869  I  was  appointed  on  a 
mission  to  the  United  States.  JEIaving 
visited  several  of  the  Eastern  States, 
I  called  at  Kirtland,  Ohio,  to  see  the 
first  Temple  that  was  built  by  our 
I)eople  in  this  generation.  "While  there, 
I  aeain  met  Martin  Harris,  soon  after 
coming  out  of  the  Temple.  He  took 
from  under  his  arm  a  copy  of  the  Book 
of  Mormon,  the  first  edition,  I  believe, 
and  bore  a  faithful  testimony,  just  the 
same  as  that  I  heard  him  bear  thirty- 
six  years  previous.  He  said  that  it 
was  his  duty  to  continue  to  lift  up  his 
voice  •'^  he  had  been  commanded  to 
do  in  defense  of  the  book  that  he  held 
in  his  hand,  and  offered  to  prove  from 
the  Bible  that  just  such  a  book  was 
to  come  forth  out  of  the  ground,  and 
that,  too,  in  a  day  when  there  were 
no  Prophets  on  the  earth,  and  that 
he  was  daily  bearing  testimony  to 
many  who  visited  the  Temple.  After 
patientlv  hearing  him,  I  felt  a  degree 
of  compassion  for  him,  and  in  turn  bore 
my  testimony  to  him,  as  I  had  received 
it  through  obedience  to  the  gospel,  and 
that  the  work  was  still  onward,  and 
the  words  of  Isaiah,  2nd  chapter,  that 
'the  house  of  the  Lord'  was  in  the  tops 
of  the  mountains,  and  that  under  the 
leadership  of  Pres.  Young  all  nations 
were  gathering  to  Zion  to  learn  of 
God's  ways  and  to  walk  in  His  paths, 
and  that  the  worst  wish  that  we  had. 
was  for  him  to  also  prepare  himself 
and  go  up  and  be  a  partaker  of  the 
blessings  of  the  House  of  the  Lord.  My 
testimony  impressed  him.  A  Mr.  Bond, 
who  held  the  keys  of  the  Temple,  and 
who  had  been  present  at  the  dedication, 
and  then  a  faithful  Latter-day  Saint, 
said  to  me  he  felt  as  though  he  would 
have  been  far  better  off  if  he  had  kept 
with  the  Latter-day  Saints,  and  that  if 
I  wculd  preach  in  the  Temple  he  would 
open  the  doors  to  me.  I  promised  to 
do  so  at  some  future  time.  After  my 
arrival  in  Utah  in  1870,  I  was  inspired 
to  write  to  Martin  Harris,  and  soon  re- 
ceived a  reply  that  the  Spirit  of  God, 
for  the  first  time-  prompted  him  to  go 
to  L'tah.  Several  letters  were  after- 
"R'ards  exchanged.  Pres.  Brigham 
Young,  having  read  the  letters,  through 

Vol.  1,  No.  18. 


±'res.  Geo.  A.  Smith  requested  me  to 
get  up  a  subscription  and  emigrate 
Martin  to  Utah,  he  subscribing  twenty- 
five  dollars  for  that  purpose.  Having 
raised  the  subscription  to  about  two 
hundred  dollars,  I  took  the  railroad 
cars  for  Ohio,  July  19,  1870,  and  on  the 
10th  of  August,  filled  my  appointment, 
preaching  twice  in  the  Kirtland  Tem- 
ple, finding  Martin  Harris  elated  with 
his  prospective  journey.  A  very  singru- 
lar  incident  occurred  at  this  time.  While 
Martin  was  visiting  his  friends,  bidding 
them  farewell,  his  pathway  crossed  a 
large  pasture,  in  which  he  became  be- 
wildered. Dizzy,  faint  and  staggering 
through  the  blackberry  vines  that  are 
so  abundant  in  that  vicinity,  his  clothes 
torn,  bloody  and  faint,  he  lay  down 
under  a  tree  to  die.  After  a  time  he 
revived,  called  on  the  Lord,  and  finally 
at  12  o'clock  midnight  found  his  friend, 
and  in  his  fearful  condition  was  cared 
for  and  soon  regained  his  strength.  He 
related  this  incident  as  a  snare  of  the 
adversary  to  hinder  him  from  going  to 
Salt  Lake  City.  Although  in  his  88th 
year  he  possessed  remarkable  vigor 
and  health,  having  recently  worked  in 
the  garden,  and  dug  potatoes  by  the 
c'ay  for  some  of  his  neighbors.  After 
visiting  New  York  and  calling  to  visit 
the  sacred  spot  from  where  the  plates 
of  the  Book  of  Mormon  were  taken,  I 
found  there  an  aged  gentleman.  74 
years  old,  who  knew  Martin  Harris, 
and  said  that  he  was  known  in  that 
neighborhood  as  an  honest  farmer,  hav- 
ing owned  a  good  farm  three  miles  from 
that  place.  He  further  said  he  well 
remembered  the  time  when  the  'Mor- 
mons' used  to  gather  at  Mormon  Hill, 
as  he  termed  it,  where  it  was  said  the 
plates  came  from.  Aug.  19,  1870,  in 
company  with  Martin  Harris,  I  left 
Kirtland  for  Utah,  and  on  the  21st  he 
was  with  me  in  Chicago,  and  at  the 
American  Hotel  bore  testimony  to  a 
large  number  of  people  of  the  visita- 
tion of  the  angel,  etc.  *  *  *  While  in 
Des  Moines, the  capital  of  Iowa,  Brother 
Harris  had  opportunity  of  bearing  tes- 
timony to  many,  and  at  a  special  meet- 
ing held  in  a  branch  of  our  Church 
(Brother  Jas.  M.  Ballinger,  president) 
Martin  Harris  bore  testimony  as  to 
viewing  the  plates,  the  angel's  visit, 
and  visiting  Professor  Anthon.  On  the 
following  day  I  baptized  a  sister  to 
Pres.  Ballinger,  in  the  Des  Moines  river. 
The  branch  here  contributed  a  new  suit 

May   4,   1901. 


274 


LATTER-DAY    SAINT 


of  clothes  to  Brother  Harris,  for  which 
he  felt  to  bless  them.  On  the  29th  of 
August  we  arrived  in  Ogden,  and  the 
following  day  in  Salt  Lake  City.  Two 
members  of  the  Des  Moines  branch  of 
the  Church  accompanied  us  to  Utah." 
("Mill.  Star,"  Vol.  44.  p.  78.)  In  another 
article  Elder  Stevenson  gives  the  fol- 
lowing additional  particulars:  "Many 
Interesting  incidents  were  related  by 
Martin  on  our  journey  (from  Ohio  to 
Utah  in  1870),  one  of  which  I  will  re- 
late. He  said  that  on  one  occasion 
several  of  his  old  acquaintances  made 
an  effort  to  get  him  tipsy  by  treating 
him  to  some  wine.  When  they  thought 
he  was  in  a  good  mood  for  talk,  they 
put  the  following  question  very  careful- 
ly to  him:  'Well,  now,  Martin,  we  want 
you  to  be  frank  and  candid  with  us  in 
regard  to  this  story  of  your  seeing  an 
ang>el  and  the  golden  plates  of  the  Book 
of  Mormon  that  is  so  much  talked 
about.  We  have  always  taKen  you  to 
be  an  honest,  good  farmer  and  neigh- 
bor of  ours,  but  could  not  believe  that 
you  ever  did  see  an  angel.  Now,  Mar- 
tin, do  you  really  believe  that  you  did 
see  an  angel  when  you  were  awake?' 
'No,'  said  Martin,  'I  do  not  believe  it.' 
The  anticipation  of  the  delighted  crowd 
at  this  exclamation  may  be  imagined. 
But  soon  a  different  feeling  prevailed, 
when  Martin  Harris,  true  to  his  trust, 
said,  'Gentlemen,  what  I  have  said  Is 
true,  from  the  fact  that  my  belief  is 
swallowed  up  in  knowledge;  for  I  want 
to  say  to  you  that  as  the  Lord  lives 
I  do  know  that  I  stood  with  the 
Prophet  Joseph  Smith  in  the  presence 
of  the  angel,  and  it  was  in  the  bright- 
ness of  day.'  Martin  Harris  related 
this  circumstance  to  me  substantially 
as  I  give  it,  adding  that,  although  he 
drank  wine  with  them  as  friends,  he 
always  believed  in  temperance  and  so- 
briety. While  on  our  journey,  and 
more  particularly  at  the  Des  Moines 
river,  at  the  baptism  of  the  woman 
spoken  of,  I  took  occasion  to  teach 
Brother  Martin  the  necessity  of  his  be- 
ing rebaptized.  At  first  he  did  not  seem 
to  agree  with  the  Idea,  but  I  referred 
him  to  the  scriptural  words,  'Repent 
and  do  the  first  works,  having  lost 
the  first  love,  etc.,  (Rev.,  2:  5.)  Final- 
ly, he  said  if  it  was  right,  the  Lord 
would  manifest  it  to  him  by  His  Spirit, 
and  He  did  so,  for  Martin,  soon  after 
his  arrival  in  Salt  Lake  City,  came  to 
my   house   and   said   the   Spirit   of   the 


Lord  had  made  it  manifest  to  him,  not 
only  for  himself  personally,  but  also 
that  he  should  be  baptized  for  his  dead, 
for  he  had  seen  his  father  seeking  his 
aid.  He  saw  his  father  at  the  foot  of 
a  ladder,  striving  to  get  up  to  him,  and 
he  went  down  to  him  taking  him  by 
the  hand  and  helped  him  up.  The 
baptismal  font  was  prepared,  and  by 
arrangement  I  led  Martin  Harris  down 
into  the  water  and  rebaptized  him. 
Five  of  the  Apostles  were  present,  viz,. 
John  Taylor,  Wilford  Woodruff,  Orson 
Pratt,  Geo.  A.  Smith  and  Joseph  F. 
Smith;  also  John  D.  T.  McAllister  and 
others.  After  baptism,  Orson  Pratt 
confirmed  him,  being  joined  with  the 
rest  of  the  brethren,  by  the  laying  on 
of  hands;  after  which  he  was  baptized 
for  some  of  his  dead  friends,  and  to 
add  to  the  interest  of  the  occasion, 
Martin's  sister  also  was  baptized  for 
their  female  friends.  •  *  •  I  wish  to  add 
that  Brother  Harris  having  been  away 
from  the  Church  so  many  years  did  not 
understand  more  than  the  first  prin- 
ciples taught  in  the  infantile  days  of 
the  Church,  which  accounts  for  his 
not  being  posted  in  the  doctrine  of  the 
gospel  being  preached  to  the  spirits 
who  are  departed,  which  was  after- 
wards taught  by  Joseph  Smith,  the 
Prophet.  •  •  *  The  economy  of  Martin 
Harris  was  particularly  illustrated  on 
the  occasion  of  our  visit  to  the  Fif- 
teenth Ward  of  Salt  Lake  City.  The 
meeting  was  crowded,  as  usual,  with 
those  anxious  to  see  him  and  to  hear  his 
constant,  undeviating  testimony.  Sister 
Sarah  M.  Kimball,  of  the  Fifteenth 
Ward,  eminent  in  the  Relief  Societies, 
en  their  behalf  offered  to  have  a  new 
set  of  artificial  teeth  made  for  Brother 
Harris,  to  which  he  replied,  'No,  sisters, 
1  thank  you  for  your  kindness,  but  T 
shall  not  live  long.  Take  the  money 
and  give  it  to  the  poor.'  This  calls  to 
my  mind  a  little  incident  or  two  that 
he  related  to  me  while  we  were  on  our 
journey  from  Ohio  to  Utah.  He  said 
that  Joseph  Smith,  the  Prophet,  was 
very  poor,  and  had  to  work  by  the  day 
for  his  support,  and  he  (Harris)  often 
gave  him  work  on  his  farm,  and  that 
they  had  hoed  corn  together  many  a 
day,  Brother  Harris  paying  him  fifty 
cents  i)er  day.  Joseph,  he  said,  was 
good  to  work  and  jovial  and  they  often 
wrestled  together  in  sport,  but  the 
Prophet  was  devoted  and  attentive  to 
his  prayers.       Brother     Martin  Harris 


BIOGRAPHICAL.   ENCYCLOPEDIA. 


275 


gave  Joseph  $50  on  one  occasion  to  help 
translate   the  Book  of  Mormon.       Thl3 
action   on    the   part    of    Martin    Harris 
so  displeased  his  wife  that  she  threat- 
ened to  leave  him.       Martin  said  that 
he  knew  this  to  be   the  work"  of  God, 
and  that  he  should  keep  the  command- 
ments of  the  Lord,  whatever  the  results 
might  be.      His  wife  subsequently,  par- 
tially  separated   from   him,    which     he 
patiently  endured  for  the  gospel's  sake. 
•  •   •  At  an  evening  visit  of  some  of 
my  friends  at  my  residence  In  Salt  Lake 
City,   to   see  and   hear   Brother  Harris 
relate  his  experience  (which  always  de- 
lighted him),  Brother  James  T.  Woods, 
who  is  now  present  while  I  am  writ- 
ing this  article,  reminds  me  that  him- 
self and  G.  D.  Keaton  were  present  on 
that  occasion,   and  asked   him   to     ex- 
plain the  manner  in  which  the  plates, 
containing  the  characters  of  the  Book 
of  Mormon,  were  exhibited  to  the  wit- 
nesses.     Brother  Harris  said  that  the 
angel  stood  on  the  opposite  side  of  the 
table  on  which  were  the  plates,  the  in- 
terpreters, etc.,  and  took  the  plates  in 
his  hand  and  turned  them    over.      To 
more   fully     illustrate     this     to   them, 
Brother   Martin   took   up   a  book     and 
turned  the  leaves  over  one  by  one.  The 
angel  -declared  that  the  Book  of  Mor- 
mon was  correctly  translated     by     the 
power    of    God    and    not   of   man,    and- 
that  it   contained   the   fullness   of     the 
gospel  of  Jesus  Christ  to  the  Nephites, 
who  were  a  branch  of  the  lost  sheep  of 
the  House  of     Israel,     and     had   come 
from  the  land  of  Jerusalem  to  America. 
The   witnesses    were    required    to   bear 
their  testimony  of  these  things,  and  of 
this  open  vision  to  all  people,   and  he 
(Harris)   testified,  not      only     to  those 
present,  but  to  all  the  world,  that  these 
things  were  true,  and  before  God  whom 
he   expected   to   meet     in     the     day   of 
Judgment  he  lied  not.      Brother  Woods 
testifies  that  he  was  present  at  the  time 
above   mentioned,   and   to    him    it   was 
marvelous    to    see    the    zeal    that    was 
manifested  by  Martin  Harris,  and  the 
spirit  of  the  Lord  that  accompanied  his 
words.      That  Martin  Harris  was  very 
zealous,     somewhat      enthusiastic,  and 
what  some  would  term  egotistical,  is  no 
doubt  the  case;  but  the  Lord  has  shown 
this   generation   that  he   can   carry   on 
His  work  independently  of  all  men,  on- 
ly as  they  live  closely  and  humbly  be- 
fore   Him.       I   will    give    one    or     two 
instances  of  Martin's  enthusiasm.  When 


Pres.   Geo.   A.   Smith   and   others   of  us 
were    being     driven     by     John    Henry 
Smith  in  a  carriage  to  take  a  bath  in 
the  Warm  Springs,  near  Salt  Lake  City, 
while   passing  over     a  high   hill   Pres. 
Smith  directed  the  curtains  of  the  car- 
riage to  be  raised,  giving  a  magnificent 
view  of  the  city  below.      The  immense 
Tabernacle  and  the  Temple— and  in  fact 
the  beautiful  city  in  full  view— looked 
wonderful     to     Brother     Harris,     who 
seemed  wrapped  in  admiration  and  ex- 
claimed, 'Who  would  have  thought  that 
the  Book  of  Mormon  would  have  done 
all  this?'     On  one  occasion,  while  cele- 
brating a  baptism,  several  persons  be- 
ing in  attendance.  Brother  Harris  with 
joyful  feelings  said,   'Just  see  how  the 
Book  of  Mormon  is  spreading.'     Hav- 
ing been  absent    so    long  from  the  body 
of  the  Church  and  considering  his  great 
age,  much  charity  was  necessarily  exer- 
cised in  his  behalf.      His  abiding  testi- 
mony,   and   his     assistance     with     his 
property  to  publish  the   Book  of  Mor- 
mon, have  earned  a  name  for  him  that 
will  endure  while  time  shall  last.      Soon 
after  hs  had  received  his  endowments 
and  performed  some  work  for  his  dead, 
he  retired  to  live  with  his  son,  Martin 
Harris,  jun.,  at  Smithfield,   Cache  val- 
ley, where  he  was  comfortably     cared 
for  in  his'  declining  old  age.       On  the 
afternoon  of  his  death  he  was  bolstered 
up  in  his  bed,  where,  with  the  Book  of 
Mormon  in  his  hand,  he  bore  his  last 
testimony  to  those  who  were  present." 
("Mill.  Star,"  Vol.  48,  p.  367.)     Soon  af- 
ter his  arrival  in  Utah  Martin  Harris 
located    in   Smithfield,      and    "later     in 
Clarkston,  Cache  county,  where  he  died 
July  10,  1875,  nearly  ninety-three  years 
old.       A   few   hours    before    his    death, 
when  prostrated  with  great  weakness. 
Bishop    Simon      Smith      came    into    his 
room;  Martin  Harris  stretched  forth  his 
hands  to  salute  him  and  said,  "Bishop, 
I   am   going."       The   Bishop   told     him 
that   he   had   something  of  importance 
to  tell  him  in  relation  to  the  Book  of 
Mormon,  which  was  to  be  published  in 
the  Spanish  language,  by  the  request  of 
Indians  in     Central     America.       Upon 
hearing  this,  Martin  Harris  brightened 
up,   his   pulsation   improved,    and,     al- 
though  very   weak,    he    began    to    talk 
as   he   formerly   had   done   previous   to 
his  sickness.      He  conversed  for  about 
two  hpurs,  and  it  seemed  that  the  mere 
mention   of   the    Book   of   Mormon   put 
new    life    Into    him.        His    son    Martin 


276 


LATTER-DAY    SAINT 


Harris,  jun..  in  a  letter  addressed  to 
Pres.  Geo.  A.  Smith  and  dated  Clarks- 
ton.  July  9.  1S75,  says:  "He  (Martin 
Harris)  was  taken  sick  a  week  ago  yes- 
terday, with  some  kind  of  stroke,  or  life 
became  so  weak  and  exhausted,  that 
he  has  no  use  in  his  limbs.  He  cannot 
move,  only  by  our  aid.  •  *  •  He  has 
continued  to  talk  about  and  testify  to 
the  truth  of  the  Book  of  Mormon,  and 
was  in  his  happiest  mood  when  he 
could  get  somebody  to  listen  to  his  tes- 
timony; if  he  felt  dull  and  weary  at 
times,  and  some  one  would  come  in  and 
open  up  a  conversation  and  give  him 
an  opportunity  of  talking,  he  would 
immediately  revive  and  feel  like  a 
young  man  for  a  little  while.  We  be- 
gin to  think  that  he  has  borne  his  last; 
testimony.  The  last  audible  words  he 
has  spoken  were  something  about  the 
Three  Witnesses  of  the  Book  of  Mor- 
mon, but  we  could  not  understand  what 
it  was."  At  his  funeral  every  respect 
that  could  be  paid  to  him  was  mani- 
fested by  the  people.  In  dressing  him. 
a  Book  of  Mormon  was  put  in  his  right 
hand  and  the  book  of  Doctrine  and 
Covenants  in  his  left  hand.  On  the 
head  board  of  his  grave  was  placed  his 
name,  date  and  place  of  his  birth  and 
death,  with  the  words,  "One  of  the 
witnesses  of  the  Book  of  Mormon."  Also 
their  testimony. 

AVHIT>IF:K,     Christian,     one  of  the 

Eight  Witnesses  to  the  Book  of  Mor- 
mon, was  the  eldest  son  of  Peter  Whit- 
mer,  sen.,  and  Mary  Musselman,  and 
was  born  Jan.  18,  1798,  in  Pennsylvania. 
He  removed  while  quite  young  with  his 
parents  from  Pennsylvania  to  Seneca 
county,  western  Xew  York,  where  ho 
married  Anne  Schott  Feb.  22,  1825,  and 
established  himself  as  a  shoemaker.  He 
was  among  the  number  who  first  em- 
braced the  fullness  of  the  gospel  as  re- 
vealed through  the  youthful  Prophet, 
and  was  baptized  together  with  his  wife 
in  Seneca  lake,  April  11,  1830,  by  Elder 
Oliver  Cowdery.  This  was  only  five 
days  after  the  Church  was  organized. 
As  early  as  June,  1830,  he  held  the  of- 
fice of  Teacher  in  the  Church  and  was 
ordained  an  Elder  in  1831.  In  that  year 
(1S31)  he  removed  with  the  rest  of  the 
Whitmer  family  and  the  Saints  general- 
ly from  New  York  State  to  Ohio,  and 
the  following  year  to  Jackson  county. 
Mo.,  where  he  at  a  council  meeting  held 
Sept.  15,  1832.  was  appointed  to  preside 


over  the  Elders  in  Jackson  county.  In 
a  council  of  High  Priests  held  Aug.  21, 
1833,  he  was  ordained  a  High  Priest 
by  Simeon  Carter.  He  passed  through 
all  the  scenes  of  persecutions  and  mob- 
bings  which  took  place  in  that  part  of 
the  country  until  he,  in  connection  with 
the  rest  of  the  Saints,  was  driven  out 
of  Jackson  county  in  November,  1833. 
He  settled,  temporarily  in  Clay  county, 
where  he  was  chosen  as  one  of  the 
High  Councilors  of  the  Church  in  Mis- 
souri, July  3,  1834.  This  position  he 
occupied  until  his  death,  which  occurred 
in  Clay  county,  Nov.  27,  1835.  For  sev- 
eral years  before  his  demise  he  suffered 
considerably  from  lameness,  having  an 
ugly  sore  upon  the  leg,  which  was  the 
direct  cause  of  his  early  death.  He 
was  faithful  and  true  until  the  last, 
and  always  bore  a  strong  testimony  of 
the  divinity  of  the  Book  of  Mormon.  He 
left  no  children.  After  his  demise  his 
wife  returned  to  her  parents  in  New 
York  State,  where  she  married  again, 
but  was  divorced  from  her  second  hus- 
band. She  died  many  years  ago  in 
Seneca  county,  N.  Y. 

WHITMER,      Jacob,     one     of     the 

Eight  Witnesses  to  the  Book  of  Mor- 
mon, was  the  second  son  of  Peter  Whit- 
mer, sen.,  and  Mary  Musselman,  and 
was  born  in  Pennsylvania  Jan.  27,  1800. 
He  removed  with  his  parents  to  New 
York  State  when  a  boy,  and  married 
Elizabeth  Schott,  Sept.  29,  1825,  with 
whom  he  had  nine  children,  of  whom 
only  two  were  alive  in  the  year  1888. 
Jacob  Whitmer  was  one  of  the 
first  who  became  convinced  that  the 
principles  revealed  by  the  Prophet  Jo- 
seph were  true,  and,  together  with  his 
wife,  he  was  baptized  by  Oliver  Cow- 
dery. in  Seneca  lake,  April  11,  1830.  a 
few  days  after  the  Church  was  organ- 
ized. With  the  rest  of  the  Whitmer 
family  he  removed  to  Ohio  in  1831,  and 
subsequently  settled  in  Jackson  coun- 
ty. Mo.,  :rom  whence  he  was  driven  by 
a  mob  in  1833.,  He  was  also  identified 
with  the  Church  in  Clay  and  Caldwell 
counties.  In  the  latter  county  he  acted 
a  short  time  as  a  temporary  High 
Councilor  and  also  as  a  member  of  the 
building  committee  for  the  erection  of 
the  Lord's  House  at  Far  West.  He 
severed  his  connection  with  the  Church 
in  1838,  after  which  he  settled  near 
Richmond,  Ray  county,  where  he  re- 
mained until  his  death,  which  occurred 


BIOGRAPHICAL    ENCYCLOPEDIA. 


April  21,  1856.  Hs  was  56  years,  2 
monihs  and  26  days  old  at  the  time  of 
his  demise.  He  was  a  shoemaker  by 
trade  and  also  owned  a  little  farm  at 
the  time  of  his  death.  One  of  his  sons, 
David  P.  Whitmer,  was  a  lawyer  of 
considerable  prominence  and  served  one 
or  more  terms  as  mayor  of  Richmond. 
One  of  his  daughters,  Mrs.  Mary  Ann 
Bisbee,  widow  of  the  late  J.  P.  Bisbee, 
lived  in  1888  near  Richmond,  Mo.,  and 
had  been  a  widow  for  a  number  of 
years.  John  C.  T\'hitmer,  his  only  re- 
mainingr  son,  also  lived  about  a  mile 
south  of  Richmond  in  1888.  He  was 
then  the  custodian  of  the  original 
Church  record  which  his  uncle  John 
Whitmer  refused  to  give  up  to  the 
proper  authorities,  and  he  also  presided 
over  the  so-called  "Whitmer  Faction" 
or  the  Church  of  Christ,  who  believe 
in  some  of  the  doctrines  taught  by  the 
Prophet  Joseph  and  reject  others.  John 
C.  Whitmer  testified  to  Elder  Andrew 
Jenson  in  September.  1888.  as  follows: 
"My  father  (Jacob  Whitmer)  was  al- 
ways faithful  and  true  to  his  testimony 
in  regard  to  the  Book  of  Mormon,  and 
confirmed  it  on  his  death-bed."  From 
other  sources  it  is  known  that  Jacob 
Whitmer  ever  remained  firm  and  stead- 
fast to  his  testimony  of  the  divinity 
of  that  sacred  record,  of  which  he  was 
permitted  to  be  so  important  a  witness. 

AVHITMER,  Peter,  Junior,    one    of 

the  Eight  T\"itnesses  to  the  Book  of 
Mormon,  was  the  fifth  son  of  Peter 
Whitmer,  sen.,  and  Mary  Musselman, 
and  was  born  Sept.  27,  1809,  in  Fayette 
Seneca  county,  New  York.  Soon  after 
Joseph's  arrival  at  Payette  from  Penn- 
sylvania in  the  summer  of  1829,  Peter 
became  a  zealous  friend  of  the  Prophet 
^nd  an  able  assistant  in  the  work  of 
God,  and  he  desired  most  earnestly 
that  Joseph  should  inquire  of  the  Lord 
for  him  in  order  that  he  might  know 
his  duties  and  the  Lord's  will  concern- 
ing him.  The  Prophet  did  so  through 
the  Urim  and  Thummim,  and  received 
a  revelation  commanding  Peter  to 
preach  repentance  to  this  generation. 
(Doc.  and  Gov.,  Sec.  16.)  This  was  in 
June,  1829.  About  the  same  time  he 
was  baptized  by  Oliver  Cowdery  in 
Seneca  lake,  being  at  that  time  less 
than  twenty  years  old.  In  Septem- 
ber, 1830,  he  was  called  by  revelation 
(Doc.  and  Gov.,  Sec.  30)  to  preach  the 
gospel,    together   with   Oliver   Cowdery, 


and   in   the   following     month   he     was 
chosen    by    revelation      to     accompany 
Parley   P.   Pratt,   Oliver  Cowdery     and 
Ziba     Peterson     on     a     mission  to  the 
Lamanites.       (Doc.   and   Gov.,   Sec.   32.) 
They  started  for  the  West  soon  after- 
wards,  and   had  an   eventful     journey, 
fraught  with  many  hardships  and  much 
suffering.        In      Kirtland,      Ohio,    they 
raised  up  a  large  branch,  after  which 
they  traveled  nearly  one  thousand  miles 
through  mud  and  snow,  mostly  on  foot, 
to    Jackson     county,      Missouri,    where 
they  arrived  in  the  early  part  of  1831. 
While  Parley  P.  Pratt  and  Oliver  Cow- 
dery commenced  a  mission  among  the 
Lamanites    across    the    borders,      Peter 
Whitmer,  jun.,  and  another  missionary 
companion  found  employment  as  tailors 
in   the   town  of  Independence,   remain- 
ing   there    until    the    arrival    of   Joseph 
Smith   and   a   number   of    the   brethren 
in  July  following.      Subsequently  Peter 
Whitmer,    jun.,    took     an      active    part 
with    the    Saints     in     Jackson    county, 
where  he  was  ordained  a   High   Priest 
Oct.   25,  1831,   by  Oliver  Cowdery.       He 
suffered   together  with   the  rest  of  the 
Saints  during  the  Jackson  county  per- 
secutions in  1833,  and  was  among  those 
who  found  a  temporary  home  in  Clay 
county.       He  took  sick  and   died  on  a 
farm    about    two    miles    from    Liberty, 
Clay    county,    Sept.    22,    1836,    and     was 
buried  by  the  side  of  his  brother  Chris- 
tian,  who  died  about  ten  months  pre- 
viously.      He     had    been     consumptive 
for  a  number  of  years  previous  to  his 
demise.      He  left  a  wife  and  three  chil- 
dren, all  daughters,  one  of  them  being 
born   after     his       death.       One   of     his 
daughters  lived  in  Richmond,  Missouri, 
in  188S,  another  in  Fort  Scott,  Kansas, 
and  the  third  one  in  Moberly,  Randolph 
county,   Missouri.       Like  all  the     other 
witnesses  to  the  Book  of  Mormon,  Pe- 
ter Whitmer,  jun.,  was  true  and  faith* 
ful  to  his  testimony  till  the  last. 

PAGE,  Hiram,  one  of  the  Eight  Wit- 
nesses to  the  Book  of  Mormon,  was 
born  in  the  State  of  Vermont  in  the 
year  1800.  He  commenced  to  study 
medicine  when  quite  young,  and  trav- 
eled considerably  in  the  State  of  New 
York  and  Canada  as  a  physician.  Fin- 
alh^  he  located  in  Seneca  county,  N.  Y., 
where  he  became  acquainted  with  the 
Whitmer  family,  and  finally  married 
Catherine  Whitmer,  a  daughter  of  Pe- 
ter  Whitmer    and     Mary      Musselman, 


278 


LATTER-DAY  SAINT 


Nov.   10,  1825,  with  whom  he  had  nine 
children.       Having   become   a   firm   be- 
liever in  the  fulness    of    the  gospel  as 
revealed   through   the   Prophet   Joseph, 
he  was  baptized  by  Oliver  Cowdery,  in 
Seneca   laJte,   April   11,   1830.       His   wife 
was  baptized  at  the  same  time.      Soon 
afterwards   he   came   in   possession     of 
a  stone   by  which   he  obtained   certain 
revelations  concerning  the  order  of  the 
Church  and  other  matters,  which  were 
entirely  at  variance  with  the  New  Tes- 
tament and  the  revelations  received  by 
Joseph  Smith.  This  happened  at  a  time 
when  Joseph  was  absent,  and  when  he 
heard  of  it,  it  caused  him  much  uneasi- 
ness, as  a  number  of  the  Saints,  includ- 
ing Oliver  Cowdery  and   the   Whitmer 
family,  believed  in  the  things  revealed 
by  Hiiam  Page.     At  a  conference  held 
in  September,  1830,  when  Joseph  presid- 
ed, this  matter  was  given  close  atten- 
tion,  and   after  considerable  investiga- 
tion   Hiiam    Page,    as   well   as    all     the 
other   members   who   were   present,   re- 
nounced everything  connected  with  the 
stone.      The  Lord  also  said  in  a  revela- 
tion that  the  things  which  Hiram  Page 
had    written    from    the    stone   were   not 
from  him.     (Doc.  and  Cov.,  Sec.  28.)    In 
isai   Hi:am  Page  removed  to  Kirtland. 
Ohio,   where  he  remained  until  the  fol- 
lowing year,  when  he  settled  in  Jackson 
county.  Missouri,  near  the  town  of  In- 
depend'-nce.       During   the   persecutions 
of  the  Saints  in  Jackson  county  in  1833. 
he    was    selected,    together   with    three 
■others,   to  go   to   Lexington   to  see   the 
•circuit  judge  and  obtain  a  peace  war- 
rant.      Unon    their     affidavits.      Judge 
John    F.    Ryland    issued  writs  against 
some  of  the  ringleaders  of  the  mob,  to 
be  placed  in  the  hands  of  the  Jackson 
county    .sheriff,    but    these    writs   never 
arromplished  any  good.     After  the  ex- 
pulsion from  Jackson  county.  Bro.  Page 
took  an  active  part  with  the  Saints  in 
Clay  countv   and  in  1836  became  one  of 
the    founders    of    Far     West,    Caldwell 
county.      In  1838  he  severed  his  connec- 
tion with   the  Saint.s  and  subsequently 
removed   to  Ray  county,   where  he  re- 
mained   until     the    end    of  his  earthly 
career.     He   died   Aug.   12.    18.52.   on   his 
farm,  near  the  present  site  of  Exelsior 
Springs,  about  fourteen  miles  northwest 
of    Richmond,    Ray    county.    Mo.,      and 
near   the    boundary    line    between    Ray 
and  Clay  counties.       Of  his   nine  chil- 
dren only  four  were  alive  in  1888.     His 
eldest  living  son.   Philander  Page,     re- 


si  :!ed  at  that  time  two  and  a  half  miles 
south  of  Richmond.  Another  son  lived 
near  by,  and  a  daughter  resided  in 
Carroll  county,  Missouri.  Philander 
Page  testified  to  Elder  Andrew  Jenson 
in  September,  18S8  ,as  follows:  "I  knew 
my  father  to  be  true  and  faithful  to 
his  testimony  of  the  divinity  of  the 
Rook  of  Mormon  until  .the  very  last. 
Whenever  he  had  an  opportunity  to 
bear  his  testimony  to  this  effect,  he 
would  always  do  so,  and  seemed  to  re- 
joice exceedingly  in  having  been  privi- 
leged to  see  the  plates  and  thus  become 
one  of  the  Eight  Witnesses.  I  can 
also  testify  that  Jacob,  John  and  David 
Whitmer  and  Oliver  Cowdery  died  in 
full  faith  in  the  divinity  of  the  Book  of 
Mormon.  I  was  with  all  these  wit- 
nesses on  their  deathbeds  and  heard 
each  of  them  bear  his  last  testi- 
mony." John  C.  Whitmer,  a  nephew 
of  Hiram  Page  by  marriage,  testified 
in  the  presence  of  Elder  Jenson:  "I 
was  closely  connected  with  Hiram 
Page  in  business  transactions  and  other 
matters,  he  being  married  to  my  aunt. 
I  knew  him  at  all  times  and  under  all 
circumstances  to  be  true  to  his  testimo- 
ny concerning  the  divinity  of  the  Book 
of  Mormon." 

SMITH,    Samuel    Harrison,    one  of 

the  Eight  "^"itnesses  to  the  Book  of 
Mormon,  was  the  fourth  son  of  Joseph 
Fmith  and  Lucy  Mack,  and  was  born 
March  13.,  1808^  in  the  town  of  Tun- 
bridge,  Orange  county,  Vermont.  In 
his  early  life  he  assisted  his  father 
in  farming.  He  possessed  a  religious 
turn  of  mind,  and  at  an  early  age 
joined  the  Presbyterian  church, to  which 
.'•ect  he  belonged  until  he  visited  his 
brother  Joseph  in  Pennsylvania  in  May, 
1829,  when  Joseph  informed  him  that 
the  Lord  was  about  to  commence  His 
^atter-day  work.  He  also  showed  him 
that  part  of  the  Book  of  Mormon  which 
he  had  translated,  and  labored  to  per- 
suade him  concerning  the  gospel  of  Je- 
sus Christ,  which  was  about  to  be  re- 
vealed in  its  fulness.  Samuel  was  not. 
however,  very  easily  persuaded  of  these 
things,  but  after  much  inquiry  and  ex- 
planation he  retired  and  prayed  that  he 
might  obtain  from  the  Lord  wisdom  to 
enable  him  to  judge  for  himself;  the 
result  was.  that  he  obtained  revelation 
for  himself  sufficient  to  convince  him  of 
the  truth  of  the  testimony  of  his 
brother  Joseph.       May  15,  1829,     havinjr 


BIOGRAPHICAL    ENCYCLOPEDIA. 


279 


been  commanded  of  the  Lord,  Joseph 
Smith  and  Oliver  Cowdery  were  bap- 
tized, and  as  they  were  returning  from 
the  water  to  the  house,  they  overheard 
Samuel  engaged  In  secret  prayer.  Jo- 
seph said  that  he  considered  that  a 
sufficient  testimony  of  his  being  a  fit 
subject  for  baptism;  and  as  they  had 
now  received  authority  to  baptize,  they 
spoke  to  Samuel  upon  the  subject,  and 
he  went  straightway  to  the  water  with 
them,  and  was  baptized  by  Oliver  Cow- 
dery, he  being  the  third  person  baptized 
into  the  Church  of  Jesus  Christ  in  the 
last  dispensation.  He  was  present  at 
the  organization  of  the  Church,  April  6, 
1830,  and  was  one  of  the  six  who  at 
that  time  constituted  the  members  of 
the  same.  He  was  ordained  to  the 
Priesthood  on  that  day.  On  the  30th 
of  June  following  he  took  some  copies 
of  the  Book  of  Mormon  and 
started  out  on  his  mission,  to 
which  he  had  been  set  apart  by  his 
brother  Joseph  and  on  traveling  twen- 
ty-five miles,  which  was  his  first  day's 
journey,  he  stopped  at  a  number  of 
places  in  order  to  sell  his  books,  but 
was  turned  out  of  doors  as  soon  as  he 
declared  his  principles.  When  evening 
came  on,  he  was  faint  and  almost  dis- 
couraged, but  coming  to  an  inn,  which 
was  surrounded  with  every  appearance 
of  plenty,  he  called  to  see  if  the  land- 
lord would  buy  one  of  his  books.  On 
going  in,  Samuel  inquired  of  him,  if  he 
did  not  wish  to  purchase  a  history  of 
the  origin  of  the  Indians.  "I  do  not 
know,"  replied  the  host,  "how  did  you 
get  hold  of  it?"  "It  was  translated,  ' 
rejoined  Samuel,  "by  my  brother  from 
some  gold  plates  that  he  found  buried 

in  the  earth. You  d— d  liar,"   cried 

the  landlord,  "get  out  of  my  house— 
you  shan't  stay  one  minute  with  your 
books."  Samuel  was  sick  at  heart,  for 
this  was  the  fifth  time  he  had  been 
turned  out  of  doors  that  day.  He  left 
the  house,  and  traveled  a  short  dis- 
tance, and  washed  his  feet  in  a  small 
brook,  as  a  testimony  against  the 
man.  He  then  proceeded  five  miles 
further  on  his  journey,  and  seeing  an 
apple  tree  a  short  distance  from  the 
road,  he  concluded  to  pass  the  night 
under  it;  and  here  he  lay  all  night 
upon  the  cold,  damp  ground.  In  the 
morning  he  arose  from  his  comfortless 
bed,  and  observing  a  small  cottage  at 
no  great  distance,  he  drew  near,  hop- 
ing to   get  a  little   refreshment.       The 


only  inmate  was  a  widow  who  seemed 
very    poor.       He    asked    her   for    food, 
relating  the  story  of  his  former  treat- 
ment. She  prepared  him  some  victuals, 
and  after  eating,   he  explained   to   her 
the    history   of    the    Book   of   Mormon. 
She   listened   attentively,   and   believed 
all    that   he    told   her,      but,    in    conse- 
quence of  her  poverty,  she  was  unable 
to  purchase  one  of  the  books.      He  pre- 
sented her  with  one,  and  proceeded  to 
Bloomington,    which    was    eight    miles 
further.      Here  he  stopped  at  the  house 
of    one   John   P.    Greene,    who    was     a 
Methodist   preacher,    and   was   at   that 
time   about   starting     on     a   preaching 
mission.      He,   like  the  others,   did  not 
wish  to  make  a  purchase  of  what  he 
considered   at  that   time   to  be  a  non- 
sensical  fable;    however,   he   said   that 
he    would    take    a    subscription    paper, 
and  if  he  found  any  one  on  his  route 
who    was    disposed      to      purchase,    he 
would  take  his  name,  and  in  two  weeks, 
Samuel  might  call  again,  and  he  would 
let  him   know   what  the   prospect  was 
of  selling.      After  making  this  arrange- 
ment,   Samuel    left   one    of   his     books 
with  him  and  returned  home.     At  the 
time   appointed,   Samuel   started  again 
for  the  Rev.   John  P.   Greene's,   in  or- 
der   to    learn    the    success    which    this 
gentleman    had    met    with,    in    finding 
sale   for   the   Book   of   Mormon.       This 
time   his    father    and     mother    accom- 
panied him,  and  it  was  their  intention 
to  have  passed  near  the  tavern,  where 
Samuel   was    so   abusively     treated     a 
fortnight  previous,  but  just  before  they 
came  to  the  house,  a  sign  of  smallpox 
intercepted  them.      They  turne-d  aside, 
and    meeting    a    citizen    of    the    place, 
they   inquired   of   him   to   what   extent 
this   disease  prevailed.       He  answered, 
that  the  tavern-keeper  and  two  of  his 
family  had  died  with  it  not  long  since, 
but  he  did  not  know  that  any  one  else 
had  caught  the  distemper,  and  that  it 
was  brought  into  the  neighborhood  by 
a   traveler  who   stopped  at  the   tavern 
over    night.        Samuel    performed    sev- 
eral short  missions  with  the  books,  and 
gave  the  following  account  of  his  third 
mission  to  Livonia:       "When  I  arrived 
at  Mr.   Greene's,  Mrs.  Greene  informed 
me  that  her  husband  was  absent  from 
home,    that    there   was    no    prospect    of 
selling  my   books,     and     even   the  one 
which  I   had  left  with   them,   she     ex- 
pected I  would  have  to  take  away,  as 
Mr.   Greene  had  no  disposition  to  pur- 


280 


LATTER-DAY    SAINT 


chase  it,  although  she  had  read  it  her- 
self and  was  much  pleased  with  it 
I  then  talked  with  her  a  short  time, 
and  binding  my  knapsack  upon  my 
shoulders,  rose  to  depart;  but  as  I 
bade  her  farewell,  it  was  impressed 
upon  my  mind  to  leave  the  book  with 
her.  I  made  her  a  present  of  it,  and 
told  her  that  the  Spirit  forbade  my 
taking  it  away.  She  burst  into  tears, 
and  requested  me  to  pray  with  her.  I 
did  so,  and  afterwards  explained  to  her 
the  most  profitable  manner  of  reading 
the  book  which  I  had  left  with  her: 
which  was,  to  ask  God  when  she  read 
it  for  a  testimony  of  the  truth  of  what 
she  had  read,  and  she  would  receive 
the  Spirit  of  God,  which  would  en- 
able her  to  discern  the  things  of  God. 
I  then  left  her  and  returned  home."  In 
December,  1830,  Samuel  was  sent  to 
preach  in  Kirtland,  Ohio,  and  the  sur- 
rounding country.  In  the  beginning  of 
1831,  Joseph,  the  Prophet,  went  to 
Kirtland  to  preside,  accompanied  by 
Hyrum  and  many  of  the  Saints,  and 
soon  after  Joseph  Smith  senior's  fami- 
ly, and  the  Saints  who  were  located  in 
Fayette,  near  Waterloo,  also  moved  to 
Kirtland.  At  a  conference  held  at 
Kirtland  June  3,  1831,  Samuel  was 
ordained  a  High  Priest  under  the  hands 
of  Lyman  Wight.  In  June,  1831,  Sam- 
uel was  called  by  revelation  to  go  to 
Missouri  on  a  mission,  in  company  with 
Reynolds  Gaboon.  They  immediately 
started,  and  while  on  their  way  called 
upon  William  E.  McLellin,and  preached 
the  gospel  to  him  and  a  large  assem- 
bly, in  a  room  which  he  procured.  Wil- 
liam being  troubled  about  the  things 
he  heard,  closed  up  his  business  and 
proceeded  after  the  brethren  to  Mis- 
souri, where  he  was  baptized  before 
they  arrived.  This  was  the  McLellin 
who  afterwards  became  one  of  the 
Twelve  Apostles.  On  their  route  to 
Mis.souri  they  preached  the  gospel,  trav- 
eling without  purse  or  scrip,  and  en- 
during much  for  the  want  of  food  and 
rest.  When  they  started  for  Mis- 
souri, about  fifty  brethren  set  out  for 
the  same  place  and  when  they  all  ar- 
rived they  met  on  the  spot  for  the  Tem- 
ple in  Jackson  county,  and  dedicated 
the  ground  unto  God.  Brothers  Smith 
and  Cahoon  spent  several  days  in  Jack- 
son county,  attended  several  meetings 
and  were  with  Joseph  when  he  received 
several  revelations.  While  in  Mis- 
souri they  were  required  to  remain  to- 


gether on  their  return  mission  until 
they  reached  home,  which  was  in 
September  following.  Soon  after  their 
arrival  in  Kirtland,  they  took  a  mis- 
sion into  the  southern  townships  and 
counties  of  Ohio.  Brother  Cahoon  re- 
turned after  laboring  about  six  weeks, 
but  Samuel  continued  preaching 
through  the  winter,  strengthening  the 
branches  and  comforting  the  Saints.  In 
a  revelation  given  in  January,  1832,  Or- 
son Hyde  and  Samuel  H.  Smith  were 
called  to  go  on  a  mission  to  the  East- 
ern country;  accordingly  they  started 
in  March,  and  traveled  and  pieached 
the  gospel  through  the  States  of  Ohio, 
New  York,  Pennsylvania,  Connecticut, 
Rhode  Island,  Massuchusetts  and 
Maine;  they  baptized  several  in  Spaf- 
ford,  N.  Y.,  in  Boston  and  Lynne,  Mass., 
in  Providence,  R.  I.,  and  in  Saco, 
Maine,  preaching  much  from  house  to 
house,  as  well  as  in  public  congrega- 
tions, and  returning  to  Kirtland  in  No- 
vember or  December.  During  the  year 
1833,  Samuel  preached  among  the 
churches  as  he  had  opportunity,  and 
spent  a  good  portion  of  his  time  labor- 
ing with  his  hands.  Feb.  17,  1834,  he 
was  ordained  and  set  apart  as  one  of 
the  High  Council  in  Kirtland,  in  which 
office  he  officiated  until  he  went  to  Mis- 
souri in  1838.  August  13,  1834,  he  mar- 
ried Mary  Bailey,  who  was  born  in 
Bedford,  Hillsborough  county,  New 
Hampshire,  Dec.  20,1808.  Sept.  16,  lS35,he 
was  appointed,  in  company  with  David 
Whitmer,  as  a  committee  and  general 
agent  to  act  in  the  name  of,  and  for 
the  Literary  Firm.  In  the  winter  of 
1835-36  he  chopped  cord  wood  for  Lo- 
renzo D.  Young.  In  1838  he  traveled 
in  company  with  his  brother  Joseph 
from  Kirtland  to  Missouri.  He  passed 
through  the  mobbings  of  that  year,  in 
Far  West  and  Adam-ondi-Ahman,  Mis- 
souri, and  his  family  suffered  nigh  unio 
death  from  exposure,  as  they  were 
driven  about  by  the  mob.  He  was  in 
the  Crooked  river  battle,  and  immedi- 
ately after,  by  the  counsel  of  Pres. 
Brigham  Young,  together  with  Brothers 
Charles  C.  Rich,  Benjamin  L.  Clapp, 
Lorenzo  D.  Y'oung  and  about  twenty 
others,  they  fled  for  Illinois  by  the  wil- 
derness through  the  north  part  of 
Missouri,  and  the  southern  part  of 
Iowa.  Messengers  overtook  them  and 
informed  them  that  General  Clark  had 
sent  a  company  of  fifty  well  armed 
men  to  follow  them,  with  strict  orders 


BIOGRAPHICAL    ENCYCLOPEDIA. 


281 


not   to  return    until    they   had   brought 
back  the  company  either  dead  or  alive. 
When  this  word  came  a  halt  was  called 
and    Samuel    asked    what    they    should 
do   in   case   the   enemy   overtook   them; 
after  a  few  moments'  consultation  the 
whole    company    covenanted    with    up- 
lifted hands  to  heaven  that  if  they  were 
overtaken    they    would    fight    till    they 
died,    and    not   a   man    would    fall    into 
the  hands  of  the  enemy  alive.  They  then 
traveled   on   ten   miles   and   camped   on 
the  edg-e  of  some  timber  on  the  north 
side  of  a  four  mile  prairie,  and     they 
afterwards  learned   that  their   enemies 
camped  on  the  south  edge  of  the  same 
prairie,  and  would  have  overtaken  them 
next   day,    had   not     the     Lord   sent   a 
heavy    snow    storm    during    the    night; 
and    when    the    brethren    arose    in    the 
morning,  Phineas  H.  Young  remarked, 
that  that  snow  storm  was  their  salva- 
tion.     The  air  was  so  full  of  snow  that 
they  could   hardly   find  their  horses   to 
saddle    them,    but    they    soon    mounted 
them    and    continued    their  journey    as 
fast   as    they    could.       The    storm    was 
from  the  north,   and   in  their  faces;    it 
filled  their  tracks  in  a  few  moments,  so 
that  Clark's  men  could  not  follow.     It 
was  reported  that  this  company  of  men 
on    their    return    informed    the    general 
that  they  could  not  overtake   the  d— d 
Mormons,   for  they  were  stopped  by  a 
snow  storm.      After  they  had  got  some 
distance  on  their  journey,  the  company 
divided    into      three    parts,      the    three 
brethren  named  fell  in     company  with 
Samuel;   their  provisions  gave  out,  and 
after    spending      several    days    without 
food,    except    eating    lynne     buds     and 
slippery   elm    bark,    they    camped   upon 
a  small  stream,  and  the  company,  num- 
bering  eight,    held   a   council,    and    ap- 
pointed   Samuel    president,      that    they 
might  receive  the  world  of  the  Lord  in 
relation  to  the  situation  of  Joseph  the 
Prophet  and  those  that  were  with  him, 
also   in   relation   to   their  families     and 
what   they  weie   to  do   to  obtain   food; 
they    all    knelt    down    in    a    circle,    and 
each  one  prayed;  then  the  Spirit  of  the 
Lord  came  upon  Samuel, and  being  filled 
with  the  Holy  Ghost,  he  arose  and  said: 
"Thus  saith  the  Lord,  my  servant  Jo- 
seph   is    not    injured,    nor    any    of    his 
brethren   that   are   with  him,   but  they 
will  all   be   delivered  out  of   the  hands 
of  their  enemies;   your  families  are  all 
well,  but  anxious  about  you.      Let  your 
hearts    be    comforted,    for    I    the    Lord 


will   provide  food   for  you  on   the  mor- 
row."     They    went    to    bed    with     glad 
hearts,   and   arose   in   the  morning  and 
prayed  again  and  went  out  two  by  two 
to  hunt  for  food.       Brother  Clapp  saw 
several  squirrels  and  shot  at  them,  but 
could  not  hit  them;    they  were  only  to 
stay  one  hour;  at  the  end  of  that  time 
they    all    returned,    except    Charles     C. 
Rich  and  Samuel.      Feeling  very  faint, 
one  of  the  brethren  proposed  killing  a 
horse.       Brother  Clapp  said  that  when 
Brothers    Rich     and     Samuel    returned 
they  would  have  food,  as  he  never  knew 
the  Lord   to  give  a  false  revelation   to 
his     servants;     and     while     conversing 
upon  the     matter,     the     brethren  made 
their  appearance  with  two  silk     hand- 
kerchiefs   tied    up    full    of    bread      and 
dried    meat.       Samuel's    mind    was    led 
in  a  certain  direction,  and  follo\\ing  it 
they   came    to   an   Indian    camp;      they 
made   known   to   the   Indians  by   signs, 
that  they  were  hungry;    upon  this  the 
squaw   with  all  possible    speed     baked 
them    some    cakes,    and    gave    each    of 
them  two,   sending  two  to  each  of  the 
six   brethren   in   camp,    giving   them   to 
understand  that  she  would  be  glad   to 
send  more,  but  she  had  but  little  flour, 
and  her  papooses   (children)   would   be 
hungry.       When   they  arrived  in  camp 
all   felt   to  rejoice;    they   formed   a  cir- 
cle around  the  food,  and  asked  a  bless- 
ing upon  it.      The  bread  was  very  good, 
being  shortened   «'ith  racoon's  oil.     Af- 
ter eating  they  started  upon  their  jour- 
ney and  obtained  food  sufllicient,  so  that 
none      perished.        Samuel      arrived    in 
Quincy,   and   was   there     to     assist  his 
father    and    mother    over    the    river   on 
their    arrival,    and    hired    a    house    for 
them,  into  which  he  also  assisted  four 
other   families   of   the    Saints;    and   ac- 
cording to  the  word  of  the   Lord   unto 
him,  his  brothers,   Joseph  and  Hyrum, 
were    delivered,    and      they    arrived    in 
Quincy   in   April,   1S39.       He   moved,    in 
company    with    Don    Carlos,    on    to    a 
farm  which  he  rented,    near     Macomb, 
McDonough  countv   HI.,  where  he  spent 
the   season   farming.       Elders     Wilford 
Woodruff  and  John  Taylor  called  upon 
them  as  they  went  on  their  missions  to 
England,  and  held  a  meeting  with  the 
Saints  in  that  place  (Oct.  11,  1S39).     Don 
Carlos  preached    and  was  followed   by 
Samuel,  who  enjoyed  much  of  the  Holy 
Spirit   and   bore  a   strong  testimony   to 
the  truth  of  the   work  of  God;    he   as- 
sisted the  brethi-en  upon  their  journey. 


282 


Latter-day  saint 


In  September,  1840,  Samuel  received  the 
following^  blessing  from  under  the 
hands  of  his  father,  Joseph  Smith,  sen., 
upon  his  dying  bed:  "Samuel,  you 
have  been  a  faithful  and  obedient  son. 
r.\'  your  faithfulness  you  have  brought 
many  into  the  Church.  The  Lord  has 
seen  your  diligence, and  you  are  blessed, 
in  that  he  has  never  chastised  you,  but 
has  called  you  home  to  rest;  and  there 
is  a  crown  laid  up  for  you  which  shall 
grow  brighter  and  brighter  unto  the 
perfect  day.  TVTien  the  Lord  called 
vou.  he  said,  'Samuel,  I  have  seen  thy 
sufferings,  have  heard  thy  cries,  and 
behalf]  thy  faithfulness;  thy  skirts  are 
clear  from  the  blood  of  this  generation. 
Because  of  these  things,  I  seal  upon 
your  head  all  the  blessings  which  I 
have  heretofore  pronounced  upon  you: 
and  this  my  dying  blessing  I  now  seal 
upon  you.  Even  so:  Amen."  Samuel's 
wife  Mary  died  Jan.  25,  1841,  after 
bearing  to  him  four  children,  namely, 
Susannah  B.,  Mary  B.,  Samuel  Harri- 
son B.  and  Lucy  B.  In  April,  1841,  he 
was  sent  on  a  mission  to  preach  the 
gospel  In  Scott  and  adjoining  counties, 
Illinois.  May  3,  1841,  he  married  Le- 
vira  Clark,  daughter  of  Gardner  and 
Delecta  Clark,  born  In  Livonia,  Living- 
ston county.  New  York,  July  30,  1815. 
She  bore  to  him  three  daughters,  viz., 
Levira  A.  C,  Louisa  C.  and  Lucy  J.  C. 
He  preached  during  the  summer  and 
fall  of  1841,  his  wife  remaining  with  his 
father-in-law.  In  the  month  of  No- 
vember he  returned  to  Nauvoo,  taking 
his  family  with  him.  Here  he  re- 
mained during  the  winter,  and  also  the 
summer  of  1842,  during  which  time  he 
worked  mostly  for  Joseph,  and  har- 
vested in  the  country.  In  the  fall  of 
1842  he  removed  to  his  brother  Wil- 
liam's tavern  at  Plymouth.  In  th? 
summer  of  1843  he  was  often  at  Nau- 
voo. In  the  fall  he  chopped  wood,  and 
prepared  his  farm  by  making  fences 
and  clearing  off  the  timber,  preaching 
the  gospel  in  the  vicinity  as  he  had  the 
opportunity.  In  the  spring  of  1844 
he  cultivated  his  farm,  and  upon  hear- 
ing of  the  imprisonment  of  his  broth- 
ers in  Carthage  jail,  he  repaired  thither 
on  horseback  to  see  them.  While  on 
the  way  he  was  pursued  by  the  mob- 
ocrats;  but  in  consequence  of  the 
fleetness  of  his  horse,  he  was  enabled 
to  reach  Carthage  In  safety,  from 
whence  he  went  to  Nauvoo  in  company 
with  the  bodies  of  his  martyred  broth- 


ers, Joseph  and  Hyrum.  He  was  soon 
after  taken  sick  of  billious  fever,  and 
died  July  30,  1844,  aged  36  years.  The 
following  extract  is  from  his  obituary 
notice,  published  in  the  "Times  and 
Seasons,"  "The  exit  of  this  worthy 
man,  so  soon  after  the  horrible  butch- 
ery of  his  brothers,  Joseph  and  Hyrum, 
in  Carthage  jail,  is  a  matter  of  deep 
solemnity  to  the  family,  as  well  as  a 
remediless  loss  to  all.  If  ever  there  lived 
a  good  man  upon  the  earth,  Samuel  H. 
Smith  was  that  person.  His  labors  ia 
the  Church  from  first  to  last,  carrying 
glad  tidings  to  the  eastern  cities,  and 
finaly  his  steadfastness  as  one  of  the 
Witnesses  to  the  Book  of  Mormon,  and 
many  saintly  traits  of  virtue,  knowl- 
edge, temperance,  patience,  godliness, 
brotherly  kindness  and  charity,  shall  be 
given  of  him  hereafter,  as  a  man  of 
God." 

WHITMER,  Peter,  one  of  the  first 
members  of  the  Church,  was  born  April 
14,  1773,  In  Pennsylvania.  He  married 
Mary  Musselm.an,  with  whom  he  had 
eight  children,  namely:  Christian,  born 
Jan.  18,  1798;  Jacob,  born  Jan.  27,  1800; 
John,  born  Aug.  27,  1802;  David,  born 
Jan.  7,  1805;  Catherine  (wife  of  Hiram 
Page),  born  April  22,  1807;  Peter,  born 
Sept.  27,  1809;  Nancy,  born  Dec.  24,  1812 
(she  died  April  19,  1813);  and  Elizabeth 
Ann  (wife  of  Oliver  Cowdery),  born 
Jan.  22,  1815.  The  Elder  Peter  Whit- 
mer  was  a  hard-working,  God-fearing 
man,  a  strict  Presbyterian,  and  brought 
his  children  up  with  rigid  sectarian 
discipline.  In  the  early  part  of  last 
century  he  removed  with  his  family 
from  Pennsylvania  to  Western  New 
York,  and  settled  on  a  farm  in  Fayette 
township,  Seneca  county,  about  three 
miles  south  of  Waterloo.  There  he 
built  a  one-and-a-ahalf-story  log  house, 
the  one  in  which  the  Church  was  or- 
ganized April  6,  1830,  and  where  Joseph 
Smith  received  a  number  of  important 
revelations.  The  house  was  torn  down 
many  years  ago,  but  when  Elder  An- 
drew Jenson  and  his  companions  vis- 
ited the  place  in  September,  1888,  they 
found  several  of  the  logs  which  once 
constituted  a  part  of  the  buildinjr  lying 
in  a  ditch  near  by;  the  old  family  well 
was  also  In  existence  at  that  time.  Pe- 
ter Whltmer  and  his  wife  were  baptized 
by  Oliver  Cowdery  in  Seneca  lake,  April 
18,  1830.  The  folowing  year  the  family 
removed  to  Klrtland,  Ohio,  and  in  1832 


BIOGRAPHICAL    ENCYCLOPEDIA. 


283 


to  Jackson  county,  Missouri,  where  they 
subsequently  suffered  during  the  perse- 
cutions. They  were  also  identified  with 
the  Church  in  Clay  and  Caldwell  coun- 
ties, but  in  1838  nearly  the  entire  Whit- 
mer  family  turned  away  from  the 
Prophet  Joseph,  and  never  afterwards 
became  identified  with  the  Church.  Pe- 
ter Whitmer,  sen.,  died  in  Richmond, 
Ray  county.  Missouri,  Aug.  12,  1854, 
and  his  wife  died  in  January,  1856.  Their 
earthly  remains  rest  on  the  old  Rich- 
mond graveyard,  side  by  side  of  their 
son  Jacob  (one  of  the  Eight  Witnesses) 
and  their  son-in-law,  Oliver  Cowdery. 
Next  to  the  Smith  family  the  Whitmers 
are  prominently  connected  with  the  ear- 
ly history  of  the  Church.  Of  the  Three 
Witnesses,  one  (David)  was  a  Whit- 
mer, and  another  (Cowdery)  afterwards 
married  one  of  the  daughters  of  the 
senior  Peter  Whitmer.  Of  the  Eight 
Witnesses,  four  were  Whitmers,  and 
the  fifth  (Hiram  Page)  married  into  the 
Whitmir  family. 

WHITMER,  Mary   ^lus.selinan,  the 

only  woman  who  saw  the  plates  of  the 
Book  of  Mormon,  was  born  Aug.  27,  1778, 
and  became  the  wife  of  Peter  Whitmer. 
Together  with  her  husband  she  was 
baptized  by  Oliver  Cowdery  in  Seneca 
lake,  April  18.  1830,  Among  the  early 
members  of  the  Church  she  was  famili- 
arly known  as  Mother  Whitmer,  she  be- 
ing the  wife  of  Peter  Whitmer,  sen., 
and  mother  of  five  of  the  witnesses  to 
the  Book  of  Mormon.  Her  son,  David 
Whitmer.  before  his  death,  testified  on 
several  occasions  that  his  mother  had 
seen  the  plates, and  when  Elders  Edward 
Stevenson  and  Andrew  Jenson  visited 
Richmond,  MiS'souri,  in  ISSS,  John  C. 
Whitmer,  a  grandson  of  the  lady  in 
ciuestion,  testified  in  the  following  lan- 
guage: "I  have  heard  my  grand- 
mother (Mary  Musselman  Whitmer) 
sav  on  several  occasions  that  she  was 
shown  the  plates  of  the  Book  of  Mor- 
mon by  a  holy  angel,  whom  she  always 
called  Brother  Nephi.  (She  undoubted- 
ly refers  to  Moroni,  the  angel  who  had 
the  plates  in  charge.)  It  was  at  th? 
time,  she  said,  when  the  translation 
was  going  on  at  the  house  of  the  ei- 
der Peter  Whitmer,  her  husband.  Jo- 
seph Smith  with  his  wife  and  Oliver 
Cowdery.  whom  David  Whitmer  a  short 
time  previous  had  brought  up  from 
Harmony,  Pennsylvania, were  all  board- 
ing with  the  Whitmers,  and  my  grand- 


mother in  having  so  many  extra  per- 
sons to  care  for,  besides  her  own  large 
household,  was  often  overloaded  with 
work  to  such  an  extent  that  she  felt  it 
to  be  quite  a  burden.  One  evening.when 
(after  having  done  her  usual  day's  work 
in  the  house)  she  went  to  the  barn  to 
milk  the  cows,  she  met  a  stranger  car- 
rying something  on  his  back  that  looked 
like  a  knapsack.  At  first  she  was  a 
little  afraid  of  him,  but  when  he  spoke 
to  her  in  a  kind,  friendly  tone  and  be- 
gan to  explain  to  her  the  nature  of 
the  work  which  was  going  on  in  her 
house,  she  was  filled  with  unexpressi- 
ble  joy  and  satisfaction.  He  then  un- 
tied his  knapsack  and  showed  her  a 
bundle  of  plates,  which  in  size  and  ap- 
pearance corresponded  with  the  descrip- 
tion  subsequently  given  by  the  wit- 
nesses to  the  Book  of  Mormon.  This 
strange  person  turned  the  leaves  of  the 
book  of  plates  over,  leaf  after  leaf,  and 
aLso  showed  her  the  engravings  upon 
them;  after  which  he  told  her  to  be 
patient  and  faithful  in  bearing  her  bur- 
den a  little  longer,  promising  that  if  she 
would  do  so,  she  should  be  blessed;  and 
her  reward  would  be  sure,  if  she  proved 
faithful  to  the  end.  The  personage  then 
suddenly  vanished  with  the  plates,  and 
where  be  went,  she  could  not  tell.  From 
that  moment  my  grandmother  was  en- 
abled to  perform  her  household  duties 
with  comparative  ease,  and  she  felt  no 
more  inclination  to  murmur  because  hei 
lot  was  hard.  I  knew  my  grandmother 
to  be  a  good,  noble  and  truthful  woman, 
and  I  have  not  the  least  doubt  of  her 
statement  in  regard  to  seeing  the  plates 
being  strictly  true.  She  was  a  strong 
believer  in  the  Book  of  Mormon  until 
the  day  of  her  death."  Mother  Whit- 
mer died  in  Richmond,  Ray  county, 
Missouri,  in  January,  1856.  (See  also 
sketch  of  David  Whitmer  and  Peter 
Whitmer;  "Historical  Record,"  Vol.  7, 
p.  621;  "Juvenile  Instructor,"  Vol  24 
p.  22.) 

3IARK.S.  AVilliaiii,  president  of  the 
Nauvoo  Stake  of  Zion  from  1839  to  1844. 
was  born  Nov.  15,  1792,  in  Rutland. Rut- 
land county.  Vermont.  His  name  oc- 
curs for  the  first  time  in  the  history  of 
Joseph  Smith  under  date  of  May,  1837, 
when  "the  'Messenger  and  Advocate 
office  and  contents  were  transferred  to 
William  Marks,  of  Portage,  Allegany 
county.  New  York;  and  Smith  and  Rig- 
don   continued   the   office,    by   power   of 


284 


LATTER-DAY    SAINT 


attorney  from  said  Marks."  At  a  con- 
ference held  at  KIrtland.  Ohio.  Sept.  3, 

1837,  Wm.  Marks  was  chosen  as  a  mem- 
ber of  the  High  Council  at  that  place. 
and  on  the  17th  of  the  same  nnonth  he 
was  "elected  agent"  to  Bishop  Newel 
K.  Whitney.      Under  date  of  March  2?. 

1838,  the   Prophet   Joseph   records   that 
he  saw  Bro.  Marks  in  a  vision  while  on 
the  road,  and  that  he  was  closely  pur- 
sued  by   an   innumerable   concourse   of 
enemies,   who   pressed  upon   him   hard; 
and  when   they  were  about  to  devour 
him.  and  had  seemingly  obtained  some 
degree  of  advantage  over  him,  "a,  char- 
iot of  fire  came, and  near  the  place, even 
the   angel   of   the   Lord,    put   forth   his 
hand   upon   Bro.    Marks  and   said   unto 
him:    "Thou    art   my     son,    come    here." 
And  immediately  he  was  caught  up  in 
the  chariot  and  rode  away  triumphant- 
ly out  of  their  midst.       And  again  the 
Lord   said,    'I   will   raise   thee  up  for  a 
blessing   unto     many   people.'  "       In   a 
revelation   given   through   the   Prophet 
Joseph,  Wm.  Marks  was  commanded  to 
settle     up     his     business     in     Kirtland 
speedily     and      remove     to     Missouri," 
where  he  should  reside  over  the  Saints 
in  Far  West.       (Doc.  and   Gov.,  117:    1, 
10.)      He  obeyed  this  command,  but  be- 
fore   he    could    identify    himself      with 
the  Saints  in  Missouri,  these  were  ex- 
pelled   from    that   State;    and   we   next 
hear    of    Wm.    Marks      in    Quincy,    111., 
where  he  sat  in  council  with  his  breth- 
ren.     At  a  conference  held  at  Quincy, 
May  6,  1839,  he  was  appointed  to  pre- 
side   over    the    Church    at    Commerce, 
111.,  where  the  Saints  were  then  locat- 
ing: and  at  the  general  conference  held 
at  Commerce.  Oct.   5,   1839,   he  was  ap- 
pointed   to   preside   over    the    Stake   of 
Zion.    which    was    then    organized      at 
Commerce   (afterwards   Nauvoo).     This 
high  and  responsible  position  he  occu- 
pied till  October,  1844,      W^en  the  first 
election  of  municipal  officers  took  place 
in  Nauvoo.  Feb.  1,  1841,  Wm.  Marks  was 
elected  alderman.       Two  days  later  he 
was  chosen  one  of  the  regents    of    the 
University  of  the  City  of  Nauvoo.     He 
was  also  one  of  the  incorporators  of  the 
Nauvoo   Agricultural  and   Manufactur- 
ing Association,  and  assisted  in  the  lay- 
ing of  the  corner  stones  of  the  Nauvoo 
Temple  jn  April.  1841.      He  took  an  ac- 
tive part  in  all  public  affairs,  both  ec- 
clesiastical and  secular,  being  constant- 
ly in  counsel  with  the  general  authori- 
ties of  the  Church.     He  also  acted  as 


associate  justice  of  the  municipal  Court, 
served    on    the    grand    jury    and    filled 
numerous  other  positions  of  honor  and 
responsibility.       After  the  Prophet  Jo- 
seph's death  he  sympathized  with  Sid- 
ney  Rigdon,   and   for   this   reason   and 
because   he   did   not   acknowledge     the 
authority   of   the   Twelve     Apostles   he 
was    "dropped"    by    the    High    Council, 
and  at  the  general  conference  held  at 
Nauvoo  Oct.  7,  1844,  he  was  rejected  as 
president  of  the  Nauvoo  Stake  of  Zion. 
Patriarch  John  Smith  being  chosen  as 
his  successor.    This  ended  Wm.  Mark's 
services  for  the  Church,  and  when  the 
Saints  went  into  the  wilderness,  he  re- 
mained in  the  East,  though  he  left  Nau- 
voo for  other  parts  of  the  country.  Be- 
coming convinced  that  Sidney  Rigdon's 
claims  were  untenantable,  Wm.  Marks 
commenced    to   affiliate    with    James   J. 
Strang,  and  attended  a  Strangite  con- 
ference   held    at    Voree,    Wisconsin,    in 
Aoril,  1847.       Prior  to  this  he  had  been 
chosen   as   a   counselor   to   Mr.   Strang, 
and  he  acted  in  that  capacity  for  sev- 
eral   years.       But    he   finallv   withdrew 
from  the  Strangite  movement,    and    in 
1855  associated  himself  for  a  short  time 
with    John    E.    Page    and    others.        In 
1859    he    joined    the     promoters    of    the 
"Reorganized  Church."  and  became  one 
of   the   leading  men   of   that   organiza- 
tion, with  which  he  continued  until  his 
death.       At     the     time   of   his   demise, 
which  occurred  May  22.  1872,  at  Piano, 
111.,  he  was  first  counselor  to  Pres.  Jo- 
seph     Smith,      of      the      "Reorganized 
Church." 

BABBITT,  Almon  W.,  president  of 
the  Kirtland  Stake  of  Zion.  from  1841 
to  1843,  was  the  son  of  Ira  and  Nancy 
Babbitt,  and  was  born  Oct.  1,  1813,  in 
Berkshire  county,  Mass.  He  joined  the 
Church  at  an  early  day,  and  is  first 
mentioned  in  the  history  of  Joseph 
Smith  as  a  member  of  Zion's  Camp  in 
1834.  At  the  organization  of  the  first 
quorum  of  Seventy.  Feb.  28.  1835.  he 
was  ordained  a  Seventy  under  the 
hands  of  Joseph  Smith  and  others.  For 
traducing  the  character  of  the  Prophet 
he  had  a  hearing  before  the  High  Coun- 
cil in  Kirtland,  Dec.  28,  1835;  he  con- 
fessed his  faults  and  was  forgiven.  Sub- 
sequently he  filled  a  mision  to  Canada, 
from  which  he  returned  in  1838,  leading 
a  company  of  emigrating  Saints  to 
Missouri.      After  passing  through     the 


BIOGRAPHICAL    ENCYCLOPEDIA. 


285 


Missouri  persecutions  he  fled  to  Illinois, 
and  at  a  conference  of  the  Church  held 
at  Quincy.  111.,  May  4,  1839,  "Almon  W. 
Babbitt,  Erastus  Snow  and  Robert  B. 
Thompson  were  appointed  a  traveling 
committee  to  gather  up  and  obtain  all 
the  libelous  reports  and  publications 
which  had  been  circulated  against  the 
Church."  In  1840  he  was  called  to  task 
by  the  Prophet  Joseph  on  account  of 
the  strange  conduct  pursued  by  him  in 
Kirtland,  Ohio.  His  proceedings  were 
considered  by  the  brethren  at  Nauvoo 
and  fellowship  withdrawn  from  him; 
but  he  was  subsequently  restored  to 
fellowship.  At  a  general  conference 
held  at  Commerce  Oct.  3,  1840,  he  was 
appointed  a  member  of  a  cimmittee  to 
"organize  Stakes"  between  Commerce 
and  Kirtland.  He  was  also  appointed 
to  preside  over  the  Church  in  Kirtland 
with  the  privilege  of  chosing  his  own 
counselors.  In  the  revelation  given 
through  the  Prophet  Joseph  Jan.  19, 
1841,  the  Lord  says:  "And  with  my  ser- 
vant Almon  W.  Babbitt  there  are  many 
things  with  which  I  am  not  well 
pleased;  behold,  he  aspireth  to  estab- 
lish his  council  instead  of  the  council 
which  I  have  ordained,  even  the  presi- 
dency of  my  Church,  and  he  setteth  up 
a  golden  calf  for  the  worship  of  my 
people."  Doc.  and  Cov.,  124:  359.)  At 
a  conference  held  at  Kirtland,  May  22, 
1841,  Elder  Babbitt  was  elected  presi- 
dent of  "that  Stake,"  with  Lester 
Brooks  and  Zebedee  Coltrin  as  his 
counselors.  For  teaching  "doctrine  con- 
trary to  the  revelations  of  God  and 
detrimental  to  the  Interest  of  the 
Church"  he  was  again  disfellowshipped 
until  he  should  make  satisfaction.  This 
was  done  at  a  conference  held  at  Nau- 
voo Oct.  2,  1841.  A  month  later  the 
Prophet  Joseph  also  rejected  him,  as 
Church  agent  at  Kirtland.  Having  re- 
moved to  Illinois,  and  located  at  Ramus, 
Hancock  county,  he  was  appointed  the 
presiding  Elder  at  that  place,  in  March. 
1843.  He  visited  the  Prophet  Joseph  in 
Carthage  jail  on  the  day  of  the  mar- 
tyrdom and  remained  with  the  Twelve 
as  against  the  claims  of  Sidney  Rig- 
don  and  others.  He  rendered  efficient 
legal  service  to  the  Church  during  the 
persecutions  and  mobbings  in  Illinois, 
and  when  the  Illinois  legislature,  in 
January,  1845,  was  discussing  the  un- 
conditioned surrender  of  the  Nauvoo 
city  charter.  Elder  Babbitt  was  at 
Springfield    laboring     diligently     as     a 


lawyer  in  defending  the  rights  of  his 
people,  but  to  no  purpose;  the  charter 
was  repealed.  As  a  member  of  a 
committee  appointed  to  formulate  a  pe- 
tition to  the  Federal  Government,  in 
behalf  of  the  Saints,  we  find  Almon  W. 
Babbitt's  name  attached  to  the  his- 
torical document  addressed  to  Pres. 
James  K.  Polk,  dated  April  24,  1845.  The 
petition,  which  was  unheeded  by  the 
chief  executive  asked  for  redress  on 
behalf  of  a  "disfranchised  and  long 
afflicted  people  "  and  asked  the  presi- 
c'ent  to  assist  the  Saints  to  obtain  a 
home  where  they  could  enjoy  their 
"rights  of  conscience  and  religion  un- 
molested." After  the  departure  of  the 
Apostles  into  the  wilderness,  in  Febru- 
ary, 1846,  the  affairs  of  the  Church  at 
Nauvoo  were  left  in  charge  of  a  com- 
mittee, consisting  of  Almon  W.  Bab- 
bitt, Joseph  L.  Heywood  and  John 
S.  Fullmer;  and  after  the  famous  bat- 
tle of  Nauvoo,  in  September,  1846,  these 
three  men  signed  the  treaty,  by  which 
the  Saints  agreed  to  surrender  the  city 
to  the  mob.  Elder  Babbitt  came  to 
the  Valley  in  1848,  and  when  a  memorial 
praying  for  Statehood  had  been  pre- 
pared by  the  Saints,  he  was,  by  a 
joint  vote  of  thi  "General  Assembly  of 
the  State  of  Deseret,"  elected  a  dele- 
gate to  Congress  to  convey  the  memo- 
rial to  Washington.  He  left  for 
that  city  in  the  fall  of  1849,  and  arriv- 
ing at  the  capital  he  "sought  the  ear- 
liest opportunity  to  present  to  Con- 
gres  the  public  documents  of  which  he 
was  the  bearer,  as  well  as  his  own 
credentials  as  delegate  from  the  Pro- 
visional State  of  Deseret;"  but  Con- 
gress would  not  permit  Col.  Babbitt  to 
take  a  seat,  and  instead  of  granting 
Statehood,  as  prayed  for,  the  Territo- 
r-"'  of  Utah  was  created  in  1850.  Elder 
Babbitt  returned  to  the  Valley,  and  in 
1853  he  was  appointed  seci-etary  of  the 
Territory,  which  position  he  filled  until 
his  death.  Oct.  24,  1856,  the  report 
reached  Salt  Lake  City  that  some  of  the 
Cheyenne  Indians  had  killed  some  white 
people  on  the  plains,  among  whom  was 
Almon  W.  Babbitt;  also  that  Mrs.  Mar- 
getts  and  child  were  taken  prisoners 
by  the  Indians.  "The  savages  on  the 
plains,"  writes  Orson  F.  Whitney,  "be- 
came hostile,  attacking  and  robbing 
trains  and  killing  travelers.  Among  the 
slain  were  several  citizens  of  Utah, 
namely:  Col.  Almon  W.  Babbitt  (secre- 
tary of  the   Territory),     Thomas   Mar- 


286 


LATTER-DAY    SAINT 


getts,  James  Cowdy  and  others.  In 
April  (1856)  Secretary  Babbitt  left  Salt 
Lake  City  for  Washington  on  business 
connected  with  his  office.  He  was  ac- 
companied across  the  plains  by  U.  S. 
Marshal  Heywood.  Chief  Justice  Ken- 
ney  and  wife,  Apostles  Orson  Pratt, 
G«o.  A.  Smith,  Ezra  T.  Benson,  Eras- 
tus  Snow  and  others.  •  •  •  The  Mar- 
getts-Cowdy  party  left  Utah  some  time 
later.  They  were  on  their  way  back 
to  England.  In  August  Secretary  Bab- 
bitt's train,  loaded  with  government 
property  for  Utah,  was  attacked  and 
plundered  by  Cheyenne  Indians,  near 
Wood  river,  now  in  Nebraska.  Of  the 
four  teamsters  in  charge,  two  were 
killed  and  one  wounded.  A  Mrs.  Wil- 
son was  wounded  and  carried  away  by 
the  savages,  who  also  killed  her  child. 
•  •  •  Col.  Babbitt  was  not  with  his  train 
at  the  time,  but  was  killed  by  the 
Cheyennes  east  of  Fort  Laramie,  a  few 
weeks  later.  For  some  time  his  fate 
was  enshrouded  in  mystery,  but  it  fin- 
ally transpired  that  after  leaving  the 
frontier  for  the  west  he  and  his  party 
were  attacked  and  slain  by  some  of 
the  same  tribe  that  had  plundered  his 
train  and  killed  his  teamsters."  (See 
Whitney's  History  of  Utah,  Vol.  1,  p. 
553.) 

SPENCER,  Daniel,  president  of 
the  Salt  Lake  Stake  of  Zion  from  1849 
to  1868,  was  the  son  of  Daniel  Spencer 
and  Chloe  Wilson,  and  was  born  July 
20.  1794,  at  West  Stockbridge,  Berkshire 
county,  Mass.  The  American  branch  of 
the  Spencers  came  from  a  good  Eng- 
lish stock  and  was  identified  with  the 
Puritan  emigration  to  America  at  an 
early  period.  Tracing  the  immediate 
line  of  the  Spencers,  who  have  made  a 
distinguished  mark  in  the  Church  and 
among  the  representative  men  of  Utah, 
we  find  them  in  character  noted  for 
their  love  of  independence  and  justice. 
The  father  of  the  subject  of  this  mem- 
oir took  up  arms  at  the  commencement 
of  the  Revolutionary  war  for  the  in- 
alienable rights  of  man  and  the  inde- 
pendence of  the  American  nation.  He 
volunteered  at  the  age  of  sixteen  and 
remained  through  the  entire  struggle; 
he  was  in  General  Washington's  body 
guard  and  witnessed  the  surrender  of 
Lord  Cornwallis  at  Yorktown.  Daniel, 
before  he  reached  the  age  of  twenty- 
one,  bought  his  time  out  from  his  fa- 
ther, and  made  a  manly  and  true  Amer- 


ican push  into  the  great  world  to  es- 
tablish his  character  and  social  posi- 
tion in  life.  At  that  period  a  new 
commercial  intercourse  was  opening  be- 
tween New  England  and  the  Southern 
States.  The  sagacious  and  enterpris- 
ing youth,  even  then  weighed  in  the 
balances  of  his  mind  the  commercial 
situations,  of  his  country,  and  started 
into  the  Southern  States.  There  he 
opened  the  way  for  five  of  his  brothers, 
In  the  State  of  Georgia  and  also  in 
North  and  South  Carolina.  For  him- 
self he  established  a  mercantile  house 
at  Savannah,  which  he  follov/ed  for 
thirteen  years.  Daniel  not  only  opened 
the  way  in  the  Southern  States  for  five 
of  his  brothers,  but  with  them  gave  to 
his   brothers   Orson  a  collegiate   train- 


ing, bearing  chiefly  the  expenses  of  that 
classical  education  for  which  Orson  be- 
came so  celebrated  in  the  Church  as  a 
theologian  and  a  highly  accomplished 
author.  Orson  was  lame  and  his  elder 
brother  educated  him  for  the  pulpit  in- 
stead of  the  counting-  house,  and  while 
his  brothers  were  pursuing  the  calling 
of  merchants  in  the  South,  he  was  ris- 
ing to  the  sphere  of  an  influential 
clergyman  in  the  Baptist  church  in 
Massachusetts.  At  the  close  of  his 
commercial  career  in  the  South,  Daniel 
Spencer  returned  to  his  native  place, 
West  Stockbridge.  Mass.,  being  then 
about  thirty-five  years  of  age.  After 
his  return  he  married  Sophronia, daugh- 
ter of  General  Grove  Pomeroy.  The 
family  of  his  bride  was  of  the  old  Pu- 
ritan stock,  high  in  social  rank  and  re- 


BIOGRAPHICAL    ENCYCLOPEDIA. 


287 


spected  by  all  for  their  moral  worth  and 
representative  character.  On  his  return 
to  his  native  place,  he  became  connect- 
ed with  a  mercantile  house  in  partner- 
ship with  the  Messrs.  Boyingtons,  cele- 
brated marble  dealers.  So  much  trusted 
by  the  firm  was  he  that  the  whole  su- 
pervision of  the  firm  fell  upon  hla 
shoulders.  Among  his  townsmen  he 
was  universally  respected,  and  he  en- 
joyed the  unbounded  confidence  of  the 
people  in  all  the  region  around.  Until 
1840  no  Elder  of  the  Mormon  Church 
had  preached  in  his  native  town.  The 
late  John  Van  Cott,  however,  belonged 
to  the  same  region,  and  already  his 
relatives,  the  Pratts,  had  been  laboring 
to  impress  Mr.  Van  Cott  with  the  "Mor- 
mon" faith.  But  Daniel  Spencer,  up 
to  this  date,  had  no  relationship  what- 
ever with  the  people  with  whom  him- 
self and  his  brother  Orson  afterwards 
became  so  prominently  identified.  At 
this  time  Daniel  Spencer  belonged  to  no 
sect  of  religionists,  but  sustained  in  the 
community  the  name  of  a  man  marked 
for  character  and  moral  worth.  It  was, 
however,  his  custom  to  give  free  quar- 
ters to  preachers  of  all  denominations. 
The  "Mormon"  Elder  came;  and  his 
coming  created  an  epoch  in  Daniel 
Spencer's  life.  Through  his  influence 
the  Presbyterian  meeting  house  was  ob- 
tained for  the  "Mormon"  Elder  to 
preach  the  gospel,  and  the  meeting  was 
attended  by  the  elite  of  the  town.  At 
the  close  of  the  sei-vice  the  Elder  asked 
the  assembly  if  there  was  any  one  pres- 
ent who  would  give  him  "a  night's 
lodging  and  a  meal  of  victuals  in  the 
name  of  Jesus."  For  several  minutes 
a  dead  silence  reigned  in  the  congrega- 
tion. None  present  seemed  desirous  to 
peril  their  character  or  taint  their  re- 
spectability by  taking  home  a  "Mor- 
mon" Elder.  At  length  Daniel  Spencer, 
in  the  old  Puritan  spirit  and  the  proud 
independence  so  characteristic  of  the 
true  American  gentleman,  rose  up, 
stepped  into  the  aisle,  and  broke  the 
silence:  "I  will  entertain  you,  sir,  for 
humanity's  sake."  Daniel  took  the  poor 
Elder,  not  to  his  public  hotel,  as  was  his 
wont  with  the  preachers  generally  who 
needed  hospitality,  but  he  took  him  to 
his  own  house,  a  fine  family  mansion, 
and  the  next  morning  he  clothed  him 
from  head  to  foot  with  a  good  suit  of 
broad  cloth  from  the  shelves  of  his 
store.  The  Elder  continued  to  preach 
the  new  and  strange  gospel,and  brought 


upon  himself  much  persecution.  This 
produced  upon  the  mind  of  Daniel  Spen- 
cer an  extraordinary  effect.  Seeing 
the  bitter  malevolence  from  the  preach- 
ers and  the  best  of  the  professing  Chris- 
tians, and  being  naturally  a  philosopher 
and  a  judge,  he  resolved  to  investigate 
the  cause  of  this  enmity  and  unchris- 
tianlike  manifestation.  The  result  came. 
It  was  as  strongly  marked  as  his  con- 
duct during  the  investigation.  For  two 
weeks  he  closed  his  establishment,  re- 
fused to  do  business  with  any  one, 
and  shut  himself  up  to  study;  and  there 
alone  with  his  God  he  weighed  in  the 
balances  of  his  clear  head  and  con- 
scientious heart  the  divine  message  and 
found  it  not  wanting.  One  day,  when  his 
son  was  with  him  in  his  study,  he  sud- 
denly burst  into  a  flood  of  tears,  and 
exclaimed:  "My  God,  the  thing  is  true, 
and  as  an  honest  man  I  must  embrace 
it;  but  it  will  cost  me  all  I  have  got 
on  earth."  He  had  weighed  the  con- 
sequences, but  his  conscientious  mind 
compelled  him  to  assume  the  respon- 
sibility and  take  up  the  cross.  He  saw 
that  he  must,  in  the  eyes  of  friends  and 
townsmen,  fall  from  the  social  pinnacle 
on  which  he  then  stood  to  that  of  a  de- 
spised people.  At  mid-day,  about  three 
months  after  the  poor  "Mormon"  Elder 
came  into  the  town  of  "West  Stock- 
bridge,  Danie)  Spencer  having  issued  a 
public  notice  to  his  townsmen  that  he 
should  be  baptized*at  noon  on  a  certain 
day,  took  him  by  the  arm  and,  not 
ashamed,  walked  through  the  town  tak- 
ing the  route  of  the  main  street  to  the 
waters  of  baptism,follo\ved  by  hundreds 
of  his  townsmen  to  the  river's  bank. 
The  profoundest  respect  and  quiet  were 
manifested  by  the  vast  concourse  of 
witnesses,  but  also  the  profoundest 
astonishment.  It  was  nothing  wonder- 
ful that  a  despised  "Mormon"  Elder 
should  believe  in  Joseph  Smith,  but  it 
was  a  matter  of  astonishment  that  a 
man  of  Daniel  Spencer's  social  standing 
and  character  should  receive  the  mis- 
sion of  the  Prophet  and  divinity  of  the 
Book  of  Mormon.  The  conversion  and 
conduct  of  Daniel  Spencer  carried  a 
deep  and  weighty  conviction  among 
many  good  families  in  the  region 
around,  which,  in  a  few  months,  result- 
ed in  the  establishment  of  a  flourishing 
branch  of  the  Church.  This  branch 
which  he  was  the  chief  instrument  in 
founding,  and  over  which  he  presided, 
contributed  its  full  quota  of  respectable 


288 


LATTER-DAY    SAINT 


citizens  to  Nauvoo  and  Utah.  John  Van 
Cott,  the  man  so  long  identified  in  the 
history  of  the  Scandinavian  mission, 
and  a  representative  man,  also  came 
from  that  region.  About  the  period 
of  Daniel  Spencer's  connection  with 
the  "Mormon"  Church,  the  partners  in 
the  firm  to  which  he  belonged,  took  the 
benefit  of  the  bankrupt  law,  which  re- 
sulted in  his  financial  depression.  He 
then  gave  himself  much  to  the  minis- 
try, and  soon  afterward  brought  into 
the  Church  his  brother  Orson.  He 
continued  for  two  years  laboring  in  the 
ministry  in  that  region,  and  then  (in 
1S41)  he  removed  to  Nauvoo.  He  had 
scarcely  arrived  in  the  city  of  the 
Saints,  when  he  was  appointed  on  a 
mision  to  Canada.  On  his  return,  he 
was  elected  a  member  of  the  Nauvoo 
city  council;  but  soon  afterwards  was 
sent  on  a  mission  to  the  Indian  nation. 
From  the  hardships  of  that  mission  he 
never  recovered  to  the  day  of  his  death. 
The  next  year,  he  was  sent  on  a  mis- 
sion to  Massachusetts.  He  returned 
and  was  elected  mayor  of  Nauvoo.  At 
the  time  a  number  of  men  were  select- 
ed by  Joseph  Smith  to  explore  the 
Rocky  Mountains,  with  the  view  of  the 
Saints  locating  there,  Daniel  Spencer 
was  called  as  one  of  them,  but  the  ex- 
ploring expedition  was  interrupted  by 
the  martyrdom  of  the  Prophet.  At  the 
time  of  the  great  exodus  from  Nauvoo, 
in  ]S46,  Daniel  Spencer  started  among 
the  first  of  the  exiles  to  the  Rocky 
Mountains.  He  was  a  captain  of  fifty. 
But  the  leading  companies  finding  that 
the  journey  could  not  be  accomplished 
that  year,  and  the  news  of  the  extermi- 
nation of  the  remnant  from  Nauvoo 
reaching  the  President,  Brigham  Young 
departed  from  his  first  intentions  and 
the  Saints  went  into  Winter  Quarters. 
When  the  city  was  organized — then 
known  as  Winter  Quarters,  but  now  as 
the  city  of  Florence — Daniel  Spencer 
was  chosen  to  act  as  a  Bishop  of  -one 
of  the  Wards.  He  spent  a  large 
amount  of  his  means  in  his  benevolent 
administration  to  the  suffering  and  dy- 
ing of  the  sorely  tried  and  afflicted 
"Camp  of  Israel."  It  was  at  the  period 
when  the  dreadful  plague  struck  the 
camps  of  the  Saints  just  following  their 
flight  from  Nauvoo.  In  the  spring  of 
1847.  when  the  Pioneers,  under  Pres. 
Young,  took  the  lead  of  the  main  bod.v 
of  the  Church,  Daniel  was  appointed 
president    of    two    companies    of    fifties 


to  follow  in  the  Pioneer  van.  There 
was  considerable  emulation  between 
most  of  the  captains  of  the  companies, 
that  year,  to  see  who  should  reach  the 
terminus  of  the  journey  first.  A  dis- 
tinguished captain  one  day  passing 
Daniel's  company,  which  was  encamped 
for  the  day  recruiting  the  strength  of 
both  man  and  beast,  with  good-natured 
sarcasm  asked  Brother  Spencer  if  he 
had  any  message  for  the  Pioneers.  He 
answered  significantly,  "Tell  them  I 
am  coming,  if  you  see  them  first."  Then 
turning  to  the  camp  he  said,  "Sisters, 
take  plenty  of  time  to  wash,  bake,  rest, 
and  go  picking  berries,  and  we  will  get 
to  the  terminus  first  and  come  back 
and  help  Brother  Parley  in,  for  we 
shall  have  it  to  do."  This  turned  out 
to  be  the  case;  and  Daniel  Spencer's 
company  was  the  first  of  the  Winter 
Quarters'  emigration  that  followed  the 
Pioneers  into  the  Great  Basin.  To 
help  the  organization  of  the  Pioneer 
company,  he  had,  at  Winter  Quarters, 
outfitted  three  men  (Francis  Boggs, 
Elijah  Newman,  and  Levi  N.  Kendall) 
with  provisions,  clothing,  seed  grain, 
farming  implements,  team  and  wagon, 
and  the  first  winter  after  the  arrival 
he  fed  twenty-six  souls.  In  the  or- 
ganization of  the  High  Council  of  the 
Salt  Lake  Stake,  in  1847,  he  was  ap- 
pointed a  member;  and  in  1849  was 
elected  its  president,  which  position  he 
filled  up  to  the  time  of  his  death.  He 
was  a  member  of  the  legislature  for 
years,  and  for  some  time  sat  in  the 
Senate  of  the  provisional  government 
of  the  State  of  Deseret,  and  acted  in 
connection  with  those  who  framed  its 
constitution.  He  was  appointed  on  a 
mission  to  England  in  1852;  there  he 
filled  the  place  of  first  counselor  to 
Franklin  D.  Richards.  He  arrived  in 
England  just  at  the  important  period  of 
the  publication  of  the  revelation  on 
polygamy,  and  by  his  wisdom  very 
much  sustained  the  Church.  Having 
honorably  fulfilled  his  mission  to  Eu- 
rope he  returned  to  his  native  land  in 
1856.  At  the  organization  of  the  Salt 
Lake  Stake,  he  was,  under  the  First 
Presidency  and  Twelve,  made  the  spir- 
itual head  of  the  entire  colony;  and 
under  his  administration  salt  Lake  City 
grew  up  several  years  before  its  in- 
corporation under  the  civic  government. 
At  that  time  the  president  of  the  Stake 
occupied  something  like  the  position  of 
the   mayor   of    the    inchoate     city,    and 


BIOGRAPHICAL    ENCYCLOPEDIA. 


289 


chief  justice  of  the  Church.  Nearly  all 
cases  were  tried  under  him,  in  the  court 
of  the  High  Council,  he  sitting  with  his 
counselors  as  presiding  judge;  and  not 
only  did  this  court  adjudicate  all  the 
differences  arising  between  members  of 
the  Church,  but  the  Gentile  emigrants 
to  California,  on  their  arrival  in  Salt 
Lake  Citv,  brought  their  difficulties  be- 
fore this  court  for  equitable  settlement. 
It  is  to  be  observed  that,  in  1849, 
there  was  no  courts  of  any  kind  to 
which  the  "gold-finders"  could  bring 
their  difficulties  after  they  left  the  Mis- 
souri river  until  they  reached  Salt  Lake 
City,  where  a  court  of  justice  of  the 
"Mormon"  Church  existed,  over  which 
Daniel  Spencer  presided.  Strange  as  it 
may  seem  in  history,  many  of  the  Gen- 
tile emigrants  brought  their  cases  for 
adjudication  before  this  court,  some  of 
them  involving  tens  of  thousands  of 
dollars;  and  with  such  equity  did  Dan- 
iel Spencer  administer  justice  that  tha 
California  emigrants  very  generally 
conceded  that  they  obtained  more  equit- 
able settlements  than  they  would  have 
done  by  litigation  in  the  courts.  In 
their  "letters  home,"  published  in  Amer- 
ican and  Enelish  papers,  may  be  found 
often  acknowledgments  of  this  kind 
from  the  gold  seekers  of  1849-50.  Two 
other  instances,  of  a  later  date,  may  be 
told  in  closing  this  sketch.  One  of 
the  most  influential  of  the  Bishops  of 
the  Southern  settlements  got  many 
thousand  dollars  into  the  debt  of  Joseph 
Nounnan,  a  Salt  Lake  banker;  and 
such  was  Mr.  Nounnan's  confidence  in 
the  ecclesiastical  court,  over  which 
Daniel  Spencer  presided,  that  he 
brought  suit  against  the  Bishop  in  that 
court  in  preference  to  going  to  law. 
The  trial  occupied  one  hour  and  a  half, 
when  decision  was  rendered  that  the 
Bishop  should  pay  the  full  amount 
within  twenty-eight  days,  or  be  sus- 
pended from  his  Bishopric.  At  the 
close  the  banker  tendered  his  thanks 
to  the  court  and  offered  a  liberal  pe- 
cuniary present  to  the  members,  which 
was  declined,  for  suits  in  this  court 
were  without  costs.  Another  case,  in- 
volving some  $4,500,  occurred  between 
Mr.  Ellis,  a  Salt  Lake  City  merchant, 
and  an  influential  "Mormon."  Ellis 
took  his  case  to  the  same  court  and 
recovered  his  entire  claim.  Daniel 
Spencer  died  in  .Salt  Lake  City  Dec. 
S,  1868,   aged  74  years.       He  was  a  re- 

A'ol.  1,  No.  19. 


markable  man  and  very  exemplary  in 
his  life.  (See  also  Tullidge's  History 
of  Salt  Lake  City,  Bio.  166.) 

FULLMER,  David,  president  pro 
tem.  of  the  Salt  Lake  Stake  of  Zion 
from  1852  to  1856,  was  the  son  of  Peter 
Fullmer  and  Susannah  Zerfoss,  and  was 
born  July  7,  1803,  at  Chillisquaque, 
Northumberland  county,  Pennsylvania. 
He  was  brought  up  on  a  farm  and  re- 
ceived a  common  school  education.  He 
left  the  farm  and  for  a  while  taught 
school,  after  which  he  went  to  mer- 
chandising. In  September,  1831.  he 
married  Miss  Rhoda  Ann  Marvin, 
daughter  of  Zera  Marvin  and  Rhoda 
Williams.  In  the  year  1835  he  moved 
to  Richmond  county,  Ohio.  While  here 
he  heard  that  the  Lord  had  revealed 
his  gosp€l  again  unto  man  on  CRrth.  He 
believed  and  was  baptized  Sept.  16,  1836, 
by  Elder  Henry  G.  Sherwood.  The  fol- 
lowing   winter    he    went      to    Kirtland, 


DAVID  FULLMER,  ABOUT  1842. 

where,  for  the  first  time,  he  had  the 
pleasure  of  meeting  the  Prophet  Jo- 
.«eph  Smith.  Shortly  afterward  he 
was  ordained  an  Elder  under  the  hands 
of  Reuben  Hedlock.  in  the  Kirtland 
Temple;  he  also  received  a  patriarchal 
blessing  under  the  hands  of  Patriarch 
Joseph  Smith,  sen.  In  September,  1S37, 
he  removed  to  Caldwell  county,  Mis- 
.==ouri,  that  he  might  be  near  the  prin- 
cipal gathering  place  of  the  Saints, 
and   in   the   spring  of  1S3S   he   removed 

May    11.    1901. 


290 


LATTER-DAY    SAINT 


to  Daviess  county  in  the  same  State. 
The  following  summer  he  had  a  severe 
attack  of  sickness  which  threatened  his 
life,  but  through  the  healing  power  of 
God  he  was  restored  to  health.  At 
this  time  great  persecution  raged 
against  the  Saints,  and  after  Governor 
Lilburn  W.  Boggs  had  issued  an  order 
of  extermination  against  them,  they 
were  compelled  to  leave  their  homes 
and  possessions  in  Missouri.  Elder 
Fullmer  and  his  family  were  among 
the  number  forced  to  leave  all  and  flea 
for  their  lives.  He  removed  to  the 
State  of  Illinois,  where  he  left  his 
family  while  he  continued  the  journey 
to  Ohio,  and  assisted  in  moving  his 
father  to  Illinois.       Settling  in  Nauvoo, 


DAVID    Hl.l.MF.R  TN    |S77. 

Hancock  county,  111.,  Elder  Fullmer 
was  ordained  to  the  office  of  a  High 
Priest  in  1839  and  appointed  one  of  the 
High  Council  for  that  Stake  of  Zion.  In 
1S44  he  was  appointed  one  of  the  elec- 
tioneering missionaries  in  behalf  of  the 
Projihet  Joseph  Smith,  and  was  en- 
gaged in  this  labor  and  in  preaching 
thf  gospel  in  the  State  of  Michigan, 
when  the  news  was  received  of  the 
martyrdom  of  the  Prophet  Joseph  and 
Patriarch  Hyrum  Smith.  Elder  Full- 
mer immediately  returned  to  his  home 
in  Nau\oo  and  attended  the  general 
meeting  of  the  T'hurch,  at  which  the 
claims  of  Sidney  Rigdon,  as  guardian 
of  the  Church,  were  rejected,  and  the 
Twelve  Apostles,  with  Rrigham  Young 
at   the   head,   were     sustained     as    the 


rightful  leaders  of  the  Church.  Elder 
Fullmei-  was  appointed  as  a  member  of 
"The  Living  Constitution"  committee, 
the  business  of  which  was  to  settle  all 
difficulties  which  might  arise  among 
the  different  mechanical  associations. 
He  was  also  a  member  of  the  Nauvoo 
City  Council:  and  when  the  State  legis- 
lature repealed  the  charter  of  the  city 
of  Nauvoo,  he  was  elected  to  the  town 
council  of  Nauvoo.  He  was  also  chosen 
a  member  of  the  Council  of  Fifty. 
When  the  Nauvoo  Temple  was  opened 
for  work.  Elder  Fullmer,  with  compan- 
ions, received  all  the  ordinances  and 
blesings  which  were  given  to  the  Saints 
at  that  time.  In  the  winter  of  1846, 
when  the  Saints  were  expelled  from 
their  homes,  and  the  presiding  author- 
ities of  the  Church  decided  to  journey 
into  the  wilderness  to  seek  a  new  home 
and  a  gathering  place  in  the  Rocky 
Mountains,  Elder  Fullmer  was  ap- 
pointed a  captain  of  hundred,  and 
started  west  with  the  first  company  of 
the  Camp  of  Israel,  to  find  a  home  in 
a  land  that  the  Lord  should  show  unto 
them.  In  1846,  when  it  was  decided  to 
make  a  temporary  settlement  or  rest- 
ing place  for  the  rear  company  of 
Saints  and  all  those,  who,  from  lack  of 
means,  were  unable  to  proceed  further, 
at  a  place  they  called  Garden  Grove, 
in  the  State  of  Iowa,  Brother  Samuel 
Bent  w-as  appointed  to  preside  at  this 
place,  and  Elder  Fullmer  was  appointed 
as  his  first  counselor.  Here  the  ex- 
iled Saints  made  a  large  farm  and 
worked  together  to  raise  grain.  There 
were  many  poor  among  them  who  were 
almost  destitute  both  of  food  and  cloth- 
ing. Soon  after  Pres.  Bent  died  and 
the  presidency  of  the  place  devolved 
UDon  Elder  Fullmer,  who  sent  mission- 
aries out  along  the  great  rivers  to  so- 
licit aid  for  the  relief  of  the  poor,  and 
by  this  means  help  was  afforded.  From 
this  place  the  company  removed  to  an- 
other temporary  settlement  called  Win- 
ter Quarters,  on  the  Missouri  river, 
where  Elder  Fullmer  acted  as  a  mem- 
ber of  a  committee  of  vigilance  by  ap- 
pointment of  Pres.  Young.  Elder  Full- 
mer traveled  from  this  place  in  the 
company  of  Pres.  Willard  Richards, 
and  arrived  in  due  time  in  Great  Salt 
Lake  valley.  He  served  as  a  member 
of  the  legislature  of  the  Provisional 
State  of  Deseret,  and  was  appointed 
first  counselor  to  Daniel  Spencer,  presi- 
j->«f  '.f  the  Salt  Lake  Stake  of  Zion,  in 


BIOGRAPHICAL    ENCYCLOPEDIA. 


291 


1849.  When  a  company  of  brethren 
were  appointed  to  travel  southward  on 
an  exploring  expedition,  Elder  Fullmer 
was  appointed  counselor  to  Apostle 
Parley  P.  Pratt  and  for  five  months  he 
traveled  with  this  company  in  the  dead 
of  winter.  As  captain  of  a  relief  com- 
pany, Elder  Fullmer  traveled  east  to 
Independence  Rock  to  assist  a  com- 
pany of  Saints  who  were  journeying 
westward.  During  Pres.  Spencer's  ab- 
sence on  a  mission  to  England,  from 
1852  to  1856,  Counselor  Fullmer  presided 
over  the  Salt  Lake  Stake.  When  the 
Territory  of  Utah  was  created,  Elder 
Fullmer  was  elected  a  member  of  the 
legislature  for  Salt  Lake  county, 
and  at  various  times  was  called  to  im- 
portant duties,  such  as  treasurer  of  the 
University,  treasurer  pro  tem  of  Salt 
Lake  county;  treasurer  of  Salt  Lake 
City;  delegate  to  one  of  the  early  Ter- 
ritorial conventions;  director  of  the 
Agricultural  Society,  and  home  mis- 
sionary. Elder  Fullmer  served  as  first 
counselor  to  Pres.  Spencer  until  April, 
1866,  when  he  was  released  at  his  own 
request,  because  of  failing  health.  He 
died  in  Salt  Lake  City  Oct.  21,  1879. 
Several  years  before  his  death  he  was 
ordained  a  Patriarch.  At  the  time  of 
his  decease  he  was  in  full  fellowship, 
beloved  and  respected  by  all  his  asso- 
ciates. 

WAIiLACE,  George  Benjamin,  pres- 
ident of  the  Salt  Lake  Stake  of  Zion 
from  1874  to  1876,  was  the  son  of  John 
Wallace  and  Mary  True,  and  was  born 
Feb.  16,  1817,  at  Epsom,  Merrimack 
county.  New  Hampshire.  Becoming  a 
convert  to  '"Mormqnism,"  he  was  bap- 
tized and  confirmed  in  December,  1842, 
by  Elder  Freeman  Nickerson,  and  he 
was  ordained  a  High  Priest  in  Boston 
in  July,  1844,  by  Brigham  Young.  In 
the  spring  of  1844  he  was  selected  by 
the  Prophet  Joseph  to  electioneer  in  his 
interest  as  candidate  for  President  of 
the  United  States.  This  was  at  a  time 
when  agitation  over  the  slave  question 
was  being  brought  to  the  front  as  a 
national  issue  in  the  politics  of  the 
country.  At  this  time  Bro.  Wallace 
was  carrying  on  an  extensive  lumber 
business  in  Boston,  employing  hundreds 
of  men.  He  emigrated  to  Nauvoo  in 
1844,  soon  after  the  Prophet's  death.  At 
that  city  he  acted  as  undertaker  dur- 
ing some  of  the  most  trying  days  ex- 


perienced by  the  Saints  there.  He  was 
also  the  first  sexton  who  dug  civilized 
graves  in  the  valley  of  the  Great  Salt 
Lake.  When  the  emigration,  which 
followed  the  Pioneers  to  Great  Salt 
Lake  valley  in  the  fall  of  1847.  was  or- 
ganized. Geo.  B.  Wallace  was  appoint- 
ed a  captain  of  fifty,  which  he  led  to 
the  valley,  arriving  on  the  present  site 
of  Salt  Lake  City  in  September,  of  that 
year.  He  built  one  or  the  best  and 
most  commodious  houses  in  the  Old 
Fort,  and  the  general  authorities  of 
the  Church  held  many  important  coun- 
cil meetings  at  his  residence.  At  a 
meeting  of  the  First  Presidency  held 
at  the  house  of  Bro.  Wallace,  in  the 
Old  Fort.  Feb.  12,  1849,  Charles  C. 
Rich,  Lorenzo  Snow.  Erastus  Snow  and 


Franklin  D.  Richards  were  ordained 
Apostles.  The  more  permanent  or- 
ganization of 'the  Salt  Lake  Stake  of 
Zion  and  the  ordaining  of  nearly  all  the 
first  Bishops  in  Salt  Lake  City  also 
took  place  in  Elder  Wallace's  house, 
in  February,  1849.  When  the  first 
misionaries  were  called  in  Great  Salt 
Lake  valley  to  go  to  the  nations  of 
the  earth.  Elder  Wallace  was  one  of  the 
number.  He  was  called  to  Great  Brit- 
ain, and  crossed  the  mountains  and 
plains  late  in  the  fall  of  1849.  together 
with  four  of  the  Apostles,  and  many 
other  Elders.  He  arrived  in  Liverpool 
England,  June  9,  1850,  and  labored  in 
the  British  Isles  about  two  years,  most 
of  the  time  as  counselor  to  Franklin  D. 
Richards  in  the  presidency  of  the  Brit- 
ish Mission.       "He     returns     to  Zion  " 


292 


LATTER-DAY    SAINT 


wrote  Elder  Richards  editorially,  "with 
our  blessing,  and  the  blessing  of  thous- 
ands of  Saints  who  have  been  Instruct- 
ed, strengthened  and  built  up  in  their 
most  holy  faith,  by  his  ministrations 
while  on  his  late  mission."  Returning 
home  from  his  mission.  Elder  Wallace 
sailed  from  Liverpool,  March  20,  1852, 
and  arrived  in  Salt  Lake  City  in  Au- 
gust following.  After  his  return  from 
this  mission.  Elder  Wallace  yielded 
obedience  to  the  higher  law  of  marriage 
and  again  took  an  active  part  in  Pio- 
neer labor  in  the  sterile  valley  of  the 
Great  Salt  Lake.  As  a  member  of  the 
High  Priests'  quorum  he  participated 
In  the  ceremonies  of  laying  the  corner 
stones  of  the  Salt  Lake  City  Temple, 
and  offered  the  dedicatory  prayer  at  the 
laying  of  the  northwest  corner  stone  of 
that  noted  structure.  In  1867,  among 
others,  he  was  instrumental  in  secur- 
ing the  organization  of  the  Brighton 
Ward,  on  the  west  side  of  Jordan  river, 
At  the  April  conference,  1860,  he  was 
sustained  as  second  counselor  to  Presi- 
dent Daniel  Spencer,  of  the  Salt  Lake 
Stake,  and  at  the  April  conference  in 
1866  he  was  promoted  to  the  position  of 
first  counselor.  He  acted  in  the  latter 
position  till  May  9,  1874,  when  he  was 
called  to  preside  over  the  Stake,  suc- 
ceeding John  W.  Toung  in  that  office. 
He  filled  this  position  about  two  years. 
From  1877  to  the  time  of  his  death, 
which  occurred  at  his  residence  at 
Granger  Jan.  30,  1900,  he  acted  as  presi- 
dent of  the  High  Priests'  quorum  in  the 
Salt  Lake  Stake  of  Zion. 

CANNON,  Angus  Mnnn,  president  of 
the  Salt  Lake  Stake  of  Zion  since  1870, 
is  the  son  of  George  Cannon  and  Ann 
Quayle.  and  was  born  in  Liverpool, 
Lancashire,  England,  May  17,  1834.  At 
the  age  of  three  years  he  went  to  live 
with  his  grandmother  Quayle  on  the 
Isle  of  Man,  where  he  remained  until 
he  was  four  years  old.  His  parents 
were  baptized  in  Liverpool  Feb.  11,  1840, 
by  Apostle  John  Taylor,  who  had  mar- 
ried Leonora,  his  father's  sister.  Angus 
was  blesed  by  the  Elders  in  the  Church 
the  same  year.  The  family,  composed 
of  parents  and  children— George  Q., 
Mary  Alice,  Ann,  Angus  M.,  David 
Henry  and  Leonora— in  September,  1842, 
took  pasage  with  a  company  of  Saints 
in  the  ship  "Sidney,"  presided  over  by 
Elder  Levi  Richards.  On  the  second 
day  the  mother  was  taken  sick,  and 
after  a  six  weeks'  Illness,  she  died  and 


was  buried  in  the  ocean.  She  had  an- 
ticipated this  fate,  but  she  could  not  be 
deterred  from  undertaking  the  voyage 
to  gather  her  children  to  the  bosom  of 
the  Church,  such  was  the  exalted  re- 
ligious nature  of  this  Apostolic  mother, 
three  of  whose  sons  were  destined  to 
become  leaders  in  the  Church.  After 
a  voyage  of  eight  weeks,  the  family 
reached  New  Orleans  and  finally  St. 
Louis,  where  they  spent  the  winter.and 
in  the  spring  of  1843  they  went  up  to 
Nauvoo  with  a  company  of  Saints  on 
the  "Maid  of  Iowa,"  a  steamboat 
owned  by  the  Church  and  commanded 
by  Captain  Dan  Jones.  In  the  sum- 
mer of  1843,  Angus  and  his  brothers  and 
sisters  were  prostrated  with  fever  and 
ague,  and  young  Angus  was  anxious 
to  be  baptized  for  fear  he  would  die 
without  the  administration  of  the  or- 
dinance. In  his  youthful  earnestness 
he  delighted  to  hear  the  instructions  of 
Joseph  and  Hyrum,  and  was  especially 
inspired  with  the  Prophet's  forecast  of 
the  future.  When  the  Prophet  deliv- 
ered his  famous  speech  to  the  Nauvoo 
Legion, in  full  dress  as  their  lieutenant- 
general,  these  feelings  were  intense; 
but  beyond  the  power  of  his  description 
is  the  memory-  still  retained  in  Presi- 
dent Angus  M.  Cannon's  mind  of  the 
awful  night  of  the  martyrdom — June 
27,  1844.  In  1844  his  father  married 
Mary  Edwards  (nee  White),  a  widow 
from  North  Wales.  He  went  to  St. 
Louis  and  died  during  that  fall.  His 
daughter  Elizabeth  is  the  issue  of  that 
marriage.  The  same  fall  Angus  was 
baptized  at  Nauvoo  by  L.  O.  Littlefield 
and  was  confirmed  on  the  river  bank. 
Charles  Lambert  married  Mary  Alice 
Cannon  anu  became  administrator  of 
Mr.  Cannon's  estate  and  guardian  of 
the  younger  children.  In  the  fall  of 
1846,  after  the  battle  of  Nauvoo,  the 
family  were  driven  with  the  Saints 
across  the  river,  on  the  banks  of  which 
they  had  laid  for  a  while,  exhausted 
and  suffering  from  hunger,  which  was 
relieved  bv  the  miracle  of  flocks  of 
quails  flying  into  their  camps  and  even 
into  their  tents.  The  famishing  ex- 
iles caught  the  birds  and  thus  their 
wants  were  relieved.  At  Winter  Quar- 
ters the  family  built  a  house.  The 
Indians  killed  their  cattle  in  the  win- 
ter, and  Angus,  in  company  with  his 
guardian,  went  to  Missouri  to  get  a 
traveling  outfit,  with  which  they  start- 
ed  west   in  1848.   but  their  outfit   went 


BIOGRAPHICAL    ENCYCLOPEDIA. 


293 


through  the  ice  on  the  Missouri  river, 
which  hindered  their  journey  till  the 
spring-  of  1849,  when  Angus  walked  from 
Missouri  to  Salt  Lake  valley,  driving 
stock  and  carrying  a  gun  for  hunting. 
He  arrived  in  Salt  Lake  valley  in  Oc- 
tober, 1849,  the  day  after  his  brotner 
George  Q.  had  started  on  his  mission  to 
California  and  the  Sandwich  Islands. 
The  next  summer  Angus  farmed  and 
hauled  wood,  and  in  November  went 
with  Geo.  A.  Smith's  company  that  set- 
tled Iron  county,  arriving  on  the  pres- 
ent site  of  Parowan  in  January,  1851. 
In  May  he  returned  to  Salt  Lake  City 
and  continued  farming  and  canyon 
work  till  the  fall  of  1852,  when  he  went 
to  the  "DeseretNews"  office  in  the  print- 
ing business.  At  the  April  conference  of 
1852  he  was  ordained  a  Seventy  in  the 


30th  Quorum.  In  the  fall  of  1854  he 
went  with  Apostle  John  Taylor  on  a 
mission  to  New  York,  to  preach  and 
assist  in  publishing  the  "Mormon."  His 
mother's  brother.  Captain  Joseph 
Quayle,  gave  him  money  and  his  moth- 
er's sister  furnished  him  with  a  home 
in  Brooklyn.  He  was  next  sent  to 
liartford,  Connecticut,  to  preach,~which 
he  did  in  various  parts  of  that  State. 
He  returned  to  New  York  in  May,  and 
was  next  sent  to  labor  in  the  New  Jer- 
sey i)art  of  the  Philadelphia  conference 
under  Jeter  Clinton.  During  the  sum- 
mer he  baptized  ten  persons.  He  next 
went  to  Franklin  county,  Penn.,  where 
he  baptized  twenty-one  persons  within 
one  month.  There,  he  was  joined  by 
Geo.    J.    Taylor,    and   others   were   bap- 


tized. In  the  spring  of  1856  he  suc- 
ceeded Elder  Clinton  in  the  presidency 
of  the  Philadelphia  conference,  which 
included  Pennsylvania,  New  Jersey, 
Delaware  and  eastern  Maryland.  In 
the  spring  of  1857  W.  I.  Appleby  waa 
appointed  to  preside  over  the  mission, 
and  Angus  was  appointed  his  first 
counselor  and  to  superintend  the  emi- 
gration on  this  side  of  the  Atlantic.  The 
same  fall  the  Elders  were  released  to 
come  home  in  consequence  of  the  "Bu- 
chanan war."  Angus  left  Philadelphia 
in  March,  1858,  and  started  for  the  West, 
but  he  was  taken  down  with  lung  fe- 
ver and  stayed  at  Crescent  City  a 
month.  He  had  also  previously  the 
lung  fever  at  Philadelphia.  In  the  be- 
ginning of  May,  1858,  he,  together  with 
one  hundred  Elders,  started  west  and 
had  an  eventful  journey,  on  which  the 
hand  of  God  was  signally  made  mani- 
fest in  the  protection  of  His  servants 
in  the  midst  of  great  danger.  They 
arrived  in  the  Valley  June  21,  1858,  and 
found  the  city  deserted,  the  Saints  be- 
ing on  their  move  south.  Angus  joined 
his  brother  George  Q.  in  Fillmore;  the 
brothers  had  not  seen  each  other  for 
eleven  years.  He  returned  to  Salt  Lake 
City,  and  engaged  in  farming,  teaming 
and  printing,  as  his  health  permitted. 
In  1859  he  was  ordained  a  president  of 
the- 30th  Quorum  of  Seventy.  In  the 
fall  of  1860  he  started  a  company  to 
manufacture  potteryware,  under  the 
firm  name  of  Cannon,  Eardley  &  Broth- 
ers. In  the  fall  of  1861  he  was  called 
on  the  "cotton  mission."  He  located 
on  the  Rio  Virgen,  and  was  associated 
on  a  committee  to  locate  the  city  of 
St.  George  with  Erastus  Snow  and  Ja- 
cob Gates.  A  charter  was  granted  dur- 
ing the  winter,  and  Angus  M.  Cannon 
was  elected  the  first  mayor  of  the  city, 
which  office  he  held  two  terms.  He 
was  also  prosecuting  attorney  for 
Washinerton  county  four  years.  He 
was  afterwards  elected  by  the  legisla- 
ture prosecuting  attorney  for  the  Sec- 
ond Judicial  District.  In  1865,  in  the 
miliiia,  he  was  elected  major  in  the  sec- 
ond regiment  of  the  Iron  Military  Dis- 
trict; and  was  afterwards  elected  lieu- 
tenant-colonel of  the  same  regiment 
and  commissioned  by  the  governor.  In 
December,  1864,  he  went  south  with  an 
expedition  to  locate  Call's  Landing,  on 
the  Colorado  river,  and  in  January, 
1866,  he  was  a  member  of  the  expedition 
under  Col.  McArthur  that  recovered  the 


294 


LATTER-DAY    SAINT 


bodies  of  Dr.  J.  M.  Whitmore  and 
Robert  Mclntyre,  who  had  been  killed 
bv  Indians.  The  expedition  punished 
the  murderers  and  assisted  the  peo- 
ple in  placing  themselves  In  a  position 
of  defense.  In  1867  Angus  removed 
north  in  consequence  of  feeble  health, 
and  in  the  fall  of  that  year  he  was 
called  to  the  management  of  the  "Des- 
eret  News"  office.  He  remained  in  that 
position  until  1874,  during  which  time 
he  filled  a  six  months'  mission  to  the 
Eastern  States,  and  traveled  about  34,- 
000  miles  inside  of  2^4  years.  His 
health  again  failing,  he  resigned  in 
August,  1874  after  which  he  traveled 
through  the  Territory  to  recruit  his 
health,  and  engaging  in  business  pur- 
suits. May  9,  1873.  he  was  ordained  to 
the  office  of  a  High  Priest  and  set  apart 
to  act  as  a  High  Councilor  in  the  Salt 
Lake  Stake  of  Z:on,  which  position  he 
held  until  April,  1876,  when  he  was 
called  to  preside  over  the  Stake,  and 
was  ordained  and  set  apart  to  fill  said 
position  under  the  hands  of  President 
Brigham  Young,  the  same  month. 
From  July  2,  1874,  to  April,  1876,  he  also 
acted  as  second  Counselor  to  Bishop 
Thomas  Taylor,  of  the  Fourteenth 
Ward.  In  August,  1876,  he  was  elected 
recorder  of  Salt  Lake  county  for  a 
term  of  four  years,  and  re-elected  in 
August  1880.  When  the  "Deseret  News" 
company  was  incorporated,  he  was 
elected  a  director  and  vice-president, 
and  has  been  several  times  re-elected. 
In  1883  he  went  east  and  purchased 
machinery  for  the  Deseret  Paper  Mills. 
Jan.  20,  1885,  he  was  arrested  on  a 
charge  of  unlawful  cohabitation  and 
placed  under  bonds.  His  preliminary 
examination  before  Commissioner  Mc- 
Kay was  commenced  on  the  21st  and 
continued  until  the  24th,  when  he  was 
boind  over  in  the  sum  of  $1,500  to 
stand  his  trial.  Feb.  11th  he  was  ar- 
raigned in  the  Third  District  Court, and 
two  days  later  he  entered  a  plea  of  jiot 
guilty.  His  final  trial  was  commenced 
on  the  27th  of  April,  and  on  the  29th 
the  jury  brought  in  a  verdict  of  guilty. 
May  9th  he  was  sentenced  by  Judge 
Zane  to  six  months'  imprisonment  and 
to  pay  a  fine  of  $300.  On  the  same  day 
he  was  taken  to  the  Utah  Penitentiary, 
together  with  A.  Milton  Musser  and 
James  C.  "Watson,  who  also  had  been 
sentenced  for  "similar  offenses."  His 
case  was  appealed  to  the  Supreme 
Court  of  the  Territory,  and  taken  on  a 


writ  of  error  to  the  Supreme  Court  of 
the  United  States,  both  of  which  trib- 
unals sustained  the  lower  courts.  Pend- 
ing the  final  adjudication  by  the  U.  S. 
Supreme  Court,  Pres.  Cannon  remained 
in  jail  more  than  two  months  over  the 
sentence,  the  chief  object  being  to 
obtain  an  authoritative  definition  of  the 
legal  scope  of  the  term  "unlawful  co- 
habitation." On  the  10th  of  May, 
1886,  three  cases  of  unlawful  cohabita- 
tion against  Lorenzo  Snow  were  dis- 
posed of  by  the  U.  S.  Supreme  Court, 
to  which  they  had  been  appealed.  The 
court  decided  it  had  no  jurisdiction.  To 
show  consistency  it  reconsidered  its 
mandate  in  Pres.  Cannon's  appeal  and 
dismissed  that  case  also.  Previous  to 
this,  however.  Brother  Cannon  had  been 
released  from  prison  (Dec.  14,  1885).  On 
the  24th  of  November,  1886,  he  was 
again  arrested  on  a  charge  of  unlawful 
cohabitation  and  placed  under  $10,000 
bonds,  and  w'hen  he  was  arraigned  be- 
fore Commissioner  McKay  Dec.  13th 
following  he  was  arrested  on  three  more 
charges,  two  for  unlawful  cohabitation 
and  one  for  polygamy.  At  the  conclu- 
sion of  the  examination  he  was  ac- 
quitted on  all  four  charges,  the  prose- 
cution being  unable  to  prove  that  he 
had  lived  with  any  one  of  his  families 
subsequent  to  his  discharge  from  the 
penitentiaiy.  He  had  previously  de- 
clared that  he  would  associate  with  all 
his  families  or  with  none  of  them.  Be- 
sides his  ministerial  labors  in  the 
Church,  President  Cannon  has  done  a 
great  deal  toward  developing  the  re- 
sources of  this  country,  reclaiming  the 
desert  and  giving  employment  to  the 
poor.  He  is  naturally  of  a  kind  and 
sympathetic  nature, and  has  ever  sho\vn 
his  zeal  and  fidelity  to  the  cau.se  of 
truth,  of  which  he  has  been  a  standard 
bearer  for  So  many  years.  July  18, 
1858,  he  married  Sarah  Maria  and  Ann 
Amanda  Mousley;  the  former  has  borne 
him  six  and  the  latter  ten  children. 
They  were  natives  of  Newcastle  county, 
Delaware,  and  descendants  of  the 
Swfdes  and  Finns  who  built  the  "brick 
church"  of  Wilmington,  Delaware,  and 
were  among  the  earliest  settlers  of 
America.  June  16,  1875,  he  also  married 
Clarissa  Cordelia  Moses  (widow  of  Wm. 
Mason)  who  bore  him  three  children. 
She  was  a  native  of  Massachusetts  and 
was  one  of  the  company  of  Saints 
which  came  around  Cape  Horn  in  the 
ship  "Brooklyn"  in  1846.      He  has  since 


BIOGRAPHICAL    ENCYCLOPEDIA. 


295 


married  Martha  Hughes  and  Maria 
Bennion;  the  former  has  borne  him 
two  daughters  and  one  son;  the  latter 
two  daughters  and  two  sons.  Altogether 
he  is  the  father  of  twenty-seven  sons 
and  daughters,  of  whom  five  sons  and 
two  daughters  are  deceased.  During 
the  last  eleven  years  Pres.  Cannon  has 
been  deeply  interested  in  mining  affairs 
in  the  Dugway  and  Mercur  mining  dis- 
tricts, holding  at  present  many  very 
promising  claims;  and  when  a  railway 
is  built  to  Dugway,  his  claims  in  that 
locality  will  undoubtedly  be  very  valu- 
able. He  has  also  been  engaged  in 
farming  and  stock-raising  on  a  large 
scale.  In  one  season  he  marketed 
horses  to   the   value   of  $10,000. 

TAYLOR,  Joseph  Edward,  first 
counselor  to  Angus  M.  Cannon,  presi- 
dent of  the  Salt  Lake  Stake  of  Zion,  is 
the  son  of  George  Edward  Grove  Tay- 
lor and  Ann  Hicks,  and  was  born  Dec. 
11,  1830,  in  the  town  of  Horsham,  coun- 
ty of  Sussex,  England.  He  was  bap- 
tized by  Elder  Henry  Beecroft  at  Hull, 
Yorkshire,  Aug.  11,  1848,  being  then  on- 
ly seventeen  years  old.  He  was  or- 
dained to  the  office  of  a  Priest  Oct.   4, 

1848,  and  was  called  at  that  time  to 
travel  in  the  Lincolnshire  conference. 
After  being  ordained  an  Elder,   Oct.   1, 

1849,  he  continued  to  travel  in  the  same 
conference  (besides  visiting  others  at 
times)  until  released  in  January,  1851. 
During  a  period  of  two  years  and  three 
months  he  walked  to  fill  appointments 
3,69.3  miles,  and  rode  during  that  time 
(mostly  by  railway)  3,166  miles, preached 
247  regular  discourses,  besides  deliver- 
ing nearly  200  exhortations,  held  27  dis- 
cussions,presided  at  52  Sacrament  meet- 
ings, baptized  nearly  two  hundred  per- 
sons who  had  been  convinced  of  the 
truth  under  his  testimony,  and  assisted 
at  the  baptism  of  a  great  many  more. 
He  organized  several  branches  of  the 
Church  and  received  during  that  time 
from  the  Saints  in  voluntary  gifts  of 
money  $65.05  and  about  $300  from  stran- 
gers. During  the  summers  of  1849  and 
1850  he  often  held  five  meetings  in  one 
or  more  large  towns  or  cities  on  Sab- 
bath days,  sometimes  two  outdoor  and 
three  indoor  and  vice  versa,  in  many 
instances  doing  all  the  preaching  and 
praying  himself,  besides  leading  the 
singing  at  each  meeting,  no  other  El- 
der or  Priest  being  associated  with  him 
in   opening   up    a     great     deal    of   new 


ground.  He  often  worked  with  his  hands 
on  week-days,  to  obtain  money  to  help 
pay  for  hall  rents  and  defray  other 
necessary  expenses,  and  says  he  seldom 
felt  weary  in  body  or  mind.  He  took 
pasage  on  board  the  ship  "Ellen,"  which 
left  Liverpool  Jan.  8,  1851,  James  W. 
Cummings  being  the  president  of  the 
company,  and  arrived  in  St.  Louis, 
Mo.,  in  the  latter  part  of  March.  He 
remained  in  that  city  until  the  spring 
of  1852.  having  been  prostrated  by  sick- 
ness nine  months  of  the  time;  left  Win- 
ter Quarters  June  12th,  in  company  No. 
4  (Captain  Joseph  Outhouse)  and  ar- 
rived in  Great  Salt  Lake  valley  Sept. 
6th  of  that  year.      Feb.  17,  1853,  he  was 


ordained  to  the  office  of  a  Seventy  and 
tecame  identified  with  the  31st  Quorum; 
received  his  endowments  Aug.  24,  1854, 
was  ordained  a  High  Priest  Sept.  12. 
1854,  and  set  apart  to  act  as  counselor 
to  Bishop  John  Lytle  of  the  Eleventh 
Ward,  Salt  Lake  City,  He  continued 
to  act  in  that  capacity  until  August, 
1856,  at  which  time  Bishop  Lytle  was 
sent  to  Carson  valley  on  a  mission. 
Jan.  25,  1857,  he  was  called  to  act  as 
counselor  to  Alexander  McRae  who  had 
been  appointed  to  fill  the  vacancy  oc- 
casioned by  Bishop  Lytle's  removal.  El- 
der Taylor  continued  to  act  as  coun- 
selor to  Bishop  McRae  until  1868,  hav- 
irc  previously  removed  to  the  Thir- 
teenth Ward.  Dec.  22,  1875,  he  was 
called  by  Pres.  Brigham  Young  to  go 
on  a  mission  to  the  States  of  Nebraska, 
Iowa  and  Illinois,  to  labor  among  the 
Josephites  and  others  who  had  seceded 


296 


LATTER-DAT  SAINT 


from     the     Church.       He     was     accom- 
panied on  this  mission  by  Elder  Clau- 
dius V.  Spencer.of  Salt  Lake  City,  who 
had  been  appointed  at  the  same  time: 
they  were  joined     by  Elder  Isaac  Bul- 
lock,  of  Provo,  at  Council  Bluffs  upon 
his  return  from  the  East.      As    the  re- 
sult  of   this   mission    36    persons     were 
baptized,      three     brancnes     organized, 
eight  children  blessed  and  one     couple 
married;    meetings     were     held   nearly 
every  night:   24  of  the  36  baptized  emi- 
grated  to   the   Valley   in   less   than   one 
year.       AVhile  upon   this  mission  Elder 
Taylor  paid  a  personal  visit   to  Emma 
Smith,    widow    of    the    Prophet    Joseph 
Smith,   who  was  residing   in   the   Man- 
sion house  in  Xauvoo  at  that  time  with 
her  husband,     Lewis     C.   Bidaman,     to 
whom  she  was  married  some  time  after 
Joseph's  death.       Elder  Taylor's  object 
in  making  this  visit  was  to  learn  from 
Emma's  own  lips  some  things  in  rela- 
tion    to     the       "Reorganized     church," 
which  was  presided  over  by  her  oldesu 
son  Joseph.       Among  other  things     ho 
propounded  this  question.  "Why  did  you 
use    your    influence    to    have    your    son 
Joseph  installed  as  the  president  of  the 
Re-organization, knowing,   as  you  must 


under  the  hands  of  the  late  Pres.  John 
Taylor,    George   Q.   Cannon   and   Angus 
M.  Cannon,  to  act  as  first  counselor  to 
the    latter.    Brother     David    O.    Calder, 
who  had  heretofore  filled  that  position, 
havinf  died  a  shoit  time  previous.     El- 
der Taylor  still  occupies  the  latter  po- 
sition  He   has  always   been   prominent 
in   sustaining  the   institutions   in   Zion, 
which    have    for    their    object    the    ad- 
vancement  of    the    people.       This    has 
been  exhibited  by  him  in  a  very  marked 
manner   in   relation   to   Church   schools 
and  especially  in  regard  to  the  L.  D.  S. 
University,   formerly  the  L.  D.   S.  Col- 
lege, in  Salt  Lake  City.  When  it  seemed 
impossible  to  longer  maintain   the  col- 
lege, he  personally  undertook  the  task 
of    raising   means   for    its    support,    for 
he   had  expressed  himself  as  believing 
that  the  Lord  would  be  displeased  with 
the  Saints  if  thev  discontinued  it.      In 
his  effort  he  was  eminently  successful. 
Liberal  donations  were  made  by  a  great 
many  of  the  citizens,  prominent  among 
whom  was  Elder  Taylor  himself.  Presi- 
dent Snow  expres.sed   himself  as  high- 
Iv  pleased    with     the    successful  effort 
made,   and    nobly   responded     with   the 
gift  in   behalf   of     the     Church   of   one 


have  done. that  the  men  who  would  con-  Quarter  of  the  block  east  of  the  Tem- 
fer  upon  him  this  authority  were  apos- 
tates and  some  of  them  had  been  cut 
off  from  the  Church?'  To  which  she 
replied  somewhat  evasively,  but  from 
her  remarks  he  discovered  her  in- 
ten.«e  dislike  for  Pres.  Brigham  Young, 
whom  she  accused  of  entirely  ignoring 
Joseph's  family.  She  claimed  that  the 
family  had  a  right  to  not  only  recogni- 
tion but  to  representation.  For  this 
reason  and  her  utter  distaste  of  the 
man  from  other  causes  had  led  her  to     Purposes  by   Ezra   T.    Clark  and   other 


pie,  upon  which  a  very  creditable  build- 
ing has  recently  been  erected  and  is 
now  fully  occupied  with  students.  Fol- 
lowing this  Sister  M.  Barratt's  gift 
of  money  sufficient  to  erect  upon  this 
ground  the  "Barratt  Memorial  Build- 
ing" for  school  purposes,  and  the  trans- 
fei-  of  real  estate  by  the  heirs  of  Presi- 
dent Young  to  the  University,  will  fur- 
nish enough  means  to  erect  a  third 
building.      The  gift  of  $1  000  for  library 


do  as  she  had  done.  Brother  Taylor 
replied  by  taking  out  of  his  pocket  a 
photograph  of  Pres.  Young,  and  show- 
ing it  to  her,  remarking:  "After  all, 
Emma,  he  appears  to  be  pretty  well 
1. reserved  personally,  and  the  Chm-ch 
has  not  lost  any  of  its  strength  either 
numerically    or    oiheiwise      from      the 


prospects  in  view  give  additional  prom- 
ise of  perpetual  success  to  this  institu- 
tion of  learning,'  in  which  Elder  Tay- 
lor has  taken  so  much  interest. 

CARD,  Charles  Ora,  president  of 
the  Alberta  Stake  of  Zion,  was  born 
Nov.  5,  1839.  at  the  confluence  of  Cana- 
opposition  which  I  think  you  have  very  saraga  and  Sugar  creeks,  in  the  town- 
unwisely  aided  and  abetted."  At  this  ^^ip  of  Ossian.  Allegany  county,  New 
point  the  conversation  ended.  Elder  York,  and  lived  there  until  he  was 
Taylor  returned  home  April  7,  1876.  and  fiffht  years  old.  In  1843  his  parents  re- 
on  the  following  day  (April  8th),  in  ceived  the  gospel,  and  under  the  hands 
general  confeience,  he  was  called  to  act  of  Elder  William  Hyde  he  received  his 
as  second  counselor  to  Angus  M.  Can-  child's  blessing.  He  accompanied  his 
non,  who  was  called  at  the  same  time  parents  to  Park  Centre,  St.  Joseph 
to  preside  over  the  Salt  Lake  Stake  of  county,  Michigan,  in  the  fall  of  1846, 
Zion.       Oct.   13,   1SS4,   he   was  set  apart    whither  his  father  went  to  care  for  his 


BIOGRAPHICAL    ENCYCLOPEDIA. 


297 


widowed  mother  and  family.  There  his 
grandfather,  William  F.  Card,  had 
lodged  on  his  way  to  Nauvoo,  but  had 
sickened  and  died.  After  the  family 
had  been  here  one  year,  they  were  all 
taken  sick  with  chills,  fever,  and  ague, 
and  three  more  of  his  grandfather's 
family  died,  one  son  and  two  daughters. 
His  father  being  in  poor  health,  con- 
cluded to  go  to  his  old  home  in  Ossian, 
New  York  State,  taking  his  mother  and 
his  own  family  with  him.  He  took  this 
step  to  regain  his  health  and  that  of  his 
family,  also  for  the  purpose  of  procur- 
ing means  to  gather  with  the  Church. 
President  Card  writes:  "During  the 
winter  of  1855-56  an  uncle  of  mine.  El- 
der Joseph  France,  returned  from  his 
mission  in  England  and  remained  with 
us  during  the  winter.      I  was  baptized 


by  him  in  Canasaga  creek,  near  Whit- 
ney's Crossing,  township  of  Burnes,  Al- 
lee-any  county.  New  York.  April  12,  1856, 
and  a  few  days  later  we  were  on  our 
way  by  train  to  Great  Salt  Lake  valley; 
we  joined  the  migrating  Saints  at  Iowa 
Cit".  Iowa,  where  father  procured  two 
yoke  of  oxen  and  a  wagon;  with  this 
outfit  we  accompanied  the  first  two  di- 
^•isions  of  the  hand-cart  companies  un- 
der the  guidance  of  Elders  E:lmund  Els- 
worth  and  Daniel  D.  McArthur,  and 
crossed  the  State  of  Iowa  to  Florence; 
at  this  point  the  company  was  divided, 
my  father  traveling  with  what  is  known 
as  the  first  hand-cart  company  under 
Elder  Edmund  Elsworth  as  captain. 
Although  I  was  only  sixteen  years  of 
age,    I    took    my    turn    standing    guard 


with  the  men.  I  was  also  chosen  as 
one  of  the  hunters  to  aid  in  securing 
meat  from  the  vast  herds  of  buffalo 
that  were  traversing  the  plains  in  those 
days.  I  also  aided  the  hand-cart  peo- 
ple in  crossing  the  streams,  after  fill- 
ing father's  wagon  with  women  and 
children,  and  then  continued  our  la- 
bors by  carrying  the  remainder  across 
the  streams  on  our  backs.  For  several 
hundred  miles  my  father  and  uncle 
were  sick,  and  the  care  of  two  wagons 
and  four  yoke  of  oxen  and  other  camp 
chores  depended  upon  me.  We  landed 
in  Salt  Lake  City  in  the  latter  part  of 
September,  and  I  assure  the  reader  that 
the  following  October  conference  was 
a  great  treat  to  me,  to  behold  Prophets 
and  Apostles  and  sit  under  their  teach- 
ings. Soon  after  this  my  father  moved 
to  Farmington,  Davis  county,  where  I 
was  ordained  a  Seventy  and  became 
identified  with  the  56th  quorum  of  Sev- 
enty. I  spent  my  20th  birthday  (Nov. 
5,  1859)  building  a  log  cabin  in  Logan 
for  my  father,  preparatory  to  moving 
there,  which  we  did  the  following 
March,  1860,  where  I  resided  with  my 
parents,  taking  an  active  part  with  the 
minute  men  under  Colonel  Thos.  E. 
Ricks  during  the  first  four  years.  I 
attended  school  in  Ogden  from  Decem- 
ber, 1864,  until  April,  1866,  under  the 
kind  tutoring  of  Elder  Francis  A.Brown 
and  his  accomplished"  wife,  Hattie  C. 
From  the  earliest  introduction  of  the 
Sabbath  Schools  in  Cache  valley,  I  took 
an  active  part  as  teacher.  Ward  super- 
intendent, and  superintendent  of  the 
consolidated  schools  of  Logan,  after 
which  I  acted  as  first  assistant  Stake 
superintendent  for  about  fifteen  years. 
During  the  winter  of  1871  I  filled  a  win- 
ters  mission  among  friends  and  ac- 
ciuaintances;  I  also  \lsited  New  York. 
iMas?arhusetts,  Michigan.  AVisconsin 
and  Iowa,  with  William  Hyde  of  Lo- 
gan as  my  companion.  I  was  coun- 
selor to  the  president  of  the  High 
Priests'  quorum  in  the  Cache  Stake 
from  1877  to  1879,  and  second  counselor 
to  William  B.  Preston  from  1879  to  1884, 
when  I  was  made  president  of  Cache 
Stake,  which  position  I  occupied  until 
August,  1890.  From  1873  to  1877  I  su- 
Iieiintended  the  erection  of  the  Logan 
Tabernacle,  and  from  1877  to  1884  I  su- 
pei-intended  the  construction  of  the  Lo- 
gan Temple.  Thus,  for  eleven  years 
I  was  engaged  in  supervising  the  erec- 
tion of  these  two  great  edifices.  About 


298 


LATTER-DAT    SAINT 


the  1st  of  September,  1886,  I  was  re- 
quested by  Pres.  John  Taylor  to  ex- 
plore the  British  possessions  and  to  re- 
port the  feasibility  of  establishing  a 
colony  on  British  soil,  which  I  did  and 
reported  favorably  to  him  in  Novem- 
ber, the  same  year.  Early  in  the  spring 
of  1887  I  was  requested  by  Pres.  John 
Taylor  to  permanently  locate  and  take 
charge  of  a  colony  of  Saints  in  south- 
ern Alberta,  and  with  grip  in  hand,  on 
the  21st  of  March,  I  took  my  journey 
by  rail  to  Helena,  Montana,  where  I 
was  joined  by  Pres.  Thomas  E.  Ricks. 
of  Rexburg,  Idaho,  Bishop  Thomas  X. 
Smith  of  the  Fourth  Ward,  Logan. Utah, 
and  Elder  Niels  Mouson,  of  Hyrum; 
the  latter  conveying  us  from  there  to 
Lees  creek.  Alberta.  On  the  27th  of 
April  we  located  the  site  of  what  is  now 
known  as  the  village  of  Cardston.  June 
3,  1887,  we  numbered  forty  souls;  to- 
day there  are  ten  Wards  and  two 
branches  with  about  three  thousand  in- 
habitants in  the  Alberta  Stake  of  Zion. 
During  this  period,  my  labors  have 
heen  directed  in  various  channels.  I 
introduced  the  first  steam  thresher  in 
Cardston,  and  directed  the  first  saw 
mill;  aided  to  establish  the  first  dairy 
and  grist  mill,  established  the  first  store 
now  known  as  the  Cardston  Co.  Limit- 
ed, also  the  Implement  Co.,  Limited.  I 
have  also  assisted  in  building  four 
meeting  houses  in  Cardston,  and  one 
large  two-story  public  school  house. 
During  the  last  two  years  almost  my 
entire  time  has  been  given  to  the  great 
canal  built  by  our  people.  I  turned 
the  first  furrow,  and  have  traveled  five 
thousand  miles  with  my  own  team 
during  its  construction.  A  railroad  is 
nearly  completed  which  will  connect  us 
with  the  outside  world.  A  word  for 
the  government:  We  have  located  on 
British  soil,  lived  in  Alberta  nearly 
fourteen  years  and  have  always  re- 
ceived from  the  government  a  just  and 
impartial  recognition." 

LEWIS,  William  Hendricks,  pres- 
ident of  the  Benson  Stake  of  Zion,  is 
the  son  of  Neriah  Lewis  and  Rebecca 
Hendricks,  and  was  born  Oct.  14,  1837, 
in  Macoupin  county.  111.  His  parents 
were  raised  in  Simpson  county,  Ken- 
tucky. His  father  was  a  descendant 
of  a  family  of  three  Welsh  brothers 
who  emigrated  from  Wales  to  America 
in  an  early  dav  and  who  took  part  in 
the  Revolutionary  war.      It  is  said  that 


twenty-two  men  of  the  Lewis  family 
fought  in  one  battle  under  General  Geo. 
Washington.  William's  father  and 
mother,  who  were  married  quite  young, 
removed  to  Illinois,  where  they  made  a 
new  home  and  were  prosperous  for 
about  nine  years.  Pres.  Lewis  writes: 
"In  the  winter  of  1846-47  my  uncle  Da- 
vid Lewis  came  to  my  father's  house 
and  preached  the  gospel  to  my  parents. 
My  father  accepted  the  same,  and  a 
few  weeks  later  sold  out  and  moved 
to    Nauvoo,    where    the   family   stopped 


with  my  father's  and  mother's  people 
for  about  two  weeks.  We  then  started 
for  the  great  unknown  west,  traveling 
through  Iowa  to  the  Missouri  river.  I 
was  present  when  Colonel  Allen  and 
other  United  States  officers  called  for 
the  Moi-mon  Battalion,  and  I  saw  the 
wives  and  mothers  of  these  soldiers  left 
on  the  bleak  prairie  without  a  protec- 
tor and  with  scarcely  food  enough  to 
eat.  A  rude  flat  boat  was  constructed 
on  which  we  crossed  the  Missouri  river. 
We  then  joined  Bishop  George  Miller's 
company  and  continued  our  journey 
westward,  hoping  to  reach  the  Rocky 
Mountains  that  same  season;  but  after 
traveling  a  few  hundred  miles,  winter 
came  on,  and  meeting  some  Punca  In- 
dian chiefs,  who  told  us  that  they  had 
grass,  timber  aijd  water,  and  that  we 
had  better  winter  with  them,  we  ac- 
cepted their  kind  offer,  left  the  trail  we 
had  been  following,  and  wintered  with 
them.  It  was  a  cold  bleak  winter,  and 
we  suffered  much  from  the  want  of 
food.       About  eighty  persons     of     our 


BIOGRAPHICAL.   ENCYCLOPEDIA. 


299 


company  died  of  black  leg  or  scurvy, 
and  were  burled  without  coffins.  We 
had  a  little  corn  in  camp,  which  the 
women  would  grind  on  a  hand  mill,  and 
there  were  at  times  as  many  as  twenty 
or  thirty  persons  waiting  their  turn  to 
grind.  When  we  first  arrived  at  the 
place  where  we  wintered,  some  two  or 
three  hundred  young  warriors  came  on 
horseback  to  serenade  our  camp;  they 
rode  at  full  speed  in  single  file,  and  in 
their  war  paint,  and  fired  their  guns  as 
they  came,  not  forgetting  to  give  the 
Indian  war  whoop.  This  made  it  very 
exciting  for  our  people,  many  of  whom 
had  never  seen  an  Indian  before.  Just 
at  that  moment  the  old  chief  appeared 
on  the  scene  in  great  excitement,  wav- 
ing his  hands  and  giving  the  word  of 
command,  saying  that  a  war  party  of 
Pawnees  was  at  their  camp,  killing 
their  women  and  children.  On  hearing 
this  the  warriors  broke  their  serenade 
and  went  at  full  speed  to  their  own 
camp,  where  they  had  a  desperate  bat- 
tle with  their  enemy.  They  fought 
like  demons  for  their  wives  and  chil- 
dren; their  war  chief  was  killed,  and  T 
have  never  before  or  since  listened  to 
such  howling  and  mourning.  While  in 
this  camp  our  corral  of  wagons  (which 
was  a  v^ry  large  one,  containing  our 
cattle  and  horses)  was  broken  one  night 
by  the  stampeding  of  the  cattle,  which 
ran  over  the  wagons,  as  though  there 
was  nothing  in  the  way,  and  made  kin- 
dling wood  of  most  of  our  vehicles  and 
their  contents.  Two  boys  or  young 
men  were  sleeping  under  one  of  the 
wagons  at  the  time,  but  an  old  iron 
pot,  which  stood  under  the  axletree, 
saved  their  lives.  During  the  fall  and 
early  winter  we  dug  roots,  which  we 
called  hog  potatoes,  to  eat;  they  were 
a  great  help  to  us,  but  later  the  frost 
became  so  intense  (the  ground  freezing 
three  or  four  feet  deep)  that  there 
could  be  no  more  digging  of  roots. 
When  the  cattle  died  of  hunger  and 
cold,  some  of  the  people  would  dress, 
boil  and  eat  some  of  the  meat.  As 
soon  as  winter  broke  up,  we  made  our 
way  back  to  Winter  Quarters, where  we 
remained  and  farmed  during  that  sea- 
son. We  then  maved  on  to  the  Iowa 
side  of  the  Missouri  river,  and  lived 
there  one  year.  My  parents  next 
moved  down  into  Platte  county,  Mis- 
souri (near  Saint  Joseph),  where  we  re- 
mained  for  two  years.       Having  there 


earned  sufficient  means  to  purchase  a 
good  outfit  to  come  to  the  Valley,  we 
started  for  Utah  in  April,  1851.  At  Win- 
ter Quarters  we  joined  Orson  Pratt's 
company,  with  James  Cummings  as 
captain  of  one  hundred,  and  Ormus 
Bates,  captain  of  fifty.  A  short  distance 
out  on  the  plains  we  left  the  old  road 
and  went  around  the  Elkhorn,  which 
compelled  us  to  travel  about  five  hun- 
dred miles  without  a  road.  We  had  a 
successful  trip,  and  arrived  in  Salt 
Lake  City  Oct.  7,  1851.  My  father  pur- 
chased a  home  in  the  15th  Ward,  Salt 
Lake  City,  and  we  farmed  the  follow- 
ing season.  In  the  fall  of  1852  we 
moved  to  Centerville,  Davis  county,  but 
returned  soon  afterwards  to  Salt  Lake 
City,  where  my  mother  died  in  the  fall 
of  1854.  My  father  was  left  with  my 
mother's  four  children  and  her  broth- 
er's two  orphan  children — six  mother- 
less children  in  all.  Then  came  a  hard 
struggle  to  make  a  living.  I  worked  at 
whatever  I  could  get  to  do,  and  finally 
obtained  employment  from  Captain 
Wm.  H.  Hooper,  and  did  fairly  well. 
The  captain  seemed  to  think  a  good 
deal  of  me.  I  attended  meetings  in 
the  Old  Tabernacle  regularly  for  ten 
years,  and  listened  with  delight  to 
Pres.  Brigham  Young,  Heber  C.  Kim- 
ball and  the  old  Apostles  and  veterans 
of  the  Prophet  Joseph's  time;  they 
spoke  with  power,  and  I  learned  to  love 
them,  and  to  cherish  their  teachings. 
Leaving  the  city  to  assist  my  father  on 
his  farm  in  Fort  Herriman,  I  became 
acquainted  with  a  young  lady  (Martha 
Petty),  whom  I  married  in  November, 
1856.  Henry  Harriman,  one  of  the 
Seven  Presidents  of  Seventies,  per- 
formed the  ceremony.  I  built  us  a 
snug  little  home  in  Fort  Herriman, 
though  we  commenced  married  life 
without  a  dollar  in  pocket.  But  we 
never  wanted  for  anything  that  we 
could  not  pay  for,  and  for  ten  years  we 
were  never  indebted  to  any  one.  I 
participated  in  the  Echo  Canyon  war, 
and  also  in  the  move  south.  Returning 
from  the  south  with  the  main  body  of 
the  people,  I  engaged  in  farming  and 
was  getting  along  very  well,  when  I 
concluded  to  go  to  Cache  valley.  I 
arrived  there  July  18,  1859.  We  fol- 
lowed an  Indian  trail  through  Wells- 
ville,  and  arriving  on  the  spot  where 
Richmond  now  stands,  I  staked  off  a 
claim,  and  in  company  with  my  broth- 


300 


LATTER-DAY    SAINT 


er-ln-law,  a  boy  of  some  sixteen  years, 
and  a  neighbor  by  the  name  of  A.  F. 
Stewart,  I  put  up  fifty  tons  of  hay.  We 
then  returned  to  Fort  Herriman,  load- 
ed up  some  ox  teams  with  lumber  for 
floors  and  roofs,  and  returned  to  Cache 
valley  to  put  up  our  log  cabins.  After 
building  them,  we  considered  them  very 
comfortable,  for  they  had  lumber  floors 
and  roofs.  Returning  once  more  to 
Fort  Herriman  I  sold  out  there,  and 
moved  my  family  to  our  new  home 
where  Richmond  now  stands.  We  ar- 
rived there  Oct.  31,  1859.  On  the  day  af- 
ter our  arrival,  my  oldest  daughter  Re- 
becca A.  Rawlins  was  born.  About  two 
weeks  later  Apostles  Orson  Hyde  and 
Ezra  T.  Benson  came  to  my  house  and 
ordained  me  a  High  Priest  and  set  me 
apart  as  a  member  of  the  High  Council 
in  Cache  Valley  Stake,  which  position 
I  held  about  twelve  years.  In  .he 
meantime  I  ofl^ciated  in  many  different 
callings,  such  as  Ward  Teacher,  minute 
man,  and  in  various  callings.  In  18G4 
I  went  down  to  the  Missouri  river  after 
the  poor  Saints;  and  in  1872  I  was  called 
to  be  Bishop  in  the  Lewiston  Ward." 
As  the  presiding  officer  in  Lewiston  for 
nearly  twenty-nine  years,  Bishop  Lewis 
witnessed  the  growth  of  that  settlement 
from  a  small  hamlet,  consisting  of  only 
four  cabins  built  in  the  desert,  to  one 
of  the  most  flourishing  settlements  in 
the  mountains.  When  the  settlements 
in  Cache  valley  were  divided  and  or- 
ganized into  three  Stakes  of  Zion, 
Bishop  Lewis  was  chosen  and  set  apart 
as  president  of  the  Benson  Stake,  which 
embraces  all  the  settlements  on  the 
north  end  of  Cache  county.  Pres.  Lewis 
is  still  young  in  heart  and  strong  in 
body,  and  has  no  doubt  a  long  career 
of  usefulness  yet  before  him. 

SESSION*,  Byron,  president  of  the 
Big  Horn  Stake  of  Zion,  is  the  son  of 
Perrigrine  Sessions  and  Mary  Call,  and 
was  bom  Nov.  7,  1851,  in  Bountiful,  Da- 
vis county,  Utah.  His  father  was  the 
first  settler  in  Bountiful,  which  was 
originally  called  Sessions'  settlement  in 
his  honor.  In  this  place  Byron  was 
raised  and  educated,  and  here  he  was 
baptized  May  31,  1858,  by  Henry 
Rampton,  and  confirmed  the  same  day 
by  Henry  Tingey.  As  a  young  man 
he  was  ordained  to  the  several  grades 
of  the  lesier  Priesthood,  and  finally  to 
the  oflFlce  of  an  Elder.  He  married 
Ida  Teombly  Oct.   31,   1870,  and   moved 


to  Woodruff,  Rich  county,  Utah,  m  1873. 
Here  he  labored  for  several  years  as  a 
Ward  and  a  Sunday  school  teacher.  He 
was  ordained  a  High  Priest  and  set 
apat^t  as  second  counselor  to  Bishop 
Wm.  H.  Lee  Aug.  19,  1888.  by  Geo.  Os- 
mond; set  apart  as  second  counselor  to 
Bishop  John  M.  Baxter  in  the  fall  of 
1890,  by  Wm.  Budge,  and  set  apart  as 
first  counselor  to  Pres.  John  M.  Bax- 
ter in  the  presidency  of  the  Woodruff 
Stake  June  6,  1898.  He  left  Woodruff 
April  22,  1901,  In  response  to  a  call  from 
the  authorities  of  the  Church     to  take 


charge  of  the  Big  Horn  colonization 
movement,  and  arrived  in  the  Big  Horn 
country  May  26,  1900.  The  ground  was 
first  broken  on  the  Sidon  canal  May  28, 
1900,  on  which  occasion  Bro.  Sessions 
drove  the  team  and  Apostle  Abrahanv 
O.  Woodruff  held  the  plow.  Elder  Ses- 
sions contracted  in  behalf  of  the  colony 
for  building  twenty  miles  of  railway 
track,  which  work  was  completed  satis- 
factorily. When  the  Saints  residing 
in  the  Big  Horn  country  were  organized 
into  a  Stake  of  Zion  in  May,  1901,  Byron 
Sessions  was  chosen  and  set  apart  as 
president  of  the  Stake,  with  Jesse  W. 
Crosby,  jun.,  as  his  first,  and  Charles 
A.  Welch  as  his  second  counselor. 
Pres.  Sessions  has  always  been  a  public 
spirited  man,  and  active  in  all  matters 
pertaining  to  the  welfare  of  the  Church, 
both  spiritually  and  temporally.  For 
several  years  he  was  the  manager  of 
the  Bear  River  Land  and  Canal  com- 
pany. He  is  the  father  of  ten  chil- 
dren. 


BIOGRAPHICAL    ENCTCLOPEDIA. 


301 


POND,  liCwis  Sumner,  president  of 
the  Bannock  Stake  of  Zion,  was  born 
Dec.  25,  1854,  in  Salt  Lake  City,  Utah. 
At  the  age  of  six  years  he  removed  with 
his  parents  to  Richmond,  Cache  county, 
where  he  labored  under  the  direction 
of  his  father  until  he  was  sixteen  years 
old,  after  which  he  was  employed  for 
ten  years  in  hauling  freight  by  team 
from  Montana.  He  married  Julia  Ann 
Whittle,  Jan.  15,  1878;  and  in  the 
spring  of  1880  located  with  his  family 
in  Gentile  valley,  Idaho,  -where  he  was 
ordained  a  High  Priest  and  set  apart 
as  first  counselor  to  Bishop  John  B. 
Thatcher  of  Mormon  Ward  July  19, 
1885.       In  1889-91  he  filled   a  successful 


mission  in  the  United  States,  laboring 
principally  in  West  Virginia.  Just  be- 
fore his  return, his  wife  moved  to  Lewis- 
ton,  Cache  county.  At  the  quarterly 
conference  held  in  Franklin,  Idaho,  Jan- 
uary, 1892,  he  was  requested  by  Apostle 
Marriner  W.  Merrill  and  Pres.  Geo.  C. 
Parkinson  to  return  to  Gentile  valley, 
where  he  was  wanted  for  a  Bishop.  In 
obedience  to  this  call  he  exchanged 
property  with  his  brother  and  moved 
back  to  Gentile  valley,  and  at  the 
quarterly  conference  of  the  Oneida 
Stake  held  in  April,  1892,  he  was  or- 
dained a  Bishop  by  Joseph  F.  Smith 
and  set  apart  to  preside  over  the 
Thatcher  Ward.  At  the  November, 
1894,  election  he  was  elected  a  county 
commissioner  on  the  Republican  ticket. 
In  June,  1897,  he  was  called  to  open  up 
a  niission  in  the  Northwestern  States, 
and  at  a  quarterly  conference  held  at 


Marsh  Center  Ward, July  24,  1897,he  was 
set  apart  to  take  charge  of  the  Idaho 
conference.  July  28,  1897,  he  com- 
menced his  labors  in  Boise  City  in  con- 
nection with  Elder  Thomas  Preston. 
After  laboring  for  four  months  in  that 
vicinity,  he  returned  home  on  a  short 
visit;  but  left  again  in  December,  1897. 
for  Spokane,  Washington;  he  presided 
over  the  mission  in  that  part  of  the 
country  till  March  29,  1898,  when  he  was 
released  to  return  home,  at  a  confer- 
ence held  at  Baker  City,  Oregon.  At 
a  quarterly  conference  held  of  the 
Oneida  Stake  in  Gentile  valley,  July  24, 
1898,  he  was  chosen  and  set  apart  as 
president  of  the  Bannock  Stake  of 
Zion.  which  was  organized  at  that  time. 
At  the  November  election,  1898,  he  was 
elected  a  county  commissioner  in  Ban- 
nock county,  Idaho. 

JENSEN,  Denmark,  first  counselor 
to  Pres.  Lewis  S.  Pond,  of  the  Bannock 
Stake  of  Zion,  is  the  son  of  Mads  Chr. 
Jensen  and  Maren  Hansen,  who  emi- 
grated from  Elling  parish,  Hjorring 
amt,  Denmark,  in  1853.  As  they  jour- 
neyed across  the  plains,  their  son,  the 
subject  -'  this  sketch,  was  born  July 
24,  1853,  on  the  plains  of  Nebraska.  The 
family  located  in  Brigham  City,  where 
Denmark  Jensen  was  raised  and  edu- 
cated. He  remained  at  home  with  hia 
parents  until  Dec.  2,  1872,  when  he  mar- 
ried Lucina  Johnson,  with  whom  he  has 
had  eleven  children.  In  the  spring  of 
1880  he  removed  to  Honeyville.  A  year 
later  he  was  called  on  a  mission  to  the 
States;  responding  to  the  call  He  left 
Ogden.  April  19,  1881,  in  company  with 
forty-six  other  Elders,  and  arrived 
safely  in  Minnesota,  which  became  his 
field  of  labor;  for  eighteen  months  he 
presided  over  the  Minnesota  conference. 
He  returned  home  Dec.  7,  1882.  In  the 
spring  of  1883  he  removed  to  Idaho  and 
settled  on  Mink  creek,  Oneida  county, 
and  in  May,  1884,  he  changed  his  plan 
of  residence  to  Chesterfield.  Being 
called  on  a  mission  to  the  Indians,  he 
left  home  Anril  20,  1885,  to  officiate  in 
that  calling.  He  labored  among  the 
Bannock  and  Shoshone  tribes,  until  ear- 
ly in  1887,  when  he  was  honorably  re- 
leased and  returned  home.  He  served 
as  a  home  missionary  in  the  Oneida 
Stake  of  Zion  until  December,  1896, 
when  he  was  called  on  a  mission  to  Ore- 
gon. In  compliance  with  that  call,  he 
left  home  Jap.   6,   1897,   and  traveled  in 


302 


LATTER-DAY    SAINT 


company  with  James  F.  Hunt  and 
James  GoliRhtly.  He  was  released  the 
following  March;  but  on  June  8,  1897, 
he  was  called  to  preside  over  the  Ore- 
gon conference;  he  was  set  apart  for 
his  field  of  labor  July  24,  1897.  after 
which  he  engaged  in  missionary  labors 
In   Oregon   till   April,    1898.       When    the 


Bannock  Stake  of  Zion  was  organized 
July  24,  1898,  he  was  chosen  and  set 
apart  as  first  counselor  to  Pres.  Lewis 
S.  Pond;  and  since  that  time  he  has 
worked  dilierently  in  discharging  the 
duties  of  that  high  and  responsible  call- 
ing. Besides  his  ecclesiastical  labors. 
Elder  Jensen  has  filled  numerous  secu- 
lar positions,  and  in  November,  1900, 
he  was  elected  a  member  of  the  sixth 
session  of  the  Idaho  State  legislature. 
His  wife  died  Oct.  7,  1901,  at  Thatcher, 
Idaho.  Elder  Jensen  is  widely  and 
favorably  known  for  his  unflinching 
integrity  to  the  work  of   God. 

HAIGHT,  Horton  David,  president 
of  the  Cassia  Stake  of  Zion,  was  born 
June  20,  1832,  in  the  town  of  Moravia, 
Cayuga  county.  New  York.  His  father 
was  Hector  Caleb  Haight.who  for  many 
years  served  as  probate  judge  of  Davis 
county.  Utah.  His  mother  was  Julia 
Van  Orden,  a  woman  noted  for  her 
business  ability  as  well  as  domestic 
qualities.  In  1837,  the  family  moved  to 
the  northern  part  of  the  State  of  Illi- 
nois, where  they  remained  till  the 
spring  of  1845.  At  this  time  Horton's 
parents   became     identified     with     the 


Church   of   Jesus   Christ   of   Latter-day 
Saints  and   moved  to  Nauvoo.       In  the 
spring  of  1846   the   family,    in   company 
with    others   of   the    Saints,    started    on 
the  westward  journey,  and  during    tho 
summer  crossed  the  State  of  Iowa.  The 
following     winter     was     spent     in     the 
rushes  on  the  Missouri  bottoms.  In  the 
spring  of  1847   the  family  left     Winter 
Quarters  for  the  Rocky  Mountains.  The 
subject   of  this   sketch   was   then     only 
fifteen   years  of  age,   but  still   did     his 
part  in  driving  three  yoke  of  cattle  and 
taking    his    turn     as    camp    and    cattle 
puard    when   occasion     required.       The 
company    arrived    in    Great    Salt    Lake 
valley  Sept.  22,  1847.       In  the  spring  of 
lS48,when  a  relief  company  was  sent  out 
to  meet  the  Saints  coming  to  the  valley, 
young  Horton  was  among  the  number 
sent  back,  and  he  experienced  the  same 
difficulties  that  the  Saints  encountered 
the  year  before^      At  this  time  the  com- 
pany went     back    as     far  as  Chimney 
Rock,   p    distance  of  about  seven  hun- 
dred  miles,    before   they   met   the  com- 
pany.      Horton   D.   Haight  was  one  of 
the  first  settlers  in  Davis  county,  Utah, 
and  took  an  active  part  in  the  develop- 
ment of  the  same,  proving  himself  to  be 
a   public   spirited   man.       In   Februarj', 
1854,    he   married   Miss   Louisa   Leavitt, 
after  which   he  lived   in  Kaysville  and 
Farmington    until    his    removal    to    the 
State  of  Idaho.      In  the  summer  of  1855 
he   accompanied  Pres.   Brigham  Young 
to  Fort  Limhi  on  the  Salmon    river,  for 
the   purpose   of   visiting   the    Saints   at 
that  place.       The  year  1857  found     him 
doing  service     with     Lot  Smith  on  the 
plains    in    the    interest    of    the    people, 
observing  the  movements  of  Johnston's 
army.  In  March,  1858,  he  left  Utah  with 
fifty   men   for   Fort    Limhi,    on    Salmon 
river,   to  relieve  the  colony  there  once 
more.       When   returning  he   found   the 
people  moving  southward,   preparatory 
to  the  arrival  of  the  army,  and  he,  with 
his    family,    moved    to    the    Provo   bot- 
toms,   living   here    during   the    summer 
months.      Sept.  14,  1858.  he  started  east 
with  Joseph  W.  Young  for  the  purpose 
of  buying  work-cattle  for  the  Church. 
In  the  summer  of  1859  he  brought  out 
a  Church  train  of  seventy-five  wagons. 
In  1860  and  1861  he  was  in  the  employ 
of  Hooper  and  Eldredge,  superintending 
their   trains   of   merchandise.       In   1863 
he   went   to   the     frontiers     again   and 
brought   out   some     freight   and   about 
three   hundred   emigrants.       In  1866  he 


BIOGRAPHICAL   ENCYCLOPEDIA. 


303 


brought  the  wire  for  the  first  telegraph 
line  in  Utah  from  Wyoming,  Neb.  He 
crossed  the  plains  seven  times  as  cap- 
tain of  emigration  companies  and  made 
himself  beloved  by  the  people  placed 
under  his  care  and  also  by  the  men 
working  under  him.  Words  or  praise 
are  often  heard  yet  when  the  name  of 


Pres.  Haight  is  mentioned  in  the  pres- 
ence of  the  men  and  women  who 
crossed  the  plains  in  his  trains.  His 
married  life  was  a  success,  ten  children 
(five  boys  and  five  girls)  having  come 
to  cheer  the  lives  of  Pres.  and  Sister 
Haight.  All  of  their  children,  with  the 
exception  of  two,  are  living  at  the 
present  writing,  and  occupying  posi- 
tions of  honor  in  their  communities  and 
in  the  Church.  Pres.  Haight's  public 
life  is  well  known  for  the  fidelity  and 
integrity  of  the  man  whenever  his  su- 
periors or  the  people  at  large  entrust- 
ed anything  to  his  care.  He  had  the 
confidence  of  his  co-laborers  and  the 
presiding  authorities  in  the  Church.  He 
served  as  a  major  in  the  Utah  militia, 
as  selectman  of  Davis  county  for  two 
terms,  as  sheriff  one  term,  and  in  1861 
represented  his  county  in  the  Utali 
legislature.  In  1882  he  was  called  to 
Oakley,  Idaho,  to  act  as  Bishop  at  that 
place;  later  (1887)  he  was  chosen  as  the 
first  president  of  the  Cassia  Stake. 
While  living  in  Cassia  county  he  served 
the  people  in  the  capacity  of  county 
commissioner  and  also  acted  as  presi- 
dent of  the  Oakley  Co-operative  Mer- 
cantile   Institution,    an    institution    that 


owes  its  solidity  to  the  wise  business 
forethought  of  Pres.  Haight.  As  a 
Latter-day  Saint  he  tried  to  follow  in 
the  Master's  foot-step;  as  a  leader  he 
was  kind  and  considerate;  as  a  citizen 
his  life  was  above  reproach.  Pres. 
Haight  died  Jan.  19,  1900,  mourned  by  a 
large,  devoted  family  and  spoken  high- 
ly of  by  the  people  of  Cassia  Stake. 
The  estimation  the  president  was  held 
in  by  his  family  is  beautifully  set  forth 
on  his  tombstone:  "Whither  thou  goest, 
we  will  go.  Thy  people  shall  be  our 
people,  thy  God.  our  God." 

HAIGHT,  Luuisa  Leavitt,  wife  of 
the  late  Pres.  Horton  D.  Haight  of 
Cassia  Stake,  was  born  in  Hatley 
county.  Lower  Canada,  Dec.  10,  1835. 
Her  parents  were  Wiar  Leavitt  and 
Phebe  Cole.  When  she  was  two  years 
of  age  the  family  moved  to  Illinois, 
settling  near  Joliet,  in  what  was  known 
as  the  Twelve  Mile  Grove.  Here 
Brother  Wiar  Leavitt  died  and  the 
mother  was  left  with  a  family  of  two 
boys  and  two  girls  to  support.  Sell- 
ing out  her  place  at  Twelve  Mile  Grove, 
the  family  journeyed  by  team  to  Nau- 
voo.  in  order  to  be  with  the  Saints.  It 
was  the  intention  of  Bro.  Leavitt  when 


leaving  Canada,  to  gather  with  the 
Saints,  but  he  was  prevented  by  cir- 
oumstances  to  do  so.  While  living  in 
Nauvoo, Louisa  attended  a  school  which 
was  conducted  by  Mrs.  Emmeline  B. 
Wells.  With  the  rest  of  the  Saints, 
Sister   Leavitt   and   her    family,    in    the 


304 


LATTER-DAY    SAINT 


spring  of  1846,  moved  westward,  rest- 
ing at  what  is  now  called  Florence  dur- 
ing the  following  winter.  Here  Louisa 
attended  a  school,  taught  by  Brother 
McGuire.  In  October,  1847,  she  came 
into  Great  Salt  Lake  valley  and  re- 
mained in  Salt  Lake  City  until  the 
death  of  her  mother  in  the  year  1851. 
She  then  moved  to  Centerville  and  at- 
tended school  here  off  and  on  until  her 
marriage  to  Horton  D.  Haight  in  the 
year  1854.  From  that  time  she  made 
her  home  at  Blooming  Grove,  in  Davis 
county.  She  became  the  mother  of 
five  boys  and  five  girls,  all  of  whom 
are  living  with  the  exception  of  two. 
She  was  connected  with  the  first  Prim- 
ary association.  organized  in  the 
Church,  acting  as  first  counselor  to  Sis- 
ter Aurelia  Rogers.  In  1S82  Pres.  Hor- 
ton D.  Haight  and  Louisa,  his  wife. 
moved  to  Oakley,  Idaho,  and  while 
here  she  served  as  first  counselor  to 
Sistt:  Sarah  Grant,  president  of  the 
Ward  Relief  Society.  When  the  Stakj 
was  organized.  Sister  Louisa  Haight 
was  chosen  as  Stake  president  of  the 
Relief  Societies,  which  position  she 
holds  at  this  writing.  Sister  Haight 
has  proven  herself  a  dutiful  wife,  a 
loving  mother,  and  a  true  Latter-day 
Saint  in  all  her  walks  of  life. 

JACK,  AVilliani  T.,  president  of  the 
Tassia  Stake  of  Zion.  was  born  in  the 
Fourteenth  Ward,  Salt  Lake  City,  Nov. 
1,  1S.'»7.  forty-five  days  after  the  ar- 
rival of  his  iiarents,  Thomas  and  M.  A. 
.lack,  from  their  hand-cart  journey 
across  the  plains.  For  forty-two  years 
Brother  Jack  was  a  resident  of  the 
First  Ward.  Salt  Lake  City,  where 
fiuietly  and  unassumingly  he  grew  to 
m.'inhofxl.  Always  of  a  devotional  dis- 
)iosition  he  has  been  a  regular  attend- 
ant at  Sunday  schools  and  religious  ser- 
vices fi-om  his  youth.  As  time  went 
on  ho  was  called  to  fill  many  ..ositions 
of  ti  ust  in  the  Ward.  In  1887,  Brother 
Jack  answered  a  tall  given  him,  and 
filled  a  mission  to  the  Indian  Territory, 
whore  ho  demonstrated  that  it  was  pos- 
sible to  fill  a  mission  in  that  malarial 
section  without  contiacting  ague  in  a 
few  months.  Ajnil  C.  1S97,  he  was  called 
to  succeed  Kldor  Andrew  Kimball  in  thi 
piesidoncy  of  the  above  named  mission; 
threo  more  States  having  been  added 
thereto,  Dui  ing  the  term  of  Elder 
Jack  in  this  labor,  the  name  of  the  mis- 


sion was  changed  to  that  of  the  South- 
western States  mission.  For  three  years 
Elder  Jack  presided  over  this  field  with 
credit  and  efficiency,  and  arrived  home 
May  6,  1900.  On  the  9th  of  the  same 
month  he  was  called  to  the  position 
which  he  now  occupies.  He  was  sus- 
tained by  the  people  of  the  Stake  at  a 


conference  held  at  Oakley  May  11th  and 
12th,  and  soon  after  moved  his  family 
to  Idaho,  making  his  home  at  Oakley. 
In  his  new  field,  as  had  been  the  case  in 
the  mission,  he  has  the  confidence  and 
esteem  of  the  people,  Brother  Jack 
gives  the  Lord  the  credit  for  all  good 
that  is  accomplished,  as  well  as  the 
honors  conferred  upon  him. 

MUltDOCK,  John  Ri^gs,  president 
of  the  Beaver  Stake  of  Zion  from  1877 
to  1891,  is  the  son  of  John  Murdock 
and  Julia  Clapp,  and  was  born  Sept. 
13,  1826,  in  Orange  township,  Cuyahoga 
county,  Ohio.  His  father  and  mother 
joined  the  Church  in  November,  1830, 
being  among  the  first  converts  to 
"Mormonism"  in  Ohio;  and  they  be- 
came closely  associated  with  the 
Prophet  Joseph.  The  mother  died  in 
1S.31.  leaving  a  tamily  of  five  children, 
including  a  pair  of  twins,  a  boy  and  a 
girl  (Josej)h  and  Julia),  born  at  their 
mother's  death.  The  twins  were  adopt- 
ed by  the  Prophet  and  his  wife  and 
tenderly  fostered.  When  the  boy  was 
a  year  and  a  half  old,  he  caught  the 
measles,  and  through  exposure  took 
cold  and  died  at  the  time  the  Prophet 
\\as  mobbed  at  Hiram  in  1832.  Julia 
remained  in  the  family  until  she  had 
grown  to  womanhood.  After  his  moth- 
er's death  John  R.   was  sent  with  Ca- 


BIOGRAPHICAL    ENCYCLOPEDIA. 


305 


leb  Baldwin,  sen.,  to  Jackson  county, 
Mo.,  where  he  lived  in  the  family  of 
Morris  Phelps.  After  the  Saints  were 
driven  out  of  Jackson  county,  he  was 
baptized  by  his  father  in  Clay  county 
in  the  year  1834;  he  also  passed  through 
the  mobbings  and  persecutions  in  Cald- 
well county.  His  father,  after  spend- 
ing about  five  years  on  missions,  mar- 
ried again,  when  John  R.  left  Brother 
Baldwin  and  rejoined  his  father's  fami- 
ly, with  which  he  removed  from  Quin- 
cy  to  Nauvoo.  Here  he  worked  on  the 
Prophet  Joseph's  farm  about  four 
years,  and  was  still  in  the  Prophet's 
employ  at  the  time  of  the  martyrdom: 
in  the  exodus  from  Nauvoo  in  1846, John 
R.  came  west  with  Father  Cornelius  P. 
Lott.       On   his  way  he  enlisted   in  the 


Mormon  Battalion,  and  as  a  private  in 
Company  B  he  marched  all  the  way  to 
San  Diego  in  California.  After  serv- 
ing his  time  he  made  his  way,  in  com- 
pany with  many  other  Battalion  boys, 
to  Great  Salt  Lake  valley,  and  arrived 
on  the  present  site  of  Salt  Lake  City, 
Oct.  12,  1847,  after  a  tedious  journey 
of  twelve  hundred  miles  with  pack  ani- 
mals. He  spent  the  winter  in  the 
"Old  Fort"  and  married  Almira  H. 
Lott,  daughter  of  Cornelius  P.  Lott.  In 
the  spring  of  1851  he  settled  in  Leh', 
Utah  county,  being  one  of  the  early  set- 
tlers of  that  place;  and  among  the 
several  positions  filled  by  him  here  was 
that  of  mayor  of  the  city.  In  1856  he 
took  a  most  active  part  in  rescuing  the 
hand-cart  companies,  who  were  perish- 
ing in  the  snow  storms.  When  he 
brought  in  some  of  the  suffering  emi- 

Vol.  1,  No.  20. 


grants  he  found  the  snow  on  the  Big 
Mountain  fifteen  feet  deep.  To  many 
of  those  who  crossed  the  plains  be- 
fore the  Union  Pacific  Railroad  was 
built,  the  name  of  John  R.  Murdock  Is 
very  familiar.  He  was  sent  east  five 
times  as  a  captain  of  Church  trains 
after  the  poor,  namely  in  1861,  1862,  1863, 
1864  and  1868.  He  also  carried  the  mails 
from  the  Valley  to  Independence,  Mo., 
as  an  employee  of  the  B.  Y.  X.  Com- 
pany, and  in  that  capacity  he  made 
two  round  trips  to  the  States  in  1857, 
in  unprecedented  short  time.  In  1858 
he  went  to  Omaha  as  an  escort  to  Col. 
Thos.  L.  Kane,  making  the  round  trip 
of  2,120  miles  with  the  same  animals 
in  42  traveling  days.  He  also  brought 
trains  of  merchandise  for  Livingston 
&  Bell  in  the  early  days.  Altogether 
"Captain  Murdock,"  as  he  was  famili- 
arly called  in  early  days,  made  eleven 
round  trips  across  the  plains,  and  has 
brought  more  "Mormon"  emigrants  to 
Utah  than  any  other  leader.  He  is 
credited  with  making  a  better  record 
than  any  other  man  known  in  bringing 
ox  and  mule  trains  across  the  plains 
and  over  the  mountains.  In  the  spring 
of  1864  he  was  called  and  ordained 
to  the  office  of  a  Bishop  by  Presi- 
dent Brigham  Young  and  sent  to 
preside  in  Beaver,  Beaver  county. 
He  occupied  that  position  until 
1877,  when  the  Beaver  Stake  of  Zion 
was  organized,  and  Re  was  chosen  and 
set  apart  as  its  president.  This  re- 
sponsible position  he  filled  for  fourteen 
years.  He  has  served  eight  terms  in 
the  Territorial  and  one  in  the  State 
legislature.  He  was  also  a  member  of 
the  Constitutional  convention,  which 
framed  the  State  constitution  in  1895. 
He  has  also  served  as  probabte  judge 
of  Beaver  county  and  as  a  colonel  In 
the  Iron  County  Military  District.  From 
the  first  Elder  Murdock  was  one  of  the 
representative  and  leading  men  in  the 
("hurch  and  community  at  large.  He 
has  occupied  many  positions  of  honoi 
and  trust  in  the  Territory  and  State, 
and  is  now  in  his  old  age  highly  re- 
spected and  beloved  by  the  people. 

PARKINSON,     William     Chandler, 

president  of  the  Hyrum  Stake  of  Zion, 
is  the  son  of  Samuel  R.  Parkinson  and 
Arabella  Ann  Chandler,  and  was  born 
Aug.  2,  1855,  at  Kaysville,  Davis  county, 
Utah.  In  the  spring  of  1860  he  removed 
with    his   parents    to    Franklin,    Oneida 

May    11,    1901. 


306 


LATTER-DAY    SAINT 


county.  Idaho,  where  he  was  baptized 
by  Elder  William  Woodward,  Nov.  24, 
1867,  and  confirmed  the  same  day  by 
John  Thompson.  He  was  ordained  an 
Eldei-  by  his  father  May  26,  1868.  Up 
to  this  time  he  had  worked  on  a  farm 
and  in  the  canyon  during  the  summer 
months  and  attended  the  district  school 
during  the  winter  months.  In  the  fall 
and  winter  of  1871-72  he  was  freighting 
from  Corinne.  Utah,  to  Dear  Lodge, 
Montana,  with  horse  and  mule  teams. 
In  the  winter  of  1872-73  he  attended  the 
B.  Y.  College  in  Logan  one  term  (Chas. 
Davis,  teachei).  and  again  in  the  win- 
ter of  1873-74  (Jas.  Z.  Stewart,  teacher); 
in  1874-75  he  attended  the  High  School 
at  Ogden  (L.  F.  Monch.  teacher).  In 
the  spring  of  1875  he  had  his  first  ex- 
l>erience  in  merchandising,  working  in 
Wallace   Foulger's  store  at  Ogden.     In 


the  fall  of  ISTo  he  was  engaged  to  man- 
age the  co-operative  store  at  Franklin, 
which  position  he  held  until  January, 
1S77.  In  the  spring  of  1878  he  worked 
•  in  the  Logan  Temple  and  also  hauled 
material  from  the  canyon  and  fenced 
one  hundred  and  sixty  acres  of  land, 
situated  about  three  miles  north  of 
Franklin.  This  land  he  had  previously 
fntered  under  the  pre-emption  law. 
During  the  following  winter  he  built  a 
two-roomed  log  house  for  himself,  and 
on  Dec.  12.  1S7S.  he  married  Miss  Ellen 
Elvira  Nash.  The  marriage  ceremony 
was     performed       in     the     Endowment 


House,  Salt  Lake  City,  by  Daniel  H. 
Wells.  In  August,  1879,  his  father  hav- 
ing contracted  to  furnish  lumber  for 
the  Z.  C.  M.  I.  and  the  Assembly  Hall. 
Salt  Lake  City,  Wm.  C.  was  given 
charge  of  hauling  the  lumber  from  the 
mill  in  Maple  creek  canyon  to  the 
Franklin  depot.  This  work  he  con- 
ducted very  successfully.  During  1879 
he  labored  as  a  home  missionary  in  the 
Cache  Stake.  He  was  also  made  a 
counselor  in  the  first  Y.  M.  M.  I.  A. 
organized  in  Franklin,  Idaho.  March 
10,  1880,  he  was  called  on  a  mission  to 
Europe,  being  the  first  missionary  ever 
called,  in  the  regular  way,  from  Frank- 
lin. He  left  his  home  April  4th  (less 
than  a  month  from  the  time  he  received 
his  call)  and  went  to  Salt  Lake  City, 
where  he,  after  attending  the  general 
conference  of  the  Church,  was  set  apart 
for  his  mission.  On  his  arrival  at  Og- 
den he  became  seriously  ill,  and  was 
taken  to  the  home  of  Andrew  Kershaw, 
where  he  was  kindly  treated  and  fin- 
ally taken  from  his  bed  to  the  train 
to  start  for  Europe  in  company  with 
thirty-seven  other  Elders.  They  ar- 
rived in  Liverpool  April  29th.  Wm.  C. 
was  appointed  to  labor  in  the  New- 
castle conference,  where  he  spent  about 
seventeen  months.  He  then  labored 
in  the  Liverpool  conference  till  Aprjl 
13,  1882,  when  he  was  honorably  re- 
leased to  return  home.  During  his  so- 
journ in  Great  Britain  he  visited  his 
mother's  birth  place,  Cheltenham,  also 
his  father-in-law's  people  in  Wales.  In 
both  these  places  he  met  many  relatives 
and  also  gathered  much  important 
family  genealogy.  In  returning  home 
he  stopped  at  St.  Louis,  Mo.,  where  he 
found  his  aunt,  who  came  to  Utah  with 
him  and  was  there  baptized.  He  also 
found  many  other  relatives  in  that  city. 
After  returning  home.  May  12,  1882,  he 
assisted  his  mother  in  building  a  home, 
and  also  did  some  contract  work  for 
the  Cub  River  Middle  Ditch  Co.  In 
the  fall  he  was  engaged  to  work  for  the 
Franklin  Co-op  store.  Later  he  was 
elected  justice  of  the  peace  and  served 
in  that  capacity  two  years.  He  served 
as  a  home  missionary  in  Cache  Stake 
for  about  three  years.  Feb.  24,  1884,  he 
was  ordained  a  High  Priest  by  Bishop 
Nahum  Porter,  and  on  June  2,  1884,  or- 
dained a  Bishop  and  set  apart  to  preside 
over  the  Preston  Ward  by  Moses 
Thatcher;  John  Larson  and  Geo.  T. 
Benson  were  chosen  as  his  counselors. 


BIOGRAPHICAL    ENCYCLOPEDIA. 


307 


Years  later,  Moses  Thatcher  remarked 
that  Bishop  Parkinson  and  his  coun- 
selors were  the  most  united  Bishopric 
In  the  Church.  In  the  spring  of  1884, 
Elder  Parkinson  bought  a  small  mer- 
cantile business  which  has  since  grown 
into  the  large  general  merchandise  es- 
tablishment now  known  as  W.  C. 
Parkinson  &  Co.  After  being  called 
to  the  Bishopric  he  immediately  took 
up  the  labors  of  that  calling.  He  also 
worked  on  the  Preston  &  Cub  River 
canal  and  assisting  to  develop  the  re- 
sources of  the  "Ward.  He  moved  to 
Preston  Oct.  16.  1884,  and  presided  there 
as  Bishop  about  fourteen  years,  during 
which  time  a  townsite  was  located  and 
surveyed,  and  the  present  meeting 
house  built.  The  following  named  pub- 
lic grounds  were  also  purchased:  A 
ten-acre  public  square,  a  tithing  lot, 
a  meeting  house  lot,  a  burial  ground 
and  a  40-acre  missionary  farm.  Three 
district  school  houses,  and  the  Oneida 
Stake  Academy  were  erected  and  the 
Mink  Creek  canal  was  located,  surveyed 
and  partly  constructed.  The  Ward  grew 
from  about  thirty  families  until  three 
other  wards  were  organized  out  of  it, 
and  there  still  remains  about  two  hun- 
dred and  fifty  families  in  Preston  Ward 
proper.  Bishop  Parkinson  also  built 
himself  a  comfortable  home,  costing 
about  $4,000,  and  in  1887  he  yielded 
obedience  to  the  higher  law  of  mar- 
riage by  taking  to  wife  Miss  Louisa 
Benson,  daughter  of  Geo.  T.  Benson. 
Up  to  the  present  time  he  is  the  father 
of  fifteen  children.  In  the  fall  of  1884 
he  was  nominated  for  assessor  and  col- 
lector of  Oneida  county,  but  was  frau- 
dulently defeated  by  the  anti-Mormon 
party.  He  served  as  a  member  of  the 
Board  of  Education  in  the  Oneida 
Stake  upwards  of  ten  years,  during 
which  time  he  was  chairman  of  the  ex- 
ecutive committee,  treasurer  and  as- 
sistant secretary.  In  the  spring  of  1896 
he  accompanied  his  brother  Frank — 
who  was  called  on  a  mission  to  Cali- 
fornia— on  a  trip  to  Portland,  Seattle, 
Victoria,  San  Francisco,  Los  Angeles 
and  San  Bernardino.  Having  been  set 
apart  as  a  missionary,  prior  to  start- 
ing on  this  trip,  he  enjoyed  himself 
verv  much  in  the  society  of  the  Elders 
whom  he  met  and  in  doing  some  mis- 
sionary labors.  In  February,  1898,  to- 
gether with  his  brother  Samuel,  he  was 
calle:l  on  a  ^hort  mission  to  the  North- 


western States.  They  labored  very 
successfully  and  with  great  pleasure, 
opening  up  that  mission  in  Baker  City. 
Walla- Walla,  Pendleton,  Vianto,  Port- 
land, Oregon  City,  Salem,  Vancouver, 
Astoria  and  other  places.  After  being 
absent  about  two  months  they  were  re- 
leased and  returned  home  by  way  of 
California  in  April,  1898.  Aug.  8,  1898, 
Bishop  Wm.  C.  Parkinson  was  called 
and  set  apart  to  preside  over  the  Poca- 
tello  Stake  of  Zion,  by  Apostle  Heber 
J.  Grant.  Subsequently  Wm.  A.  Hyde, 
of  Downey,  and  Noah  S.  Pond  were 
chosen  as  his  counselors.  Before  tak- 
ing his  departure  from  Preston,  the 
good  people  of  that  Ward  arranged  a 
grand  farewell  festival  in  his  honor, 
and  as  a  token  of  their  love  and  good 
will  towards  him,  they  presented  him 
with  a  costly  gold  watch.  In 
1899  he  worked  for  the  Studebaker 
Bros.  Mfg.  Co.,  and  traveled  during 
the  year  in  nearly  all  the  counties  o' 
southeastern  Idaho.  In  that  year  als„ 
he  sold  his  home  and  land  in  Preston, 
and  as  he  was  not  yet  ready  to  move 
to  Pocatello,  he  rented  a  small  house 
until  he  could  dispose  of  his  business. 
When  it  was  decided  by  the 
Church  authorities  to  divide  Cache 
Stake,  President  Parkinson  was  re- 
called from  Idaho  and  appointed 
to  preside  over  the  Hyrum  Stake,which 
embraces  the  settlements  situated  in 
the  south  end  of  Cache  valley.  He 
was  accepted  and  sustained  in  this  po- 
sition by  the  people  at  a  conference 
held  at  Hyrum  April  30,  1901.  Elder 
Parkinson  is  a  humble  and  unassum- 
ing man  and  ranks  high  among  his 
brethren  for  his  integrity  and  faith- 
fulness to  the  cause  of  truth.  His 
great  reverence  for  God  and  the  au- 
thorities of  the  Church,  his  obedience  to 
parents  and  respect  for  old  age,  and 
his  considerate  treatment  of  all  his  as- 
sociates, has  made  him  popular  and 
beloved  by  all  who  know  him. 

MILLER,  Orrin  Porter,  president 
of  the  Jordan  Stake  of  Zion,  is  the  son 
of  Reuben  Miller  and  Ann  Craner,  and 
was  born  Sept.  11,  1858,  in  Mill  Creek. 
Salt  Lake  county,  Utah.  He  was  bap- 
tized June  16,  1867,  by  Edward  F.  M. 
Guest  and  confirmed  on  the  same  date 
by  Washington  Lemmon;  ordained  a 
Priest  Dec.  9,  1877,  by  Reuben  Miller: 
ordained  an  Elder  Nov.  6,  1881,  by  Alex- 


308 


LATTER-DAY    SAINT 


ander  HHl,  and  became  a  member  of 
the  13th  quorum  of  Elders  in  the  Salt 
Lake  Stake  of  Zlon.  Nov.  10,  1881,  he 
mai  ried  Elizabeth  M.  Morgan  of  Mill 
Creek,  in  the  Endowment  House,  Salt 
Lake  City.  Daniel  H.  Wells  offlciating. 
July  22,  1882,  his  father  died,  being 
stricken  with  paralysis.  In  1882,  after 
the  settling  up  of  his  father's  estate, 
he  moved  to  Riverton,  having  fallen 
heir  to  eiphtv  acres  of  land  under  his 
will.  Feb.  10,  1884,  he  was  ordained  a 
Seventy  by  Enoch  B.  Tripp  at  South 
Jordan  Ward  and  became  a  member 
of  the  33rd  quorum  of  Seventy.  In  May, 
1885,  he  was  set  apart  to  preside  over 
the   Riverton   branch,    under  the  juris- 


diction of  Bishop  Wm.  A.  Bills.  Aug. 
8,  1886,  the  Riverton  branch  was  or- 
ganized as  a  Ward  when  he  was  or- 
dained a  Hieh  Priest  and  Bishop  and 
set  apart  to  preside  over  the  same, with 
Jesse  M.  Smith  and  Gordon  S.  Bills 
as  his  counselors.  Jan.  24,  1887,  he  was 
elected  president  of  the  Riverton  eccle- 
siastical corporation.  In  1887  he  became 
a  member  of  the  county  central  com- 
mittee and  also  served  one  term  as  a 
member  of  the  Territorial  central  com- 
mittee of  the  People's  party.  For  six 
years  he  acted  as  deputy  registrar 
under  the  famous  Utah  commission. 
Aug.  6,  1889,  he  was  elected  a  member 
of  the  county  board  of  commissioners 
for  Salt  Lake  countv.  This  was  the 
last  term  the  People's  party  had  con- 
trol. In  July,  1891,  he  was  elected  a 
member  of  the  first  Democratic  Terri- 
torial  central   committee  after   the   di- 


vision on  party  lines.  He  served  as 
a  member  of  a  board  of  arbitration 
appointed  by  the  First  Presidency,  with 
Bishop  Sheets  and  Elder  John  Nichol- 
son, in  the  interests  of  the  people  of 
Deseret;  also  acted  as  agent  of  Presid- 
ing Bishop  Wm.  B.  Preston  from  1886 
to  1900,  in  receiving  hay,  grain,  etc., 
from  all  the  Wards  in  the  south  end  of 
Salt  Lake  county.  Oct.  1,  1897,  he  was 
appointed  a  special  agent  by  Bishop 
Preston  to  look  after  Church  sheep, and 
is  still  serving  in  that  capacity.  At 
the  division  of  the  Salt  Lake  Stake,  he 
was  chosen  to  preside  over  the  Jordan 
Stake,  which  was  organized  January 
21,  1900,  being  set  apart  by  Elder  Fran- 
cis M.  Lyman,  with  Elders  Hyrum 
GofC  and  James  Jensen  as  counselors. 
In  March,  1900,  at  the  request  of  Apos- 
tle Lyman,  he  changed  his  residence 
from  Riverton  to  Union  Ward  in  order 
to  become  centrally  located  in  the 
Stake.  President  Miller  says:  "I  re- 
joice in  the  gospel  and  in  the  testimony 
of  Jesus;  and  I  have  accepted  in  my 
heart  every  principle  revealed  through 
the  Prophet  Joseph  Smith  and  have 
been  greatly  blessed  of  the  Lord  in  my 
ministerial  labors."  At  a  meeting  of  the 
First  Presidency  and  Twelve  Apostles 
held  Oct.  24,  1901,  Pres.  Miller  was 
chosen  as  second  counselor  to  Presiding 
Bishop  Wm.  B.  Preston. 

GOF''P,  Hyrum,  first  counselor  to 
Orrin  P.  Miller,  president  of  the  Jordan 
Stalte  of  Zion  is  the  son  of  Isaac  Goff 
and  Marv  Taylor,  and  was  born  July 
29,  1849,  at  Long  Whatton,  Leicester- 
shire, England.  He  was  the  first  "Mor- 
mon" --Viild  born  in  that  town,  his  pa- 
rents having  joined  the  Church  a  few 
months  prior  to  his  birth.  Hyrum 
was  baptized  on  the  eighth  anniversa- 
ry of  his  birth  day,  by  his  father,  and 
confirmed  a  member  in  the  Church  the 
same  day,  by  Elder  Isaac  Higbee.  In 
the  year  1858  he  removed  with  his  pa- 
rents to  Nottingham,  England,  where 
he  resided  until  April  17,  1862,  when  he 
started  for  Utah,  in  company  with  two 
sisters  and  onj  brother;  sailed  for 
America  on  the  ship  "John  J.  Boyd," 
landing  at  Castle  Garden,  N.  T.,  June 
1,  1862;  crossed  the  plains  from  Flor- 
ence, Neb.,  to  Utah,  by  ox  team,  in 
Captain  Homer  Duncan's  company,  ar- 
riving in  Salt  Lake  City  Sept.  25,  1862. 
While  crossing  the  plains  Hyrum's 
health  was  very  poor.      After  arriving 


BIOGRAPHICAL    ENCYCLOPEDIA. 


309 


in  Utah  he  was  taken  into  Bishop  Ar- 
chibald Gardner's  family,  and  through 
a  severe  siege  of  mountain  fever  he 
was  kindly  cared  for  by  Bro.  Gard- 
ner's wife,  "Aunt  Abbie,"  at  West 
Jordan.  He  was  ordained  an  Elder  in 
the  Endowment  House,  Salt  Lake  City, 
Feb.  15,  1869.  Though  never  ordained 
to  any  office  in  the  Aaronic  Priesthood, 
he  acted  in  all  the  callings  thereof, 
when  requested  by  the  Bishop  to  do 
so.  January  2,  1871,  he  married  Maria 
T.  Arnold,  who  has  borne  him  six  sons 
and  six  daughters;  four  of  these  died 
in  their  early  childhood.  Oct.  24,  1878, 
he  obeyed  the  celestial  order  of  mar- 
riage by  taking  to  wife  Maiinda  P.Bate- 
man,  who  has  blessed  him  with  three 
sons  and   five   daughters;    one  of  these 


sons  died  at  the  age  of  one  year,  while 
the  mother  was  in  exile.  For  living 
with  his  wives,  three  indictments  were 
found  against  him,  under  the  segrega- 
tion scheme;  he  was  convicted  on  one 
count,  and  served  a  term  of  six  months 
in  the  Utah  penitentiary,  and  paid  a 
fine  of  $300.00  and  costs  of  court,  which 
amounted  to  $399.65.  While  in  prison 
he  was  visited  by  the  West  Jordan 
Sunday  School  in  a  body,  numbering 
some  three  hundred  persons  in  all. 
He  had  been  a  member  and  a  teacsher 
in  said  school  from  the  time  it  was 
first  organized,  and  acted  as  first  as- 
sistant superintendent  from  1878  to 
1883.  April  1,  1883,  he  was  set  apart 
as  superintendent  of  the  school,  and  la- 
bored   in    that    capacity    twelve    years 


and  seven  months.  He  was  chosen  a 
member  of  the  Ward  choir  when  four- 
teen years  of  age,  and,  later,  acted  as 
its  leader  for  a  number  of  years,  until 
called  away  to  perform  other  duties. 
He  became  a  member  of  the  T.  M.  M.  I. 
Association  at  its  first  organization  in 
the  Ward,  acted  as  secretary  for  several 
years,  and  president  four  years.  He 
labored  as  a  home  missionary  in  the 
Salt  Lake  Stake  of  Zion  for  six  years; 
was  ordained  to  the  office  of  a  Seven- 
ty by  Elder  James  Crane  Jan.  3,  1877, 
and  became  a  member  of  the  33rd  quo- 
rum of  Seventy;  was  set  apart  as  one 
of  the  presidents  of  said  quorum  March 
20.  1887,  by  Elder  Abraham  H.  Cannon, 
and  continued  as  such  until  June  1, 
1891,  when  he  was  ordained  a  High 
Priest  and  set  apart  as  first  counselor 
to  Bishop  John  A.  Egbert  of  West 
Jordan  Ward,  under  the  hands  of  Apos- 
tle Abraham  H.  Cannon.  This  posi- 
tion he  occupied  until  Dec.  15,  1895, 
when  he  was  ordained  a  Bishop  and 
fet  apart  to  preside  over  the  East  Jor- 
dan Ward,  which  was  organized  on  that 
date.  This  ordination  was  also  per- 
formed by  Apostle  Abraham  H.  Cannon. 
Elder  Goff  labored  in  this  capacity  un- 
til Jan.  21,  1900,  when,  at  the  organiza- 
tion of  the  Jordan  Stake  of  Zion,  he 
was  called  and  set  apart  as  first  coun- 
selor to  Pres.  Orrin  P.  Miller  of  said 
Stake,  by  Apostle  Francis  M.  Lyman. 
Elder  Goff  testifies  that  the  power  of 
the  Almighty  has  been  over  him  for 
good  all  the  days  of  his  life.  Once, 
when  a  child,  he  was  pronounced  dead 
liy  the  Elders  who  had  been  cftUed  in 
to  administer  to  him,  and  also  by  others 
who  were  there,  but  at  the  earnest 
request  of  his  mother,  he  was  anoint- 
ed with  oil,  prayed  for  and  restored  to 
life  again.  A  non-member  of  the 
Church,  who  held  his  hands  at  the  time, 
testified  that  the  child's  pulse  began  to 
beat  again  before  the  Elders  got 
through  with  their  administration.  Bro. 
Goff  says  that  at  subsequent  times, 
also,  the  Almighty  has  miraculously 
healed  him  by  the  power  and  authority 
(jf  the  Holy  Priesthood,  exercised  in  his 
behalf.  For  these  and  other  blessings 
received,  he  desires  to  praise  and  serve 
his  Heavenly  Father  forevermore.  At 
;i  meeting  of  the  First  Presidency  and 
Twelve  Apostles  held  Oct.  24.  1901,  El- 
dt-r  Goff  was  chosen  as  president  of  the 
Jordan  Stake,  succeeding  Pres.  Orrin 
P.    Miller,   who    was     appointed   second 


310 


LATTER-DAT    SAINT 


second    counselor    to    Presiding    Bishop 
W'm.  B.  Preston. 

JKNSKN,  James,  second  counselor 
to  Orrin  P.  Miller,  president  of  the  Jor- 
dan Stake  of  Zion,  was  born  July  14, 
1847,  in  S<ottrup,  Denmark;  was  bap- 
tized in  the  spring  of  1861.  by  Parley 
Thompsen;  came  to  Utah  in  1861,  ar- 
riving in  Salt  Lake  City.  Sept.  12th  of 
that  year  lived  in  Mill  Creek  Ward 
till  the  spring  of  1868;  served  in  the 
Black  Hawk  war  in  the  summer  of  1866; 
moved   to   Bear   River   City,   Box   Elder 


county,  in  the  spring  of  1868;  organized 
the  Bear  River  City  Sunday  School  in 
the  summer  of  1868;  moved  to  Draper, 
Salt  Lake  county,  in  1871,  where  he 
served  as  constable,  justice  of  the  peace 
and  postmaster;  also  as  Ward  Teacher 
for  about  fifteen  yeara,  and  Ward  clerk 
some  four  years.  May  15,  1892,  he  was 
made  Bishop  of  Sandy  Ward  and  called 
to  locate  in  that  town;  he  acted  as 
Bishop  till  Jan.  21,  1900,  when  he  was 
chosen  as  second  counselor  to  Pres.  Or- 
rin P.  Miller  of  the  Jordan  Stake  of 
Zion: 

LiIND,  Niels,  clerk  and  historian  of 
the  Jordan  Stake  of  Zion,  is  the  son  of 
Johannes  Lind  and  Anna  Pehrson,  and 
was  born  Sept.  25,  1862.  in  Swedala, 
Malmohus  Ian.  Sweden.  He  writes: 
"My  mother  died  when  I  was  but  three 
years  of  ape,  and  my  early  childhood 
was  spent  to  a  great  extent  with  my 
grandmother,  who  was  a  devout  re- 
ligious worshipper  in  the  Lutheran 
church,  which  is  the  dominant  or  state 


church  of  my  native  land.  From  my 
grandmother  1  therefor  received  my 
early  religious  training,  and  although  1 
was  not  religiously  Inclined,  her  in- 
structions had  a  great  effect  upon  my 
young  mind.  When  I  was  twelve  years 
of  age  my  father  moved  to  the  city  of 
Malmo,  and  while  in  that  place,  hav- 
ing received  a  good  common  school  edu- 
cation. I  had  some  very  tempting  offers 
of  good  positions,  and  many  opportuni- 
ties for  a  successful  future  presented 
themselves;  vet  I  became  an  apprentice 
to  the  shoemaker  trade,  which  I  hear- 
tily dispised;  but,  as  I  look  upon  it 
now,  that  was  my  opportunity  of  hear- 
ing the  gospel.  I  was  baptized  April 
23,  1880,  by  Elder  Nils  B.  Edler,  and  con- 
firmed the  same  day  by  Elder  John  A. 
Halvorsen;  ordained  a  teacher  by  Elder 
N.  T.  Vigren,  Sept.  1,  1880;  ordained  a 
Priest  June  6,  1881,  by  Elder  Nils  B. 
Edler,  and  ordained  an  Elder  by  Nils 
B.  Edler  Aug.  29,  1881,  and  appointed 
to  labor  as  a  local  traveling  Elder  in 
the  Scone  conference.  During  the  fol- 
lowing two  years  I  traveled  constantly 
without  purse  and  scrip,  preaching  the 
gospel,  of  which  I  was  and  am  now  the 
only  representative  of  my  family.  My 
experience  in  so  doing  did  not  differ 
materiall-"  from  that  of  my  brethren 
who  have  labored  in  the  ministry,  and 
though  from  a  business  point  of  view 
my  best  years  were  spent  in  the  minis- 
try. I  have  never  had  occasion  to  regret 
it.  On  the  contrary,  those  were  times 
of  happiness  and  pleasure  always  to 
be  remembered.  In  1883,  I  emigrated  to 
Utah,  arriving  in  Salt  Lake  City  Jul> 
8th.  I  took  un  my  abode  in  East  Mill 
Creek  and  later  removed  to  West  Jor- 
dan. I  have  pursued  various  avoca- 
tions in  Utah,  but  have  not  been  very 
.successful  in  accumulating  this  world's 
goods.  October  17.  1888,  I  married  Sarah 
A.  Nelson  in  the  Logan  Temple.  Our 
union  thus  far  has  been  blessed  with 
six  children,  five  of  whom  are  now  liv- 
ing. I  was  ordained  a  Seventy  Dec.  22, 
1889,  by  Enoch  B.  Tripp,  and  set  apart 
as  a  president  in  the  SSrd  quorum  of 
Seventy  in  Aueust,  1892,  by  Elder  Brig- 
ham  H.  Roberts.  Dec.  15,  1895.  when 
the  East  Jordan  Ward  was  organized,  I 
was  selected  to  act  as  Ward  clerk.  The 
labors  of  clerk  and  historian  are  especi- 
ally pleasing  to  me.  Upon  the  organi- 
zation of  the  Jordan  Stake  of  Zion, 
Jan.  21,  1900,  I  was  set  apart  as  clerk 
of    the    Stake    by    Apostle    Anthon    H. 


BIOGRAPHICAL    ENCYCLOPEDIA. 


311 


Lund;  and  thus  I  am  privileged  to  la- 
bor in  my  favorite  callingr.  During  m> 
residence  in  West  and  East  Jordan 
Wards  I  have  labored  as  a  Ward 
Teacher  and  in  the  Sunday  School  and 
Y.  M.  M.  I.  A.  and  in  various  other  ca- 
pacities, under  the  direction  of  my 
Bishops.  I  love  to  be  associated  with 
the  work  of  God,  which  I  know  to  be 
true." 

IVINS,  Anthony  Woodward,  presi- 
dent of  the  Juarez  Stake  of  Zion,  is  the 
son  of  Israel  Ivins  and  Anna  Lowrie, 
and  was  born  Sept.  16,  1852,  at  Toms 
River,  Ocean  county.  New  Jersey.  He 
came  to  Utah  with  his  parents  in  1853, 
and    removed    with    them    to    southern 


Utah  in  1861;  thus  he  Jiecame  one  of  the 
first  settlers  of  St.  George.  In  1878, 
he  married  Elizabeth  Ashby  Snow, 
daughter  of  Apostle  Erastus  and  Eliza- 
beth R.  Snow.  In  1875,  he  performed  a 
mission  to  Mexico,  in  company  with 
Dan.  W.  Jones,  Heleman  Pratt,  James 
Z.  Stewart,  R.  H.  Smith,  Ammon  M. 
Tenny  and  Wiley  C.  Jones.  They  went 
as  far  south  as  the  city  of  Chihuahua, 
west  to  the  Sierra  Madre  mountains, 
and  thence  went  north  through  the  sec- 
tion of  country  where  the  colonies  of 
the  Saints  are  now  established.  Hav- 
ing explored  the  Salt  river  valley,  the 
Little  Colorado  river  country  and 
northern  Chihuahua,  they  returned 
home.  In  1878,  in  company  with  Eras- 
tus B.  Snow,  Elder  Ivins  went  on  a 
mission  to  the  Navajo  and  Pueblo  In- 
dians, in  Arizona  and  New  Mexico.     In 


1879,  he  was  chosen  president  of  the 
Y.  M.  M.  I.  A.  of  the  4th  Ward  in  St. 
George,  and  at  a  later  date,  when  the 
four  associations  in  that  town  were 
consolidated,  he  was  chosen  to  preside 
over  the  association  thus  formed.  In 
1881,  he  was  chosen  as  a  member  of  the 
High  Council  in  St.  George  Stake,  and 
later  (1888)  he  was  called  and  set  apart 
to  act  as  first  counselor  to  Daniel  D. 
McArthur,  of  that  Stake.  He  occupied 
that  position  until  1895,  when  he  was 
chosen  president  of  the  Juarez  Stake, 
in  Mexico,  which  was  organized  Dec.  9, 
1895.  In  consequence  of  this  call,  he 
removed  with  his  family  to  Mexico.  Be- 
sides the  many  ecclesiastical  positions 
which  he  has  filled,  he  has  held  many 
political  and  civil  ofl?ices  in  the  com- 
munities where  he  has  resided.  Thus 
he  served  as  constable  of  St.  George 
precinct,  city  councilor,  city  attorney 
and  mayor,  deputy  sheriff  of  Washing- 
ton county,  county  prosecuting  attor- 
ney, and  for  six  years  assessor  and 
collector  of  said  county.  He  was  also 
a  representative  to  the  legislature  in 
1894,  and  a  member  of  the  State  Con- 
stitutional convention  in  1895.  He  se- 
cured the  first  appropriation  for  the 
benefit  of  the  Shebit  Indians,  and  was 
appointed  government  Indian  agent  for 
these  Indians,  under  which  appointment 
he  acted  two  years,  when  he  resigned 
to  accept  nomination  for-representativa 
to  the  legislature.  Pres.  Ivins  now  re- 
sides at  Colonia  Juarez,  Chihuahua, 
Mexico,  occupied  witu  the  duties  per- 
taining to  his  high  and  responsible  posi- 
tion as  president  of  the  Stake  and  vice 
president  and  general  manager  of  the 
Mexican  Colonization  and  Agricultural 
company.  Before  going  to  Mexico  he 
engaged  successfully  in  the  cattle  busi- 
ness, both  privately  and  as  manager  of 
the  Mojave  Land  and  Cattle  company 
and  the  Kiabah  Cattle  company,  both 
of  which  were  incorporated  companies 
with  ranches  in  the  northern  part  of 
Arizona.  Pres.  Ivins  ranks  high  among 
his  brethren  as  a  public  speaker,  and 
is  considered,  in  many  respects,  one  of 
the  ablest  and  most  influential  men  in 
the  Church. 

EYRING,  Henry,  first  counselor  to 
Anthony  W.  Ivins,  president  of  the 
Juarez  Stake  of  Zion,  was  born  March 
9,  1835,  in  Coburg,  Saxe-Coburg-Gotha. 
Germany.  The  following  is  a  brief 
sketch  of  his  life     from     his  own  pen- 


312 


LATTER-DAY  SAINT 


"My  parents  wore  in  good  circum- 
stances and  socially  well  connected. 
My  father  owned  an  apothecary  busi- 
ness, which  had  descenaea  to  him  from 
his  father  and  was  quite  lucrative.  My 
mother  was  the  daughter  of  the  Vis- 
count George  Louis  von  Blomberg,  who 
was  at  the  time  of  my  mother's  mar- 
riage employed  in  the  service  of  Khik 
"VAMUiam  III  of  Prussia,  as  counselor  of 
the  kings  domains.  He  was  a  man 
of  considerable  ability  and  well  liked 
by  the  king.  My  mother  died  when  I 
was  eight  years  of  age.  Soon  after, 
my  father  met  with  heavy  financial 
losses,  and  when  he  died  I  was  left  an 
orphan  at  the  age  of  fifteen  years, with- 
lut    means,    but    not    entirely    without 


friends.  When  I  was  quite  young,  my 
father  (having  then  ample  means  at  his 
command)  employed  a  private  teacher 
to  give  me  a  good  start.  Later  on,  an 
eminent  professor  in  my  native  town 
started  a  private  institute  of  learning, 
which  I  attended  several  years,  and 
when  I  was  ten  years  of  a^e  I  studied 
the  following  branches:  Reading,  writ- 
ing, composition,  arithmetic,  geo- 
graphy, grammar,  history,  Latin, 
French,  natural  history,  natural  phil- 
osophy and  singing.  After  that  I  was 
sent  to  a  higher  institute  at  Ootha, 
where  I  remained  for  four  years.  When 
fifteen  years  old.  I  became  an  appren- 
tice in  a  wholesale  drug  business  in  the 
city  of  Vienna,  in  Austria.  Not  ad- 
miring  the   despotic   rule  of  Austria,   I 


made  up  my  mind  to  leave  for  America 
at  the  end  of  my  apprenticeship,  which 
I    did    in    the   year   1853,    at   the   age   of 
eighteen,    taking     with     me    my    sister 
Bertha,    some    fifteen    months    younger 
than  myself.      We  ariived  in  New  York 
Sept.  8,  1853.      On  the  1st  of  March,  1854, 
1  started  for  Saint  Louis,  Mo.,  where  I 
f«^und  employment  in  a  wholesale  drug 
establishment.        During    this     year      I 
heard  more  or  less  about  the  'Mormon' 
people,  but  not  a  word  that  was  in  their 
favor.      Hearing  that  they  held  regular 
meetings,    I    was    led    by    curiosity    to 
enter  their  meeting-house,  for  the  first 
time,   on   the   evening   of   Dec.   10,    1854. 
Elder  Milo  Andrus,  who  was  president 
of    the    Saint    Louis    Stake    of    Zion    at 
that  time,     preached     that     night     and 
made    quite   an     impression     upon   my 
mind.        From    that    time    on,    I    inves- 
tigated '"ry  closely,  and  on  the  11th  of 
March,  1855,  I  received  the  ordinance  of 
Vjaptism.       Apostle  Erastus  Snow,  who 
then   presided  over  the   Saints  in      the 
Mississippi  valley    had  me  ordained  to 
the  office  of  a  Priest,   and  on  June  17, 
1S55,  I  had  the  great  joy  and  satisfac- 
tion to  baptize  my  sister  Bertha.       At 
the   October   conference,    held   at   Saint 
Louis,   I  was  called  to  perform  a  mis- 
sion to  the  Indian  Territory.       Oct.  11, 
1855,  I  was  ordained  an  Elder  and  set 
apart   for   the   Cherokee   mission,   as   it 
was    then    called.       Four   other    Elders 
were  called  at  the    same  time,    and  we 
.urived     in     our     field     of     labor     on 
Spavinaw   creek,    in   the   Cherokee   Na- 
tion, on  Nov.  10,  1855.      I  labored  among 
the  Cherokees  and   Creeks     and     some 
little  among  the  Choctaws.       The  Lord 
was  very  merciful  to  me  and  by  his  aid 
I    raised     up       some     branches   of   the 
Ohurch   and    baptized   quite   a  number. 
The  country  being  subject  to  the  chills 
and  fever,   I  waS  sick  a  great  deal,  in 
fact,  the  greatet-  part  of  the  time  I  re- 
mained there.      In  May,  1860,  after  bav- 
in? labored  in  the  Indian  Territory  four 
and   a  half  years,    I   started    for  Utah, 
where  I  arrived  Aug.  29,  1860.     At  that 
time   the   Cherokee   Mission   was  under 
the  direct  charge  of  the  Presidency  in 
Utah,  but  it  was  very  difficult  in  those 
'lays   to  get  ^ny  news   from   there.       I 
had  had  charge  of  the  mission  for  over 
two  years,  and  altogether  had  been  in 
that  field  nearly  four  and  a  half  years; 
hence   I   began     to   think   that   possibl> 
my  mission  might  come  to  a  close  be- 
fore long.  Getting  no  news  of  any  kind 


BIOGRAPHICAL    ENCYCLOPEDIA. 


313 


from  Utah,  I  enquired  of  the  Lord  and 
He  answered  me  in  a  dream,  as  fol- 
lows: 1  dreamed  that  I  was  in  the 
President's  office  in  Salt  Lake  City,  and 
that  I  addressed  Pres.  Young,  say- 
ing: 'I  have  come  of  my  own  accord, 
hut  if  -  have  not  stayed  long  enough, 
I  am  willing  to  return  and  complete  my 
mission.'  The  president  answered:  'It 
is  all  right,  you  have  stayed  long 
enough.'  On  the  strength  of  this  dream 
I  started  for  Utah;  and  when  I  met 
the  President,  I  said  to  him:  'Pres. 
Young,  I  have  come  without  being  sent 
for;  if  this  was  not  right,  I  am  willing 
to  "'o  back  and  finish  my  mission.  He 
answered  pleasantly:  'It  is  all  right, 
we  have  been  looking  for  you.'  A  call 
for  volunteers  to  go  to  our  Utah  Dixie 
was  made  at  the  October  general  con 
ference,  in  1862,  and  I  volunteered  to 
go  to  the  sunny  south.  Dec.  ■'^,  1860, 
I  had  married  Mary  Bonneli.with  whom 
I  had  become  acquainted,  in  crossing 
the  plains,  and  after  living  at  Ogden 
till  March,  1862,  I  moved  with  my  wife 
to  Salt  Lake  City.  In  November,  1862, 
we  reached  Saint  George  and  located 
there.  Nov.  1,  1863,  I  was  called  to 
be  the  Bishop  of  the  Second  Saint 
George  Ward,  and  on  November  29th 
was  ordained  under  the  hands  of  Apos- 
tle Erastus  Snow  and  Pres.  Jacob 
Gates.  I  had  previously  belonged  to 
the  60th  Quorum  of  Seventy,  being  or- 
dained a  Seventy  March  9,  1861  when 
I  lived  in  Oerden.  Aug.  1,  1874,  I  was 
called  to  take  a  mission  to  Germany 
and  Switzerland, where  I  arrived  in  Oc- 
tober of  that  year.  I  labored  with  mod- 
erate success  in  Germany,  baptizing  a 
few.  Later  I  was.  mostly  occupied  in 
the  office  in  Berne,  where  I  worked  on 
the  "Stern,"  translated  the  book  of 
Doctrine  and  Covenants  into  the  Ger- 
man language  and  attended  to  other 
office  duties.  I  returned  home  in  July, 
1S76.  At  the  general  conference,  which 
was  held  in  the  Saint  George  Temple 
in  April,  1877,  I  was  called  to  be  a  coun- 
"selor  in  the  Saint  George  Stake  presi- 
dency, which  position  I  held  for  nearly 
ten  years.  During  my  stay  in  Saint 
George.  I  occupied  the  position  of  ad- 
jutant to  Brigadier-General  Erastus 
Snow,  and  was  mayor  of  Saint  George 
City  for  two  years.  I  also  held  several 
minor  offices.  After  the  settlements 
had  been  started  in  Mexico  and  the 
deputy  marshals  became  somewhat 
solicitous  about  my     welfare,     Apostle 


Erastus  Snow,  who  was  then  in  Mexico, 
directing  the  location  of  places  of  ref- 
uge for  the  Saints,  wrote  to  me,  invit- 
ing me  to  cast  my  lot  with  the  people 
of  Mexico.  Taking  his  advice,  I  start- 
ed with  a  portion  of  my  family,  Feb. 
10,  1887,  for  Mexico,  arriving  at  Colonia 
Juarez  April  8th,  following.  Soon  after 
arriving.  Apostle  Snow  gave  me  a  mis- 
sion to  lower  Mexico,  with  a  view  to 
learn  the  Spanish  language,  become  ac- 
(|uainted  with  the  customs,  some  of  the 
laws  of  Mexico,  some  of  their  commer- 
cial manner  of  doing  business,  and  also 
to  cultivate  an  acquaintance  with  the 
leading  men  of  the  nation.  After  lo- 
cating my  family  and  making  them  as 
comfortable  as  possible  in  so  short  a 
time,  and  under  rather  trying  circum- 
stances. I  started  for  the  city  of  Mexi- 
co, reaching  there  the  latter  part  of 
July,  1887.  Soon  afterwards  I  took 
charge  of  the  mission  and  labored  in 
that  section  until  the  end  of  the  year 
1888.  Our  success  in  lower  Mexico  at 
that  time  was  rather  limited,  as  the 
people  appeared  to  be  very  indifferent 
in  matters  pertaining  to  the  gospel.  I 
was  only  able  to  convert  one  man,  and 
I  fear  that  the  Lord  never  converted 
him,  as  he  soon  after  left  the  Church. 
After  returning  to  Colonia  Juarez,  I 
took  charge  of  a  co-operative  store 
which  up  to  this  date  has  done  a  suc- 
cessful business.  Apastle  Teasdale  lo- 
cated with  us  in  the  spring  of  1891, 
and  in  the  same  fall  the  Mexican 
mision  was  organized  with  Apos- 
tle George  Teasdale  as  president, 
and  Elder  Alexander  F.  MacdSnald 
and  myself  as  counselors.  In  De- 
cember, 1895,  the  settlements  of  the 
Saints  in  Mexico  were  organized  as  a 
Stake  of  Zion,  called  the  Juarez  Stake, 
with  Anthony  W.  Ivins  as  president 
and  myself  and  Elder  Helaman  Pratt 
as  counselors.  After  many  privations, 
the  Saints,  who  located  here  in  Mexico 
have  seen  the  hand  of  the  T..ord  in  their 
marvelous  protection  and  prosperity, 
until  from  ^  very  small  beginning  we 
now  number  eight  prosperous  Wards 
and  a  population  of  about  3.500  souls. 

HYDK,  William  Alonzo,  president 
of  the  Pocatello  Stake,  is  the  son  of 
Rosel  H^-de  and  Mary  Ann  Cowles.  and 
was  born  June  16.  1863,  in  Kaysville, 
Davis  county.  Utah.  He  was  baptized 
and  ordained  to  the  various  grades  of 
the  Priesthood  under  I'.ishop  Peter  Bar- 


314 


LATTER-DAY    SAINT 


ton;  received  a  comriion  school  educa- 
tion In  the  schools  of  his  birthplace, 
with  a  six  months'  course  at  the  Des- 
eret  University,  and  married  Maria 
Reddish.  June  16,  1886,  at  Logan.  In 
that  year  he  removed  to  Layton,  Da- 
vis county,   and   subsequently   assisted 


^■ 


in  the  formation  of  that  "Ward,  being 
clerk  for  Bisho"  Harris  and  acting  in 
other  callings  in  the  Priesthood.  He 
was  ordained  a  Seventy,  Feb.  9,  1890. 
In  May,  1894,  he  removed  to  Cambridge, 
Bannock  county,  Idaho  (then  in  Oneida 
Stake).  In  the  fall  of  that  year  he 
was  chosen  as  Bishop  of  Cambridge, 
and  on  Jan.  20,  1895,  he  was  ordained 
and  set  apart  to  that  position  under 
the  hands  of  Apostle  Francis  M.  Ly- 
man, at  Franklin,  Idaho.  After  the 
organization  of  the  Pocatello  Stake,  he 
acted  as  Stake  clerk  until  October, 
1900.  Nov.  21,  1898  he  was  chosen  to  be 
first  counselor  to  Pres.  Wm.  C.  Parkin- 
son, and  was  set  apart  to  that  posi- 
tion by  Apostle  Matthias  F.  Cowley.  He 
removed  to  Pocatello  in  April,  1900, 
where  he  now  resides.  Pres.  Parkinson 
being  called  to  preside  over  the  Hyruni 
Stake  of  Zion,  Counselor  Wm.  A.  Hyde 
was  chosen  as  his  successor  in  the  pre- 
siding of  the  Pocatello  Stake,  in  March, 
1901. 

POND,  Noah  8., first  counselor  to  Wm. 
A.  Hyde,  president  of  the  Pocatello 
Stake  of  Zion,  is  the  son  of  Stillman 
Pond  and  Anna  Regina  Swenson,  and 
was  born  Dec.  22,  1872,  at  Richmond, 
Cache  county,  Utah.  He  was  reared 
and  educated  in  the  district  schools  of 


Richmond  until  October,  1,  1882,  when 
in  company  with  his  mother  and  broth- 
ers, Lysander  C.  and  Moses  A.,  he  re- 
moved to  Preston,  Oneida  county, Idaho, 
his  father  having  died  four  years  pre- 
viously. He  lived  at  Preston  until  Dec. 
21,  1884,  when  he  followed  his  mother 
and  brothers  to  Eagle  Rock  (now  Ida- 
ho Falls),  Idaho.  Here  he  made  his 
home  until  October,  1889,  when,  in 
company  with  many  others,  he  follow- 
ed the  removal  of  the  railroad  shops 
from  Eagle  Rock  to  Pocatello,  which 
has  since  become  his  permanent  home. 
In  company  with  Lysander  C.  he  at- 
tended the  Brigham  Young  college  at 
Logan  during  the  years  1891,  1892  and 
1893,  from  which  institution  he  gradu- 
ated in  the  Normal  course  May  26,  1893, 
While  at  the  college  he  formed  an  ac- 
t;uaintance  and  friendship  with  Miss 
AUie  Snow  Young,daughter  of  Brigham 
Morris  Young  and  Armeda  Snow,  which 
terminated  in  their  marriage  in  the  Salt 
Lake  Temple  June  24,  1896,  President 
Lorenzo  Snow  performing  the  ceremo- 
ny. May  23,  1897.  their  little  son  Noah 
S.,  jun.,  was  born.  Brother  Pond  was 
ordained  a  Deacon  under  the  direction 
of  Bi*^*^^  ^orter  of  Preston;  a  Teache>- 
by  Elder  Wm.  Williason,    presiding   El- 


der of  the  Pocatello  branch;  an  Elder 
by  Bishop  Carl  J.  Cannon,  of  Pocatello 
W^ard,  and  a  High  Priest  by  Pres.  Geo. 
C.  Parkinson,  at  which  time  he  was 
also  set  apart  as  second  sounselor  to 
Bishop  Carl  J.  Cannon  of  the  Pocatello 
Ward.  Pursuant  to  a  call  from  the 
authorities   of   the    Church    he   .'eft    his 


BIOGRAPHICAL    ENCYCLOPEDIA. 


315 


home  in  Pocatello  April  6,  1898.  to  fill  a 
mission  to  Scandinavia.  He  was  set  apart 
by  Apostle  Francis  M.  Lyman  April 
8th,  and  left  Salt  Lake  City  the  follow- 
ing- day;  arrived  in  Copenhagen  April 
30th  and  was  assigned  to  labor  in  the 
Gothenburg  conference,  Sweden,  in 
which  conference  he  labored  as  presid- 
ing Elder  of  Trollhattan,  Norrkoping 
and  Wingaker  branches.  After  filling 
an  honorable  mission  he  returned  to 
Salt  Lake  City  July  7,  1900,  During 
the  intevening  years,  from  1889  to  1898, 
he  was  engaged  as  clerk  and  bookkeep- 
er in  the  mercantile  houses  of  New 
York  Dry  Goods  Co.  and  the  Blyth  & 
Fargo  Co.  of  Pocatello.  Upon  his  re- 
turn from  Sweden  he  formed  a  mer- 
cantile partnership  with  Wm.  A.  Hyde 
July  23,  1900.  At  the  Pocatello  Stake 
quartely  conference  held  at  Marsh  Cen- 
ter Sept.  3,  1900,  he  was  sustained  and 
set  apart  by  Apostle  Rudger  Clawson 
as  second  counselor  to  Pres.  Wm.  C. 
Parkinson  in  the  Stake  presidency;  and 
at  the  reorganization  of  the  Pocatello 
Stake,  March  10,  1901,  he  was  set  apart 
as  first  counselor  to  Pres.  Wm.  A. 
Hyde. 

WOODLAND,  Henry  Solomon,  sec- 
ond counselor  to  Wm.  A.  Hyde,  presi- 
dent of  the  Pocatello  Stake,  is  the  son 
of  Thomas  S.  Woodland  and  Margaret 
Whitaker,  and  was  born  Oct.  10,  1866, 
in  Willard,  Box  Elder  county.  Utah.  He 
was  baptized  July  7,  1877  by  George 
Facer  and  confirmed  by  him  on  the 
following  day;  was  ordained  a  Teacher 
by  Alexander  Perry,  Feb.  7,  1883,  and 
ordained  an  Elder  by  Niels  C.  Edlef- 
sen  at  Logan,  Utah,  Dec.  20,  1893;  on 
that  day,  also,  he  married  Louisa  J. 
Morrison,  a  daughter  of  Andrew  Morri- 
son and  Mary  Ann  Smart.  The  follow- 
ing spring  he  removed  to  Marsh  Center 
in  Bannock  county,  Idaho,  where  he 
resided  till  1901.  He  was  ordained  a 
Seventy  by  Apostle  Francis  M.  Lyman 
Dec.  2,  1896,  and  departed  the  next  day 
on  a  mission  to  Australia,  where  he  la- 
bored for  two  and  a  half  years.  He 
returned  home  in  1899.  Soon  after  his 
return  he  was  ordained  a  High  Priest 
by  Apostle  Matthias  F.  Cowley  and  set 
apart  to  act  as  a  High  Councilor  in  the 
Pocatello  Stake  of  Zion.  At  Marsh 
Center  he  acted  as  president  of  the 
Ward  Y.  M.  M.  I.  A.  and  also  presided 
over  the  Elders  in  a  local  capacity.    At 


the  reorganization  of  the  presidency  of 
the  Pocatello  Stake,  March  10.  1901.  he 
was  chosen  as  second  counselor  to  Pres. 
Wm.  A.  Hyde;  and,  agreeable  to  coun- 


sel, he  commenced  at  once  to  make 
preparations  to  remove  to  Stake  head- 
quarters at  Pocatello.  Elder  Wood- 
land's secular  occupation  has  been  that 
of  a  rancher  and  stockman,  but  since 
his  call  to  active  Church  service  he 
has  gone  into  other  business. 

POND,  Lysander  Christens^^n,  clerk 
and  historian  of  the  Pocatello  Stake 
of  Zion,  is  the  son  of  Stilman  Pond  and 
Anna  Regina  Swenson,  and  was  born 
Dec.  31st,  1870.  in  Richmond.  Cache 
county,  Utah.  While  in  his  eighth  year, 
his  father  died.  He  received  his  ear- 
ly education  in  the  schools  of  that  place 
until  eleven  years  of  age.  when  he 
moved  with  his  mother  and  brothers 
to  Preston,  Idaho,  where  they  resided 
for  two  years.  Then  the  family  moved 
to  Eagle  Rock  (now  Idaho  Falls).  Ida- 
ho, and  soon  afterwards  Lysander  be- 
came employed  in  the  railroad  shops  as 
an  apprentice  in  the  boiler-maker's  de- 
partment. At  the  instance  of  the  shops 
being  moved  to  Pocatello.  Idaho,  in  1887. 
the  family  soon  followed,  and  he  was 
again  engaged,  this  time  going  into  the 
blacksmith  shop,  and  there  served  full 
time  as  an  apprentice  to  the  trade.  The 
school  year  of  1887-88  he  attended  the 
Brigham  Young  College  at  Logan, Utah, 
and  also  from  1891-93  with  his  brother 
Noah;  completed  the  normal  course  and 
graduated    May    26.    1893.      He    married 


316 


LATTER-DAY    SAINT 


Miss  Louie  Prescindia  Kimball,  daugh- 
ter of  Joseph  and  Lathllla  Pratt-Klm- 
ball,  in  the  Logan  Temple,  June  28,  1893. 
Shortly  afterwards  he  was  called  on  a 
mission  to  the  Island  of  Tasmania  in 
the  South  Seas.  His  wife  was  also 
called  to  accompany  him;  and  there,  in 
conjunction  with  Elder  Fred  W.  Ellis 
of  North  Ogden,  Utah,  they  opened  up 
the  Tasmania  mission,  now  a  part  of 
the  Australian  mission.  Through  their 
earnest, assiduous  labors, and  those  who 
have  followed  after,  a  fruitfull  field  has 
been  developed.  Two  little  daughters 
were  born  to  Elder  Pond  and  wife 
during  their  sojourn  in  Tasmania.  They 
were  absent  nearly  three  years.  Since 
their  return   Elder   Pond   has   been  en- 


gaged with  some  of  the  business  houses 
of  Pocatello  as  booickeeper  and     cleric. 
He    has    held    various    positions   in    the 
auxiliary   organizations  of   the   Church 
from    his    early    boyhood.        When    the 
Pocatello    Stake    was   organized,     Aug. 
7,  1898,  he  was  selected  a  member  of  the 
High    Council     and     superintendent  of 
Sunday  schools,  and  on  Sept.  3,  1900, was 
appointed  Stake  Tithing  clerk.  The  date 
of  his  baptism  and  ordination  to  vari- 
ous   grades    of    the    Priesthood    are    as 
follows:       Baptized,  Feb.     16,     1879,     in 
Richmond,   Utah,     by     Elder  N.    Robt. 
Lewis,  and  confirmed   the   same  day  a 
member   of   the     Church     by     Thomas 
Moore;  ordained  an  Elder  Sept.  3,  1887, 
by  Wm.  Thomas,  of  Idaho  Falls,  Idaho; 
ordained  a  Seventy     Oct.     22,     1893,  by 
Apostle  Francis     M.     Lyman,     and  or- 
dained  a   High  Priest  Aug.   7,  1898,   by 
Pres.  Geo.  C.  Parkinson. 


SMITH,   Jesse  Nathaniel,  president 

of    the    Snowflake    Stake    of    Zlon,    was 
born  Dec.  2,  1834,  in  Stockholm, St.  Law- 
rence county.  New  York.    The  following 
is    a    brief    autobiography    of    his    life: 
"I  was  the  youngest  child  of  a  second 
marriage.      My  ancestors    were,  on  the 
father's    side,    Silas    Smith    and    Mary 
Aikens;  Asahel  Smith  and  Mary  Duty. 
Samuel   Smith     and       Priscilla     Gould; 
Samuel    Smith     and      Rebecca    Curtis; 
Robert  Smith   and  Mary  his  wife,  who 
came  from  England  in  1666,  and  settled 
at   Topsfield,    Mass.       On    the   mother's 
side,   my  grandparents  were  Nathaniel 
Aikens  and  Mary  Tupper,     whose     pa- 
rents were  Solomon  Aikens  and  Dorcas 
Whitcomb,    whose    parents    came    from 
England.      Both  my  grandfathers  were 
engaged    in      the      Revolutionary    war, 
Nathaniel  Aikens  serving  under  the  im- 
mediate   command    of     Gen.    Washing- 
ton.      Asahel   Smith     was  a  somewhat 
visionary  man;  he  predicted  that  some- 
thing would   come   forth   in   his   family 
that  would  transmit  his  name  with  hon- 
or to  posterity.      When  near  his  death 
in  1830,  his  son  Joseph,  father     of     the 
Prophet,     and     grandson     Don   Carlos, 
visited  him  at  my  father's  house,  hav- 
ing   with    them    the    Book    of    Mormon, 
and  the  tidings  of  the  gospel.      He  re- 
ceived with  gladness  the   testimony  of 
his  son,  and  i>emarked  that  he  had  al- 
ways been  expecting  the  coming  forth 
of  the  true  gospel.  At  this  Jesse  Smith, 
his  oldest  son,  who  lived  in  the  neigh- 
borhood,  became   greatly   enraged,   and 
conducted     himself      like     a    madman. 
Grandfather  died  a  few  days  after.over 
eighty-six  years  of  age.  His  wife  moved 
to  Kirtland  with  my  father  in  1836,  but 
died  soon  after  arriving,  being  ninety- 
three  years  old.       Father  was  baptized 
by    Hyrum    Smith    in    the    summer     of 
1835;  he  had  been  convinced    for    nearly 
five  years,  but  owing  to  the  opposition 
of  my  mother,  his  oldest  children  and 
other  relatives,  he  refrained  from  tak- 
ing the  decisive  step.     My  mother  had 
not  joined  the  Church  when  the  family 
moved  to  Kirtland,  but   took  with  her 
a    certificate     of     membership     in    the 
Presbyterian  church;   she  was  baptized 
by  Hyrum  Smith,  July  18,  1837.     On  the 
13th  of  April  following,  my  father  with 
his  family  left  Kirtland  for  Far  West, 
Missouri,    but    losing    a    horse    stopped 
near  Mount  Vernon,  Knox  county, Ohio. 
Here   also   father     became     acquainted 
with    a    family      named     Jackson,    and 
prophesied    that    they    all    would      join 


BIOGRAPHICAL    ENCYCLOPEDIA. 


317 


the  Church,  which  proved  true,  though 
some  of  them  afterwards  apostatized. 
In  the  fall  we  again  proceeded  on  our 
journey.  When  near  Huntsville,  Mis- 
souri, we  were  met  by  a  man  living 
in  the  State,  who  had  a  copy  of  the  ex- 
terminating order  of  Governor  Boggs, 
as  It  was  called,  which  he  read.  It  was 
to  the  effect  that  all  the  "Mormons"  at 
Far  West  should  leave  the  State  forth- 
with, and  all  that  were  on  the  road 
should  turn  back  on  pain  of  death. 
Some  who,  despite  the  order,  persisted 
in  going  forward,  were  deprived  of  their 
teams  and  whipped  with  hickory 
withes.  Halting  for  the  night  we  re- 
mained in  camp  the  following  day,  but 
understanding  that  a  mob  was  prepar- 
ing to  attack  us,  we  turned  back  early 


the  next  day.  and  were  soon  overtaken 
by  a  number  of  others  who,  like  our- 
selves, were  fleeing  before  the  extermin- 
ating order.  One  Isaac  Russell,  claim- 
ing to  have  authority  from  the  au- 
thorities of  the  Church  at  Far  West, 
gathered  together  quite  a  number  of 
these  fugitives,  and  located  them  on 
the  western  bank  of  the  Mississippi 
river,  in  the  State  of  Missouri,  where 
they  built  log  cabins  and  prepared  to 
pass  the  winter.  Not  being  able  to  get 
grinding  done,  we  lived  principally  on 
boiled  corn  for  some  weeks.  My 
brother,  John  Aikens  Smith,  died,  over 
six  years  old,  from  exposure  to  wet  and 
cold.  Finding  that  Russell  was  act- 
ing without  authority,  the  camp  broke 
up   in   February,   1838,   and  crossed    the 


river,  halting  at  Pittsfield,  Ills.  Here 
one  Thomas  Edwards  made  offers  of 
land  on  favorable  terms,  and  the  breth- 
ren concluded  to  settle;  being  joined 
by  others,  a  branch  of  the  Church  was 
organized.  Father  attended  a  confer- 
ence of  the  Church  at  Commerce,  af- 
terwards called  Nauvoo,  Hancock 
county.  Ills.,  where  he  met  the  Prophet 
Joseph  and  many  others  of  our  faith, 
he  returned  with  the  intention  of  mov- 
ing there,  but  was  taken  sick  and  died 
Sept.  13,  1839,  nearly  sixty  years  of 
age.  He  was  ordained  an  Elder  and 
afterwards  a  High  Priest.  He  was  in 
the  war  of  1812,  as  captain  of  militia. 
My  mother  moved  to  Nauvoo  where  we 
were  kindly  received  by  our  relatives. 
Being  a  school  teacher,  she  took  a 
school,  by  which  means  I  received  some 
schooling;  she  also  taught  me  the 
principles  of  the  gospel,  to  exercise 
faith  in  God  and  pray  to  Him.  Aug. 
13,  1843,  I  was  baptized  by  John  Smith, 
who  also  confirmed  me.  I  was  in  Nau- 
voo when  Joseph  and  Hyrum  Smith 
went  to  Carthage,  and  I  heard  the 
speech  of  Governor  Ford  to  the  people 
of  Nauvoo  on  the  day  of  the  martyr- 
dom. I  saw  the  bodies  of  the  mar- 
tyrs after  they  were  prepared  for 
burial.  In  the  summer  of  1845  the  mob 
spirit  again  broke  out  in  Hancock  and 
adjoining  counties.  In  February,  1846, 
the  great  exodus  commenced;  the  lead- 
ers of  the  Church  departed  for  the 
west,  accompanied  by  such  of  the  Saints 
as  were  able  to  fit  themselves  out  for 
the  journey.  My  mother  passe^  the 
summer  about  six  miles  west  of  Nau- 
voo, in  Lee  county,  Iowa.  While  we 
were  there  the  mob  forces  of  the  State 
of  Illinois  attacked  the  remnant  of  the 
Saints  in  Nauvoo  and  drove  them  across 
the  river.  The  Church  teams  that  came 
down  from  Council  Bluffs  for  the  out- 
casts of  Nauvoo,  also  picked  up  my 
mother.  We  reached  Winter  Quarters, 
afterwards  Florence.  Nebraska,  Nov.  30, 
1846.  I  made  a  trip  to  Missouri  for 
grain  during  the  winter.  Before  the 
grass  grew  in  the  spring,  I  was  en- 
gaged for  several  weeks,  felling  elm 
trees  for  the  cattle  to  browse  upon  the 
swelling  buds.  The  Pioneers  set  out 
in  April,  1847.  On  the  9th  of  June 
the  later  companies  were  organized 
near  the  Elk  Horn  river,  where  Jacob 
Wetherby  was  killed  by  Indians.  We 
traveled  with  a  company  if  fifty  wag- 
ons;   Perregrine  Sessions  was  our  cap- 


318 


LATTER-DAT    SAINT 


tain.       I     drove     Uncle     John    Smith's 
ox    team.        We    followed    the    track   of 
the  Pioneers  up  the  north  side     of  the 
Platte   river.       In   the   Blacli   Hills     we 
met    some    men    who    had    been    in    the 
Mormon    Battalion,   on   their   return   to 
their  families.      We  crossed  the  South 
Pass  of  the  Rocky  mountains  and  met 
the   Pioneers  on   the   Little  Sandy.       A 
meeting   was     called    and   glowing   de- 
scriptions given  of  the  Valley  and  sur- 
rounding country.      The  Pioneers    tar- 
ried with  us  one  day.      We  reached  the 
Valley   Se- t.   25,   1847.       Here  we  found 
a  detachment  of  the  Mormon  Battalion 
who   came    from    Santa   Fe   by   way  of 
Pueblo,    where    they    wintered;    also    a 
few  Saints  from  the  State  of  Mississip- 
pi, who  joined  the  above  named  detach- 
ment on  the  Arkansas  river.      The  set- 
tlement consisted  of  an  adobe  fort  en- 
closing   ten    acres,      only     partly   built. 
There  were  gates  in  the  center  of  each 
of  the  four  sides,  with  no  other  opening 
except  port  holes  for  rifles.       The  fort 
was  afterwards  enlarged  by  adding  ten 
acres   on    the   south   and    ten    more   on 
the   north   of   the     first   enclosure,    the 
houses  facing  each  of  the  three  squares 
thus  formed.       It  soon  became  evident 
that   there  would  be  great   scarcity  of 
provisions   before    a   harvest     could   be 
produced.      There  were  not  many  cows 
and   the  most   of  them   had  worked  In 
the  yoke  while  crossing  the  plains,   so 
they  gave  but  little  milk.      Fortunately 
the  winter  of  1847-8  was  very  mild  and 
the    worn    out    cattle    found    abundant 
grass   on    the   ranges.       Nearly   every- 
body went  on  short  rations  of  food,  as 
was  strictly  true  with  our  little  family, 
not  receiving  more  than  half  as  much 
nourishment  as     was     required.       Our 
houses  were  mostly  log  cabins    without 
floors,  the  roofs  being  flat  and  made  of 
poles   and    earth.       A     big     field     was 
fenced  and  a  crop  planted.       The   first 
attempts  to  irrigate   the  soil   were  un- 
successful,  but  with  practice   the  diflfl- 
culties     were       measurably     overc6me. 
Then  came  the  crickets  to  destroy  the 
crops,    and   no   doubt   would   have   suc- 
ceeded but  for  the  swarms  of  beautiful 
gulls    from    beyond    the    lake.       These 
appeared  to  be  organized  in  armies  and 
to  move  against  the  enemy  under  strict 
•liscipllne,  their  movements  being  regu- 
lated   with   much   precision.       The   first 
mills    for   grinding   grain    were   of   the 
[irimitive     construction,      and     without 
i>oltlng     apparatus:       the       flour     was 


wretched  in  the  extreme.    Much  of  the 
corn  was  frost-bitten  and  the  meal  cor- 
respondingly  poor.     Very   few   vegeta- 
bles could   be  obtained;    potatoes  were 
out  of  the  question  owing  to  the  dlffl- 
culty  in  procuring  seed.      Fruit  was  not 
to  be  thought  of,  excepting  service  ber- 
ries, which  were  sometimes  bought  of 
the  Indians.      The  people  were  entirely 
without  swine's  flesh  In  any  form,  and 
beef  and  game  were  quite  scarce.  Some 
fish  were  caught  in  the  Utah  lake,  but 
the   supply   was   not  equal   to   the     de- 
mand.      So  great  was  the  scarcity   of 
timber  that  no   one   was   permitted   to 
cut   any   green    tree   except   there   was 
some  pressing  necessity  therefor.  With 
the  arrival  of  Pres.  Brigham  Young,  in 
the  fall  of  1848,  a  change  came  over  the 
spirits  of   the   people.       He   lifted     the 
embargo  that  rested  on  the  cutting  of 
green  timber,     proclaiming     that  there 
would    be    enough    for    all,    and      more, 
a  thing  which   then   seemed  very     un- 
likely,  and  he  also     put      forth     what 
seemed  to  me  a  very  hazardous  predic- 
tion, that  was,  that  in  a  few  years  the 
crickets   would    entirely   disappear,     so 
that  there  would  hardly  be  a  specimen 
left.        I    have    seen      these    predictions 
fulfilled,  though  at  the  time  they  were 
made,  they  were  opposed  to  all  human 
probability.        The      Church    was    more 
fully  organized,  the  presiding  quorums 
being  filled.  The  outlook  generally  was 
more    encouraging.       Permission     was 
given  to  leave  the  fort,  and  parties  be- 
gan to  build  on  their  city  lots.    Browns- 
ville,  afterwards     Ogden,     and     Provo 
were     settled,     and      farmers  began  to 
scatter  out.  My  brother  and  I  tried  our 
fortunes    In    what    afterwards    became 
Davis  county.     July  6,  1851,   I  was  or- 
dained  an     Elder     by     Patriarch  John 
Smith,  and  in  the  fall  of  the  same  year 
with  my  brother,  was  called,  by  Pres 
Young,   to     go       to     Parowan     to  help 
strengthen  the  settlement,  and     devel- 
op the  country.      In  May  following     I 
married  Emma   S.  West.       In  1853    the 
I'tah  Indian  war  broke  out.       Our  set- 
tlement was  under  martial  law  for  sev- 
eral months.       I     bore    a     part  of  the 
hardships  of  tlie  war,  in  common  with 
other  citizens.       I  received  my  endow- 
ments in  Salt  Lake  City  early  in  March, 
1854,  and  on  the  12th  of  the  same  month 
was  ordained  a  Seventy  by  Pres.  Joseph 
Young  and  was  placed  in  the  9th  quo- 
rum;   was  elected  district  attorney  by 
the    legislature   of   Utah,    officiated     as 


BIOGRAPHICAL   ENCYCLOPEDIA. 


319 


county  clerk  of  Iron  county,  and  during 
the  winter  of  1854-5  taught  school.  In 
the  spring  Pres.  Young  organized  a 
Stake  at  Parowan,  with  John  C.  L. 
Smith  as  president,  and  James  H.  Mar- 
tineeau  and  myself  counselors,  I  hav- 
ing been  ordained  a  High  Priest.  At 
the  August  election  I  was  elected  a  rep- 
resentative to  the  legislature  from  Iron 
county.  This  year  my  crops  were  en- 
tirely destroyed  by  grasshoppers.  The 
legislature  convened  at  Fillmore;  of  the 
important  acts  passed,  was  one  provid- 
ing for  a  convention  to  form  a  State 
government.  Pres.  John  C.  L.  Smith 
having  died,  the  Stake  was  reorganized 
by  Apostle  Geo.  A.  Smith,  with  "William 
H.  Dame  president,  and  Calvin  C.  Pen- 
dleton and  myself  counselors.  I  was 
appointed  to  preside  over  the  High 
Priests  in  Parowan.  In  the  latter  part 
of  the  winter  of  1856,  while  I  was  in 
Great  Salt  Lake  City,  another  war  with 
the  Utah  Indians  broke  out.  Governor 
Young  gave  orders  to  break  up  the 
smaller  settlements  of  southern  Utah, 
and  consolidate  them  with  the  larger 
settlements.  I  was  the  bearer  of  his 
dispatches,  and  reached  home  after  a 
very  cold  and  dangerous  journey,  dur- 
ing which  I  was  reported  to  have  been 
killed  by  the  Indians.  I  taught  school 
the  following  winter  and  also  per- 
formed missionary  work  among  the  set- 
tlements. I  assisted  to  move  the  pub- 
lic machine-shop  from  Salt  Lake  City 
to  Parowan.  At  the  time  of  the  move 
Pres.  Young  sent  by  me  the  first  sorg- 
hum cane  seed  to  be  tried  in  the  south. 
I  was  with  the  White  mountain  explor- 
ing partv  from  May  21st  until  the  par- 
ty came  in,  and  was  at  one  time  in 
great  peril  with  Indians,  fourteen  of 
them  having  surrounded  me  and  one 
companion,  with  a  view  to  rob  us;  we. 
however,  showed  fight  and  thereby  es- 
caped. Being  sent  out  for  that  pur- 
pose, with  a  small  party,  I  explored 
the  valleys  on  the  head  waters  of  the 
Sevier  and  Rio  Virgen  rivers,  and  made 
a  report  thereof  to  the  Church  His- 
torian. Feb.,  1859,  I  was  elected  mayor 
of  Parowan  City.  The  following  spring 
I  assisted  in  makin°'  a  settlement  at 
Minersville,  Beaver  county,  Utah.  Sept. 
12,  1860,  while  harvesting  at  Minersville. 
I  received  a  letter  from  Geo.  A.  Smith, 
informing  me  that  I  was  called  on  a 
mission  to  Europe,  and  that  the  Elders 
would  leave  Salt  Lake  City  the  25th 
inst.      I  arranged  my  business  and  left 


for  Parowan  the  following  morning.  On 
the  17th,  leaving  my  business  in  my 
brother's  hands,  I  started  on  my  mis- 
sion; arriving  in  Salt  Lake  City  I  was 
informed  that  my  mission  was  to  Scan- 
dinavia. Receiving  an  Elder's  certifi- 
cate from  the  First  Presidency,  and  a 
blessing  at  the  hands  of  the  Apostles,  I 
crossed  the  plains  with  about  fifty  El- 
ders on  missions  to  various  parts  of  the 
world.  Among  them  were  Orson  Pratt. 
Erastus  Snow  and  Geo.  Q.  Cannon.  "We 
reached  Florence  after  a  hard  journey 
of  forty  days;  sold  our  teams  and  took 
the  last  boat  of  the  season  going  down 
the  river,  which  was  overcrowded 
with  returning  miners  from  Pike's  Peak. 
At  St.  Joseph  we  took  rail  for  New 
York;  turned  aside  and  visited  rela- 
tives in  the  northern  part  of  the  State 
of  New  York;  found  most  of  them  very 
bigoted;  the  spirit  of  intolerance  seemed 
to  inhere  in  the  very  soil.  We  joined 
the  Elders  in  New  York  in  time  to  take 
steerage  passage  with  fourteen  others, 
on  the  steamship  "City  of  Baltimore,"' 
for  liiverpool  Dec.  1,  1860,  where  we  ar- 
rived after  a  stormy  passage  of  twelve 
days.  We  reported  to  Presidents  Ly- 
man and  Rich.  Not  wishing  to  go  on 
before  the  arrival  of  Pres.  Cannon,  who 
was  daily  expected,  we  took  a  tour  into 
the  country,  where  Joseph  F.  and 
Samuel  H.  B.  Smith  were  laboring  as 
missionaries.  At  London  I  obtained  an 
American  passport  at  tne  legation  of 
the  United  States.  I  also  received  a 
letter  of  appointment  from  the  presi- 
dency in  Liverpool  to  labor  in  the  Scan- 
dinavian mission,  and  sailed  from  Lon- 
don Jan.  1,  1861,  in  company  with  Wm. 
"W.  Cluff  and  J.  P.  R.  Johnson  for  Rot- 
terdam, that  being  the  most  northerly 
port  on  the  continent  free  from  ice,  as 
was  learned  by  telegraph.  Detained 
by  bad  weather,  we  were  four  days  get- 
ting across  the  channel  and  then  our 
steamer  grounded  in  the  mouth  of  the 
Meuse.  Having  paid  our  way  twenty 
miles  further,  we  waited  for  high  tide, 
but  there  being  no  prospect  of  the  ship 
getting  afloat  soon,  we  left  with  the 
boat  that  went  ashore  for  provisions. 
We  entered  Brielle  in  Belgium,  from 
the  country  side,  where  they  spoke 
French,  and  made  ourselves  understood 
with  difficulty.  The  cold  was  intense. 
We  crossed  the  mouth  of  the  Rhine  in 
an  ice  boat  into  Holland  where  Dutch 
was  the  prevailing  language,  and  hii-ed 
a  carriage  to  Leyden.      The  road     was 


320 


LATTER-DAY    SAINT 


very  narrow,  and  lined  on  each  side 
with  trees  and  raised  about  ten  feet 
above  the  surrounding  surface.  At 
Leyden  we  reached  the  railroad,  The 
cold  was  so  great  that  the  trains  were 
often  behind  times;  there  was  a  delay 
at  all  the  Junctions  of  the  roads;  at 
one  time  we  waited  eight  hours  in  one 
place,  not  knowing  when  the  train 
would  move  on.  We  suffered  a  great 
deal  with  the  cold,  and  for  want  of 
proper  nourishment,  for  we  traveled 
third  class,  being  short  of  money.  We 
reached  Copenhagen  in  the  evening  of 
Jan.  11.  1861,  and  reported  ourselves  to 
John  "Van  Cott,  president  of  the  mis- 
sion. I  was  sent  out  to  travel  for  a 
short  time  with  Ola  N.  Liljenquist,  who 
was  traveling  Elder  for  the  mission; 
after  which  I  was  assigned  to  C.  A. 
Madsen's  pastorate,  comprising  the 
conference  of  Aalborg  and  Vendsyssel. 
I  was  very  kindly  and  considerately 
treated  by  all  with  whom  I  came  in 
contact,  especially  by  Elder  Anthon  H. 
Lund,  who  assisted  me  in  my  efforts  to 
learn  the  Danish  language.  I  remained 
here  some  three  months  and  formed  a 
pleasant  acquaintance  with  many 
Saints;  afterwards  passed  some  time  in 
Zro.  Knud  H.  Brown's  pastorate,  com- 
prising the  Fredericia  and  Fyen  con- 
ferences. Christmas  times  found  me  In 
th  >  Aarhus  conference,  presided  over 
by  Peter  C.  Geertsen,  when  I  was  called 
to  headquarters  by  the  president  of  the 
mission.  I  enjoyed  my  labors  among 
the  people  very  much,  and  rejoiced  to 
learn  that  my  presence  gave  strength 
to  the  local  Elders,  and  consolation  to 
the  Saints.  It  was  seven  months  af- 
ter leaving  home  before  I  received  a 
letter  from  my  family.  They  seemed 
to  think  I  had  gone  so  far  away  that  It 
was  of  no  use  to  write.  I  applied  my- 
self assiduously  to  the  study  of  the  lan- 
guage. I  accompanied  Pres.  Van  Cott 
upon  his  journey  in  the  interests  of  the 
emigration;  attended  regularly  our 
meetings  in  the  city  where  often  as 
many  as  400  persons  were  present.  On 
Sunday  March  16,  1862,  at  a  conference 
of  nearly  one  thousand  Saints,  Pres. 
Van  Cott  announced  that  I  had  been 
.appointed  his  successor  by  Pres. 
Young.  This  .was  sanctioned  by  the 
vote  <  '  the  assembly.  At  this  time 
there  were  In  the  mission  5,157  officers 
and  members.  Including  9  Elders  from 
Zlon.  All  had  emigrated  who  had  the 
means  to  pay  the  expenses  of  the  jour- 


ney. W.  W.  Cluff  and  H.  P.  Lund 
were  appointed  traveling  Elders  for  the 
mission.  In  the  course  of  the  summer 
we  were  visited  by  Pres.  Geo.  Q.  Can- 
non and  wife  and  Elders  Joseph  F. 
and  Samuel  H.  B.  Smith,  and  with  them 
came  Patriarch  John  Smith,  a  mission- 
ary from  Zion.  I  traveled  with  them 
and  held  conferences  in  Aalborg,  Aar- 
hus and  Copenhagen.  I  accompanied 
Pres.  Cannon  and  his  wife  through 
Germany,  Holland  and  Switzerland.  In 
Holland  we  met  Elder  Paul  A.  Schett- 
ler  and  in  Switzerland  Elder  John  L. 
Smith.  I  returned  to  my  field;  found 
there  had  been  some  disturbances  In 
the  meetings  of  the  Copenhagen 
branch,  by  mobs,  during  my  absence.  I 
occasionally  crossed  the  Sound,  and  at- 
tended meetings  in  Malmo,  Sweden; 
revised  the  Swedish  hymn  book,  with 
the  assistance  of  Elder  Jonas  Engberg, 
and  published  a  new  edition;  I  also  re- 
vised the  Book  of  Doctrine  and  Coven- 
ants, and  issued  a  new  edition.  I  was 
very  successful  in  collecting  legacies 
and  other  dues  for  parties  in  Utah  from 
whom  I  had  powers  of  attorney.  In 
company  with  Elder  Cluff  I  visited  the 
Saints  in  Norway;  they  were  under  the 
immediate  care  of  Elders  Carl  C.  N. 
and  John  F.  F.  Dorius.  I  labored  ear- 
nestly to  induce  the  brethren  in  the 
ministry  to  abstain  from  using  strong 
drink  and  tobacco,  the  latter  especially 
being  very  common;  negotiated  with 
several  companies  about  forwarding 
our  emigrants  as  far  as  England,  and 
secured  better  terms  than  were  ever 
had  before,  and  defended  our  cause  in 
the  daily  press  of  the  city  from  the 
scurrilous  attacks  by  an  anonymous 
correspondent.  I  was  sometimes  fol- 
lowed in  the  streets  by  gangs  of  boys, 
who  hooted  me,  crying  "Mormon 
Priest."  During  the  year  1,177  Church 
members  and  officers  emigrated, 
including  eight  Elders  from  the 
Valley,  besides  children  under  eight 
years  of  age.  Our  force  had 
been  strengthened  by  the  arrival  of 
four  Elders  from  the  Valley.  The  whole 
branch  of  Hamburg  emigrated,  being 
helped  by  the  Church.  I  accompanied 
the  emie:rants  as  far  as  Liverpool; 
made  a  tour  of  the  Isle  of  Man.  A.  W. 
Winberg  was  appointed  traveling  Elder 
for  the  mission.  Elders  Chauncey  W. 
West  and  Brigham  Young,  jun.,  visited 
Copenhagen.  Pres.  Cannon  visited 
Scandinavia,  and  I  accompanied  him  to 


BIOGRAPHICAL   ENCYCLOPEDIA. 


321 


Sweden  and  Norway.  On  our  return  an 
Elders'  conference  was  convened  in 
Copenhagen.  Peter  O.  Thomassen 
having  emigrated,  Carl  Larsen  assisted 
on  "Skandinaviens  S:jerne."  By  in- 
vitation I  attended  an  Elders'  confer- 
ence at  Birmingham,  England,  Dec.  31, 
where  the  blessings  and  power  of  God 
were  plainly  manifest.  Four  more 
young  Elders  from  the  Valley  came 
some  months  before.  Elder  Mons  Pe- 
terson came  from  Norway  to  work  in 
the  office.  A  war  broke  out  between 
Prussia  and  Austria  on  one  side,  and 
Denmark  on  the  other,  over  the  Schles- 
vig-Holstein  question,  and  many  breth- 
ren, including  some  of  the  local  min- 
istry, were  called  into  the  army.  I 
"helped  some  of  the  brethren  to  emigrate 
who  expected  to  be  called  into  the  mili- 
tary service.  The  war  closed  up  the 
usual  line  of  travel  by  way  of  Kiel  and 
Hamburg,  so  a  route  was  taken  by  way 
of  Lubeck  and  Hamburg.  I  again  con- 
tracted with  Morris  &  Company  to  for- 
ward our  emigrants.  The  city  of  Co- 
penhagen, through  its  officers,  extended 
to  me  the  right  to  vote,  which  was  un- 
solicited on  my  part.  Pres.  Cannon 
informed  me  that  it  was  Pres.  Young's 
wish  that  I  should  turn  over  the  mis- 
sion, when  I  went  home,  to  Samuel  L. 
Sprague,  jun.  I  wrote  to  Elder  Sprague 
accordingly.  Pres.  Cannon  also  sent 
Elder  Thomas  Taylor  to  help  with  the 
emigration.  I  received  the  accounts  of 
the  mission  with  a  deficit  of  874  Rigs- 
daler;  through  the  profits  of  the  pub- 
lishing department  I  was  enabled  to 
pay  this  off  and  pass  the  accounts  to 
my  successor  square.  Six  Elders  re- 
turned home  this  y£ar  and  601  Church 
members,  besides  children,  emigrated; 
the  returns  showed  5,454  members  in  the 
mission,  so  the  increase  almost  kept 
pace  with  the  emigration.  I  left  Co- 
penhagen with  the  last  of  the  season's 
■emigrants  April  13,  1864,  but  receiving 
some  letters  while  at  Liverpool  inform- 
ing me  of  some  transgression,  Pres. 
Cannon  sent  me  back  to  inform  the 
brethren  remaining  of  the  matter,  and 
to  ascertain  how  far  the  evil  had 
spread.  Elder  John  W.  Young  accom- 
panied me.  Having  performed  the 
duty  assigned  me,  I  again  left  Copen- 
liagen.  May  24th.  I  was  invited  to  join 
a  party  for  a  tour  on  the  continent  of 
Europe,  went  accordingly  with  Geo.  Q. 
Cannon,  John  W.  Young,  "Wm.  W.  Ritei 
and    John    Sharp,    jun.       We     traveled 

Vol.  1,   No.   21. 


through  Holland,  Germany,  Switzer- 
land and  France  and  took  notes  by 
the  way.  Returning  to  Liverpool  I 
took  passage  for  New  York  on  board 
the  steamship  "Australasia."  At  Wyo- 
ming on  the  Missouri  river,  I  assisted 
in  fitting  out  the  last  trains  of  the  sea- 
son; crossed  the  plains  in  Joseph  W. 
Young's  company.  The  Indians  were 
hostile,  and  we  saw  several  places 
where  they  had  lately  made  raids  on 
trains  and  burned  ranches.  Reaching 
Salt  Lake  City  I  gave  an  account  of 
my  mission  to  the  Saints  in  the  Bow- 
ery. I  reached  home  Oct.  22,  1864,  and 
found  my  family  in  great  poverty, every, 
thing  that  I  possessed  had  barely  suf- 
ficed for  their  support.  I  rented  a 
farm  and  raised  a  good  crop.  Was 
chosen  regimental  adjutant  for  the  Iron 
Military  District,  was  also  appointed 
county  clerk.  January,  1866,  I  was 
elected  probabte  judge  for  Iron  coun- 
ty. During  the  year  a  state  of  war 
again  existed  with  the  Utah  Indians. 
The  Sevier  river  country,  including  all 
above  Gunnison,  was  organized  into 
what  was  known  as  Piute  Military  dis- 
trict, of  which  I  was  elected  colonel, 
and  the  duty  of  organizing  the  militia 
therein  was  assigned  me.  I  made  the 
organization  in  full  and  reported  to 
military  headquarters  at  Salt  Lako 
City.  During  the  year  I  was  engaged 
on  six  military  expeditions,  for  which 
I  furnished  my  own  horse,  arms  and 
outfit,  and  for  which  service  I  have 
never  received  any  pay  from  any  quar- 
ter. After  assisting  in  establishing  a 
co-operative  store  in  Parowan.  I  left 
home  on  a  second  mission  to  Scandi- 
navia in  1868.  At  Salt  Lake  City  I 
was  blest  and  set  apart  to  preside  in 
Scandinavia  by  the  First  Presidency, 
and  left  Salt  Lake  City  in  company 
with  Elder  Albert  Carrington;  trav- 
eled by  stage  as  far  as  Lara- 
mie city,  where  we  took  rail- 
way for  New  York.  Here  we  were 
joined  by  Elder  George  Teasdale  and 
took  passage  for  Liverpool  on  the 
steamship  "City  of  Antwerp,"  arriving 
in  due  course  after  an  extraordinary 
fine  passage.  I  met  Pres.  Franklin  D. 
Richards,  Elders  Carl  Widerborg,  late 
president  of  the  Scandinavian  mission, 
and  others.  In  council  on  the  subject 
of  our  emigration,  I  expressed  the  opin- 
ion that  we  ought  not  to  forward  any 
more  emigrants  by  sailing  ships,  but 
send    them    altogether    by    steamships. 

May  18,  1901. 


322 


LATTER-DAT    SAINT 


thereby  saving  many  lives  that  would 
otherwise  be  lost  through  being  longer 
exposed,  possibly  to  contagious  dis- 
eases, sea  sickness  and  other  dangers 
on  the  sea.  I  went  by  way  of  London 
and  took  steamer  to  Hamburg;  from 
thence  by  rail,  steamer  and  again  by 
rail  to  Copenhagen,  arriving  Sept.  19th. 
I  was  very  kindly  welcomed   by  Elder 

C.  D.  Fjeldsted,  traveling  Elder  in  the 
mission,  and  by  other  acquaintances 
and  friends.  I  inaugurated  a  quarter- 
ly settlement  with  all  book  agents,  with 
instructions  to  return  all  surplus  books 
and  pamphlets  on  hand  at  the  end  of 
each  quarter.  The  emigrants  sailed  in 
good  order,  some  Elders  returning 
home,  but  there  arrived  more  than 
enough  to  keep  the  number  good.  Elder 
Carl  Larsen  assisted  with  the  emigra- 
tion business.  By  means  of  powers  of 
attorney  I  collected  a  number  of  small 
legacies  for  parties  in  Utah.      Elder  C. 

D.  Fjeldsted  took  charge  in  Norway 
and  Elder  L.  Larsen  officiated  as  trav- 
eling Elder  for  the  mission.  Pres.  Car- 
rington  and  Elder  Lewis  W.  Shurtliff 
visited  Scandinavia  and  I  accompanied 
them  through  the  principal  places  in 
the  mission.  Bro.  Wm.  W.  Cluff  came 
to  take  charge  of  the  mission.  The  re- 
ports showed  that  during  the  past  two 
years  we  had  emigrated  nearly  eleven 
hundred  adults  besides  children,  and 
the  numbers  in  the  mission  still  re- 
mained about  the  same  as  before.  When 
I  received  the  mission  there  was  a 
deficit  in  the  accounts  of  1,343  Rigsda- 
ler.  This  I  paid  up  through  the  profits 
of  the  publishing  department  and 
passed  over  the  accounts  square  to  my 
successor.  I  started  home  with  the 
emigrants  and  nine  other  returning  El- 
deis.  July  15,  1870.  Took  passage  from 
Liverpool  to  New  York,  on  board  the 
steamship  "Minnesota,"  being  presi- 
dent of  the  company  of  emigrants  num- 
bering nearly  six  hundred,  and  made  a 
very  successful  journey  both  by  sea 
and  land.  Just  before  reaching  Salt 
Lake  City  we  were  met  and  welcomed 
by  the  First  Presidency,  the  presiding 
Bishop  and  other  prominent  citizens. 
I  gave  an  account  of  the  mission  in 
the  old  tabernacle,  speaking  both  in 
English  and  Danish,  and  accompanied 
I'res.  Young  and  party,  by  his  invita- 
tion, on  an  exploring  trip  to  the  Pah- 
reah.  I  next  officiated  as  county  clerk 
and  justice  of  the  peace;  assisted  in 
i-«-orKimizing   the  co-operative   store   at 


Parowan  and  organizing  a  co-operative 
stock  raising  company,  for  both  of 
which  I  was  secretary;  made  a  journey 
of  exploration  with  Apostle  Erastus 
Snow  and  others  through  Arizona  Ter- 
ritory. Being  called  to  preside  over 
the  Eastern  Arizona  Stake,  I  moved  a 
part  of  my  family  to  Snowflake, Apache 
county  where  I  obtained  some  land. 
Lorenzo  H.  Hatch  and  Oscar  Mann 
were  set  apart  as  my  counselors.  I 
assisted  in  organizing  the  Wards  of  the 
Stake,  returned  to  Utah  and  served  a 
term  in  the  legislature,  where  I  took 
strone-  ground  against  appropriating 
Territorial  funds  to  cover  deficiency 
bills  in  the  district  courts  under  the 
Poland  law.  I  was  set  apart  to  pre- 
side over  the  Eastern  Arizona  Stake 
by  Apostle  Erastus  Snow.  I  sold  out 
at  Parowan  and  moved  to  Arizona. 
Upon  arriving.  I  found  such  a  scarcity 
of  breadstuff  that,  with  John  W.  Young 
and  Ammon  M.  Tenney,  I  took  a  small 
contract  of  grading  on  the  A.  &  P.  rail- 
road near  the  continental  divide  in 
New  Mexico.  I  was  appointed  pro- 
bate judge  by  the  governor  of  the  Ter- 
ritory, to  fill  an  unexpired  term.  Gov. 
Fremont  appointed  me  notary  public.  I 
was  called  by  the  First  Presifiency, 
with  Erastus  Snow,  Brlgham  Young 
and  John  W.  Young  to  work  on  the 
railroad,  and  at  the  same  time  preach 
the  gospel  among  the  railroad  camps 
while  the  road  was  being  built  near 
our  settlements.  I  engaged  in  this 
duty  some  months.  I  assisted  to  start 
a  small  grist  mill  on  Silver  creek  in 
the  Taylor  Ward,  also  a  co-operative 
herd  in  Snowflake;  was  called  as  a  La- 
manite  or  Indian  missionary  at  the  Oc- 
tober conference,  1883.  I  assisted 
in  organizing  and  incorporating  the 
Arizona  Co-operative  Mercantile  Insti- 
tution, a  successful  and  reliable  firm 
at  Holbrook,  with  branch  house  at 
Snowflake,  Arizona;  was  among  the 
first  to  be  prosecuted  under  the  Ed- 
munds-Tucker law  in  the  Territory.  As 
there  was  no  chance  for  protection  un- 
der the  law,  I  was  appointed  by  the 
First  Presidency  of  the  Church  one  of 
a  committee  of  five  to  select  locations 
and  purchase  land  for  some  settlements 
of  the  Saints  in  Mexico.  The  commit- 
tee was  composed  of  the  following  mem- 
bers: Moses  Thatcher,  Christopher 
Layton,  Alexander  F.  McDonald,  Lot 
Smith  and  myself.  In  the  discharge 
of  this  duty  I  labored  in  Mexico  nearly 


BIOGRAPHICAL.    ENCYCLOPEDIA. 


323 


a  year  in  the  States  of  Sonora  and  Chi- 
huahua. So  strong  was  the  opposition 
of  the  Church  party  to  our  gaining  a 
foothold  in  that  land,  that  we  would 
have  been  expelled,  had  it  not  been  for 
the  protection  extended  by  the  president 
of  the  Republic,  Porflrio  Diaz.  I  re- 
turned to  my  duties  in  eastern  Arizona, 
where  I  labored  to  incorporate  our  ir- 
rigation companies  and  build  reservoirs 
to  hold  the  flood  waters  against  the 
dry  part  of  the  year.  As  much  of  the 
land  we  occupied  was  a  portion  of  a 
grant  made  by  the  government  to  the 
Atlantic  and  Pacific  R.  R.  Company, 
we  were  ordered  by  that  company  to 
vacate  the  land,  or  pay  for  it.  As  it 
would  break  up  our  settlements  to  va- 
cate, I  went  east  with  Apostle  Brig- 
ham  Young  to  negotiate  a  purchase.  In 
New  York  we  bought  of  the  Aztec  Land 
and  Cattle  Company  seven  sections  of 
land  in  the  Snowflake  and  Taylor 
Wards  at  $4.50  per  acre.  I  afterwards 
bought  one  section  in  the  "Woodruff 
Ward  from  the  railroad  authorities  at 
Albuquerque,  New  Mexico,  at  $8  per 
acre.  The  Church  authorities  advanced 
the  money,  to  be  refunded  by  those 
occupying  the  land.  Afterwards, when 
all  had  been  collected  that  came  readi- 
ly, the  remainder  was  appropriated  to 
the  settlements  for  assisting  to 
build  reservoirs  and  to  help  the  Church 
schools.  I  assisted  in  organizing  an 
incorporation  called  the  Snowflake  and 
Taylor  Irrigation  Company,  and  also 
the  Woodruff  Irrigation  Company,  and 
a  similar  company  at  St.  Joseph.  These 
companies  greatly  benefitted  our  irriga- 
tion interests.  I  also  took  a  lively  in- 
terest in  building  reservoirs  to  hold 
the  surplus  water  until  the  time  of  the 
year  when  the  water  would  be  scarce. 
For  several  years  the  country  suffered 
much  from  drouths,  culminating  with 
the  close  of  the  century.  But  the  set- 
tlements just  named  got  off  fairly  well 
owing  to  their  reservoirs,  and  well  or- 
ganized irrigation  organizations.  I  at- 
tended the  19th  session  of  the  Arizona 
legislature  as  a  member  of  the  House." 

HATCH,  Lorenzo  Hill,  first  coun- 
selor to  Jesse  N.  Smith,  president  of  the 
Snowflake  Stake  of  Zion,  is  the  son  of 
Hezekiah  Hatch  and  Aldura  Sumner, 
and  was  born  Jan.  4,  1826,  in  the  town 
of  Lincoln,  Addison  county,  Vermont. 
He  was  baptized  by  Elder  Sisson  A. 
Chase   in   February,   1840,     being     then 


fourteen  years  of  age,  and  emigrated 
with  his  mother  to  Nauvoo,  where  he 
was  ordained  a  Seventy  April  14,  1844, 
by  Joseph  Young.  The  next  day  he 
started  out  on  a  mission  in  company 
with  Thomas  B.  Fuller,  and  he  was  la- 
boring in  Vermont,  his  native  State, 
when  the  news  of  the  Prophet's  assas- 
sination reached  him.  He  returned  to 
Nauvoo  in  1845,  and  assisted  his  brother 
Jeremiah  to  build  a  house  near  that 
city,  which  they  were  forced  to  leave 
at  the  time  of  the  exodus  the  follow- 
ing year.  But  Lorenzo,  instead  of 
grieving  over  going  into  the  wilder- 
ness, rejoiced,  as  it  had  been  prophesied 
over  his  head  that  he  should  go  to  th& 


Rocky  Mountains  and  there  perform 
a  great  work.  He  married  Hannah 
Fuller,  Feb.  3,  1846,  and  soon  after  that 
left  Nauvoo  for  the  west,  together  with 
his  father-in-law  and  family.  They 
joined  Geo.  Miller's  camp,  and  this  be- 
ing the  advance  company  of  the  emi- 
gration from  Nauvoo,  Lorenzo  became 
early  accustomed  to  building  bridges, 
making  roads  and  doing  other  pioneer 
work  which  qualified  him  for  the  labor 
which  he  was  destined  to  perform  later 
in  life.  While  journeying  westward 
he  made  several  trips  into  the  State  of 
Missouri  to  obtain  provisions  for  the 
camp.  Remaining  with  Miller's  com- 
pany, he  wintered  in  the  Ponca  Indian 
country.  He  spent  three  years  on  the 
frontiers,  part  of  the  time  on  what  was 
called  Brigham's  farm,  ten  miles  above 
Winter  Quarters,  on  the  Missouri  river, 
where  about  forty  families  of  Saints 
had  located  for  the  purpose  of  raising 


324 


LATTER-DAY    SAINT 


crops.  After  harvest  he  went  to  Mis- 
souri, where  he  spent  the  winter  of 
1847-48. chopping  wood  and  hauling  logs. 
In  order  to  obtain  means  to  defray  the 
expenses  of  going  to  the  Valley,  he, 
together  with  his  brothers  Jeremiah 
and  Abram,  established  a  wagonshop 
in  St.  Joseph.  Mo.,  and  after  a  success- 
ful year's  business  they  purchased  cat- 
tle and  cows  for  the  journey  across 
the  plains,  and  early  in  the  spring  of 
1850.  toeether  with  his  brother  Abram, 
Lorenzo  left  St.  Joseph  for  the  Valley. 
They  became  a  part  of  a  company  con- 
sisting of  fifty  wagons,  of  which  Da- 
vid Evans  was  appointed  captain.  The 
company  entered  Great  Salt  Lake  val- 
ley by  way  of  Parley's  canyon  Sept. 
15,  1850.  After  spending  the  winter  in 
Salt  Lake  City,  Lorenzo  located  in 
Lehl,  Utah  county,  in  the  spring  of  1851, 
and  thus  became  one  of  the  first  set- 
tlers of  that  prosperous  commonwealth. 
Feb.  27,  1851,  he  married  Sylvia  S. 
Eastman,  whose  first-born  is  now  the 
Bishop  of  Franklin,  Idaho.  His  first 
wife  had  died  while  journeying  in  the 
wilderness.  Togethep  with  his  brother 
Abram  and  Nathan  Packer  he  built  a 
grist  mill,  at  the  mouth  of  American 
Fork  canyon,  which  was  the  first  grist 
mill  in  the  north  end  of  Utah  county. 
The  mill  was  completed  in  1851;  it  was 
burned  down  in  1852,  but  the  owners 
rebuilt  it  in  1852,  agreeable  to  counsel 
from  Pres.  Willard  Richards.  Bro.  Lo- 
renzo was  chosen  as  first  counselor  to 
Bishop  David  Evans,  of  Lehi,  and  was 
ordained  a  High  Priest  in  May, 1855,  and 
presided  over  the  Ward  while  the 
Bishop  was  away  on  a  mission.  He 
also  served  as  a  member  of  the  city 
council  of  Lehi,  and  in  the  Utah  legis- 
lature (1855).  In  1856  he  was  called  on 
a  mission  to  Europe.  Together  with 
about  forty  other  Elders,  including 
Apostle  Orson  Pratt,  Geo.  A.  Smith, 
Ezra  T.  Benson  and  Erastus  Snow^  they 
left  Salt  Lake  City  April  23,  1856.  On 
his  arrival  in  England,  Elder  Hatch 
was  made  pastor  of  four  conferences, 
namely  Sheffield,  Bradford,  Lincolnshire 
and  Hull.  In  February,  1858,  when 
nearly  all  the  Elders  were  called  homo 
from  their  foreign  missions  on  account 
of  the  Utah  war.  Elder  Hatch  left 
England  to  return  home.  Together 
with  six  others  he  crossed  the  plains 
with  a  B.  Y.  X.  company  outfit,  which 
was  in  charge  of  Elder  Samuel  W. 
Richards,    and    rejoined    his   family     in 


Lehi   in   the  fall  of  1858.       This  was  at 
the  time  of  the  move,  and  Elder  Hatch 
reported  his  mission  to  Pres.   Brigham 
Young  and  the  Saints  in  Provo.   After 
his  return  home,  he  was  elected  mayor 
of  Lehi  and  served  three  terms  in  the 
Utah   legislature.       In     1860  he   yielded 
obedience   to   the     principle     of   plural 
marriage  by  taking  to  wife  Alice  Han- 
son, who  has  borne  him  eight  children. 
In  1863  he  was  called  to  Franklin,  Ida- 
ho,  to  preside  as  Bishop.       He   served 
in  that  capacity  for  thirteen  years,  or 
until  1876.      Together  with  Bishop  (now 
Apostle)   Merrill  he  was  sent  to  locate 
Weston  and  Oxford.       In  1872  and  1873 
he  served  as  the  first  "Mormon"  repre- 
sentative in   the   Idaho  legislature;    he 
was  also  elected  a  director  in  the  Utah 
Northern  railroad.       While  serving     in 
the  legislature  he  succeeded  in  getting 
several  important  bills  through  and  ob- 
tained a  city  charter  for  Franklin.  The 
people  appreciating  his  efforts  in  their 
behalf   elected   him   the   first  mayor   of 
that   municipality.       June   27,   1873,     he 
was  ordained  a  Patriarch  by  Geo.     A. 
Smith,  since  which  he  has  given  about 
two  thousand  patriarchal  blessings.  In 
1875  he  w'as  sent  on  a  mission  to  south- 
ern Utah,  where  he  traveled  as  a  home 
missionary  in  company  with  Patriarch 
John  L.  Smith.      In  June,  1875,  he  was 
called  to  visit  the  camps  of  the  Saints 
in  Arizona,  and  started  for  that  Terri- 
tory in  company  with  Pres.  Daniel  H. 
Wells  and     others.       In     crossing     the 
Colorado  river  he  had  a  narrow  escape 
from  drowning.      At  Kanab,  on  his  re- 
turn   from   Lee's   Ferry   he   was   called 
on  a  mission  to  the  Indians  in  Arizona 
and  New  Mexico;   responding  to  which 
he  returned  to  Arizona  with  part  of  his 
family,   whom  he  left,  at  Obid,   on  the 
Little  Colorado  river,  while  he  proceed- 
ed to  the  Indian  villages.  Being  reject- 
ed   by    the    Zunis,      he     located    at   the 
Mexican   town   San   Lorenzo,   where  he 
and    fellow     missionaries     baptized     a 
number  of  Navajos.       Subsequently  he 
made  a  trip  to  Utah   to  bring  out  the 
remainder  of  his  family.      Having    at- 
tended   to   ordinance   work   in    the     St. 
George  Temple,  he  left  that  place  early 
in   1878,    and    traveled   by   teams   to   the 
Little  Colorado     settlements,     Arizona. 
On    his    arrival    there    he    learned    that 
he  had  been  chosen  a  counselor  to  Pres. 
Lot   Smith,    in   the     presidency     of   the 
Little  Colorado  Stake.       He  located  at 
what   is   now  WoodrufT,     and   with   his 


BIOGRAPHICAL.    ENCYCLOPEDIA. 


325 


family  passed  through  untold  hard- 
ships. In  his  missionary  experience 
among  the  Navajos  he  witnessed  many 
miraculous  manifestations  of  the  power 
of  God.  When  the  Eastern  Arizona 
Stake  of  Zion  was  organized  in  1879, 
Elder  Hatch  was  chosen  as  first  coun- 
selor to  Pres.  Jesse  N.  Smith;  and  when 
the  Eastern  Arizona  Stake  was  divided 
in  1887,  he  was  again  chosen  first 
counselor  to  Pres.  Jesse  N.  Smith  in 
the  presidency  of  that  Stake.  This  high 
and  responsible  position  Elder  Hatch 
has  nobly  filled;  and  he  has  been  very 
energetic  in  discharging  every  duty  en- 
trusted to  him.  He  has  traveled  ex- 
tensively in  different  parts  of  Arizona 
and  helped  to  found  and  organize  set- 
tlements on  both  sides  of  the  MogoUon 
mountains  in  that  part  of  the  coun- 
try which  is  now  included  in  the  Snow- 
flake,  St.  Johns  and  St.  Joseph  Stakes 
of  Zion.  He  has  also  made  several 
trips  to  Utah  in  the  interest  of  the 
Saints  in  Arizona.  Elder  Hatch  has 
from  the  beginning  been  one  of  the 
foremost  factors  among-  the  Saints  in 
Arizona,  and  in  the  histories  of  the 
Stakes  of  Zion  in  that  land  (which  are 
now  being  written),  Elder  Hatch  will 
receive  the  credit  which  his  indefatig- 
able labors  merit. 

UDALL,  David  King,  president  of 
the  St.  Johns  Stake  of  Zion,  is  the  son 
of  David  Udall  and  Eliza  King,  and 
was  born  Sept.  7,  1851,  at  St.  Louis,  Mo. 
His  parents  embraced  the  gospel  and 
were  married  in  the  year  1850.  They 
emigrated  to  the  United  States  in  1851 
and  soiourned  one  year  in  St.  Louis, 
Mo.,  after  which  they  emigrated  to 
Utah  and  located  at  Nephi,  Juab  coun- 
ty, where  the  subject  of  this  sketch 
was  reared.  He  was  baptized  when 
eight  years  old.  At  eleven  years  of 
age  his  mother  died.  At  the  age  of 
twenty  years  he  was  ordained  an  El- 
der and  he  was  married  to  Eliza  Luel- 
la  Stewart,  daughter  of  Bishop  Levi 
Stewart  (of  Kanab)  and  Margery  Wil- 
kerson,  Feb.  1,  1875.  The  following 
April  he  was  ordained  a  Seventy  and 
went  on  a  mission  to  Great  Britain, 
where  he  labored  in  the  London  con- 
ference until  June,  1877,  when  he  was 
honorably  released  to  return  home  and 
to  take  charge  of  a  company  of  two 
hundred  Saints,  with  which  he  arrived 
in  Utah  the  following  July.  From 
boyhood    until    his    departure    for   Eng- 


land his  time  had  been  spent  in  farm- 
ing and  herding  sheep,  occasionally 
making  freighting  trips  to  Pioche.  In 
November,  1877,  he  was  made  president 
of  the  Y.  M.  M.  I.  A.  at  Nephi.  Jan. 
20,  1878,  he  was  ordained  a  High  Priest, 
under  the  hands  of  Apostles  Orson 
Hyde  and  Joseph  F.  Smith  and  Pres. 
Geo.  Teasdale,  and  set  apart  as  second 
counselor   to   Bishop   John    Andrews   of 


Nephi.  In  November,  1878,  having  met 
with  financial  reverses  in  which  he  lost 
his  farm  and  other  property,  he  moved 
to  Kanab,  Kane  county,  and  engaged 
in  the  business  of  merchandising,  stock 
raising  and  farming  with  two  brothers- 
in-law,  Wm.  T.  Stewart  and  Laurence  C. 
Mariger.  In  May,  1880,  he  was  called 
by  Pres.  John  Taylor  to  be  Bishop  of 
the  St.  Johns  Ward,  Eastern  Arizona 
Stake,  and  was  set  apart  to  that  office 
by  Apostles  Erastus  Snow  June  5,  1889. 
In  September  following  he,  with  his 
family,  started  for  Arizona,  arriving 
in  St.  Johns  Oct.  6,  1880,  when  he  was 
sustained  as  Bishop  and  appointed 
agent  for  the  St.  Johns  purchase.  In 
November  he  returned  to  Utah  to  see 
Pres.  Taylor  on  business  matters;  he 
brought  back  with  him  a  herd  of  cat- 
tle belonging  to  the  Church.  The  fol- 
lowing spring,  according  to  instruc- 
tions from  Apostle  Erastus  Snow  and 
Pres.  Jesse  N.  Smith,  he  assisted  in 
locating  the   Saints  on   the  new   town- 


326 


LATTER-DAT     SAINT 


Fite.   adjoining   the   Mexican   village  of 
St.    Johns.        The    Catholic    priest    and 
his  church  members  protested  in  writ- 
ing, claiming  the  light  to  the  land,  but 
the    Saints    held    their   possessions,    the 
land  in  disjiute  having  previously  been 
purchased   by  Apostle  "Wilford     Wood- 
ruff per  Ammon  M.  Tennoy.       May  24, 
1SS2.  Bishop  Udall  married  Ida  Francis 
Hunt   (daughter  of  Bishop  John  Hunt, 
of  Snowflake,  Arizona,  and  Lois  Pratt). 
April  26,  18S4.  an  attempt  was  made  by 
non-Mormons    to   jump    some    city   lots 
belonging  to  the  Saints     at  St.   Johns. 
Bishop   Udall   and  other     brethren  ap- 
peared on  the  scene  as  peace  makers, 
fur  which  he  and  nine  of  the  brethren 
were  arrested  on  a  charge  of  unlawful 
assembly.       They   were   tried   before   a 
justice  and  acquitted.     Later,  the  case 
was  brought  before  the  grand  jury,  but 
no   indictments  were  found.      April  28, 
1884.    he   and   Joseph   Crosby   served   as 
witnesses  In  the  case  of  Miles  P.  Rom- 
ney,    in    making    final    proof    to   a   pre- 
emption claim.       When  asked  if  Rom- 
ney    had    resided    continuously    on    the 
land.    Bro.    Udall   answered     no.       The 
clerk  then  asked    if  Romney  had  aban- 
doned  the  property  for  more   than  six 
months  at  a  time;   he  answered,   "No, 
sir.    not    to    my    knowledge."      "Then," 
said    the   clerk,    "that   constitutes   con- 
tinuous residence  under  the  law,"  and 
wrote    answer    to    the    question    "yes." 
May   20,    1884,    he   was   arrested     on     a 
charge  of  perjury  in  the  Romney  land 
case,  and  after  a  rigid  examination  be- 
forf   a   U.     S.     commissioner     was  dis- 
miss^^-d.      The  following  August  he  and 
Brother  John     T.     Lesueur     were  sub- 
po^naed  as  witnesses  before   the  U.   S. 
grand    jury    at    Prescott.    two    hundred 
and   fifty  miles  distant  from  St.  Johns, 
where  an  effort  was  made  to  indict  him 
for  jierjury  on  this  same  land  case,  but 
through    the    honor      of    one    John    G. 
Cam))bell    (ex-delegate   to  Congress},  it 
failed,  he     being  foreman  of  the  jury. 
In    consequence     of     the    anti-Mormon 
ring    in    Apache   county   and    their  col- 
leagues in  Prescott,  including  the  U.  S. 
district  judge,    Sumner   Howard,   ex-IJ. 
S.  attorney  of  Utah   (notorious  in     the 
John  D.  Lee  case),  the  following  named 
brethren   were     Indicted   for   polygamy 
and  unlawful     cohabitation:     James  N. 
Skousen,  Wm.  J.  Flake,  Christopher  J. 
Kempe,  B.  H.  Wilhelm.  Ammon  M.  Ten- 
ney,  Peter  J.  Christofferson  and  DaviS 
K.  Udall.       The  last  named   (being  the 


only  one  of  the  number  then  in  Pres- 
cott)   was    arrested    and    placed    under 
$25,000     bonds,     the       aforenamed     Mr. 
Campbell   and   a   Mr.   Walker,   both  of 
Prescott  and   entire   strangers   to   him, 
gave    the   required   bonds.       The   other 
bi-ethren   indicted,    except     B.    H.    Wil- 
helm,   were   subsequently  arrested   and 
attended    the   November,   1884,    term   of 
court    at    Prescott,    and    one    after   an- 
other were  tried,  convicted  and  placed 
behind  prison  bars,  except  Bishop  Udall 
in  whose  case  there  was  lacking     evi- 
dence; hence  it  was  continued  till  next 
term  of  court.     Bros.  Flake  and  Skou- 
sen  were  sentenced   to   six  months     in 
the  Yuma  prison.  Bros.  Tenney,  Kempe 
and  Christofferson  were  sent  to  the  De- 
troit House  of  Correction,  Michigan,  for 
three  and  one  half  years.      The  Apache 
county    "ring"    attended    this    term    of 
court  and   succeeded  in  getting  indict- 
ments against  Miles  P.  Romney,  David 
K.  Udall  and  Joseph  Crosby  for  perju- 
ly    on    the    aforementioned    land    case. 
Bishop  Udall  was  immediately  arrested 
and     placed       under     additional     $2,500 
bonds.       The  same  gentlemen,  John  G. 
Campbell   and   Mr.   Walker,     gave     the 
required  security.    During  the  progress 
of   the    trials  of     the     brethren.   Judge 
Sumner   Howard   lectured    one   evening 
on   the  Mountain  Meadow  massacre  in 
the    same    hall    where     his    court    con- 
vened during  the  day,  which  event  will 
give  a  slight  idea  of  the  anti-Mormon 
feeling  prevalent  in  Prescott    at     that 
time.       July,    1885,     Bishop   Udall    and 
Jos.   Crosby  again  went  to  Prescott  to 
trial  on  the  perjury  case.       On  the  6th 
of    August,    Bro.    Udall    was    convicted 
on   the  same  state   of   facts   that   Bro. 
Crosby  w-as  acquitted  on.       That  same 
day  he  was  Imprisoned  in  the  Prescott 
jail;   on   the  10th  he  was  sentenced  to 
three   years'   imprisonment   in    the   De- 
troit  House  of  Corrections     and    fined 
three  hundred   dollars   by  Judge   How- 
ard.     Bishop  Hiram  B.  Clawson  of  Salt 
Lake  City,  who  visited  him  a  few  days 
before   he    left     Prescott,    accompanied 
him  on  his  journey  as  far  as  Ash  Fork. 
After    a    most    humiliating    journey    of 
over  two  thousand  miles,  he  arrived  in 
Detroit,  Mich.,  Sept.  2,  1885,  having  been 
handcuffed  and   guarded   as  though  he 
was  a  desperado;  he  was  even  chained 
to   a   counterfeiter    while    going   a   dis- 
tance of  three  miles  from  the  depot  to 
the   House  of   Correction.       On  his  ar- 
rival  there  he  was  not  permitted,     on 


BIOGRAPHICAL   ENCYCLOPEDIA. 


327 


account  of  the  silent  system,  to  con- 
verse with  Bros.  Tenney,  Kempe  and 
Christofferson,  who  had  been  there 
about  one  year.  A  few  days  after  his 
arrival  in  the  prison  he  received  a  let- 
ter from  Presidents  Jo'nn  Taylor  and 
Geo.  Q.  Cannon  which  gave  him  more 
satisfaction  than  words  can  express, 
showing  to  him  that  the  Prophet  of  the 
Lord  and  his  associates  were  assured 
of  his  innocence  of  the  heinous  crime 
of  perjury.  The  following  is  a  copy 
of  the  letter: 

"Salt  Lake  City,  Utah,  Aug.  20,  1885. 
"Bishop  David  K.  Udall: 

"Dear  Brother:  We  have  been  favored 
by  your  father  with  the  perusal  of  your 
letter  to  him,  written  under  date  of 
the  11th  from  the  prison  at  Prescott. 
"We  cannot  express  to  you  the  regret  we 
feel  at  your  position. 

"We  might  write  to  you  many  things 
that  would  be  of  interest,  but  we  don't 
know  whether  the  letter  will  reach  you 
or  what  the  rules  of  the  prison  may  be 
respecting  communications  such  as  we 
would  like  to  write. 

"We  and  all  your  friends  are  perfect- 
ly satisfied  respecting  your  innocenc€ 
of  the  charge  made  against  you,  and 
for  which  you  have  been  convicted;  this 
should  comfort  you.  Tou  will  emerge 
from  this  trouble  without  a  blemish 
on  your  honor  or  character,  and  your 
word  will  be  esteemed  and  relied  upon 
as  firmly  as  if  this  had  never  occurred. 
Tou  express  yourself  to  the  effect  that 
you  feel  that  your  character  is  gone 
for  life,  and  that  your  signature  and 
word  will  hereafter  be  doubted  by 
many!  This  will  not  be  so.  The  men 
who  have  contributed  to  your  convic- 
tion, believe  you  are  a  man  of  honor, 
and  they  are  satisfied  in  their  secret 
souls  that  you  are  no  perjurer,  but  an 
honest  man. 

"You  have  been  selected  as  a  victim, 
and  it  will  redown  to  your  credit  in 
time  to  come,  to  be  convicted  as  you 
have  been,  as  much  as  if  it  were  for 
the  practice  of  some  principle  of  our 
religion.  If  you  could  have  been  seized 
and  punished  on  the  latter  account  with 
}?reater  ease  than  for  perjury,  without 
<1oubt  that  would  have  been  taken  ad- 
vantage of  in  the  place  of  the  charge 
upon  which  you  were  tried.  We  say 
to  you:  Be  of  good  cheer,  do  not  let 
your  courage  fail,  nor  your  faith  wa- 
ver; rely  upon  the  Lord  and  He  will 
sustain  and  bless  you.     With  love  and 


prayers  for  your  preservation  and  de- 
liverance, we  remain  your  brethren  in 
the  gospel, 

"John   Taylor,    Geo.    Q.    Cannon." 

Shortly  after  his  incarceration  a 
movement  was  put  on  foot  to  obtain  a 
Presidential  pardon.  Many  aflfidavits 
and  statements  by  county  and  Terri- 
torial officials  were  forwarded  to  Pres. 
Cleveland  to  obtain  the  pardon.  The 
following  Is  the  statement  of  Mr.  Ruiz, 
before  whom  the  deposition  was  made, 
and  it  may  here  be  stated  for  his  bene- 
fit, in  justice  to  him,  that  he  would 
have  made  this  same  statement  during 
the  trial  at  Prescott,  had  Judge  Howard 
permitted  him  to  do  so: 

"In  the  matter  of  the  application  of 
D.  K.  Udall  for  pardon. 

"I,  Alfred  Ruiz,  certify  as  follows:  I 
am  now  and  was  during  the  month  of 
April,  1884,  clerk  of  the  District  court 
of  Apache  county,  Arizona,  and  record- 
er of  said  county.  That  on  the  28th 
day  of  April,  1884,  one  Miles  P.  Romney 
(with  two  witnesses,  D.  K.  Udall  and 
Joseph  Crosby),  came  before  me  for  the 
purpose  of  making  his  final  pre-emption 
proof  on  one  hundred  and  sixty  acres 
of  land  in  this  county.  D.  K.  Udall 
testified  as  a  witness  for  Miles  P.  Rom- 
ney on  that  occasion.  When  the  ques- 
tion of  said  Romney's  continuous  resi- 
dence upon  said  land  was  propounded 
to  said  Udall,  his  reply  was,  'No,  Mr. 
Romney  has  not  lived  on  the  land  con- 
tinuously.' Thereupon  I  expressed  to 
said  Udall  my  interpretation  and  con- 
struction of  the  requirements  of  the 
federal  statutes  as  to  continuous  resi- 
dence upon  public  lands  under  the  pre- 
emption laws.  Said  Udall  then  told  me 
the  extent  and  time  of  said  Romney's 
residence  on  said  land,  and  said,  'If 
that  is  continuous  residence,  then  Mr. 
Romney  has  lived  on  that  land  con- 
tinuously.' I  said,  'That  is  continuous 
residence  under  the  law,'  whereupon 
Udall  to  the  question  said  'yes.'  I  did 
not  in  reducing  Udall's  testimony  to 
writing  use  his  words,  but  only  put  my 
construction  upon  their  legal  meaning 
and  told  him  that  I  had  written  sub- 
stantially in  point  of  law  just  what  he 
had  said. 

"Alfred     Ruiz,     Clerk     Third   Districet 
Court." 

During  his  imprisonment  Bro.  Udall 
labored  ten  hours  a  day  making  chairs. 
Through  the  kindness  of  Hon.  John  W. 
Young,   arrangements  were  made  with 


328 


LATTER-DAY    SAINT 


Supt.   NIckolson   for  an    interview   once 
a  month  for  the  four  "Mormon"  Elders 
and  also   for  them   to  occupy  two  cells 
instead    of    four,      whereby    they    could 
converse  in  a   whisper     mornings     and 
evenings,  which  made  life  more  endur- 
able.      On    Oct.    1st    it   was    shown     to 
Bio.  I'dall  by  dream  or  vision  that  his 
baby  daughter  Mary  had  passed  from 
eaith.        He    awoke    Bro.    Tenney    and 
told  him  she  was  dead.  Two  days  later 
he  recei\ed  a  telegram  from  home  con- 
veying the  sad  news.      Dec.  17,  1SS5,  he 
received    an    unconditional    presidential 
pardon.      He  arrived  home  on  the  23rd, 
having  to  bonow  money  to  pay  his  fare 
from  Detroit.    In  1SS6  the  indictment  for 
polygamy    and    unlawful    cohabitation 
was  ciuashed.       Thus  ended   the  storm 
of    persecution    which     had     raged   for 
more  than  two  years, during  which  time 
Bishop    Udall    had    been    compelled    to 
travel  o\er  se^en  thousand  miles  back 
and    forth    to    trial    and    imprisonment. 
During   the     years     of     1886     and   1887 
Bishop  Udall  labored  as  one  of  a  com- 
mittee to  settle  the  Sunset    United  Or- 
der business,   this  committee  being  ap- 
pointed   by    Pres.    John    Taylor.       July 
23,   1SS7,   he  was  set  apart  president  of 
the  St.  Johns  Stake  by  Apostles  Fran- 
cis M.  Lyman  and  John  Henry  Smith, 
with   Elijah   N.   Freeman  and   Wm.   H. 
Gibbons  as  counselors.       From  1881  to 
1885  he  was  president  and    superinten- 
dent of  St.   Johns  C.   M.   &  M.   I.,   and 
during  that  period  made  several   busi- 
ness   trips   east.       In    1889    he    removed 
his  family  to  Eagar,   Round  Valley,   35 
miles  south  of  St.  Johns,  where  he  had 
purchased  a  large  farm  and  grist  mill 
for  $20,000.  In  1889  he  served  as  a  mem- 
ber of  the  council  of  the  20th  legislature 
of   Arizona.       He    is   the    father   of   six 
daughters  and  nine  sons;    four  daugh- 
ters and  seven  sons  are  living.     Owing 
to   continued   drouth   and   heavy   losses 
in   sheep,    the    farming     enterprise   has 
been  the  means  of  wrecking  him  finan- 
cially,  losing  his  $15,000     in   payments, 
$8,000    in    improvements    and    the    farm 
and    mill.       Owing    to    a   heavy    judg- 
ment against  him  in  this  connection  he 
has    been    forced    into   bankruptcy,    but 
has  been   able   to   settle  all  obligations 
outside  of  said  judgment.      Pres.  Udall 
presents   a    fine     personal    appearance; 
his  hight  is  5  feet  IOV2  inches;  his  aver- 
age weight  is  190  pounds;    and   he  has 
brown  hair  and  eyes.      He  is  industri- 
ous and  very  hopeful,   even   under   the 


most  adverse  circumstances,  showing- 
discretion  and  forethought  in  his 
counsels.  Humble  and  unassuming  in 
nature,  those  who  know  him  best  can- 
not but  appreciate  his  exemplary  life, 
his  temperate  habits,  his  strict  observ- 
ance in  keeping  the  commandments  of 
God.  and  his  justice  in  dealing  with 
his  fellow  men.  He  is  naturally  spirit- 
ually minded.  He  has  labored  faith- 
fully to  promote  the  interests  of  the 
people  over  whom  he  has  presided  for 
twenty  years.  His  chief  desire  is  to 
see  the  work  of  God  triumph,  and  he  is 
a  man  of  great  faith,  having  implicit 
confidence  in  God,  whom  he  loves  and 
whom  he  has  endeavored  through  life 
to  serve  faithfully. — Z. 

GIBBONS,  William  Hoover,  sec- 
ond counselor  to  David  K.  Udall  (pres- 
ident of  the  St.  Johns  Stake  of  Zion) 
from  1887  to  1900,  is  the  second  son  and 
third  child  of  Andrew  S.  Gibbons   (one 


of  the  original  pioneers  of  Utah)  and 
Rizpah  Knight,  and  was  born  Jan.  23, 
1851,  near  Kanesville,  Pottawattamie 
county,  Iowa.  He  emigrated  to  Utah 
in  1852,  and  located  at  Bountiful,  Da- 
vis county;  he  afterwards  settled  at 
Lehi,  Utah  county.  In  1854  he  was 
called  to  Iron  county,  and  in  1858  moved 
to  Santa  Clara  to  labor  on  the  Indian 
Mission.  In  1867  he  was  called  to  the 
Muddy,  Nev.,  to  settle  and  continue  la- 
bors   among    the    Lamanites.        He    re- 


BIOGRAPHICAL    ENCYCLOPEDIA. 


329 


mained  there  until  1871,  at  which  time 
the  settlements  were  broken  up.      Feb. 
17,    1871,    he   married   Evaline     Augusta 
Lamb,  and  moved  with  his  young  wife 
to  Glendale,  Kane  county,  in  the  same 
month.       In  the  winter  of  1873  he  was 
called    with    his    father    and    others    to 
make   a  forced   march   to   the   relief  of 
some  of  the  brethren  who  were  laboring 
among  the  Navajo  and  Moqui  Indians, 
their  headquarters  being  in  Moancoppy, 
Ariz.  They  found  the  brethren  safe  and 
moved  them  back  to  Utah.      Some  Na- 
vajoes    had    been    killed    by   non-'*Mor- 
mons,"    which    had    made    the    Indians 
hostile.      In    the    summer      of    1874  El- 
der Gibbons    was    stationed    with  oth- 
ers at   Lee's  Ferry,   to  act  as  a  guard 
between    the    Saints    and    the    Indians. 
He  gathered  and  traded  Church  horses 
for  Navajo  blankets  and  other  articles, 
while  there,  these  things  being  used  for 
the  benefit  of  those  working  on  the  St. 
George  Temple.       In  April,   1875,   being 
released,    he    returned    to    his    home    in 
Glendale.      In  October,  1875,  in  going  to 
conference   in   Salt   Lake   City,   he   was 
surprised  with  a  call  to  return  to  Ari- 
zona to  labor  as  an  Indian  missionary 
under  James   S.    Brown.       Their   head- 
quarters were  in  Moancoppy,  at  which 
place    Elder    Gibbons    labored    until    he 
spring  of  1878,   when  he  was  called  by 
Apostle  Erastus  Snow  to  do  missionary 
work  among  the  Spanish  people  in  New 
Mexico.      He  returned  the  same  fall  to 
labor  among  the   Moqui   Indians,   help- 
ing to  build  John  W.   Young's  woollen 
factory  at  that  place.       He  was   there 
at  the  time  Pres.  Wilford  Woodruff  was 
in  exile  and  had  the  privilege  of  being 
with  him   some  two  weeks  in   the   San 
Francisco    mountains,    during    most    of 
which  time  he  enjoyed  Pres.  ^Woodruff's 
company  alone.      He  still  looks  back  on 
that    time    as    a    bright    period    in    his 
life.       In   the   fall   of   1879   he   was     re- 
leased   from    the    Indian      Mission      by 
Pres.  Woodruff  and  called  to  locate  at 
St.  Johns,  Ariz.      When  the  Ward  was 
organized  in  1880,  he  was  chosen  coun- 
selor to  Bishop  Udall.     In   1881  he  was 
ordained  a  High  Priest  by  Pres.  Jesse 
N.    Smith.       He    held    the    position     of 
counselor      to     the     Bishop   until   July, 
1877,  when  the  St.  Johns  Stake  was  or- 
ganized, at  which  time  he  was  chosen 
second    counselor    in    the    Stake    presi- 
dency,  holding  that  position   until  De- 
cember,   1900,      when     he    tendered    his 
resignation.       In  his  frontier  life  Elder 


Gibbons  has  passed  through  many  try- 
ing scenes  and  has  repeatedly  seen 
God's  power  manifested  in  behalf  of 
His  people. 

FREEMAN,  Elijah  Norman,  coun 
selor  to  David  K.  Udall,  president  of 
the  St.  Johns  Stake  of  Zion,  is  the  son 
of  Elijah  Norman  Freeman  and  Mary 
Bingham,  and  was  born  May  20,  1845,  in 
La  Harpe,  Hancock  county,  111.  His 
father  enlisted  in  the  Mormon  Battalion 
and  died  on  the  march  to  California, 
in  New  Mexico.  Elijah  emigrated  to 
Utah  in  Daniel  Spencer's  company  and 
arrived  on  the  site  of  Salt  Lake  City 
Sept.  19,  1847;  he  moved  to  Weber  coun- 


ty in   1850   and   lived   a  short   time     in 
what  is  now  the  north  part  of  Ogden; 
later    he    resided    at     Bingham's    Fort, 
north  of  Ogden.  He  was  baptized  when 
eight   years    old     by     his    grandfather, 
Erastus    Bingham.       His    mother   hav- 
ing married  Pres.  Lorin  Farr,  he  again 
became  a  resident  of  Ogden,  and  when 
about   seventeen  years   old   he  was  or- 
dained a  Seventy  by  Luman  A.  Shurt- 
liff  and  became  identified  with  the  60th 
quorum.        M'hen    about    twenty    years 
old  he  was  ordained  a  High  Priest  and 
set  apart  as  a  High  Councilor     in  the 
Weber  Stake  of  Zion.       For  a  number 
of  years  he  acted  as  a  Ward  Teacher 
in   the  Third   Ward   of  Ogden;    labored 
as    a    home    missionary,    presided    over 
the  Y.  M.  M.  I.  A.  in  Ogden  3rd  Ward 


330 


LATTER-DAY  SAINT 


about   three  years,   and   was  counselor 
In   the  presidency  of  the  Weber  Stake 
Y.  M.  M.  I.  A.  for  several  years.    March 
11,  1S72,  he  married  Miss  Anna  M.  Poul- 
sen:    she   died   Jan.   17,   1873,   leaving-  a 
little  baby  girl.      At  the  April  confer- 
ence    1S73,    Elder   Freeman    was    called 
on  a  mission   to  Great  Britain;    on  his 
arrival   in  Liverpool  he  was  appointed 
to  pieside  over  the  Bristol  conference, 
which  at  that  time  embraced  a  part  of 
seven  counties.  After  presiding  in  Bris- 
tol  conference   about   a     year,   he   was 
called    by   Pres.     Joseph     F.    Smith   to 
preside    over    the    Sheffield    conference. 
By    invitation    he    visited    the    London, 
Birmingham,  Manchester  and  Glasgow 
conferences;      and      also     accompanied 
Pres.  Joseph  F.  Smith  and  other  breth- 
ren on  a     tour     to  continental  Europe, 
in   1875,    on   which   he   attended   several 
18S1,   he  was  called  to   St.   John's,   Ari- 
large   meetings   in   Denmark,    Germany 
and   Switzerland.     He  also  visited     his 
wife's  relatives  in  Frederikshavn,  Den- 
mark,  and  spent  a  few   days  in  Paris, 
France,  on  the  return  trip.    Being  hon- 
orably   released    from      his    missionary 
labors    in    Great    Britain,     he   returned 
home  with  a  company  of  Saints  which 
sailed  from  Liverpool  June  16.  1875,  and 
arrived  in  Salt  Lake  City  July  7,  1875. 
During     the      following     winter    Elder 
Freeman   assisted  Apostle  Franklin  D. 
Richards  in     Weber     county     with  re- 
formation work.    April  24,  1876,  he  mar- 
ried Mary  Ellen   Farley,   and   in  April, 
ISSl.  he     was     called  to  St.  Johns,  Ari- 
zona, where  he  arrived  June  2nd  foUow- 
inp;  a  few  months  later  (March  26,  1882) 
he    was    chosen    second     counselor     to 
Bishop  David  K.  Udall  in  the  St.  Johns 
Ward.       He    labored    in    that    capacity 
until  July  23,  1887,  when  the  St.  Johns 
Stake  was  organized, and  he  was  chosen 
first  counselor  to  Pres.  David  K.  Udall. 
This   high   and   responsible   position   he 
still  holds. 


Lesueur  grew  up  to  manhood  and  was 
married  to  Geneva  Casto  Oct.  17,  1875. 
His  natural  instincts  and  inclinations 
were  in  the  direction  of  financial  pur- 
suits; and  his  employment,  while  a 
young  man,  In  a  store  for  a  few  years, 
served  to  increase  his  desire  to  become 
a  business  man.  With  his  young  wife 
he  removed  to  Arizona,  locating  in  St. 
Johns  in  the  spring  of  1880,  where  they 
have  since  resided,  and  now  have  an 
interesting  family  of  seven  sons  and 
two  daughters.  Their  second  son, 
Frank,  a  very  intelligent  and  faithful 
young  man,  was  killed  in  March.  1900. 


by  outlaws,  while  serving  his  country 
with  a  sheriff's  posse.  Since  locating 
in  St.  Johns,  Elder  Lesueur  has  been 
engaged  in  business  pursuits,  having 
taken  an  active  interest  in  various  en- 
terprises, particularly  the  mercantile 
and  sheep  business,  in  all  of  which  he 
has   been  remarkably   successful.       He 


has  taken  an  active  part  in  the  man- 
iFJSL'EUH,      John    Taylor,    second     agement  of  the  St.  Johns  Co-operative 


counselor  in  the  presidency  of  the  St. 
Johns  Stake  of  Zion  since  1900,  was 
bora  on  the  little  isle  of  Jersey,  off  the 
French  coast,  Dec.  4,  1852.  His  parents, 
John  Lesueur  and  CaioMne  Le  Gresley, 
who  had  embraced  the  gospel  a  short 
time  prior  to  his  birth,  emigrated  to 
Zion  in  1855,  settling  in  Bountiful,  Da- 
vis county,  Utah,  where  his  father  died 
in  ls6:;.  The  widowed  mother  with  her 
children   soon    afterwards     removed    to 


Mercantile  and  Manufacturing  Institu- 
tion, either  as  superintendent  or  presi- 
dent since  1885,  assisting  materially  in 
making  that  institution  one  of  the  most 
solid  business  house  in  Arizona.  In 
political  affairs  he  has  served  as  coun- 
ty treasurer,  probate  judge  and  mem- 
ber of  the  legislature,  having  been 
elected  by  the  Democratic  party.  He 
also   served   under   an    appointment   of 


Bear  Lake  valley,   Idaho,   where  Elder    Gov.  Hughes  as  Territorial  Prison  Com- 


BIOGRAPHICAL    ENCYCLOPEDIA. 


331 


missioner  for  two  years.  Upon  the 
organization  of  the  St.  Johns  Stake,  El- 
der Lesueur  was  sustained  as  a  mem- 
ber of  the  High  Council  (having  been 
set  apart  to  that  calling  and  ordained 
a  High  Priest  by  Pres.  Elijah  N.  Free- 
man July  23,  1887).  He  held  his  position 
as  a  High  Councilor  until  Dec.  16,  1900. 
when  he  was  called  to  be  a  counselor 
in  the  Stake  presidency,  being  set  apart 
by  Pres.  Joseph  F.  Smith. 

BAXTER,    John   McKinnon,   presi- 
dent of  the  Woodruff  Stake  of  Zion,  is 
the  son  of  Robert  Baxter  and  Jane  Mc- 
Kinnon   McPhail,    and    was    born   June 
3,    1859,    in    Salt   Lake    City,    Utah.     He 
was  baptized    Nov.    7,    1867,  by  Charles 
R.     Jones     and       confirmed       by     Jo- 
seph    Duncome;       moved       to       Ran- 
dolph,    Rich     county,     Utah,     in  May, 
1871,     being     one     of     the     first       set- 
tlers of  Bear  River  valley,  and  he  as- 
sisted in  surveying  the  first  canal  that 
was  taken  out  of  the  Randolph  creek. 
He  was  ordained  a  Deacon   in  1873  by 
James  H.  Hart  and  set  apart  to  preside 
over  the   Deacons'    quorum  in  1875;    he 
also  acted  as  secretary     of     the     Ran- 
dolph   Sunday    school;     married      Miss 
Agnes  Smith  May  8,  1878,  was  ordained 
an   Elder  Sept.  1,  1878,  and  ordained  a 
Seventy  July  6,  1884,  by  Mosiah  Booth. 
He   was   also   elected    county   treasurer 
of    Rich    county    in    1884     and      county 
clerk  in  1885;  was  appointed  clerk    of  the 
Randolph   Ward    in    1885    and    superin- 
tendent of  the  Sunday  school.     April  4, 
1888,   he  left  home  on  a  mission   to  the 
Southern    States;    laJaored    in    the    mis- 
sionary  field   two   years,   principally  in 
Mississippi   and  Alaoama;    met  with  a 
great  deal  of  opposition  the  first  year; 
was   mobbed   a   number    of   times,    and 
laid  out  in  the  woods  without  food  or 
shelter  eighteen   nights.       He  returned 
home  March  25.  1890.      Soon  afterwards 
he  was  again  elected  county  clerk,  and 
in  the  month  of  September  of  the  same 
year    was    called    to    go    to    Woodruff, 
Utah,    to   act   as   the     Bishop     of   that 
"Ward.     He  was  ordained  a  High  Priest 
and    a   Bishop    in   September,    1890,     by 
Pres.  William  Budge,  of  the  Bear  Lake 
Stake;  remained  in  the  office  of  Bishop 
until   June  6.    1898.       During   that  time 
he  assisted  in  the  building  of  a  tithing 
granary,    meeting     house      and    school 
house  in  the  Woodruff  Ward.      June  6, 
1S98.    the    Woodruff    Stake    was    organ- 
ized   under    the    direction    of    Apostles 


John  Henry  Smith,  Heber  J.  Grant, 
Matthas  F.  Cowley  and  Abraham  O. 
Woodruff  and  the  presidency  of  the 
Bear  Lake  and  Summit  Stakes,  and 
Elder  Baxter  was  chosen  president  of 
the  Woodruff  Stake.  He  was  set  apart 
by  Apostle  John  Henry  Smith.  This 
position  he  holds  at  the  present  time. 

KINGSTON,    Charles,    second  coun- 
selor to  John   M.   Baxter,   president  of 
the  Woodruff  Stake  of  Zion,  is  the  son 
of   Fredrick    Kingston    and    Mary   Ann 
Hunter,   and  was  born  Nov.  9,  1865,   in 
Petersboro,   Lincolnshire.   England.     In 
the    fall   of  1879   he  emigrated   to  Utah 
as    an    unbeliever     in     the    "Mormon" 
faith    and    settled    in    Morgan    county, 
where    his    father    resided,    he    having 
left  the   son  with  his  mother  in  Eng- 
land    over     twenty-one     years   before. 
Charles  had  been  reared  to  believe  that 
the   "Mormons"   were  a  bad  people,   in 
consequence   of  which   much   prejudice 
existed  in  his  mind.       However,   being 
of  a  studious  nature,  and  finding  noth- 
ing in  his  father's  house  but  "Mormon" 
literature,  he  was  obliged  to  read  that 
in  order  to  satisfy  his  craving  for  some- 
thing  to    study.       At     the   commence- 
ment  of   his   investigation    he   had   no 
idea   whatever     that     he     would     find 
"Mormonism"    true,    but    after    several 
months    of     very      careful      study    his 
prejudices   gave   way   to   belief   in   the 
gospel    as    taught    by      the    Latter-day 
Saints.       He   then,    for    the    first   time, 
attended  a  meeting  and  listened  to  dis- 
courses   delivered    by   Junius    F.   Wells 
and  Apostle  John  Henry  Smith.       The 
sermon  preached  by  this  first  Apostle 
he  had  ever  seen    made  a  deep  impres- 
sion on  his  mind,  and  although  he  was 
not   yet   a  member   of   the   Church,    he 
commenced  from  that  day  to  keep  the 
Word  of  Wisdom   (that  being  the  sub- 
ject   spoken    upon    by    Apostle    Smith), 
and  has  ever  since  done  so  to  the  best 
of  his   ability.       On   his  23rd   birthday, 
he  was  baptized  and  confirmed  a  mem- 
ber  of   the    Church   by   Bishop     Albert 
D.  Dickson  of  Richville,  Morgan  coun- 
ty.     Shortly  afterwards,  on  retiring  to 
his   bed   one   night,   and   while   ponder- 
ing over  the  great  blessing  he  had  re- 
ceived,   he    seemed   of   a   sudden    to    be 
carried  away  into  a  large  and  spacious 
building,  the  walls  of  which  were  built 
of  massive  masonry;   and  so  dark  was 
the  surroundings  that  he  tried  in  vain 
to    grope    his    way    out    of   what     ap- 


332 


LATTER-DAY    SAINT 


peared    a    fearful    darkness.       In     this 
dilemma  he  fell  upon  his  knees  and  in 
mighty  prayer  implored  God  to  deliver 
him:   suddenly,  as  he  prayed,  a  bright 
light   appeared   over  his   head,   and   he 
distinctly    heard   the   air   cut   by   what 
appeared   the   decent  of   seven  heaven- 
ly beings,  all  dressed  in  flowing  white 
raiment,   reaching   to   their   feet;    these 
beings    encircled    him    about    and    one 
had    a    two    edged    sword    in    his    hand 
which  he   held  point  upward,  with  his 
arm  bent  at  the   elbow;   neither  spoke, 
but  as  he  continued  to  pray,  the  vision 
closed     and      he      found     himself  wide 
awake  and  wondering  at  what  he  had 
seen.       Jan.    7,    1883,    he    was    ordained 
an  Elder  under  the  hands  of  James  H. 
Mason.       May  17,  1883,  he  was  married 
to    Mary    P.    L.    Tucker    by    Daniel    H. 
Wells  in  the  Endowment  House.       Ten 
children    has     been     the    issue    of    this 
union.       He      acted      as  a     teacher    in 
the     South      Morgan      Ward    for    sev- 
eral   months,      and      was      also    called 
to     labor     as       Stake       clerk,       which 
position     he      filled      for      two    years. 
He      was      ordained      a      Seventy    un- 
der   the    hands    of  Seymour  B.  Young. 
Oct.  19,   1884,  and  in  May,  1886,  he  was 
called   to  fill   a  mission  to   Great   Brit- 
ain.     On  his  return  he  settled  in  Rock 
Springs,       Wyoming,       where     he     was 
chosen  first  counselor  to  Joseph  Souls- 
by,  of  the  Rock  Springs  branch.  After 
two  years'   residence    in   Rock  Springs, 
he  settled  in  Star  valley,  and  upon  the 
organization  of  the  Star  Valley  Stake, 
was  ordained  a  High  Priest  by  George 
Osmond    and    set     apart   as   a   member 
of  the  High  Council,  and  was  soon  after 
chosen  a    member  of  the   Stake   Board 
of  Education.       In  1894,  he  was  chosen 
to  preside  over  the  Young  Men's  Mutu- 
al   Improvement      Association      of    the 
Stake,  which  position  he  held,  together 
with    his   other    callings,    until    he    was 
honorably  released,  he  having  been  ap- 
pointed in  June,  1897,  by  Pres.  William 
McKinley   to   be   Register  of   the  U.    S. 
Land    Office    at    Evanston,    Wyoming. 
The    same   year   he   was   set   apart   by 
Pres.   Lorenzo  Snow,  at  Coalville,   to  a 
special   mission,    in    which   he   was     to 
travel  and  look  up  the  scattered  Saints 
located    along   the    line     of   the   Union 
Pacific  railroad,   in   Wyoming,    at  such 
times  and  places  as  he  should  be  able 
to    visit.       When    the    Woodruff    Stake 
of  Zion  was  organized,  he  was  chosen 


second  counselor  to  Pres.  John  M.  Bax- 
ter, which  position  he  now  holds.  In 
addition  to  his  religious  duties.  Elder 
Kingston  has  been  active  in  all  tem- 
poral affairs  pertaining  to  the  welfare 
of  the  people  among  whom  he  has  re- 
sided. 

McKIXXON,  Archibald,  first  coun- 
selor to  John  M.  Baxter  (president  of 
the  Woodruff  Stake  of  Zion),  is  the 
youngest  of  a  family  of  nine  children, 
and  was  born  June  20,  1837,  in  Argyle- 
shire,  Scotland.  When  he  was  nine 
years  old,  his  parents  moved  to  Green- 
ock, where  they  resided  nine  months, 
durmg  which  time  his  father  and  a 
grown  sister  (Catharine)  died  of  ty- 
phoid fever.  Three  months  later,  the 
family  moved  to  Paisley.  At  the  age 
of  thirteen,  Archibald  was  apprenticed 
to  learn  the  shoemaking  trade.  He 
was  baptized  into  the  Church  of  Jesus 


Christ  of  Latter-day  Saints  July  26, 
1852,  and  in  1855  he  emigrated  to  Zion, 
crossing  the  Atlantic  in  the  ship  "Sam- 
uel Curling,"  and  the  plains  in  Milo 
Andrus'  company,  which  arrived  in 
Salt  Lake  City  Oct.  24,  1855.  After 
spending  a  few  weeks  in  the  city,  he 
went  to  Provo,  where  he  found  em- 
ployment as  a  shoemaker  with  a  firm, 
which  also  carried  on  a  tanning  busi- 
ness. Here  also  he  was  ordained  to 
the  office  of  a  Teacher.  Early  in  the 
following  spring,  he  went  to  Palmyra, 
an    adobe    fort,    situated      about      two 


BIOGRAPHICAL    ENCYCLOPEDIA. 


333 


miles  from  the  present  site  of  Span- 
ish Fork,  where  Stephen  Markham 
acted  as  Bishop.  Late  in  the  fall  of 
1859.  Archibald  returned  to  Salt  Lake 
City  where  he  worked  at  his  trade  for 
John  W.  Jenkins  about  five  months. 
He  was  then  engaged  by  Howard  Egan 
to  take  charge  of  the  mail  and  pony 
express  station,  near  the  Point  of  the 
Mountain,  about  nineteen  miles  south 
of  Salt  Lake  City.  Later  he  resumed 
his  labors  in  the  city,  and  on  Aug.  9, 
1861.  he  married  Miss  Mary  McKay.  In 
the  spring  of  1862  he  joined  the  artil- 
lery and  was  a  member  of  the  expedi- 
tion sent  to  the  Morrisite  camp,  on  the 
"V\''eber,  in  June,  1862.  During  certain 
perilous  times  he  stood  guard  in  Pres. 
Brigham  Young's  ofl^ice  and  acted  as 
a  special  policeman  in  the  Theatre  for 
many  years.  In  1864,  in  company 
with  Foster  Curtis,  he  opened  a  har- 
ness shop  on  Main  Street,  and  the  fol^ 
lowing  year  built  a  home  in  the 
Eighth  Ward,  where  he  subsequently 
was  called  to  act  as  superintendent  of 
the  Sunday  school.  Agreeable  to  coun- 
cil from  Pres.  Brigham  Young,  he  re- 
moved with  his  family  to  Bear  River 
valley  and  settled  in  Randolph,  Rich 
county,  Utah.  Soon  after  his  arrival 
he  was  called  to  act  as  second  coun- 
selor to  Bishop  Randolph  H.  Stewart 
June  23,  1871,  assisted  by  Geo.  A.  Peart 
and  AVm.  Rex,  he  organized  a  Sunday 
school  with  fifteen  pupils.  From  1872 
to  1878  inclusive,  he  served  as  assessor 
and  collector  of  Rich  county.  In  1876, 
he  became  first  counselor  to  Bishop 
Stewart,  and  on  July  10,  1879,  he  yield- 
ed obedience  to  the  law  of  plural  mar- 
riage by  taking  to  wife  Jane  Brough, 
who  was  sealed  to  him  in  the  Endow- 
ment House,  Salt  Lake  City.  In  1880 
he  served  as  a  member  of  the  Terri- 
torial legislature,  and  in  August,  of 
that  year,  he  was  ordained  a  Bishop 
and  succeeded  Bishop  Stewart  in  tak- 
ing charge  of  the  Randolph  Ward. 
With  some  regret  he  was  now  obliged 
to  resign  his  positions  as  Sunday  school 
superintendent  and  choir  leader  which 
he  had  held  since  the  first  organiza- 
tion of  the  Ward.  Sept.  3,  1888,  he 
was  arrested  on  the  charge  of  unlaw- 
ful cohabitation  and  cited  to  appear 
before  U.  S.  Commissioner  Goodwin, 
at  Logan,  Cache  county,  within  ten 
days.  Bishop  Wm.  H.  Lee,  of  Wood- 
ruff, had  been  arrested  the  day  pre- 
vious   on    the    same    charge,    and,      to- 


gether with  his  wife  Lizzie,  he  had 
been  ordered  to  appear  in  Logan  at 
the  same  time.  The  three  therefor 
started  for  Logan  together,  and  pre- 
sented themselves  before  Mr.  Goodwin, 
who  put  them  all  under  bonds  to  ap- 
pear before  the  grand  jury  at  Ogden 
on  the  20th.  On  the  day  appointed 
Bro.  McKinnon  and  wives  and  Wm.  H. 
Lee  and  wives  were  at  Ogden;  but  the 
brethren  made  the  appearance  of  their 
wives  before  the  grand  jury  unneces- 
sary, as  they  furnished  sufficient  evi- 
dence themselves  to  have  indictments 
made  out  for  unlawful  cohabitation. 
Accordingly,  on  Dec.  24,  1888,  Bro.  Mc- 
Kinnon was  sentenced  to  three 
months'  imprisonment  in  the  Territo- 
rial penitentiary,  with  costs  of  suit, 
and  Wm.  H.  Lee  to  four  months'  im- 
prisonment. One  month  after  his  in- 
carceration Bishop  McKinnon  learned 
by  letter  ftom  home  that  his  little  boy 
George,  2^/^  years  old,  had  died.  He 
was  released  from  imprisonment  March 
9.  1889,  and  in  the  following  October 
he  moved  his  wife  Jane  and  her  family 
to  Fish  Haven,  Bear  Lake  county,  Ida- 
ho where  he  had  purchased  a  home 
for  them  and  where  they  now  resided 
five  years.  In  1900,  Bishop  McKin- 
non was  elected  collector  and  treas- 
urer for  Rich  county  by  a  large  majori- 
ty. May  4,  1901,  he  was  set  apart  as 
first  counselor  to  Pres.  John  M.  Baxter. 
by  Apostle  Abraham   O.   Woodruff. 

TiXGEY,  Thomas,  Jr„  clerk  and 
historian  of  the  Woodruff  Stake  of 
Zion,  is  the  oldest  son  of  Thomas  Tin- 
gey  and  Alzina  Call,  and  was  born 
Oct.  7,  1864,  at  Centerville,  Davis  coun- 
ty, Utah.  When  eight  years  old  he 
was  baptized  into  the  Church  of  Jesus 
Christ  of  Latter-day  Saints  by  Thomas 
Tingey,  July  15.  1873,  and  was  con- 
firmed the  same  day  by  Ozias  Kil- 
bourn.  He  was  ordained  a  Deacon 
Dec.  18,  1877,  by  Melvin  H.  Randall  and 
labored  in  that  capacity  for  about  ten 
years;  removed  to  Woodruff,  Rich 
county,  Utah,  in  1882;  became  acquaint- 
ed with  Annie  Cox  and  was  united 
with  her  in  the  holy  bonds  of  matri- 
mony in  the  Logan  Temple  Nov.  2, 
1887,  having  been  ordained  an  Elder 
the  same  day  by  Niels  Christian  Ed- 
lefsen.  He  was  called  and  set  apart 
as  the  second  counselor  in  an  Elders' 
quorum,  in  the  Bear  Lake  Stake  of 
Zion,    which    position    he   held   for   two 


334 


LATTER-DAY    SAINT 


years.  Aug.  11,  1890,  he  was  ordained 
a  Seventy  by  Seymour  B.  Young.  Feb. 
IS,  1S94,  he  was  set  apart  as  clerk  of 
the  Woodruff  Ward,  and  was  called  on 
a  mission  in  the  interest  of  the  Wood- 
ruff Sunday  school  to  the  Brigham 
Young  Academy  at  Provo,  Nov.  30,  1894; 
he  returned  from  Provo  May  26,  1895. 
After  acting  as  a  teacher  in  the  Wood- 
duff  Sunday  school  for  one  year,  he 
was  called  and  set  apart  as  first  as- 
sistant superintendent  of  the  Woodruff 
Ward  Sunday  school  Nov.  29,  1896.  He 
also  labored  as  superintendent  of  re- 
ligion classes  in  the  Woodruff  Ward 
for  two  years  (1897  and  1898).  At  the 
organization  of  the  Woodruff  Stake  of 
Zion  in  June,  1898,  he  was  sustained 
and  set  apart  as  Stake,  Tithing,  and 
High  Council  clerk.  May  8,  1899,  he 
was  set  apart  as  a  president  of  the 
102nd  quorum  of  Seventy  by  Pres.  Ru- 
lon  S.  Wells. 

McALiLISTER,  John  Daniel  Thomp- 
son, president  of  the  St.  George  Stake 
of  Zion  from  1877  to  1888,  is  the  son  of 
Wm.  J.  F.  McAllister  and  Eliza  Thomp- 
son, and  was  born  Feb.  19,  1827,  in 
Lewis.  Sussex  county,  Delaware.  The 
following  is  a  short  sketch  of  his  early 
life,  written  by  himself:  "I  removed 
to  Philadelphia,  the  city  of  my  first 
recollection,  Oct.  12,  1844.  I  was  bap- 
tized in  the  Church  of  Jesus  Christ  of 
Latter-day  Saints  by  Elder  Albtit  Lutz, 
president  of  the  Philadelphia  branch 
July  5,  1847.  I  married  Ellen  Handley 
July  28,  1848,  and  my  first  born  was 
named  Moroni.  Sept.  28,  1848,  with  my 
wife,  I  started  for  the  body  of  the 
Church,  traveling  by  railroad,  canal 
and  steamboat  to  St.  Louis,  Mo.,  where 
I  labored  at  blacksmithing.  July  12, 
1S49,  I  took  passage  on  a  steamboat  for 
Council  Bluffs,  where  we  arrived  Aug. 
iPt.  In  the  spring  of  1850,  I  built  a 
house,  and  while  working  at  carpen- 
tering for  Jos.  E.  Johnson,  he  engaged 
me  to  clerk  for  him  in  the  store  we  buiU. 
Jan.  9,  1851,  my  wife  Ellen  gave  to  me 
another  boy;  we  named  him  John. 
June  20,  1851,  we  left  Kanesville  with  a 
wagon  and  five  yoke  of  cattle.  At 
the  six  mile  grove,  beyond  Winter 
Quarters,  I  was  appointed  clerk  of  Al- 
fred Cordon's  company  of  fifty  wagons. 
We  started  for  the  valley  of  the  Great 
Salt  Lake,  July  1,  1851,  and  arrived 
there  in  safety  Oct.  1,  1851.    I  met  with 

the  Saints  in  an  adobie  bowery,  on  the 


south  side  of  the  Temple  Block  near 
the  spot  where  the  south  gate  is  at  the 
present  time.  Previous  to  this  (while 
in  Philadelphia),  I  had  been  ordained 
a  Priest  Sept.  27,  1846,  and  commis- 
sioned to  preach  the  gospel;  in  Kanes- 
ville I  was  ordained  an  Elder,  and  in 
the  Valley,  I  was  ordained  a  Seventy, 
Nov.  8,  1851,  and  became  a  member  of 
the  Sth  quorum.  As  soon  as  I  arrived 
in  the  Valley  I  found  employment  on 
the  public  works'  carpenter  shop;  I 
worked  on  the  old  Tabernacle,  where 
the  Assembly  Hall  now  stands.  I  also 
joined  Captain  Ballo's  brass  band  and 
became  lieutenant,  playing  the  cornet. 
Feb.  14,  1853,  a  large  number  of  people 


assembled  on  the  Temple  Block  to  wit- 
ness the  breaking  and  consecrating  of 
the  Temple  grounds.  There  was  about 
three  inches  of  snow  on  the  ground,  but 
the  morning  was  clear  and  lovely,  the 
snow  soon  melted,  and  in  some  places 
the  ground  was  left  quite  bare.  The 
Nauvoo  and  Ballo  bands  cheered  us 
with  their  sweet  music.  At  about  10 
o'clock  a.  m.,  Pres.  Young  arrived,  and 
with  Pres.  Kimball  and  Pres.  Richards 
and  the  assembled  multitude  I  wit- 
nessed the  sur\'ey  of  the  site  of  the 
Temple,  by  Elders  Truman  O.  Angell, 
Church  architect,  and  Surveyor  Jesse 
W.  Fox.  This  work  was  completed 
about  11  o'clock,  when  the  First  Presi- 
dency, the  Twelve  Apostles  and  others 
moved  to  the  corner  of  the  south  and 
east  lines.  Pres.  Brigham  Young 
addressed  us  thirty  minutes,  and  re- 
lated   briefly     the       changes     through 


BIOGRAPHICAL    ENCYCLOPEDIA. 


335 


which  the  Church  had  passed,  the  dif- 
ficulties the  Saints  had  encounterd  in 
Ohio,  Missouri  and  Illinois,  and  how 
they  had  been  led  by  an  overruling 
providence  to  this  consecrated  spot. 
Seven  years  ago,  he  said,  he  had  left 
Nauvoo,  not  knowing  which  way  to  go, 
only  as  he  learned  by  dreams,  visions 
and  revelations,  that  there  was  a  good 
place  in  the  mountains  for  the  Saints. 
The  united  bands  of  music  were  invited 
to  the  center;  the  standard  bearer 
placed  the  ensign  on  the  center  stake 
of  the  Temple  plat,  where  all  could 
see  it,  the  musicians  formed  in  a  cir- 
cle, and  gave  a  cheering  strain  to 
'Auld  Lang  Syne.'  Pres.  Kimball  of- 
fered the  dedicatory  prayer,  after 
which  the  presidency  moved  to  the 
southeast  corner  of  the  Temple  site, 
where,  with  the  Twelve,  Mayor  Jede- 
diah  M.  Grant,  Marshal  Jesse  C.  Little 
and  others,  they  succeeded  in  picking 
around  a  piece  of  earth,  about  one  foot 
square,  and  while  doing  this  a  silver 
dollar  fell  on  the  square  of  earth  with- 
out any  one  knowing  where  it  came 
from.  Pres.  Kimball  prophesied  that 
it  was  a  good  token,  and  that  means 
would  not  be  wanted  to  build  the  Tem- 
ple. After  the  earth  was  loosened, 
about  six  inches  deep,  Pres.  Young  said 
that  it  was  his  privilege  to  remove  it; 
and  he  took  the  lump  upon  his  spade 
and  lifted  it  up  high,  Avhile  he  said, 
'Get  out  of  my  way,  for  I  am  going  to 
throw  this.'  He  held  it  about  a  minute 
before  he  could  get  room  to  lay  it 
down  off  the  Temple  site.  He  then 
addressed  the  multitude  and  declared 
the  ground  broken  for  the  Temple, 
blesed  the  people  in  the  name  of  the 
Lord,  and  dismissed  the  assembly.  We 
all  said  Amen.  The  general  conference 
was  held,  as  usual,  in  April,  1851,  and 
it  was  celebrated  by  the  laying  of  the 
four  corner  stones  of  the  Temple.  At 
that  conference  (on  the  8th)  I  was  ap- 
pointed a  mission  to  England.  The 
beautiful  block  of  stone  contributed  by 
the  State  of  Deseret  to  the  Washington 
monument  was  intrusted  to  the  care  of 
Elder  Philemon  C.  Merrill  and  my- 
self, to  deliver  to  the  committee  at 
Washington,  to  whom,  and  to  Pres. 
Franklin  Pierce  and  Hon.  John  M. 
Bernhisel,  we  carried  letters  of  in- 
troduction from  Governor  Young.  The 
block  mentioned  was  three  feet  long, 
two  feet  wide,  and  six  and  a  half 
inches  thick.      In  the  center  stood  the 


bee-hive,  the  emblem  of  industry.  Over 
it  was  the  motto  "Holiness  to  the 
Lord."  Above  this  was  the  allseeing 
eye  with  rays;  beneath  the  line  was 
the  word  "Deseret;"  over  that  (spring- 
ing from  the  ground  which  was  cov- 
ered with  different  kinds  of  foliage) 
was  a  semicircular  arch,  enriched  with 
\he  convololus.  On  each  side  were 
spandrels;  in  one  was  the  symbol  of 
union,  with  foliage;  in  the  other  was 
the  cornucopia.  Near  the  edge  was 
a  fillet,  one  and  a  half  inches  wide 
and  three-quarters  of  an  inch  deep. 
After  being  set  apart  for  our  missions, 
we  bid  our  families  and  friends  good 
bye  June  21,  1851,  and  started  on  our 
journey.  We  arrived  in  Washington 
Sept.  23rd,  presented  our  letters  of  in- 
troduction and  the  stone  to  the  com- 
mittee, who  received  us  in  a  very  kind 
and  affectionate  manner.  After  doing 
our  business,  we  went  to  Baltimore 
and  took  passage  for  Philadelphia, 
whence  we  started  on  the  steamer 
'Glasgow'  for  Liverpool,  where  we 
landed  Oct.  25,  1851.  On  this  mission 
I  was  gone  from  home  about  three 
years  and  a  half.  I  was  welcomed 
home  by  the  Presidency  and  many  ac- 
quaintances." After  his  return  from 
this  mission,  Oct.  4,  1856,  Elder  Mc- 
Allister labored  at  carpentering  and 
mill  work  to  support  his  family  and  at- 
tended to  his  several  duties  as  an  El- 
der in  the  Church.  He  was  chosen 
president  of  the  sixteenth  quorum  of 
Seventy  and  elected  major  of  the  sec- 
ond battalion  of  the  Nauvoo  Legion,  in 
the  Salt  Lake  Military  District.  As  a 
member  of  the  De.sei-et  Dramatic  As- 
sociation he  took  an  active  part  in 
Latah's  early  drama.  From  1860  to 
1862  he  filled  another  mission  to  the 
United  States  and  to  Europe.  On  his 
return  he  brought  a  company  of  emi- 
grants across  the  plains.  After  that, 
he  served  as  city  marshal  of  Salt  Lake 
City,  Territorial  marshal  and  chief  of 
the  Salt  Lake  City  fire  department.  He 
also  laboi-ed  for  several  years  in  the 
Endowment  House,  and  was  acting  as 
superintendent  of  Pres.  Young's  wool- 
en mills  when  he  was  called  to  ac- 
company the  president  on  a  mission 
to  St.  George.  At  a  meeting  of  the 
general  conference  held  in  the  St. 
George  Temple,  April  5,  1S77,  he  was 
chosen  president  of  the  St.  George 
Stake  of  Zion,  being  ordained  a  High 
Priest  and  set  apart  to  that  position  by 


336 


LATTER-DAY    SAINT 


Pies.  Brlgham  Young.  For  his  coun- 
Eelors  he  chose  Thos.  J.  Jones  and 
Htnry  Eyring.  He  was  also  appoint- 
ed an  assistant  to  Pres.  Wilford  Wood- 
ruff, who  had  been  called  to  presidvi 
over  the  Temple  and  its  affairs.  He 
was  blessed  and  set  apart  by  Pres. 
Woodruff  to  officiate  in  all  the  ordi- 
nances of  the  Temple,  April  13,  1877. 
\.hile  residing  In  St.  George  he  was 
e.ected  president  of  the  Rio  Virgen 
L.anufacturing  Company,  president  of 
t-e  St.  George  Dramatic  Association, 
a  Id  brigadier-general  of  the  Washing- 
ton county  brigade.  He  presided  over 
the  St.  George  Stake  about  eleven 
years.  In  1893  he  was  called  to  assist 
m  the  Salt  Lake  City  Temple  and  later 
in  the  Manti  Temple,  of  which  he  has 
Leen  the  president  for  a  number  of 
years 

MuARTHUR,  Daniel  Duncan,   pres- 
ident of  the  St.   George  Stake  of  Zion 
from  1888  to  1901,  is  the  son  of  Duncan 
McArthur  and  Susan  McKeen,  and  was 
born    April    8.    1820,    at    Holland.      Erie 
county.   New   York,   where   his  earliest 
years    were    spent.        He    writes:.     My 
parents      joined      the      Church    in    the 
spring  of  1833.  and  I,  believing  the  doc- 
trines taught,   became  a     member     by 
baptism  in  1838,  in  Missouri.      Early  in 
the    year   1836    my    father    and    family 
moved  to  Kirtland,   Ohio.       In  the  fall 
of  1838  many  of  the  Saints  from  Ohio 
journeyed  to  Far  West,  Caldwell  coun- 
ty, in  the  so-called  Kirtland  Camp;  we 
were  members  of  that  organization,  and 
located  in  Adam-ondl-Ahman.  Daviess 
county.       Under   threat   of   extermina- 
tion  in  ten   days,     we     were  forced  to 
leave  that  place,  after  which  we  made 
our    abode    for    three     months    at    Far 
West.       Thence,    leaving    Missouri,    we 
went  to  Qunicy.  Ill-  where  we  arrived 
in     the     spring    of     1839.       While     my 
father  was  absent  on  a  two  ye  -.rs'  mis- 
sion    I,    together     with     my    younger 
brothers,  took  care  of  the  large  family. 
In  1841,  I  married  Miss  Cordelia  Clark. 
From  Quincy  father's  family  moved  to 
Nauvoo,    while   I    remained    in    Quincy. 
Here  my  wife  died.       After  the  death 
of  the  Prophet  Joseph  Smith  I  went  to 
Nauvoo,  where  I  was  ordained  a  Sev- 
enty in  1844.       I  married  Miss  Matilda 
C.   Fuller,    Dec.   14,   1845.     Preparing  to 
leave  Nauvoo,  I  was  engaged  in  wagon 
building   and    other    occupations.       My 
wife   and    I    were    endowed   and    sealed 


in  the  Nauvoo  Temple,  Feb.  1,  1846.  In 
a  day  or  two  afterwards  we  crossed 
the  Mississippi  river  on  the  ice  and 
passed  to  the  general  camp  ground  of 
our  people  on  Sugar  creek.  Thence, 
we  traveled  to  Garden  Grove.  Here 
we  built  houses  and  fenced  five  hun- 
dred acres  of  land  for  the  poor,  who 
were  unable  to  go  further.  Bridge 
building,  road  making,  etc.  were 
necessary  occupations  for  us  on  our 
way  to  the  Missouri  river.  In  the 
spring  of  1846  one  of  my  brothers 
joined  the  Mormon  Battalion.  I  re- 
mained with  my  father  and  family  un- 
til 1848,  when  we  crossed  the  plains, 
arriving  in  Salt  Lake  City  in  the  fall 
of  that  year.  I  was  called  on  a  mis- 
sion to  Europe  in  1852,   and   succeeded 


Andrew  Ferguson  in  the  presidency  of 
the  Dundee  conference,  in  Scotland.  Be- 
ing released  early  in  1856,  I  was  chosen 
second  counselor  to  Elder  James  Fer- 
guson, who  presided  over  the  Saints 
who  crossed  the  Atlantic  in  the  ship 
"Enoch  Train."  Reaching  Iowa,  a 
hand-cart  company  was  given  into  my 
charge.  By  the  blessings  of  God  I 
landed  safely  in  Salt  Lake  City.  Oct. 
2nd  of  said  year,  with  all  my  passen- 
gers. Jan.  4,  1858,  I  was  set  apart  as 
the  senior  president  of  the  57th  quorum 
of  Seventy.  At  the  general  conference 
held  in  October,  1861,  I  was  called  on  a 
mission  to  settle  in  "Our  Dixie."  Thus 
I  became  one  of  the  first  settlers  of 
St.  George.  In  1862,  I  was  ordained  a 
High  Priest  and  called  to  act  as  first 
counselor   to   Bishop   Robert  Gardener. 


BIOGRAPHICAL    ENCYCLOPEDIA. 


337 


Nov.  15,  1862.  I  was  ordained  a  Bishop 
by  Apostle  Orson  Pratt  and  set  apart 
to  preside  over  the  Third  Ward,  St. 
•George.  In  1863  I  was  appointed  to 
take  charge  of  a  train  of  sixty  wagons 
(ox  teams)  and  teamsters  and  go  to 
the  Missouri  river  to  bring  in  the  poor. 
May  14.  1864,  I  was  elected  a  member  of 
the  High  Council  of  the  St.  George 
Stake  of  Zion.  I  served  in  that  ca- 
pacity until  Sept.  15,  1869,  when  I  was 
called  to  act  as  presiding  Bishop  in 
southern  Utah.  In  1866  I  was  called 
to  make  another  trip  to  the  Missouri 
river  after  the  poor,  but  was  released 
by  Bishop  Edward  Hunter,  in  order 
that  I  might  attend  to  other  duties. 
In  1868  I  was  again  called  to  go  with 
teams  to  the  frontiers  and  bring  in  the 
poor  Saints.  I  performed  this  mission 
to  the  satisfaction  of  the  First  Presi- 
dency. June  4,  1877,  I  was  called  on 
another  mision  to  Great  Britain,  and 
labored  principally  in  the  Manchester 
conference.  Returning  home,  I  acted 
as  first  counselor  to  Elder  Henry  W. 
Naisbitt  in  leading  a  company  of  Saints 
"home  to  Zion.  'We  arrived  in  Salt  Lake 
Lake  City  Oct.  3.  1878.  March  20,  1881, 
1  was  set  apart  as  second  counselor  to 
Pres.  John  D.  T.  McAllister,  president 
of  the  St.  George  Stake  of  Zion.  Sept. 
26,  1888,  I  was  unanimously  chosen  by 
the  Council  of  the  Apostles  to  succeed 
Pres.  McAllister  in  the  presidency  of 
the  St.  George  Stake,  and  to  that  posi- 
tion I  was  set  apart  by  Apostle  John 
W.  Tavlor,  Dec.  17.  1888.  At  various 
times  I  have  been  called  to  do  military 
and  police  service — notably  during  the 
troublous  times  of  Nauvoo — lawfully 
defending  our  liberties  and  homes 
against  the  base  and  cruel  assaults  of 
bigoted  citizens,  which  were  headed 
chiefly  by  persons  who  called  them- 
selves ministers  of  the  gospel.  In  Utah, 
during  the  Walker,  Ute  and  Navajo 
raids  and  wars,  I  took  part,  also  in  the 
so-called  Buchannan  war.  I  served 
for  some  time  as  major  under  Gen. 
Daniel  H.  Wells  and  was  afterwards 
commissioned  colonel  of  infantry  by 
Governor  Durkee.  During  the  anti- 
polygamy  raids  I  was  hunted  for  six 
years.  The  officers  succeeded  in  find- 
ing me  in  April,  1890,  and  in  order  to 
save  my  family  from  exposure,  insult 
and  insolence  of  court  officials,  I 
pleaded  guilty  to  the  charge  of  unlaw- 
ful cohabitation,  and  was  fined  $321.00, 
which  was  promptly  paid.      Having  al- 

Vr.l.  1,  No.  22. 


most  totally  lost  my  eyesight,  I  was 
honorably  released  from  the  presidency 
of  the  St.  George  Stake,  June  14,  1901, 
and  ordained  a  Patriarch  in  the 
Church.  And  now,  in  conclusion,  I 
bear  this  my  solemn  testimony:  God 
has  in  these  last  days  spoken  from 
the  heavens  and  organized  His  Church 
through  the  instrumentality  of  the 
Prophet,  Joseph  Smith.  He  has  also 
spoken  through  his  (Joseph's)  succes- 
sors until  the  present  time;  and  to  God 
and  the  Lamb  be  all  praise  forever. 
Amen." 

SPEXCER,  Orson,  president  of  the 
St.  Louis  Stake  of  Zion,  was  the  son  of 
Daniel  and  Chloe  Spencer,  and  was 
born  March  14,  1802,  in  the  town  of 
West  Stockbridge,  Berkshire  county, 
Massachusetts.  His  parents  belonged 
to  that  virtuous,  industrious  class  of 
New  Englanders  of  the  Puritan  stock, 
which  has  produced  so  many  eminent 
men  to  figure  on  the  stage  of  action  in 
all  the  various  departments  of  life.    At 


the  age  of  twelve  years  he  was  taken 
ill,  and  little  or  no  hopes  were  enter- 
tained of  saving  his  life  for  some  two 
weeks.  This  sickness  occasioned  a 
fever  sore  in  one  of  his  legs,  which  was 
the  cause  of  its  imperfect  development. 
In  1817  he  entered  the  Academy  at  the 
town  of  Lenox,  in  his  native  county, 
where  he  received  the  highest  honors 
of  his  class.  Here,  at  a  public  exam- 
ination, the  high  sheriff  of  the  county. 
Henry   C.   Brown,    noticed    his   unusual 

June  1.  1901. 


338 


LATTER-DAY    SAINT 


proficiency,    and    ascertaining    that   his 
father    was    in   very   moderate   circum- 
stances, voluntarily  offered  to  loan  the 
necessary  means  for  his  education,  and 
wait    until    he    could    pay    it    after    its 
completion.   He  entered  Union  College, 
at  Schenectady.  State  of  New  York,  in 
1819,    and    graduated    with   great   honor 
and  credit  to  himself  in   1824.     In  1825, 
he   obtained  a   situation   as   teacher  in 
an  academy,  in  the  town  of  Washing- 
ton.   Wilkes   county.   State   of  Georgia. 
Here,   in  addition  to  the  duties     of  his 
calling,   he  turned  his  attention  to  the 
study  of  law.      About  this  time  he  had 
some   singular   manifestations     on    the 
subject    of    religion,    and      soon    after, 
either  at  Washington,  or  on  his  return 
home     in     1827,      joined     the     Baptist 
Church.       He   now     changed  his  mind 
•with  regard  to  a  future  profession,  and 
left   the   study   of   the   law   for  that  of 
theology.       He    accordingly,    the    same 
year,  entered  the  theological  college  at 
Hamilton,    State   of   New   York,   where 
he    graduated    in    1829.       After   this   he 
labored   in   the   ministry   about  twelve 
years     in     his     native     county,  and  in 
Connecticut.       He   received   the   gospel 
in  1841,  from  his  brother  Daniel,     who 
baptized  him  in  the  spring  of  that  year. 
Soon   after  his   baptism,   he   bid   adieu 
to  a  numerous  circle  of  acquaintances 
and  friends,  and  cast  his  lot  with  the 
persecuted   people   of   God   at   Nauvoo. 
Here  he  was  soon  called  to  act  his  part 
in   those   scenes   of   scathing  trial   and 
affliction    which    are    recorded      in    the 
archives  of  eternity,  with  the  blood  of 
innocence  as  a  testimony  against  this 
generation.       He    for    some    time    ably 
filled  the  office  of  alderman  in  the  city 
of  Nauvoo,  and  when  the  Saints  were 
driven  from  that  beautiful     monument 
of  their  peaceful  industry  and  virtues, 
he,  with  his  wife  and  little  ones,  shared 
their  fate  and  participated  in  the  suf- 
ferings  of   that   memorable   winter,   in 
which  the  Saints  were  driven  over  the 
bleaK  prairies  of  Iowa,  to  find  a  home 
among  prowling  savages,  who  were  less 
ferocious   than   the   Christian   mobs   of 
Illinois.       How     many  a  pang   of  sor- 
row even  at  this  late  day  throbs  in  the 
bosoms  of  the  living,  when  vivid  recol- 
lection  calls   up   before   the   mind     the 
husbands    and    fathers,    the   wives   and 
children    that    were    sacrificed    in    that 
memorable  exodus,  to  appease  the  fury 
of  blood-thirsty  mobs.       Mrs.   Spencer, 
an  accomplished  and  refined  lady,  sunk 


under    the    accumulated    sufferings    of 
the  journey,  and  left  Elder  Spencer  to 
pursue   his   way  with   a   solitary   heart 
and  a  family  of  six  small  children,  all 
under   thirteen   years   of  age.       In   the 
midst  of  this  trying  scene,  having  been 
appointed    on    a    mission    to    England, 
he   left   his  children     in     the     care   of 
friends,  and  started  on  his  journey  to 
Europe,    landing   in    Liverpool   Jan.   23, 
1847.       He   presided     over     the   British 
mission,   and   ably   edited   the   "Millen- 
nial Star,"  about  two  years.       During 
his  ministry  there,   he  wrote   the  most 
of  a  series  of  letters  to  the   Rev.   Mr. 
Crowel,  which  were  embodied  and  pub- 
lished  as   Spencer's   Letters.       He   left 
Liverpool  for  the  United  States,  in  1849, 
and  gathered  to  Great  Salt  Lake  val- 
ley   the   same   year.       When    the   Uni- 
versity    of     Deseret   was   founded     in 
1850,   he   was  appointed   its   chancellor, 
which  position  he  occupied  at  the  time 
of  his  death.      He  was  a  judicious,  dis- 
criminating man,  a  wise  counselor,  and 
occupied  an  honorable   position  in  the 
legislative   council   of     Utah   Territory 
on   its   first  organization.       In  1852   he 
was   again  appointed   on  a  mission  to 
Europe.      In  his  travels  he  visited  the 
kingdom  of  Prussia,  with  a  view  of  in- 
troducing the  gospel  there,  but  was  re- 
jected and  expelled  from  the  kingdom. 
He  returned  again  to  Utah  in  1853.     In 
1854   he   was  called   upon   to  perform  a 
mission  to  the  United  States.    He  spent 
most   of   his   time   in   Cincmnati,    until 
July,   1855,   wh<.n  ho   was  requested  by 
Pres.  Erastus  Snow  to  occupy  the  edi- 
torial chair  of  the  "St.  Louis  Lumina- 
ry."      He   arrived   in   St.   Louis,     Mis- 
souri,   on    the    7th    of   July.       Here   he 
remained  but  a  short  time,  as  he  was 
called  upon  to  go  on  a  mission  to  the 
Cherokee   Nation.       He   left   St.    Louis 
on    the   21st  of  July  for     the  camp   of 
emigrating  Saints  near  Atchison, where 
he  remained  until  the  last  company  of 
the    outfitting    Saints    had    started   for 
Utah.      On  the  5th  of  August,  accom- 
panied   by    Elder    James    McGaw,    he 
proceeded  on  his  mission  to  the  Chero- 
kee  Nation,    where   he   remained    until 
the   5th   of   September.       Here    he   was 
attacked   with   chills   and   fever.       His 
mission   being   accomplished,     he     im- 
mediately  returned   to   St.    Louis,     ar- 
riving there  Sept.  17th,  sick,  and  in  a 
debilitated  condition.      After  an  illness 
of  forty  days  he  died  at  St.  Louis  Oct. 
15,    1855.       At   the    time   of   his   demise 


BIOGRAPHICAL    ENCYCLOPEDIA. 


339 


the  following  was  published  in  the 
"Millennial  Star:"  "Orson  Spencer's 
honesty  of  heart,  sterling-  integrity.and 
determination  of  purpose  were  forcibly 
manifest  in  his  embracing  the  truth  for 
the  love  of  it,  forsaking  an  enviable 
position  in  society,  and  an  extensive 
circle  of  influential  acquaintances  and 
friends,  and  cleaving  to  a  persecuted 
and  down-trodden  people  for  the  gos- 
pel's sake.  These  characteristics  have 
marked  his  entire  career  in  this 
Church.  Always  willing  and  ever 
ready,  he  never  failed  to  be  at  the 
post  of  duty,  and  fulfil  the  require- 
ments made  on  him.  He  bore  trial  and 
affliction  with  the  most  unflinching 
fortitude.  Knowing  that  he  was 
right,  with  him  consequences  were  no 
consideration.  He  needs  no  praise,  no 
eulogy,  to  embalm  his  name  to  pre- 
serve it  from  oblivion.  It  is  written 
in  the  Lamb's  Book  of  Life — indelibly 
inscribed  in  the  hearts  of  his  brethren, 
and  his  generations  will  become  as  in- 
numerable as  the  stars  of  heaven,  for 
the  Lord  will  have  them  in  remem- 
brance before  Him.  The  crowning  act 
of  his  life  was  administering  the  gos- 
pel to  one  of  the  nations  of  Israel.  He 
could  not  leave  this  stage  of  action 
without  doing  a  deed  that  would  wit- 
ness that  he  loved  these  remnants  of 
Jacob,  and  longed  for  their  redemption. 
Death  has  sealed  up  his  testimony  to 
them  and  this  generation.  His  body 
sleeps  for  a  little  season  only,  while 
his  spirit  labors  with  Joseph  and  Hy- 
rum,  Willard  and  others  of  the  faith- 
ful who  have  gone  before  him  to  pre- 
pare a  counterpart  in  the  spirit  world 
to  the  great  work  that  is  being  done 
in  this,  that  both  may  be  blended  in 
one  in  the  day  when  all  things  are 
perfected."  ("Millennial  Star,"  Vol.  17, 
p.   762.) 

IjUND,  Christian  Nielsen,  presi- 
dent of  the  North  Sanpete  Stake  of 
Zion,  is  the  son  of  Laurids  Nielsen  and 
Frederikke  Jensen  Lund,  and  was  born 
Jan.  13.  1846,  in  Sest  parish,  Ribe  amt, 
Denmark;  he  received  an  ordinary  edu- 
cation and  was  raised  on  a  farm.  His 
parents  having  previously  embraced 
"Mormonism,"  he  himself  became  a 
convert  and  was  baptized  by  Elder 
Hans  Peter  Iverson  March  21,  1858. 
Having  been  ordained  a  Priest,  he  was 
called  to  labor  as  a  missionary  In  the 


TT-r-edericia  conference,  in  which  capa- 
city he  labored  from  November,  1865, 
till  June,  1868,  presiding  successively 
over  Horsens,  Fredericia  and  Vejle 
branches,  and  was  for  a  time  travel- 
ing Elder  in  the  whole  conference.  In 
the  meantime  he  had  been  ordained 
an  Elder  by  the  late  Niels  Wilhelmsen, 
in  September,  1866.  He  emigrated  to 
Utah  in  the  summer  of  1868,  crossed  the 
ocean  in  the  "Emerald  Isle,"  the  last 
sailing  vessel  that  carried  a  company 
of  Latter-day  Saints  over  the  Atlantic. 
He  crossed  the  plains  from  Port  Ben- 
ton to  Salt  Lake  City  in  Captain  John 
G.  Holman's  train  (the  last  ox  train 
that  brought  emigrants  to  Utah),  arriv- 
ing in  Salt  Lake  City.  Sept.  25,  1868. 
Oct.  9,  1869  he  married  Petra  Anton  ie 
Maria  Jensen,  from  Odense,  Denmark, 
and  settled  in  Mt.  Pleasant,  Sanpete 
county,  where  he  has  resided  ever  since. 


He  filled  a  mission  to  the  Northwest- 
ern States  in  1879-80,  laboring  princip- 
ally in  Minnesota.  His  first  wife  hav- 
ing died  in  1882,  he  married  Anna  Niel- 
sen, of  Odense,  Denmark,  Oct.  11,  1884. 
He  was  ordained  a  Seventy  in  1876,  and 
was  for  a  number  of  years  one  of  the 
presidents  of  the  66th  quorum.  In  No- 
vember, 1855,  he  was  ordained  a  High 
Priest  and  set  apart  as  first  counselor 
to  Bishop  "William  S.  Seely,  of  Mt. 
Pleasant  South  Ward,  by  Pres.  Canute 
Peterson;  appointed  acting  Bishop  of 
Mt.  Pleasant  South  Ward  Jan.  10,  18SS. 
and  set  apart  by  Apostle  Francis  M. 
Lyman   as     Bishop     of     Mt.    Pleasant 


340 


LATTER-DAY    SAINT 


(united  in  one  Ward)  May  20,  1890.  He 
filled  a  mission  to  Europe  In  1896-98, 
presiding  over  the  Scandinavian  mis- 
sion. At  the  division  of  the  Sanpete 
Stake  of  Zlon  in  December,  1900,  he 
was  chosen  and  set  apart  as  president 
of  the  North  Sanpete  Stake.  Besides 
the  majiy  ecclesiastical  positions  filled 
by  him,  he  has  held  many  civic  offices 
of  trust  and  responsibility  within  the 
gift  of  the  people,  such  as  city  record- 
er, city  councilman.  Justice  of  the 
peace  and  mayor  of  the  municipality 
where  he  resides;  has  twice  represented 
the  people  In  the  Territorial  legislature, 
namely  in  1890  and  1894, and  was  a  mem- 
ber of  the  constitutional  convention  In 
1882.  and  again  in  1887.  Pres.  Lund  Is 
universally  known  as  a  true  and  faith- 
ful Latter-day  Saint,  an  able  and  en- 
ergetic Elder  in  the  Church  and  a  man 
of  wisdom  and  sound  judgment,  both 
in  spiritual   and   secular  affairs. 

CLUFF,  William  Wallace,  presi- 
dent of  the  Summit  Stake  of  Zion  from 
1877  to  1901,  is  the  fourth  son  of  David 
Cluff  and  Betsey  Hall,  and  was  born 
March  8,  1832,  in  Willoughby,  Lake 
county,  Ohio.  His  father  joined  the 
Church  of  Jesus  Christ  of  Latter-day 
Saints  in  1833,  and  moved  to  Kirtland 
Ohio,  in  1834,  where  he  worked  on  the 
first  Temple  built  by  the  Latter-day 
Saints.  The  family  left  Kirtland  for 
Missouri  in  1837,  but  were  compelled  to 
remain  at  Springfield,  111.,  on  account 
of  sickness.  In  1840,  as  soon  as  the 
Saints  commenced  to  gather  at  Nau- 
voo,  after  the  expulsion  from  Missouri, 
the  family  moved  thither  from  Spring- 
field and  here  William's  father  worked 
on  the  Temple  until  it  was  finished. 
AVilliam  was  baptized  in  the  Mississip- 
pi river  by  Elder  Peter  Shurtz  in 
1S42.  He  well  remembers  the  Prophet 
Joseph  Smith  and  his  brother  Hyrum, 
the  Patriarch.  All  the  trying  and  ex- 
citing scenes  attending  their  martyr- 
dom, and  the  expulsion  of  the  Saints 
from  the  beautiful  Temple  and  city  of 
Xauvoo.  are  still  vivid  in  his  mind; 
especially  will  he  never  forget  the  oc- 
casion when  the  lifeless  bodies  of  the 
beloved  Prophet  and  Patriarch  were 
brought  back  from  Carthage  jail,  where 
these  great  and  good  men  had  been 
murdered  in  cold  blood.  William's 
parents  went  with  the  main  body  of 
the  Church  when  the  Saints  left  Nau- 
voo     for     the     wilderness,  in   the  great 


"unknown  West!"  On  their  Journey 
west  the  Cluff  family  halted  temporari- 
ly at  Mount  Pisgah  and  at  Council 
Bluffs,  in  Iowa,  remaining  two  years 
at  each  place.  In  1850  they  crossed  the 
Plains,  arriving  in  Great  Salt  Lake 
valley  in  October;  the  family  settled 
in  Provo.  William  served  as  a  caval- 
ry-man in  the  Indian  war  (known  as 
the  Walker  war)  in  1853.  In  1854,  he 
was  called  on  a  four  years'  mission  to 
the  Sandwich  Islands,  where  he  passed 
through   a   varied   experience,   learning 


the  language,  manners  of  living  etc.  of 
that  strange  people.  In  1860  he  was 
called  to  take  a  mission  to  Scandinavia. 
After  learning  the  Danish  language,  he 
spent  over  three  years  traveling 
through  Denmark.  Norway  and  Swe- 
den under  the  presidency  of  Elder  Jes- 
se N.  Smith.  In  October,  1863,  he 
married  Miss  Ann  Whipple  who  has 
borne  him  five  sons  and  three  daugh- 
ters. In  March,  1864,  in  company  with 
Apostles  Ezra  T.  Benson  and  Lorenzo 
Snow,  and  Elders  Joseph  F.  Smith  and 
Alma  L.  Smith,  he  was  called  to  take 
a  second  mission  to  the  Sandwich 
Islands.  The  object  of  this  mission 
was  to  investigate  certain  charges  pre- 
ferred, by  native  Elders,  against  Wal- 
ter M.  Gibson.  Elder  Cluff  was  in  the 
boat  with  Apostles  Benson  and  Snow 
and  Elder  Alma  L.  Smith  when  it  was 
capsized  in  a  heavy  surf,  on  attempting 
to  land  at  Lahaina,  on  the  island  of 
Maui.  March  31,  1864,  when  Apostle 
Snow,  came  so  near  losing  his  life,  but 


BIOGRAPHICAL    ENCYCLOPEDIA. 


341 


was  miraculously  saved.  In  March, 
1865,  Elder  Cluff  was  called  by  Pres. 
Brigham  Toung-,  to  preside  over  the 
settlements,  in  Morgan,  Summit  and 
Wasatch  counties,  as  presiding  Bishop. 
He  located  with  his  family  at  Coal- 
ville, that  town  being  centrally  located 
in  the  district.  In  1870-71  he  filled  a 
second  mission  to  Scandinavia,  and 
presided  over  the  mission.  Between 
1865  and  1885  he  was  twice  elected  a 
delegate  to  Territorial  constitutional 
conventions,  and  served  six  terms  as  a 
members  of  the  Territorial  legislature; 
the  last  term  he  was  elected  president 
of  the  council  of  that  body.  On  the 
organization  of  the  Summit  Stake  of 
Zion,  July  9,  1877,  he  was  called  and 
set  apart  as  its  president — a  position 
which  he  filled  with  honor  and  zeal  for 
twenty-four  years,  or  until  1901,  when 
he  was  honorably  released.  In  finan- 
cial matters  Pres.  Cluff  has  been  quite 
successful;  he  has  served  as  president 
of  the  Coalville  Co-operative  Mercan- 
tile Institution  for  thirty-three  years. 
In  November,  1900,  he  left  home,  to 
accompany  Pres.  Geo.  Q.  Cannon  on  a 
special  mission  to  the  Sandwich  Is- 
lands. The  object  of  the  visit  was 
to  participate  in  the  semi-centennial 
jubilee  which  had  been  arranged  in 
commemoration  of  the  arrival  in  Hono- 
lulu of  the  first  Latter-day  Saint  mis- 
sionaries Dec.  12,  1850.  After  a  most 
pleasant  visit  Presidents  Cannon  and 
Cluff  returned  to  Utah    early  in  1901. 

EliDKEDGE,  Alma,  counselor  to 
Wm.  W.  Cluff  (president  of  the  Sum- 
mit Stake  of  Zion)  from  1877  to  1901, 
is  the  son  of  Ira  Eldredge  and  Nancy 
Back,  and  was  born  Oct.  13,  1841,  in 
Warren  township,  Marion  county,  In- 
diana. The  Book  of  Mormon  name 
Alma,  given  him  by  his  father,  sug- 
gests that  the  family  had  already  cast 
their  lot  with  the  Saints  when  the  sub- 
ject of  this  sketch  was  born.  In  1845 
Alma  accompanied  his  father  on  a  visit 
tO'  Nauvoo,  111.,  and  the  next  year  the 
family  joined  the  Saints  going  into 
exile,  arriving  in  Great  Salt  Lake  val- 
ley in  the  fall  of  1847.  His  father 
was  a  captain  of  fifty  in  crossing  the 
plaiii.'<,  and  he  located  his  family  five 
milts  southeast  of  Salt  Lake  City,  in 
1S4'J.  In  the  spring  of  1850,  j-ouns 
Alma  was  sent  to  American  Fork, Utah 
county,  to  li\-e  with  his  father's  Innth- 


er,  John  S.  Eldredge.  There  he  wa3 
baptized  when  he  was  about  eight 
years  old.  In  March,  1861,  when  in  his 
twentieth  year,  he  went  (in  company 
with  others)  into  the  Weber  river  val- 
ley and  located  at  a  place  since  known 
as  Eldredge's  Spring,  ll^  mile  south  of 
Chalk  creek.  Alma  was  elected  a  dele- 
gate to  the  first  convention  held  in  the 
newly  formed  Summit  county  for  the 
nomination  of  candidates  for  the  ensu- 
ing August  election,  and  this  was  his 
first  experience  in  politics.  In  October, 
1861,  he  went  east  to  meet  a  company 
of  emigrating  Saints,  of  which  his 
father  was  captain,  and  pilot  them  in 
over  the  new  route  down  Chalk  creek. 


In  November,  1861,  he  was  ordained  an 
Elder.  He  worked  on  his  place  on  the 
Weber,  keeping  his  own  home  until 
Jan.  24,  1863,  when  he  married  Miss 
Marinda  M.  Merrill,  the  daughter  of 
Oilman  and  Rebecca  Sevier  Merrill.  In 
1863  he  made  a  trip  to  the  Missouri 
river  as  a  teamster  in  Horton  D. 
Haighfs  train,  driving  an  ox  team. 
After  his  return  he  labored  in  making 
improvements  on  his  farm.  At  the 
election,  Aug.  7,  1865,  he  was  elected 
sheriff  of  Summit  county.  During  the 
Indian  hostilities  in  1866,  the  presidency 
of  the  Church  advised  the  people  to 
mo\e  together  on  good  locations  for 
mutual  prutection.  Alma  Eldredge, 
cnmiilied  with  this  counsel,  took  down 
liis  imiuovfments  on  the  AVeber,  and 
ni(i\t'd  t(j  the  town  ni'  Coalville,  the  site 
of  which  hf  hHli.M.l  to  survey  and  where 


342 


LATTER-DAY    SAINT 


he  hat:  i-esiil«^<l  e\t-r  sinct-.  In  1S67,  the 
liist  city  council  of  Coalville  elected 
him  city  maiphal.  The  next  year  (1868) 
ho  initiated  the  manufacture  of  brick 
in  Summit  county  and  built  the  first 
liouse  in  Coalville  of  that  material.  In 
August,  1S6S,  he,  in  connection  with 
■\Vm.  H.  Smith,  took  a  contract  of  grad- 
ing- on  the  Union  Pacific  railroad,  which 
undertaking  proved  a  financial  success. 
They  also,  by  contract,  furnished  the 
telegraph  poles  for  the  Union -Pacific 
railroad  company  from  the  Muddy  to 
Ogden,  a  distance  of  ninety  miles.  Hav- 
ing been  ordained  a  Seventy  he  filled  a 
mission  to  Great  Britain  in  1868-71. 
After  laboring  for  some  time  in  the 
Birmingham  conference  and  Wales,  he 
was  called  to  preside  over  the  Bristol 
and  Lands  End  conferences;  later  he 
presided  over  the  Sheffield  conference, 
and  also  traveled  in  Ireland  and  Scot- 
land. In  the  spring  of  1872,  in  com- 
pany with  his  brother  Edmond,  he  took 
a  contract  to  grade  a  portion  of  and 
furnish  ties  for  the  Summit  County 
Railroad.  This  road  was  constructed 
by  the  citizens  of  the  county  and  oth- 
ers, to  convey  coal  from  the  mines  of 
Spring  Hollow  to  Echo.  In  1874  he 
became  mayor  of  Coalville,  which  of- 
fice he  held  for  several  years.  When 
the  Summit  Stake  of  Zion  was  organ- 
ized in  July,  1877,  he  was  appointed  sec- 
ond counselor  to  Pres.  Wm.  W.  Cluff, 
and  was  ordained  a  High  Priest  by 
Apostle  Lorenzo  Snow.  Two  years 
later  he  was  promoted  to  the  position 
of  first  counselor,  which  position  he 
held  till  1901.  In  1878  he  was  elected 
prosecuting  attorney  of  Summit  coun- 
ty and  appointed  a  member  of  the  Ter- 
ritorial Board  of  Trade.  In  1879  he 
was  chosen  superintendent  of  the  Coal- 
ville Co-operative  Institution.  In  the 
spring  of  1880,  top-ether  with  Wm.  W. 
Cluff  and  others,  he  contracted  to 
grade  the  Echo  and  Park  City  Railroad, 
a  distance  of  27  miles,  and  in  addition 
a  branch  road  of  five  miles.  The  job 
was  completed  in  December  the  same 
year.  The  amount  received  on  the 
contract  was  $90,000.  and  it  furnished 
much  profitable  labor  to  the  citizens  of 
Summit,  Utah  and  Salt  Lake  counties. 
In  1881,  Bro.  Eldredge  went  east  on 
business,  and  in  1882  he  served  as  a 
member  of  the  constitutional  conven- 
tion. In  1883,  he  was  elected  probate 
judfre  of  Summit  county;  in  1886  he  was 
'hosf-n  a  member  of  the  first  Territorial 


Central  Committee  of  the  People's  Par- 
ty, and  in  1887  he  served  as  a  member 
of  another  constitutional  convention; 
again,  in  189'!,  he  assisted  in  framing 
the  constitution  of  the  State  of  Utah, 
as  a  member  of  a. similar  convention. 
In  1890  he  made  a  pleasure  trip  to  the 
Pacific  coast.  At  the  November  elec- 
tion, 189-3,  he  was  elected  a  member  of 
the  council  branch  of  the  Territorial 
lee-islature  on  the  Republican  ticket, 
and  did  efficient  service  as  a  law  maker. 
In  September,  1898,  he  was  nominated 
by  the  Renublican  party  for  a  member 
of  Congress.  He  made  an  extensive 
campaign  tour  through  the  State  of 
Utah,  visiting  the  principal  places  from 
Richmond  in  the  north  to  Kanab  and 
St.  George  in  the  south,  but  he  was 
defeated  by  the  Democratic  nominee, 
Brigham  H.  Roberts.  Since  1895  Pres. 
Eldredge  has  carried  on  the  business  of 
merchandising,  besides  working  on  his 
farm  and  attendinfr  to  his  duties  as  a 
member  of  the  Stake  presidency.  "The 
beginning  of  the  20th  century,"  writes 
Bro.  Eldredge,  "finds  me  surrounded 
bv  o]]  my  children — two  daughters  and 
one  son  married  and  living  in  Coalville, 
ind  three  sons  and  myself  and  wife  at 
home  in  good  health." 

ROBISON,  Willi.s  Eugene,  presi- 
f'ent  of  the  Wayne  Stake  of  Zion,  Is 
the  son  of  Benjamin  Hancock  Robison 
and  Lillis  A.  Andree,  and  was  born 
March  1,  1854,  in  the  town  of  Crete, 
Hill  county,  Illinois.  When  but  a  mere 
babe  he  came  to  Utah  with  his  parents 
and  was  reared  to  manhood  in  Fill- 
more, Millard  county.  In  his  child- 
hood he  received  the  limited  education 
common  to  boys  on  the  frontiers,  at- 
tending school  during  the  winter,  and 
the  balance  of  the  year  engaged  in 
farming,  freigh,ting  and  stock-raising. 
When  seventeen  years  of  age,  he  was 
engaged  as  a  clerk  in  the  co-operative 
store,  where  he  worked  about  three 
years.  At  the  age  of  twenty  years  he 
married  Miss  Sarah  A.  Ellett,  and  the 
young  couple  moved  to  Scipio,  Millard 
county.  Here  Bro.  Robison  engaged  in 
farming  until  the  year  1882,  when  he 
was  called  on  a  mission  to  the  Southern 
States,  where  he  labored  as  a  traveling 
Elder  for  two  years.  It  then  fell  to 
his  lot  to  bring  home  to  Utah  the  man*- 
gled  bodies  of  two  of  his  co-laborers, 
namely  Elders  John  H.  Gibbs  and  Wil- 
liam S.   Berry,  who  were  martyred  for 


BIOGRAPHICAL    ENCYCLOPEDIA. 


343 


tne  iriicn's  sake  in  Tennessee.  After 
his  return  from  this  mission,  he  was 
set  apart  as  one  of  the  presidents  in 
a  quorum  of  Seventy,  and  also  labored 
as  a  home  missionary.  In  1888,  he 
moved  to  Piute  county,  where  he  could 
get  more  land,  and  settled  in  the  town 
of  Fremont.  He  remained  there  one 
year,  after  which  he  was  called  to  Loa 


HANSKN,  Hans  M.,  first  counselor 
to  Wilis  E.  Robison  (president  of  the 
Wayne  Stake  of  Zion),  is  the  son  of 
Martin  Hansen  and  Emma  Caroline 
Olsen  and  was  born  Aug.  8,  1856,  in 
Drammen,  Norway.  He  emigrated 
with  his  parents  to  Utah  in  1859,  and 
resided  on  his  father's  farm  in  South 
Cottonwood,  Salt  Lake  county,  until 
1878.  In  the  fall  of  1876  he  joined  a 
U.  S.  surveying  party,  under  Bailey,  & 
Perron,  surveyors,  and  went  to  Rabbit 
valley;  he  assisted  in  surveying  that 
valley,  which  took  about  two  months. 
The  party  continued  on  southward, 
while  Bro.  Hansen  remained  in  the 
valley  about  three  weeks.  He  then 
returned  home  to  Cottonwood.  He  la- 
bored at  the  smelter  at  West  Jordan 
during  that  winter  and  summer,  and 
also  a  part  of  the  winter  of  1877.  In 
the  spring  of  1878  he  again  went  to 
Rabbit  valley.  Dec.  2,  1879  he  married 
Helen  A.  Maxfield,  a  daughter  of  Elijah 
H.  Maxfield  and  Helen  A.  Tanner;  she 
has  borne  him  twelve  children,  of 
whom  seven  are  living,  four  boys  and 
three  gins;  two  boys  and  three  girls 
are  dead.  At  the  organization  of  the 
Fremont     Ward,     June   24,    1887,    Elder 


and  ordained  a  Bishop  to  preside  over 
the  Ward.  In  1889  he  was  elected  to 
the  legislature,  representing  Beaver  and 
Piute  counties  in  the  house  of  repre- 
sentatives. Piute  county  being  very 
large,  it  was  deemed  advisable  in  1892  to 
divide  it,  and  create  a  new  county  out 
of  the  eastern  part,  and  the  legislature 
accorded  the  honor  of  naming  the  new 
county  and  also  its  first  set  of  oflEicers 
to  Bro.  Robison.  He  called  the  newly 
created  county  Wayne,  after  one  of  his 
sons,  who  was  unfortunately  soon  af- 
terwards killed  by  a  horse  falling  upon 
him.  When  the  Wayne  Stake  of  Zion 
was  organized  in  1893  Elder  Robison 
was  chosen  to  preside  over  it.  This 
position  he  still  occupies.  He  has  filled 
many  positions  of  trust  among  the  peo- 
ple; thus  three  times  in  succession  he 
was  elected  superintendent  of  schools 
in  the  county,  and  was  also  a  member 
of  the  Constitutional  convention  which 
framed  the  constitution  of  the  State  of 
Utah.  His  main  avocation  is  farming 
and  stock  raising,  and  he  prides  him- 
self in  the  fact  that  he  never  was 
sued  for  a  debt  and  has  never  collect- 
ed one  by  l9.w. 


Hansen  was  chosen  as  counselor  to 
Bishop  James  A.  Taylor;  he  labored  in 
that  capacity  until  July  20,  1889,  when 
he  left  his  home  and  family  to  fill  a 
mision  to  Norway,  in  response  to  a  call 
received  from  the.  First  Presidency  of 
the  Church.  He  labored  in  the  Dram- 
men branch  of  the  Christiania  confer- 


344 


LATTER-DAT    SAINT 


ence;  and  returned  home  May  7,  1891. 
Owing  to  the  sickness  and  death  of  two 
children,  he  was  released  before  the 
ordinary  time  was  up.  June  29,  1891,  he 
was  ordained  a  Bishop  and  appointed 
to  preside  over  the  Fremont  Ward, 
which  position  he  held  till  May  27,  1893, 
at  which  time  the  Wayne  Stake  of  Zion 
was  organized,  and  he  was  called  to  act 
as  first  counselor  to  Pres.  Willis  E. 
Robison.  Nov.  6,  1894,  he  was  elected 
county  clerk  and  recorder  of  Wayne 
county,  and  served  in  that  office  three 
terms  (six  years).  Dec.  12,  1894,  he 
moved  to  Loa,  having  been  counseled 
so  to  do,  by  Apostle  Francis  M.  Lyman, 
where  he  still  resides. 

BASTIAX,  Gearsen  S  ,  second 
counselor  to  Willis  E.  Robison  (presi- 
dent of  the  Wayne  Stake  of  Zion),  is 
the  son  of  Jacob  Bastian  and  Johanne 
Marie  Sander,  and  was  born  July  1, 
1860,  at  Moroni,   Sanpete  county,  Utah. 


He  was  baptized  Nov.  5,  1868,  (at  the 
age  of  eight  years)  by  James  Wilkanes, 
at  Washington,  Utah.  In  1861  his  father 
was  called  to  help  settle  the  Dixie  coun- 
try, and  being  a  very  industrious,  hard 
working  man,  he  overtaxed  his  physical 
strength,  and  by  exposure,  while  build- 
ing dams  in  the  Rio  Virgen  river,  he 
contracted  a  severe  cold,  which 
brought  on  a  long  and  lingering  sick- 
ness and  made  him  a  cripple  for  life. 
At  this  time  he  had  a  very  large  fami- 
ly, and  it  was  necessary  to  make  two 
trips  every  winter  to  Sanpete  valley 
after  breadstuff.       Not     being   iihysic- 


ally  able  to  make  these  long  and  haz- 
ardous journeys  alone,  it  fell  to  the  lot 
of    the    subject   of    this    sketch    in    his 
young  and  tender  years,  together  with 
his  elder  brother  Jacob  S.,   to  accom- 
pany  him   on   these   journeys,    each   of 
them  driving  a  team.      In  the  summer 
time  he  generally  worked  on  the  farm, 
and  thus  helped     to     provide     for  the 
wants  of  the  family.       Being  endowed 
with  much  bodily  strength  and  vigor, 
and   of  an  enterprising  disposition,   he 
soon  became  recognized  as  an  energetic 
worker    in    public    affairs,    among    the 
youth   of   the   town   where   he   resided. 
As   he   approached  manhood,   he   spent 
much  of  his  time  in  the  winter,  work- 
ing in   the  mining  camps,   taking  con- 
tracts and  furnishing  supplies.      Up  to 
the   age    of    twenty   years   he   had   at- 
tended school  but  a  very  few  months, 
as  his   whole  time  and  energies     were 
directed  in  helping  to  provide  the  com- 
forts   of    life    for    his    father's    family. 
However,  in  the  years  1881  and  1882,  he 
attended  the  B.  Y.  Academy  at  Provo, 
On  entering  the  school  he  sought     an 
interview   with     Dr.     Karl   G.   Maeser, 
made  known  to  him  his  condition  and 
his  ardent  desire  to  get  an  education; 
and  that  great  teacher  took  him  under 
his   especial   care   and   gave   him   much 
personal  attention  and  counsel;  and  to- 
day Elder  Bastian  declares  that  to  the 
mercy  of   God   and   the  faithful  labors 
of  Brother  Karl  G.  Maeser,  and  the  un- 
tiring interest  he  manifested  in  his  be- 
half,  he  owes  much   of  the  success  he 
has  thus  far  attained  in   life.       INIarch 
28,  1883,   at  Washington,  Utah,  he  was 
ordained   an   Elder     by   Elder   Marcus 
Funk.      In  1884  he  was  elected  a  mem- 
ber of  the  city  council  of  Washington, 
and   served   in     that     position   for   two 
years.      April  3,  1885,  he  married  Emily 
S.  Paxman;  in  the  St.   George  Temple. 
This  has  proved  a  happy  union,  for  his 
wife  has  ever  been  to  him  a  tower  of 
strength  in  the  performance  of  his  va- 
ried labors  in     the     Church.      June     4, 
1885,  he  was  ordained  a  Seventy  by  Ja- 
cob   Gates,    at   Washington,    where    he 
continued  to  reside  until  1887,  when,  in 
the   summer,   he  made  a  visit   to   Loa, 
now   the   county   seat   of  Wayne,     and 
while     there      he     purchased     what  is 
known  as  the  Horse  valley  ranch.      On 
his  i^turn  home,  he  commenced  to  sell 
out  his  interests  at  Washington  and  to 
make  preparations  to  move  to  his  ranch 
at  Loa.     In  the  fall  nf  the  year  he  was 


BIOGRAPHICAX.   ENCYGL.OPEDIA. 


345 


called  on  a  mission  to  Scandinavia,  and 
requested  to  leave  for  his  new  field  of 
labor  in  the   spring-.       As  the  time  ap- 
proached for  his  departure,  he  experi- 
enced  much   anxiety  of  mind.       As  he 
had  sold  out  his  property  in  Washing- 
ton it  became  necessary  for  his  family 
to  move  to  Loa,  and  the  thought  of  his 
wife  and  two  small  children,  having  to 
travel  two  hundred  miles  by  team  and 
locate   in  a  new  country,   far  removed 
from   a  town,   and   bereft   of  the  asso- 
ciation, counsel  and  help  of  a  husband 
and  father,  was  almost   more  than   he 
could  bear.      But  trusting  in  the  Lord, 
he  left  his  home  at  Washington  May  7, 
1S88,  and  started  for  his  field  of  labor. 
He   arrived   at   Copenhagen,    Denmark, 
June  6,  1888;   and  received  an  appoint- 
ment to  labor  in  the  Aarhus  conference, 
His    misionary    labors    were    successful 
and  replete  with  many  marvelous  mani- 
festations   and   gifts.       He     had   much 
difficulty  in  acquiring  the  language,  and 
after  a  few  weeks  he  became  discour- 
aged, and  thought  it  impossible  for  him 
to  learn  the  language.       But  the  Lord 
gave    him    a    marvelous    manifestation 
of   His    power.       His    missionary    com- 
panion was  released     to  return   home, 
and   Elder  Bastian  was  left  in  charge 
of  the  Randers  branch.     Only  once  had 
he    attempted  to  speak  before  the  pub- 
lic and  he  was  not  able  to  say  but  a 
very  few  words.   Sunday  came,  and  at 
the  appointed     time     for     worship   the 
meeting  hall  was  well  filled.      After  the 
opening   exercises    he    called    upon    one 
of  the  native  Elders   to   speak,   but   he 
had  only  occupied  a  few  minutes. when 
a  burning  desire  to  speak  filled  the  soul 
of  Elder  Bastian.       He  arose,   and  un- 
der the  influence  and  power  of  God  he 
preached  the  gospel   with  much  plain- 
ness   in    the    Danish    language    for    an 
hour  and     twenty       minutes.       At   the 
close  of  the  meeting  the  native  breth- 
ren and  sisters  all  flocked  around  him 
to  congratulate  him;   and  they  claimed 
that  he  had  spoken  the  language  with 
as  much  plainness  as  they  could  have 
spoken;   and  they  rejoiced  greatly.  But 
as  yet  he  could  not  converse  with  them; 
nevertheless  the  Lord  had  given  to  him 
a  testimony  that  he  should  henceforth 
have  freedom  and   power  in  preaching 
the   gospel.       Jan.   4,   1890,   in   company 
with  his  traveling  companion, he  visited 
a  sister  who  expected    shortly    to  emi- 
grate to  Zion,  for  the  purpose  of  hold- 
ing a  meeting  at  her  dwelling^.      But  a 


strange  feeling  took  possession  of  him 
and   he  was   constrained   to   return     to 
Randers.      He  started  at  once,  and  on 
his   arrival  there  he  received  a      tele- 
gram summoning  him  to  attend  on  El- 
der Andrew  K.  Anderson, who  was  pros- 
trated on  a  bed  of  sickness  in  the  city 
of  Aalborg.      He  at  once  proceeded  to 
that  place  and  found  his  brother  in  a 
very  critical  state.      The  next  day,Jan. 
5th,    1890,    he    experienced    one    of      the 
most  trying  incidents  of  his  life.       To 
all   appearances   Elder  Anderson     was 
dying;  all  the  persons  in  the  room,  con- 
sisting of  Elder  Anderson's  wife,  three 
Elders  from  Zion  and  two  native  Elders, 
were     asleep;     Elder     Bastian     roused 
them   and   requested    that   they    should 
all  kneel  with  him  around  the  bed  side 
of  the  afflicted  Elder.      Evil  spirits  en- 
tered the  room  and  took  possession  of 
one   of   its   inmates,     who     fell   to   the 
ground  with  a  terrible   force — like  one 
that  was  dead.       They  at  once  admin- 
istered the  ordinances  of  the  gospel  and 
rebuked  the  powers  of  darkness  in    the 
name  of  the  Lord.      But  no  sooner  had 
they    done    this    than    another  of   their 
number  was  afflicted  in  the  same  man- 
ner.      For   two   hours   they   were   thus 
tormented;    the   evil    influence     leaving 
the  person  to  whom  they  administered 
and   entering  into  and   tormenting  an- 
other. Finally  Elder  Bastian  addressed 
the  brethren  in  the  power  of  God.  and 
rebuked  the  disunion  that  existed,  and 
declared  in  the  name  of  the  Lord  that 
if  they  should  administer  to  the  person 
then  under  the  evil  influences  once  more, 
and   the  parties  present  who  were   the 
cause   of  the   disunion   did     not     unite 
their  faith   in   casting  out  the  evil   in- 
fluences or  leave  the  room,  they  would 
become    subject    to    the    power    of    the 
devil.      This  caused  all  the  brethren  to 
humble  themselves  before  the  Lord,and 
perfect   unity   prevailed.       They   again 
rebuked    the    power    of   Satan    and    the 
evil  spirits  left  the  room  and  returned 
no    more;    all    present    rejoiced    in    the 
power   of  God.       The   next  day  one  of 
the  brethren  present  acknowledged  with 
tears  in  his  eyes  that  he  was  the  cause 
of  the  experience  the  previous  day,  and 
had    received    a    testimony    from    God 
that  would   remain   with   him   forever. 
Shortly   afterwards   Elder   Andrew     K. 
Anderson    passed    peacefully     away    to 
his  heavenly  rest;  and  a  few  days  later 
his   body    was   interred   by   the   side   of 
his   parents   in   a  small   country     town 


346 


LATTER-DAY  SAINT 


near    Randers.   Denmark.       Elder  Bas- 
tian  was  released  to  return  home  and 
assigned    to   accompany   Sister   Ander- 
son  and   have   in   charge   the   body     of 
her  husband,  but  satisfactory  arrange- 
ments could  not  be  made.      He  arrived 
at  his  home  in  Loa.  Utah.  May  29,  1890. 
For  some  time  after  his  return  home, 
he  labored  as  a  home  missionary  in  the 
Sevier    Stake   of   Zion.       Sept.    23,    1892, 
he   was    chosen   as   first    counselor     to 
Willis   E.   Robison.    Bishop   of   the   Loa 
Ward,  and  ordained  a  High  Priest  by 
Pres.    Wm.    H.    Seegmiller.        He    con- 
tinued in  this  calling  until  the  organi- 
zation  of   the   "Wayne     Stake    of   Zion, 
which  occurred  May  27.  1893,   when  he 
was  chosen   and  set   apart  by  Apostle 
Francis  M.  Lyman  as  second  counselor 
to  Willis  E.   Robison,   president  of  the 
Wayne    Stake   of   Zion,    which   position 
he    still    holds.       It    can    be    truthfully 
said  of  Elder  Bastian,  that  his  greatest 
ambition-  in  life  is  to  honor  his  calling 
in  the  Priesthood  and  be  a  blessing  to 
mankind.      By  reason  of  his  experience, 
he  is  a  good  and  wise  counselor,  and  a 
friend  to  the  youth  of  Zion:  industrious, 
energetic   and   zealous   in    all   labors. — 
J.  E. 

ECKERSIiEY,  Joseph,    Stake  clerk 
and    recorder   of   the   Wayne    Stake    of 
Zion,  is  the!  son  of  Abraham  Eckersley 
and   Ellen   Cleworth,   and  was  born   at 
Eccles.  near  Manchester,  England,  July 
19,   1866.       When     three   years    old,    his 
parents   moved   to   an   adjoining     town 
named  Patricroft.      Here,  in  the  sum- 
mer of  1870,  when  but  four  years  old, 
he  fell  a  victim  to  that  terrible  mala- 
dy, smallpox.      Afflicted  by  this  loath- 
some  disease   in   its  very  worst     stage 
and   form,   he   became  an   intense   suf- 
ferer.     For  several  weeks  he  was  total- 
ly blind,   and     when,     in     about   eight 
months  from  the  time  he  first  contract- 
ed   the    disease,    he   was   permitted     to 
venture   outdoors,   his   frame   was     re- 
duced to  a  mere  skeleton,  and  the  rav- 
isher  had  left  its  lasting  imprints  upon 
the   body  of   its     victim.       For     many 
years   afterwards   he   suffered   from    a 
complication   of     physical    weaknesses, 
which  rendered  life  a  burden,  and  often 
he  was  tempted  to  wish  for  a  fulfilment 
of  the  physician's  prophecy  that  "death 
would  relieve  him  of  suffering  early  in 
life."      He     was  but  thirteen  years  ola 
when,  accompanied  by  his  mother,  two 
brothers    and   two   sisters,   he  followed 


the  earthly  remains  of  his  father  to 
the  churchyard.  This  event  was  In- 
deed a  great  bereavement  to  the  fami- 
ly, and  was  followed  by  more  hardships 
to  our  youthful  subject  and  the  family 
of  which  he  was  a  member  than  his 
most  gloomy  thoughts  had  conceived. 
His  father,  when  living,  as  well  as  be- 
insr  a  kind  and  affectionate  parent, 
was  an  industrious  blacksmith  and  pro- 
vided admirablv  for  the  wants  of  his 
family.  Now  the  support  of  the  house- 
hold was  gone,  and  prospects  for  the 
future  of  the  family  left  behind    were 


indeed  gloomy.  The  Lord  had  not  yet 
revealed  the  fullness  of  the  everlasting 
gospel  to  Joseph;  nevertheless  he  had 
sufficient  faith  in  the  Giver  of  All  Good 
to  believe  that  He  would  be  a  "hus- 
band to  the  widow,  and  a  father  to  the 
fatherless,"  and  provide  a  way  for  them 
to  exist.  He  had  already  attained  that 
degree  of  scholarship  required  by  the 
law  of  his  country  in  order  for  a  per- 
son of  his  tender  years  to  absent  him- 
self from  school  and  engage  all  his 
time  at  manual  labor.  As  he  was  one 
of  the  older  members  of  the  family,  he 
immediately  set  out  in  search  of  em- 
ployment: his  efforts  were  rewarded, 
and  he  experienced  no  small  degree  of 
happiness,  when,  at  the  expiration  of 
the  first  week's  work,  he  wended  his 
way  homeward  from  the  factory  and 
ran  to  his  mother  with  his  first  week's 
earnings.  He  continued  working  at 
the  factory,  ten  hours  a  day,  for  two 
years,  during  which  time  he  earned 
good  wages  and  became  a  substantial 


BIOGRAPHICAL    ENCYCLOPEDIA. 


347 


help  in  providing  for  the  wants  of  the 
family.       Most     of     his  evenings,    dur- 
ing this  period,  and  in  later  years,  were 
spent  ai  night  schools,  where  he  sought 
to  improve  his  education  and  more  ful- 
ly prepare  himself  for  the  battle  of  life. 
At  the   age   of  sixteen     he  commenced 
work  in   the  coal   mines,   but  in   a  few 
months,    being    unable    to    continue    on 
account  of  ill  health,  abandoned  it,  and 
took  up  his  abode  in  the  city  of  Man- 
chester,  where  he  engaged  to  work  as 
an  apprentice  in  a  gas  engine  factory; 
at  which  work  he  continued  until  called 
to  preach  the  gospel.      Early  in  life  he 
formed    a   habit   of  attending     Sunday 
School  and  took  unusual  pleasure  for  a 
boy  of  his  years  in  reading  the  Bible; 
and   seldom   on   the   Sabbath     day   did 
he  absent  himself  from  attendance  at 
some   church.       He.    however,    was  un- 
settled in  his  religious  convictions  and 
confused   in  his  efforts     to  understand 
the  dogmas  of  men.      In  the  Methodist 
church    he   had     many     warm   friends, 
some  of  whom  desired  him  to  study  for 
the  ministry;  finally  he  became  a  mem- 
ber and  an  active  worker  in  the  Sun- 
day school      As  he  grew  older  he  was 
frequently   brought     in     contact     with 
ministers     and     leading     men     of     the 
church:   and  being  of  an  investigating 
turn   of  mind  and  unable   to   reconcile 
many    of   the   teachings   of   the   church 
with    his   understanding   of    the    Scrip- 
tures, he  would  seek  information  at  the 
hands    of    his    spiritual    advisers;    they 
gave  him   no   satisfaction,    but   warned 
him  not   to  pry  into  the  mysteries     of 
God,  for  fear  it  should  lead  him  to  un- 
belief.      About   this   time,    through  the 
influence  of  some  friends  who  were  In- 
vestigating the  doctrines  of  the  "Mor- 
mon" Church,  his  attention  was  called 
to  the   necessity     of     investigating  the 
claim  of  a  new  revelation  from  God.  At 
first  his  mind  was  deeply  prejudiced  by 
reason  of  the  scurrilous  stories  he  had 
read  concerning  this  unpopular  Church 
and    people,    which    he    supposed    were 
true;     but    after    spending    two    weeks 
in    reading     the     publications     of     the 
Church,   the   Spirit   of  God   illuminated 
his  soul   and   gave   him   correct  under- 
-standing.       He    was    convinced    of    the 
restoration   of  the   gospel,   and     longed 
for    baptism      before      he      heard    any 
preaching  by  the  Elders.      Feb.  15,  1886, 
in    his    nineteenth    year,     he   was   bap- 
tized  at    Manchester,    England,   by   El- 
der Wm.  C.  B.  Orrock,  and  on  the  Sth 


day  of  the  same  month  was  confirmed  a 
member  of  the  Church  by  Elder  Thomas 
Slight,  and  received  the  witness  of  the 
Spirit   and    a   marvelous    manifestation 
from  heaven  that  his  sacrifice  had  been 
accepted  of  the  Lord.      We  cannot  here 
recount  the  apparent  sacrifices  he  was 
called   to  make,   the  suffering  and  per- 
secution through  which  he  passed,  the 
ridicule  and  abuse  heaped  upon  him  by 
his  once  most  devoted  friends,  and  his 
isolation  from  -home  and  kindred;    but 
the  joy  experienced  in  receiving  an  as- 
surance   that    his    sins     were    remitted 
and  that  he  was  a  special  recipient  of 
God's    favors    more    than    compensated 
him  for  all  the  vicissitudes  he  endured. 
and  the  many  and  frequent  manifesta- 
tions of  the  gifts  of  the  gospel  prom- 
ised to  believers  witnessed  and  enjoyed 
by  him  gave  additional  strength  and  a 
more  longing  desire  to  bear  testimony 
of  God's  goodness  and  preach  the  gos- 
pel to  all  with  whom  he  came  in  con- 
tact.     Especially  did  he  labor  and  plead 
with  his  kindred,  and  the  many  friends 
to   whom    he   had    become   endeared    in 
the  various  churches.      But  all  rejected 
his   testimony;    some  expressing     sym- 
pathy for  him  being  overcome  as  they 
supposed  by  a  delusion,  and    others  de- 
nouncing him  as  an  Impostor,  treating 
him    with    bitter    scorn    and    contempt. 
May  2.  1886,  he  was  ordained    a    Priest 
by  Elder  John  Holt,  and  whenever  an 
opportunity  presented  itself     he  would 
assist   the    traveling   Elders    who   were 
sent  from  Zion  in  conducting  open  air 
meetings.       He  was  called   to   superin- 
tend   the    Manchester     branch    Sunday 
school,    and    to    act     as    chorister   and 
a  Teacher  in   the  branch,  which  duties 
occupied    almost     every     night    in    the 
week    for    nearly    two    years.        Oct.    5, 
1887,  he  was  ordained  an  Elder  by  El- 
der Wm.     G.     Phillips     and   set   apart 
second  counselor  to  George  Clark,  pres- 
ident   of   the    Manchester    branch,    and 
called  to  labor  as  a  home  missionary  in 
the  Manchester  conference,   which   du- 
ties   he   joyfully   performed    until    Dec. 
12,    1887,    when    he    was   called   and    set 
apart    by   Apostle    George    Teasdale    to 
labor  as  a  traveling  Elder  in  the  Brit- 
ish mission.       For  eighteen  months  he 
labored  successfully  in   the  Leeds  con- 
ference,   often,    when   the   weather  was 
propitious    holding    open    air    meetings 
every  night   in   the     week,   distributing 
tracts  and  visiting  the   Saints  and   in- 
vestigators  during   the     daytime,     and 


348 


LATTER-DAT    SAINT 


prearhinp  to  the  Saints  on  Sundays.  He 
was  next  called  to  the  Liverpool  con- 
ference, where  for  eleven  months  he 
labored  as  a  tra\eling:  Elder  and  su- 
perintendent of  the  Hindley  Sunday 
s(ho<jl.  He  was  released  to  gather  to 
Zion  Mav  24,  1890,  having-  traveled 
thousands  of  miles  preaching  the  gos- 
pel to  tens  of  thousands  of  his  country- 
men. Shortly  after  his  arrival  in  this 
country  he  became  a  member  of  the 
Springxille  Ward, and  fo«  a  time  worked 
at  the  factory  and  as  a  section  hand  on 
the  railroad  and  such  other  labor  as 
he  could  obtain  to  secure  a  livelihood. 
He  was  called  to  labor  as  a  Ward 
Teacher  and  was  active  in  Sunday 
school  and  mutual  improvement  work. 
Dec.  10.  1890  he  was  joined  in  matri- 
mony to  Sarah  Ellen  Wilkinson,  in  the 
Manti  Temple.  Elder  Daniel  H.  Wells 
officiating.  The  Lord  has  since  blessed 
them  with  five  children,  four  of  whom 
are  now  living.  In  the  fall  of  1891  he 
moved  to  Loa  (then  Piute  county),  at 
which  place  he  had  engaged  to  teach 
school,  and  was  appointed  a  Ward 
Teacher.  The  next  spring  he  engaged 
to  teach  school  at  Fremont,  and  dur- 
ing his  sojourn  there  was  called  to 
labor  as  Ward  Teacher, assistant  super- 
intendent of  Sunday  schools,  secretary 
of  quorum  meetings,  counselor  of  the  Y. 
M.  M.  I.  A.  and  instructor  of  religion 
classes.  At  the  organization  of  the 
Wayne  Stake  of  Zion,  May  27.  1893.  he 
was  called  to  the  office  of  Stake  clerk 
and  recorder.  Bishop's  clerk  and  clerk 
of  the  High  Council,  and  requested  to 
make  his  residence  at  Loa,  the  head- 
quarters of  the  Stake.  At  the  same  time 
he  was  set  apart  as  second  assistant 
Stake  superintendent  of  Sunday 
schools;  and  on  Aug.  29,  1893,  was  set 
apart  as  first  assistant  to  Jos.  J.  An- 
derson, Stake  superintendent  of  Sunday 
schools.  On  Nov.  26,  1893,  he  was 
oidained  a  Seventy  and  set  apart  as 
one  of  the  presidents  of  the  82nd  quo- 
lum  of  Seventy,  by  Elder  Brigham  H. 
Roberts.  Feb.  3,  1894,  he  was  appoint- 
ed religion  class  instructor  in  the  Ly- 
man Ward,  which  office  he  filled  for 
three  years.  Aug.  26,  1894,  he  wa.^ 
called  and  set  apart  to  labor  as  Stak«! 
superintendent  of  Sunday  schools,which 
position  he  still  retains.  Industiy. per- 
severance, humility,  reverence  for  the 
I'liesthood.and  the  faithful  an<l  prompt 
discharge  of  duty,  in  the  opinion  of  the 
subjcii  of  our  ski't'h,  are  essential  ele- 


ments to  a  life  of  usefulness  and  suc- 
cess in  the  great  Latter-day  work,  and 
to  his  steadfast  belief  in  and  adherence 
to  the  principles  of  the  gospel  he  owes 
whatevei'  of  success  he  may  in  this  life 
thus  far  have  attained. — J.  E. 

OSMOND,  George,  president  of  the 
Star  Valley  Stake  of  Zion,  is  the  eldest 
son  of  George  Osmond  and  Nancy  Can- 
ham,  and  was  born  May  23,  1836,  in 
London,  England.  At  a  very  early  age 
he  was  greatly  interested  in  the  sub- 
ject of  religion,  and  was  very  anxious 
to  learn  which  of  the  many  sects  of 
professing  Christians  was  in  posses- 
sion of  the  true  gospel.  In  comparing 
modern  Christianity  with  that  which 
was  taucht  by  Jesus  and  His  Apostles, 
there  were  two  differences  which  gave 
him  great  concern  and  thought,  name- 
ly the  absence  in  the  modern  church  of 
immediate  and  direct  revelation  and  of 
the  divine  power  and  authority  of  the 
Priesthood.  In  February,  18.50.  he  was 
apprenticed  to  the  ship-building  trade 
in  the  government  dock  yard  at  Wool- 
wich, near  London.  In  the  latter  part 
of  that  year  some  of  his  fellow  appren- 
tices were  converted  to  the  '"Mormon" 
faith,  which  was  then  making  a  great 
stir  in  that  neighborhood.  He  was  in- 
duced to  attend  their  meetings  and  wa^ 
surprised  at  finding  satisfactory  an- 
swers to  his  queries  as  to  divine  reve- 
lation and  authority.  He  gladly  em- 
braced the  faith  of  the  Latter-day 
Saints  and  was  baptized  Nov.  27,  1850, 
by  Elder  Thomas  Bottrell.  Early  the 
next  spring  he  was  ordained  a  Priest 
and  called  to  assist  in  buildiiig  up  a 
branch  of  the  Church  in  Elsnam,  a  vil- 
age  in  Kent,  about  four  miles  from 
Woolwich.  He  was  soon  after  ordained 
an  Elder  and  labored  actively  in  dis- 
tributing tracts  and  preaching  the  gos- 
jiel  in  the  surrounding  villages,  during 
such  time  as  he  could  spare  from  his 
daily  labor.  To  his  surprise  he  failed 
to  convert  any  of  his  relatives  to  the 
tiuth  of  the  gospel;  he  still  remains 
the  only  representative  of  his  parents' 
families  in  the  Church.  In  the  fall  of 
1S;.')4  he  emigrated  to  New  Orleans  in 
the  ship  "Clara  Wheeler,"  and  worked 
his  way  up  to  St.  Louis,  Mo.,  where  he 
entei-ed  the  employ  of  Captain  James 
Eads,  the  famous  engineer.  In  the 
summer  of  1805  he  married  Georgina 
Huckvale  and  ciossed  the  plains  to 
Salt  Lake  City,  driving  an  ox-l.-am  for 


BIOGRAPHICAX.   ENCYCLOPEDIA. 


349 


Hooper  and  Williams,  merchants,  and 
arrived  in  Salt  Lake  City  after  a  most 
tedious  and  arduous  journey  of  four 
months  from  the  Missouri  river.  He 
removed  successively  to  Bountiful,  Da- 
vis county,  Willard,  Box  Elder  county, 
and  finally  to  Bear  Lake  valley,  Idaho, 
in  1864.  Here  he  remained  until  1892, 
acting  as  Bishop  of  Bloomington  for 
more  than  seven  years,  and  in  1877,  at 
the  organization  of  Bear  Lake  Stake, 
he  was  appointed  second  counselor  to 
President  "Wm.  Budge.  In  1884  he  was 
called  on  a  mission  to  England  and  la- 
bored for  two  years  in  Liverpool  as 
assistant  editor  of  the  "Millennial 
Star."  In  1890  he  was  again  called  on 
a  mission  to  Great  Britain,  during 
which  he  was  successively  president  of 
the  Scottish  conference  and  the  London 
conference.  In  1892,  immediately  after 
his  return  home,  he  was  called  to  Star 
valley.  Wyoming,  to  preside  in  that 
Stake  which  was  organized  Aug.  14, 
1892.  In  civil  life  he  has  served  for 
many  years  as  a  justice  of  the  peace, 
probate  judge,  and  finally  as  State 
senator  in  the  Wyoming  legislature 
during  the  sessions  of  1898-99  and  1900- 
1901. 

BURTON,  William  AVatton,  first 
counselor  to  George  Osmond,  president 
of  the  Star  Valley  Stake  of  Zion,  was 
born  March  23,  1833,  in  Bradford,  York- 
shire. England.  He  was  baptized  by 
Elder  Eliiah  F.  Sheets  June  9,  1845. 
About  the  year  1849  he  was  ordained  a 
Teacher,  and  with  an  elder  brother 
visited  the  families  of  the  Saints  in  the 
Bradford  branch.  Later  he  was  or- 
dained a  Priest:  and  on  Sabbath  days 
with  other  brethren  he  visited  the 
towns  and  villages  within  ten  miles  of 
Bradford,  frequently  walking  twenty 
miles  on  the  Sabbath  day  and  holding 
from  one  to  two  meetings.  He  writes: 
"Aftei-  being  ordained  a  Priest,  and  be- 
fore taking  part  in  the  missionary  la- 
bors on  Sabbath  days,  a  request  came 
from  the  president  of  the  "Wilsden 
branch  to  the  Priesthood  meeting  held 
at  Bradford,  to  send  them  some  experi- 
enced Elders  next  Sabbath,  as  it  was 
expected  some  Socialists  were  going  to 
give  them  opposition.  To  my  aston- 
ishment. I  and  two  other  brethren,  with 
little  more  experience  than  myself, 
were  selected  to  fill  the  appointment, 
and  from  that  time  until  the  appoint- 
ment was  filled     I  could  eat  and  sleep 


but  very  little.  I  prayed  very  earnest- 
ly for  the  Lord  to  help  us.  At  the  time 
appointed  I  was  there,  but  the  other 
two  failed  to  come.  This  made  me 
feel  very  bad,  but  I  concluded  to  go  on 
without  them  and  do  the  best  I  could, 
and  trust  in  the  Lord  to  help  me.  On 
account  of  the  expected  opposition  a 
large  congregation  assembled  and  the 
house  where  the  meeting  was  appointed 
not  being  large  enough  to  hold  the  peo- 
ple, an  open  air  meeting  was  held. 
After  the  openins'  services  I  was  called 
upon  to  speak,  and  immediately  my 
fear  and  timidity  left  me,  and  I  don't 
Know  that  I  ever  spoke  with  greater 
freedom.  At  the  close  of  the  meeting, 
no  opposition  was  offered,  and  I  went 
home  rejoicing  and  feeling  that  it  was 
not  *iard  offer  all  to  fill  those  appoint- 
ments. Next  Sabbath,  it  fell  to  my  lot 
to  go  with  two  other  brethren  to  a 
town,  about  ten  miles  from  Bradford, 
where  I  was  also  called  upon  to 
speak.  I  rose  with  confidence,  thinking 
that  I  would  do  as  well  as  on  the  pre- 
vious Sabbath;  but  I  had  scarcely  oc- 
cupied two  minutes  of  time  when  I  sat 
down  very  much  confused;  and  when  I 
came  to  look  over  my  conduct  the  week 
previous  I  saw  that  I  had  not  been  as 
humble  as  the  week  before.  I  had  not 
fasted  and  pra-"ed  as  much,  but  lelied 
more  on  my  own  strength  than  on  the 
Lord's  help.  This  lesson  impressed  me 
with  the  feeling  that  without  the  Lord's 
help,  which  is  only  reached  through  hu- 
mility and  prayer,  a  man  cannot  preach 
the  gospel  of  Jesus  Christ.  When 
eighteen  years  of  age,  I  was  ordained 
an  Elder  and  appointed  to  travel  in  the 
Bradford  conference.  I  started  on  this 
mission  in  April,  1851,  and  soon  arrived 
at  Knaresborough,  where  I  expected  to 
meet  Elder  Jonathan  Midgley,  who 
should  direct  me  in  my  labors.  But  as 
he  was  prevented  from  meeting  me  I 
had  to  labor  a^best  I  could  till  the  fol- 
lowing June.  For  nearly  a  year  I 
could  see  but  little  success  attending 
my  labors.  In  the  meantime,  a  young 
man  had  been  sent  to  labor  with  me, 
but  he  became  discouraged,  went  home 
and  left  me  alone  again.  Some  of  those 
who  had  been  friendly,  became  preju- 
diced against  me,  through  slanderous 
stories  circulated  by  ministers,  and  al- 
most every  door  that  had  been  opened 
was  now  closed.  While  in  this  condi- 
tion. I  took  shelter,  one  cold  wet  day 
(and  I  had  the  tooth  ache  at  the  time), 


350 


LATTER-DAT   SAINT 


under  a  tree,  and  offered  a  most  ear- 
nest prayer,  that  the  Lord  would  open 
my  way  before  me,  help  me  to  live  ac- 
ceptably before  him,  and  crown  my  ef- 
forts with  success.     The  Lord  answered 
my  prayer,  for  it  was  not  long  before 
I  had  many  friends  and  all  the  places 
opened  to  preach  in  that  I  could  attend 
to.       About  this  time  ministers  of  six 
denominations   in    Knaresborough   sent 
for  one  John  Theobold.   a  lecturer  and 
author  of  slanderous  works  against  us, 
to  come  and  help  them  put  down  "Mor- 
monism."       On   his   arrival,     he     gave 
five  lectures  and  issued  a  challenge  to 
meet  any  of  the  lenders  of  our  Church 
in    discussion.       The    president    of    the 
Bradford  conference  reported  our  con- 
dition to  the  presidency  of  the  British 
mission,  and  asked  counsel  as  to  what 
would  be  best  for  us  to  do;  word  came 
to  the  effect  that  in  our  case  it  would 
be  best  to  accept  the  challenge  for  dis- 
cussion and  that  I  was    the  one  to  meet 
Mr.  Theobold.      As  other  and  more  ex- 
perienced  Elders  were  within   reach,   I 
had  not  expected  this;   however,   I  re- 
solved to  obey,  trust  in  the  Lord  and  do 
my  best.      This  was  in  1852,  and  during 
the  week  that  the  discussion  was  pend- 
ing the   revelation   on   plural   marriage 
was   first   published   in   the   "Millennial 
Star."  Five  nights'  discussion  was  held. 
The  Lord  was  with  us.      Our  friends  in- 
creased every  day,  and  soon  after  the 
debate  was  over,  we  had  a  branch  at 
Knaresborough  of  thirty-eight  members 
and  another  branch  at  Skelton,     about 
eight  miles  from  there,  of  eight  mem- 
bers.     One  night,  while  trying  to  find 
my  way  through  some  fields,  to  a  place 
where   I   expected   to  lodge,   I  lost  my 
way,  and  having  no  overcoat  I  walked 
to  keep  warm.      I  was  quite  absorbed 
in  thought,  thinking  how  much  the  El- 
ders were   trying  to  do   for  the  world 
and   how  little   their  efforts  were     ap- 
preciated.      Suddenly  I  stopped,   with- 
out knowing  why.       Having  a  cane  in 
my  hand,  I  instinctively  put  it  before 
me  and  found  no  bottom.      I  then  re- 
membered that  somewhere  in  the  fields 
there   was   a  deep     stone     quarry.       I 
turned   around,   felt  my  way   with  my 
cane,    and    a   few   rods   away    found  a 
road.    I  knew  where  I  was  and  that  this 
was    the    stone    quarry.       John     Cum- 
mings,  of  Skelton,  was  my  friend  from 
the  first  time  we  met.      He  invited  me 
to  make  my  home  with  him,   when  In 


that  neighborhood,  and  he  also  opened 
his  house  for  me  to  hold  meetings  in. 
Notwithstanding  all  this,  his  wife  was 
bitterly  opposed  to  me  and  our  people. 
Mr.  Cummings  and  I  were  sitting  up 
late  one  evening  conversing  on  the 
principles  of  the  gospel,  after  hold- 
ing meetings  there  for  some  months, 
when  Mrs.  Cummings  said:  "I  had  a 
strange  dream  last  night.  I  thought 
that  I  was  walking  along  a  road  and 
that  Mr.  Burton  was  there.  He  ran 
after  me,  and  caught  me."  I  answered, 
"The  interpretation  of  that  dream  is 
that  I  shall  soon  baptize  you."  Her 
response  was:  "No,  never,  you  will 
never  baptize  me,  for  I  shall  never  join 
your  Church."  She  seemed  so  positive 
that  I  felt  that  perhaps  I  had  said  too 
much.  About  two  weeks  afterwards 
I  had  an  appointment  to  hold  meeting 
at  Langthorpe,  two  or  three  miles  away. 
It  was  rumored  that  a  Baptist  minster 
had  said  that  he  would  be  there  and 
expose  "Mormonism."  Mrs.  Cummings 
was  induced  to  walk  that  distance  to 
hear  us  exposed.  The  minister  was 
not  there,  but  that  night  Mrs.  Cum- 
mings was  convinced  of  the  truth.  I 
was  invited  to  go  home  with  them. 
Mrs.  Cummings  scarcely  said  a  word  all 
the  way  home.  When  we  entered  the 
house;  it  was  nearly  midnight.  She 
sat  down  and  seemed  to  be  very 
thoughtful.  Her  husband  turned  to 
her  and  said,  "Hannah,  why  don't  you 
take  your  things  off?"  She  responded 
"John,  are  you  ready  to  be  baptized 
to-night."  He  answered,  "No,  not  quite 
ready  tonight."  But  she  said  that 
she  could  not  sleep,  if  not  baptized  that 
night;  and,  turning  to  me,  she  said, 
"Mr.  Burton,  will  you  baptize  me  to- 
night?" I  answered,  "Tes,  if  your  hus- 
band will  go  with  us."  He  assented, 
and  though  it  was  midnight,  and  the 
winds  were  whistling  through  the  trees, 
we  started  off  down  to  the  river,  about 
two  miles  away,  and  I  baptized  her, 
fulfilling  the  interpretation  to  her 
dream  to  the  very  letter.  Feb.  22.  1854, 
I  sailed  on  the  ship  "Windermere  "  from 
Liverpool  for  New  Orleans.  We  were 
eight  weeks  and  five  days  on  the  way, 
and  we  encountered  heavy  storms.  On 
the  18th  of  March  we  were  In  the  same 
latitude  that  we  were  in  on  the  8th. 
The  weather  was  very  rough,  and  the 
captain  of  the  vessel  came  to  Elder 
Daniel    Gams,    who   presided   over   the 


BIOGRAPHICAL    ENCYCLOPEDIA. 


351 


Saints,  and  said,  "Mr.  Garns,  I  have 
done  all  I  can  for  the  vessel,  and  I 
am  afraid  that  it  cannot  stand  this 
sea.  We  are  in  great  danger.  I  don't 
know,  whether  there  is  a  God  or  not. 
Your  people  say  there  is,  and  if  there 
is  a  God  and  He  will  hear  you,  you 
had  better  talk  to  Hinn."  It  was  early 
in  the  morning;  a  fast  was  decided 
upon,  and  prayer  meeting  held  at  10 
a.  m.  The  storm  abated  a  little — 
enough,  to  make  us  feel  out  of  danger — 
but  continued  in  considerable  force  till 
the  18th.  On  the  14th  (March)  small- 
pox broke  out.  There  were  forty  cases 
on  board  and  thirteen  funerals  took 
place  between  Liverpool  and  New  Or- 
leans. On  the  17th'  the  ship  caught 
fire  under  the  cooking  galley.  Great 
excitement  prevailed,  until  the  fire  was 
extinguished.  On  the  27thj  the  pro- 
visions and  water  supply  failed  and 
from  that  time  till  we  reached  New 
Orleans  April  23,  1854,  our  ration  was 
one  sea  biscuit  a  day.  "We  had  no 
new  cases  of  small  pox  after  leaving 
New  Orleans,  but  were  aflaicted  with 
cholera,  which  proved  fatal  to  many 
from  that  time  till  June  19th,  when  we 
commenced  our  journey  over  the  plains 
from  our  camping  ground  near  Kansas 
City.  We  arrived  at  Salt  Lake  City 
Sept.  23,  1854.  During  the  winter  I 
taught  school,  and  resided  with  my  eld- 
est Brother  Robert.  Soon  after  my  ar- 
rival, I  was  ordained  a  Seventy  and 
joined  the  17th  quorum.  March  28,  1856. 
I  married  Rachel  Fielding.  During 
1862,  1863  and  1864  I  taught  school  in 
Kaysville,  Davis  county,  and  in  the 
latter  year  I  moved  to  Ogden,  where 
I  taught  school  for  about  ten  years. 
I  also  served  many  years  as  superin- 
tendent of  schools  for  Weber  county, 
was  bookkeeper  for  the  Ogden  Branch 
Z.  C.  M.  I.  for  five  years,  served  as 
first  counselor  to  Joseph  Parry,  presi- 
dent of  the  3rd  Ward,  and  presided 
over  said  Ward  during  Elder  Parry's 
absence  on  a  mission.  For  many  years, 
and  up  to  1882,  I  served  as  a  member  of 
the  city  council.  In  the  latter  year  I 
resigned.  I  also  served  many  years 
as  a  member  of  the  High  Council  of 
Weber  Stake  and  up  to  my  leaving 
there  for  Star  Valley  in  1886.  When  the 
Star  Valley  Stake  was  organized  Aug. 
14,  1892,  I  was  appointed  first  counselor 
to  Elder  Geo.  Osmond,  who  was  chosen 
Stake  president." 


HAMMOND,  Francis  Asbury,  pres- 
ident of  the  San  Juan  Stake  of  Zion 
from  1884  to  1900,  is  the  son  of  Samuel 
S.  Hammond  and  Charity  Edwards, and 
was  born  Nov.  1,  1822,  at  Patchogue, 
Suffolk  county  (Long  Island),  New 
York.  In  August,  1898,  he  wrote  the 
following  sketch  of  his  life:  "In  my 
childhood  and  youth  I  had  but  very  lit- 
tle schooling.  My  father  was  a  prac- 
tical boot  and  shoe  maker,  and  also 
carried  on  the  business  of  tanning  and 
saddle  and  harness  making.  I  learned 
enough  from  him  to  enable  me  in  after 
years  to  establish  all  these  branches  of 
industry.  When  about  fourteen  j-ears 
of  age,  I  commenced  going  to  sea  in 
small  coasting  vessels,  as  cook  and  ca- 
bin boy,  at  $4  per  month.  This  was 
during  the  summer  months;  the  wintei 
I  spent  in  laboring  with  my  father,  and 
sometimes  attended  school  part  of  the 
time.  I  soon  became  attached  to  a  life 
on  the  sea,  and  chose  that  as  a  life 
vocation,  with  an  ambition  to  become 
master  of  a  ship.  I  continued  in  this 
coasting  business  till  1840,  when  I 
shipped  as  able  seaman  on  a  whaling 
expedition  on  board  of  the  barque 
'White  Oak,'  comanded  by  Capt. 
Daniel  Fitch,  and  sailed  from  New 
London  in  company  with  the  brig 
Sommerset,'  commanded  by  Capt. 
Beck.  The  two  captains  were  sole 
owners  of  the  outfit.  We  whaled  in  a 
bay  in  latitude  40  degrees  south  and 
along  the  coast  to  the  Straits  of  Ma- 
gellan and  Cape  Horn,  including  the 
Falkland  Islands.  During  the  off  sea- 
son we  engaged  in  sealing.  At  Falk- 
land Islands,  during  a  gale  of  wind, 
the  crew  refused  to  go  on  shore  to  pack 
freight  from  a  shipwreck  for  the  bene- 
fit of  the  captains.  The  result  of  this 
was  that  I  and  two  other  able  seamen 
got  into  iron  5.  I  was  confined  for  nine 
days  and  fed  on  bread  and  water. 
While  the  barque  was  moored  in  a 
South  American  bay,  the  second  season 
out,  the  chief  mate  and  the  Portugese 
Stewart,  ran  away,  taking  with  them  a 
new  whale  boat,  all  the  spice  on  board, 
the  chronometer,  the  arms  and  ammu- 
nition belonging  to  the  ship  and  the 
chart  of  the  Spanish  coast.  They 
were  subsequently  taken  and  brought 
back  in  irons,  and  I  was  chosen  to  be 
the  steward  and  placed  in  charge  of 
the  prisoneis  till  we  arrived  at  Rio  de 
Janeiro,   where   they   were   turned  over 


352 


LATTER-DAY    SAINT 


to  the  American  consul  with  witnesses 
to  accompany  them  to  the  United 
States.  I  was  chosen  as  one  of  the 
witnesses,  and  we  were  put  on  board 
a  sU'tip,  which  landed  us  in  Richmond, 
Virginia,  where  a  trial  was  held  May  5, 
1S42.  They  were  charged  with  piracy 
on  the  high  seas:  but  as  the  charge 
could  not  be  proven,  they  were  set  free. 
June  23.  1843.  I  sailed  from  Sag  Harbor, 
Long  Island,  on  the  good  ship 
"Thames,"  Capt.  Jeremiah  Hedges,  for 
a  whaling  voyage  to  the  Arctic  ocean. 
I  shipped  as  boatswain,  with  the  privi- 
lege of  living  aft  and  associating  with 
the  chief  officers.  We  rounded  the 
Cape  of  Good  Hope,  after  a  very  pleas- 
ant voyage;  took  in  water  at  the  Cape 
and  sent  Capt.  Hedges  home  sick,  when 
Chiefmate  Bishop  became  our  captain. 
We  pursued  our  way  through  the  In- 
dian and  South  Pacific  oceans  till 
March,  1844,  when  we  landed  in  Hawaii, 
on  the  very  spot  where  Capt.  Cook  was 
massacred  by  the  natives  on  his  last 
visit  to  the  Sandwich  Islands.  While 
whaling  in  the  Okhotsk  Sea  I  was  dis- 
abled by  an  accident  which  nearly  cost 
me  my  life,  a  barrel  of  flour  headed  up 
in  an  empty  90-gallon  cask  fell  down  a 
distance  of  about  fifteen  feet  and 
struck  me  in  the  small  of  my  back, 
while  I  was  bracing  with  all  my  might 
against  a  ten-barrel  cask  of  oil.  This 
accident  led  to  a  perfect  change  in  my 
life's  history.  In  the  fall  of  1844  I  was 
put  ashore  at  Lahaina,  Maui,  on  the 
Sandwich  Islands.  The  captain  and 
my  fellow-oflficers  thought  I  was  a  first- 
rate  candidate  for  the  graveyard.  But 
in  two  months  I  was  sufficiently  re- 
covered to  set  up  shoe  making,  and  I 
carried  on  that  business  till  the  fall  of 
1S47,  when  I  set  sail  for  San  Francisco, 
with  the  intention  of  going  to  New 
York  to  marry  a  wife,  and  then  return 
to  the  islands  to  make  my  home  there. 
I  landed  in  San  Francisco  in  October, 
1847,  and  commenced  shoeman.ing  as 
soon  as  I  landed.  Here  I  became  ac- 
quainted with  the  'Mormons,'  or  Lat- 
ter-day Saints,  who  had  recently  ar- 
rived in  the  ship  'Brooklyn,'  and  also 
with  some  of  the  members  of  the  Mor- 
mon Battalion.  Dec.  31,  1847,  I  was 
baptized  into  the  Church  of  Jesus 
Christ  of  Latter-day  Saints,  and  in 
May,  1848.  I  set  out  for  the  gold  mines 
which  had  been  discovered  some  time 
during  the  previous  January.  I  dug 
gold  on  Mormon  Island  for  about  fifty 


days,  and  then  returned  to  San  Fran- 
cisco, where  I  purchased  an  outfit  and 
set  out  for  Great  Salt  Lake  valley  in 
the  Rocky  Mountains.  Sept.  6,  1848,  in 
company  with  quite  a  number  of  oth- 
ers, I  arrived  at  the  Old  Fort,  where 
Salt  Lake  City  now  stands.  Nov.  17, 
1848,  I  married  Miss  Mary  Jane  Dil- 
worth,  Pres.  Heber  C.  Kimball  perform- 
ing the  ceremony.  In  March,  1851,  I 
was  called  on  a  mission  to  the  Sand- 
wich Islands;  my  wife  and  one  child 
about  six  months  old  accompanied  me. 
We  labored  in  that  mission  for  several 
years,  and  after  spending  a  winter  in 
San  Bernardino,  we  returned  home  to 
Big  Cottonwood,  Utah,  arriving  there 
June  6,  1857.  That  year  the  news  came 
to  us,  while  celebrating  in  Big  Cotton- 
wood canyon,  that  the  U.  S.  army  was 
coming  against  us.  I  joined  the  stand- 
ing army  and  spent  the  winter  in 
Echo  canyon,  standing  guard.  In  the 
spring  of  1858  I  moved  my  family  south 
and  pitched  my  camp  at  Payson,  Utah 
county.  After  the  army  had  come  in 
and  pardon  had  been  granted  the  're- 
bellious Mormons,'  I  returned  to  my 
home  in  Salt  Lake  City.  In  March,  1859, 
I  removed  to  Ogden,  Weber  county, 
where  I,  in  company  with  General 
Chauncy  W.  West,  commenced  the 
business  of  manufacturing  leather,boots 
and  shoes,  saddles  and  harnesses.  Dur- 
ing this  period  I  acted  as  counselor  to 
Bishop  Chauncy  W.  West,  and  served 
as  a  member  of  the  city  council,  and  as 
justice  of  the  peace.  In  1865  I  was 
called  on  a  second  mission  to  the  Sand- 
wich Islands,  where  I  took  an  active 
part  in  purchasing  the  estate  or  plan- 
tation known  as  Laie.  In  company 
with  Elder  Geo.  Nebeker,  I  took  out 
quite  a  company  of  Elders  and  Saints, 
and  located  them  on  said  estate.  I 
returned  to  Utah  in  the  fall  and  was 
called  to  take  charge  of  the  Saints  who 
had  settled  at  Huntsville,  Ogden  val- 
ley. Here  I  was  afterwards  ordained 
a  Bishop  and  appointed  to  preside.  Dur- 
ing the  railroad  construction  times  I 
took  a  number  of  contracts  on  the 
Union  Pacific  and  Central  Pacific  rail- 
roads. In  the  fall  of  1869,  in  company 
with  about  five  hundred  Elders,  I  went 
on  a  mission  to  the  United  States,  to 
visit  friends  and  relatives  and  to  do 
all  we  could  to  modify  the  intense  feel- 
ing of  bitterness  and  hatred  which  pre- 
vailed at  that  time  in  the  hearts  of 
the    people    and    with    the    government 


BIOGRAPHICAL    ENCYCLOPEDIA. 


353 


against  the  Saints.  We  accomplished 
some  good  and  returned  to  our  homes 
in  the  spring-.  I  served  as  a  member 
of  the  Weber  county  court  for  six  years. 
The  winter  of  1S83-84,  in  company  with 
my  son,  I  spent  in  traveling  through 
Colorado,  New  Mexico,  Arizona  and 
old  Mexico,  looking  for  places  suitable 
for  settlements.  In  December,  1884,  I 
was  called  to  go  south  and  take  charge 
of  the  San  Juan  Stake  of  Zion.  I  spent 
a  part  of  the  winter  of  1884-85  traveling 
in  that  region  of  country.  In  the  fall 
of  1885  I  moved  with  my  family  and  a 
few  others  into  the  San  Juan  Stake.  The 
winter  of  1888  I  spent  in  Washington, 
D.  C,  in  the  interest  of  the  settlers 
in  that  county,  in  connection  with  what 
was  called  the  Southern  Ute  Indian 
Removal  Bill.  I  shall  be  76  years  old 
on  my  next  birthday  and  am  still  quite 
hale  and  hearty.  I  have  built  or  bought 
twenty-five  different  homes  since  I 
married.  I  am  the  father  of  fifteen 
children,  the  husband  of  three  wives, 
and  grandfather  to  thirty-two  children. 
Only  one  of  my  wives  are  now  living. 
Life  to  me  has  indeed  been  worth  liv- 
ing." President  Hammond  resided  for 
a  number  of  years  in  Bluff  City,  San 
Juan  county;  his  last  place  of  residence 
was  Moab.  Grand  county,  L^tah.  He 
died  as  the  result  of  an  accident,  Nov. 
27,  1900,  at  Bloomfield,  New  Mexico. 
Pres.  Hammond  was  faithful  and  true 
to  the  last  and  proved  to  be  one  of 
God's  noblemen.  He  was  undoubtedly 
ordained  before  the  foundation  of  the 
world  to  take  a  prominent  part  in  the 
building  up  of  God's  kingdom.  His 
wise  counsel  and  fatherly  kindness  was 
much  appreciated  by  all  who  had  the 
pleasure    of    associating   with    him. 

REDD,  Wayne  Hartleson,  second 
counselor  to  Francis  A.  Hammond, 
president  of  the  San  Juan  Stake  of 
Zion,  from  1898  to  1900,  is  the  son  of  Le- 
muel H.  Redd  and  Sariah  Louisa  Cham- 
berlain, and  was  born  Feb.  27,  1870,  at 
Harmony,  Washington  county,  Utah, 
where  he  also  received  his  early  train- 
ing. Following  is  a  short  sketch  of 
his  life  written  by  himself:  "I  was 
baptized  when  eight  years  old,  by 
Bishop  Wilson  D.  Pace.  My  boyhood 
days  were  spent  on  the  farm,  helping 
to  care  for  my  father's  large  family. 
My  education  consisted  of  what  I  was 
able  to  learn,  in  the  district  school, 
during    the    winter    months,    as    I    was 


obliged  to  work  on  the  farm  during 
the  summer  season.  At  the  age  of 
eighteen,  the  responsibilities  of  caring 
for  my  father's  two  families  and  one 
of  my  brother's  family,  devolved  upon 
me  for  a  time,  owing  to  the  fact  that 
my  father  was  compelled  to.  live  in 
exile  for  the  gospel's  sake,  and  my 
brother  was  absent  from  home  on  a 
mission.  When  twenty  years  old,  I 
moved,  in  company  with  my  father  and 
mother,  to  Bluff.  San  Juan  county, 
Utah,  at  which  place  I  have  resided 
ever  since,  following  as  a  business  stock 
raising  on  the  public  domain.  I  was 
ordained  an  Elder  under  the  hands  of 
Pres.  Francis  A.  Hammond  in  the  fall 
of   1S93.       Until    that    time,    I    held    the 


office  of  a  Deacon.  Nov.  15,  1S93,  I 
married  Caroline  Nielsen,  in  the  Salt 
Lake  Temple.  She  is  a  daughter  of 
Bishop  Jens  Nielsen,  of  Bluff,  Utah, 
and  has  blessed  me  with  three  child- 
ren, two  boys  and  one  girl.  Being 
called  to  take  a  mission  to  the  South- 
ern States,  I  was  ordained  a  Seventy 
and  set  apart  as  a  missionary,  under 
the  hands  of  Pres.  Seymour  B.  Young, 
April  3,  1896.  During  the  greater  part 
of  my  mission  (which  lasted  two  years 
and  a  half)  I  laboring  in  the  South 
Alabama  conference  which  comprised 
the  southern  part  of  Alabama  and  the 
northern  part  of  Florida.  While  labor- 
ing in  that  conference  I  baptized  abouc 
twenty  converts,  and  preached  the  gos- 
pel without  purse  or  scrip  in  the  city 
of  ^Montgomery;  also  in  a  number  of 
other  smaller  cities  and  counties.      Part 


Vol.  No.  23. 


June   S,    1901. 


354 


LATTER-DAY    SAINT 


Of  the  time  I  acted  as  counselor  to 
Daniel  H.  Thomas,  president  of  the 
conference.  In  the  spring  of  1898,  in 
obedience  to  a  call  from  Pres.  Elias  S. 
Kimball,  I  went  to  Atlanta,  Georgia, 
where  I  joined  Elder  Albert  Mathison 
and  assisted  him  and  others  in  open- 
ing up  anew  the  work  in  that  city  and 
State.  For  nine  years  prior  to  that 
time  the  Elders  had  not  labored  in 
Georgia  on  account  of  the  martyrdom 
of  Joseph  Standing.  We  traveled  with- 
out purse  or  scrip.  While  laboring  in 
the  citv  of  Atlanta,  and  in  the  evening 
of  April  29,  1898,  just  after  the  close  of 
our  services  on  the  street,  we  were  ar- 
rested and  put  in  jail.  Through  thn 
friendly  effort  of  a  news  repoiter, 
connected  with  the  "Atlanta  Constitu- 
tion" we  were  liberated.  From  Georgia 
I  went  to  South  Carolina,  where  I  pre- 
sided over  the  conference  until  my  re- 
lease came.  Returning  home,  I  ar- 
rived in  Salt  Lake  City  Oct.  4,  1898.  In 
November  following,  by  request  of 
Pres.  Francis  A.  Hammond,  of  the  San 
Juan  Stake,  I  made  a  tour  of  that  Stake 
in  his  company  and  in  that  of  others. 
At  a  conference  held  at  Monticello, 
Utah,  on  the  20th  and  21st  of  November, 
1898.  I  was  chosen  second  counselor  to 
Pres.  Hammond,  and  was  ordained  a 
High  Priest  and  set  apart  for  that  po- 
sition by  Apostle  Brigham  Young  Nov. 
21  1898.  Since  that  time  I  have  la- 
bored in  this  calling,  ministering  among 
the  Faints  of  San  Juan  Stake.  I  was 
with  Pres.  Hammond  when  he  was  ac- 
cidentally thrown  from  his  buggy  by  a 
runaway  team,  at  Bloomfield,  New 
Mexico,  which  caused  his  death  Nov. 
:v    laoo. 

GOAVAXS,  Hugh  Sydney. third  presi- 
dent of  the  Tooele  Stake  of  Zion,  is  the 
son  of  Robert  Gowans  and  Grace  Mc- 
Kay, and  was  born  Feb.  23,  1832.  in 
Perth.  Perthshire.  Scotland.  While 
(luite  young  his  parents  removed  to 
the  city  of  Aberdeen  in  the  northeast 
part  of  Scotland,  where  he  lived  until 
he  was  about  ten  years  of  age.  Then 
he  removed  with  them  to  the  town  of 
Arbroath  in  Fosforshire.  Scotland,  in 
which  place  he  first  heard  and  received 
the  gospel  of  Jesus  Christ,  as  taught 
bv  the  Elders  of  the  Church  of  Jesus 
Christ  of  Latter-day  Saints.  He  was 
liaptizfd  in  his  eighteenth  year,  Aug.  1, 
l^h<),  by  Elder  Joseph  Booth,  in  con- 
sequence  of  which   he  had   to  contend 


with  much  opposition  from  his  parents 
and  other  relatives.  In  the  following 
July,  in  response  to  a  call  made  by 
Elder  James  Marsden.  president  of  the 
Edinburgh  conference,  for  volunteers 
to  go  out  and  preach  the  gospel,  Bro. 
Gowans  offered  his  services.  He  was 
accordingly  ordained  a  Priest  and 
started  from  Dundee,  in  company  with 
Robert  Bain,  to  labor  in  Fifeshire,  un- 
der the  direction  of  Elder  John  Dun- 
can. After  some  six  months  he  was 
called  to  sro  to  the  north  part  of  Scot- 
land,  where   he   traveled  and   preached 


Jff^ 

- 

#»  '^, 

..^^.^,«-- 

•  *  *.«% , 

1 

^  ^ 

.A 

in  Stonehaven  Aberdeen,  Banff  and 
other  places.  In  the  meantime  he  was 
ordained  an  Elder  under  the  hands  of 
Elders  James  McNaughton  (then  presi- 
dent of  the  Dundee  conference)  and 
Alexander  F.  McDonald.  Having  la- 
bored In  the  ministry  for  some  eigh- 
teen months,  he  returned  home  and 
was  appointed  to  jireside  over  the  Ar- 
broath branch  of  the  Dundee  confer- 
ence, which  position  he  occupied  until 
he  emigrated  to  Utah  with  his  wife  and 
her  father  and  mother  in  1855.  He 
.sailed  from  Liverpool  April  22,  1855. 
w'llh  a  company  of  581  Saints,  on  board 
the  ship  "Samuel  Curling."  Having 
landed  safely  in  New  York,  the  jour- 
ney was  continue'  via  Philadelphia, 
I'ittsburg,  St.  Louis,  Atchison, and  Mor- 
mon Grove.  He  crossed  the  plains  in 
< 'apt.  Milo  Andrus'  emigrant  train,  ar- 
living  in  Salt  Lake  City  Oct.  24th  in  the 
same  year.  He  spent  the  following 
winter  on  the  government  Reservation 
in  Rush  Valley,  Tooele  county.     In  con- 


BIOGRAPHICAL    ENCYCLOPEDIA. 


355 


sequence  of  Indian  hostilities,  in  the 
spring  of  1856,  he  located  in  Tooele  City, 
where  he  has  resided  ever  since.  He 
was  oi-dained  a  Seventy  in  Salt  Lake 
City  under  the  hands  of  Joseph  Young 
April  20,  1857,  and  set  apart  as  one  of 
the  presidents  of  the  43rd  quorum  of 
Seventy  at  its  organization  in  Tooele 
City,  May  9,  1857.  He  was  appointed 
assessor  and  collector  for  Tooele  coun- 
ty in  1865,  and  held  the  office  for  six 
years.  In  August  of  the  same  year 
he  was  elected  mayor  of  Tooele  City, 
to  which  office  he  was  three  times  suc- 
cessively re-elected.  May  16,  1868,  he 
was  elected  adjutant  of  Company  A, 
first  Battalion  of  Cavalry,  Nauvoo  Le- 
gion, and  commissioned  as  such  with 
the  rank  of  first  lieutenant  by  Governor 
Dui-kee.  In  1872,  he  was  called  to  go 
on  a  mission  to  Europe.  He  left  Salt 
Lake  City  Oct.  25th,  and  sailed  from 
New  York  Nov.  6th, on  board  the  steam- 
er 'Minnesota"  of  the  Guion  line.  Pres. 
Geo.  A.  Smith  and  company,  en  route  to 
Palestine,  were  on  board  the  same  ship, 
which  arrived  in  Liverpool  Nov.  19th. 
During  this  mission  Elder  Gowans  pre- 
sided successively  in  the  Bedford.  Dur- 
ham and  Newcastle  and  Manchester 
conferences,  and  was  released  to  return 
home.  As  the  leader  of  a  company  of 
emigrating  Saints,  he  sailed  from  Liv- 
erpool on  the  steamship  "Wyoming" 
May  12,  1875,  and  arrived  in  New  York 
May  24th,  and  in  Salt  Lake  City  June 
3rd.  Aug.  7,  1876,  he  was  elected  pro- 
secuting attorney  for  Tooele  county 
and  on  the  27th  of  September  following 
he  was  elected  chairman  of  the  central 
and  executive  committees  of  the  Peo- 
ple's Party  in  Tooele  county,  and  took  a 
prominent  part  in  recovering  the  coun- 
ty from  the  Liberal  rule.  At  the  or- 
ganization of  the  Tooele  Stake,  in 
June.  1877.  he  was  ordained  a  High 
Priest  and  set  apart  as  a  member  of 
the  High  Council.  In  August,  1878,  he 
was  elected  probate  judge  of  Tooele 
county,  and  re-elected  to  the  same  of- 
fice in  August.  1880.  At  the  quarterly 
conference  of  the  Tooele  Stake  held  in 
Grantsville  in  January.  1881.  he  was 
sustained  as  first  counselor  to  Heber 
J.  Grant,  president  of  Tooele  Stake.  In 
Dctober.  1882,  he  was  sustained  and  set 
apart  by  Pres.  John  Taylor  to  preside 
(iver  the  Tooele  Stake. succeeding  Heber 
J.  Grant,  who  was  called  to  be  one  of 
the  Twelve  Apostles.  July  16,  1885,  he 
was    arrested    at    his    home    in    Tooele 


City  by  U.  s.  deputy  marshals,  on  the 
charge  of  unlawful  cohabitation  with 
his  wives.  He  was  taken  before  Com- 
misioner  McKay  in  Salt  Lake  City  and 
by  him  bound  over  in  the  sum  of 
$1500.00  to  answer  the  findings  of  the 
grand  jury.  On  the  23rd  of  September 
he  was  arraigned  to  plead  to  three  In- 
dictments for  the  same  offence,  being 
the  first  man  in  the  Territory  on  whom 
Prosecuting  Attorney  W.  H.  Dickson 
and  the  grand  jury  commenced  their  il- 
legal business  of  segregation,  to  all  of 
which  he  pleaded  not  guilty  and  was 
placed  under  $3000  bonds— $1000  on  each 
indictment.  Feb.  11,  1886,  he  was 
brought  into  court,  but  was  only  tried 
on  one  of  the  indictments  under  the 
plea  of  not  guilty  (the  other  two  in- 
dictments were  held  over  for  future 
use),  on  the  express  condition  that  he 
would  go  on  the  witness  stand  and  give 
evidence  for  the  prosecution,  which  he 
did.  No  other  witnesses  were  called. 
Judge  Zane  charged  the  jury,  who 
found  a  verdict  of  guilty  without  leav- 
ing their  seats.  At  his  request,  sen- 
tence was  deferred  until  the  26th, 
when,  in  answering  the  question  in  the 
negative,  if  he  had  any  promises  to 
make  in  regard  to  the  future,  he  was 
sentenced  to  six  months  in  the  peni- 
tentiary and  to  pay  a  fine  of  $300  and 
costs^in  all  $520.05.  The  same  day  he 
was  taken  to  the  penitentiary,  where  he 
served  out  his  sentence,  less  the  deduc- 
tion allowed  by  the  Copper  Act.  He 
also  served  thirty  days  in  lieu  of  the 
fine,  being  discharged  Aug.  30,  1886. 

NUTTALL,  Leonard  John,  presi- 
dent of  the  Kanab  Stake  of  Zion  from 
1877  to  1884,  is  the  son  of  William  Nut- 
tall  and  Mary  Langhorn,  and  was  born 
in  Liverpool,  Lancashire,  England, 
July  6,  1S34.  His  early  education  was 
had  at  St.  Brides  School,  Liverpool.  At 
the  age  of  thirteen  and  a  half  years  he 
was  bound  an  apprentice  as  a  ship  and 
1  oat  builder.  He  and  his  parents  and 
brother  Joseph  were  baptized  in  Liver- 
riool  Oct.  .<?,  1850,  by  Apostle  John  Tay- 
lor, and  L.  John  was  confirmed  by 
Elder  John  Lindsay  Oct.  11,  1850,  his 
older  brother  William  having  been  bap- 
tized one  month  earlier.  The  family, 
fomi>osed  of  parents  and  children 
(\^'illiam,  L.  John  and  Joseph)  emi- 
grated to  Utah  in  1852.  They  sailed 
from  Liverpool  March  6,  1852,  crossin-? 
the   Atlantic  in    the   ship    "Rockaway," 


356 


LATTER-DAY    SAINT 


whi'h  arrivetl  at  New  Orleans  the  lat- 
ler  I'art  of  April.  This  ship  carried 
the  machinery  for  the  first  beet  sugar 
factory  that  landed  in  or  was  built  in 
America.  The  machinery  left  the 
Missouri  river  in  fifty-two  wagons  on 
the  6th  of  July  and  arrived  at  Salt 
Lake  City  in  November.  L.  John  ar- 
rived Oct.  10,  ISoJ.  and  moved  with  his 
parents  to  Provo  in  November,  1S52, 
where  they  made  their  home  and  took 
part  in  the  early  development  and 
building  up  of  that  city.  July  3,  1853, 
he  took  part  in  the  suppression  of  the 
Indian  outbreaks,  which  resulted  in 
much  hardship  to  the  Saints  in  the 
southern  part  of  Utah  and  Sanpete 
counties  during  that  fall  and  winter. 
In   the  fall   of  1S53  he,  associated   with 


Elder  William  W.  Allen.  Henry  White 
and  Sister  Elizabeth  Roper,  organized 
a  Sunday  school  at  Provo,  wherein 
classes  were  conducted  in  the  first  log 
meeting  house  at  that  place,  these  per- 
sons officiating  as  officers  and  teachers. 
L.  John  was  ordained  a  Teacher  Feb. 
22.  18J7,  by  Bishop  Elias  H.  Blackburn, 
and  was  ordained  a  Seventy,  May  19, 
18.".T,  under  the  hands  of  William  F. 
Carter  and  Se«ly  Owens;  he  became  a 
member  of  the  20th  quorum  of  Seven- 
ty. From  August  to  September, 
1S57,  as  regimental  adjutant  of  the 
F'irst  Regiment,  Utah  Military  District, 
he  took  an  active  part  in  defending  the 
rights  of  the  people  in  what  was  known 
as  the  Buchanan  war.  He  was  in  the 
mountains,  exposed  to  the  perils,  hard- 
ships   and    winter    weather,    and   again 


went  out  on  the  frontiers  in  the  follow- 
ing  spring    (1858),   at   the    time   of   the 
move  south.      He  was  one  of  one  hun- 
dred and  ten  men  detailed,  in  case  the 
order  should  be  given,  to   destroy  Salt 
Lake  City,  and  make  it  a  barren,  deso- 
late waste.       He  was     elected  a  mem- 
ber of  the  city  council     of     Provo,  and 
served  as  councilor  in  1861  and  1865,  and 
as   alderman   and  justice  of  the   peace 
for  the  years  1864,  1872-73  and  1874.  Feb. 
28,  1861,  he  was  appointed  recorder  and 
auditor  of   Provo     city,   and    continued 
in  that  office  until  February,  1875,  ex- 
cept  the   year   1863.       His   father,   Wil- 
liam  Nuttall,   died  at  Provo  March  14, 
1864,  aged  67  years        L.  John  was  ap- 
pointed   probate    and    county    clerk    of 
Utah     county     by     Judge     Zerubabbel 
Snow,  and  took  the  oath  of  office  March 
21,  1864,  and  held  said  office  until  Sep- 
tember,   1875.       August   31,    1861,   he   re- 
ceived orders  and  fitted  out  for  an  ex- 
ploring expedition  to  Uintah  valley  for 
the    purj)ose    of    locating    and    making 
settlements   of  the   Saints  in   that  sec- 
tion of     country.       He     left     home   on 
Tuesday,  Sept.  3,  1861,  in  company  with 
William   B.    Pace,   James  W.    Loveless, 
John  W.  Turner,  Peter  M.  Wentz,  Alex. 
Wilkins,  James  W.  Cummings  and  four 
others.      They  joined  another  company 
from  Salt  Lake  City  for  this  same  pur- 
pose in  Strawberry  valley.   They  thor- 
oughly    explored     that    country,     then 
occupied   by   the   Ute   Indians,   and   re- 
turned home  on  Sept.  17th.  On  Monday, 
Aug.  S,  1864,  he  was  elected  county  re- 
corder  for   Utah   county    and    was   re- 
elected  five  subsequent  terms,   holding 
the  office  till  September,  1875.      He  was 
elected   colonel   of   the   first     regiment. 
First   Brigade,    Utah    Military  District, 
May  8,   1866,  and  received  his  commis- 
sion  from   Governor     Charles    Durkee. 
Aug.    15,   1866,   he   left   Provo     in   com- 
mand of  a  detachment  of  cavalry  and 
proceeded  on  an  expedition  against  the 
Utah  Indians  in  Sevier  county,  accom- 
panied  by   Major      Samuel     S.     Jones, 
Captain    Caleb    W.    Haws    and    sixty- 
nine  officers,  rank  and  file.      The     ex- 
pedition was  a  part  of  the  Black  Hawk 
war;  the  command  was  made  up  most- 
ly  of   young   men    from    Utah    county, 
only  eight  of  whom  were  married.  Aug. 
.^1.  1867,    L.    John    was  ordained  a  High 
Priest  under  the  hands  of  Aaron  John- 
son,  and   set   apart  as   High   Councilor 
in  the  Utah  Stake  of  Zion;  he  was  also 
set  apart  as  clerk  of  the  High  Council, 


BIOGRAPHICAL    ENCYCLOPEDIA. 


3^1 


which    position    he    had    held    for      two 
years   previous.       Feb.      4,    1869,      Pres. 
Brigham   Young,    with    Pres.    Abraham 
O.  Smoot  called  a  few  of  the  brethren 
together  and  submitted  the  propriety  of 
organizing     a    co-operative   institution, 
the  result  of  which  was  that  the  "Pro- 
ve   Co-operative      Mercantile      Institu- 
tion"  was     organized.       L.     John   was 
elected    secretary.       The   buildings  and 
stock  of  merchandise  owned  by  Henry 
W.  Lawrence  were  purchased  and  the 
first   co-operative  organization  in  Zion 
was   effected    and    brought    into    exist- 
ence.      Feb.   2.   1870,    Elder   Nuttall   did 
the    first    printing    performed    in    Utah 
county    at     Provo     City,     on    his    own 
printing   press.       May   28,    1870,    he   as- 
sisted   Pres.    Abraham    O.    Smoot     and 
others   in   the   laying  of   the   southeast 
corner  stone  of  the  Provo  Co-operative 
Woolen    Factory.        On    Sunday    morn- 
ing,   Sept.   3,    1870,   while   Elder   Nuttall 
was  at  Springville,  attending  the  Sun- 
day  services,    his    home     and     all    his 
household   effects     were     destroyed   by 
fire.      The  citizens  being  called  out  of 
the    meeting   house     did     all     in    their 
power  to  save  what  they  could,  yet  his 
household   property,     grain     and     hay 
stacks  were  destroyed  in  a  short  time, 
his   loss   being   estimated   at   from    five 
to  six  thousand  dollars.       The  first  in- 
timation  he   had   of   the     fire   was    by 
telegram      from      Pres.      Abraham      O. 
Smoot,   which   read,    "Your  property   is 
all  destroyed   by  fire.     The  family   are 
all    safe."       At    the    twentieth    session 
of   the   legislature    of   Utah,     January, 
1872,    Elder    Nuttall    was    elected    chief 


hp    having    made    a    trip    in    company 
with    Pres.    Daniel    H.    "Wells,    Apostle 
Lorenzo   Snow   and   others,   in   Septem- 
ber, to  St.   George,  via  Kanab  and  re- 
turned.      May    21,   1876,    he   left   Kanab 
in  company  with  Pres.  Daniel  H.  Wells, 
Erastus    Snow,      Brigham      Young,    jr., 
Daniel  D.  McArthur,  Lorenzo  W.  Roun- 
dy   and  twelve  others  with  teams  and 
carriages    to    visit    the    settlements    of 
the   Saints   in   Arizona.       While    cross- 
ing the   Colorado  river  on   the   24th    of 
September,    the   boat    sank   with   Elder 
Nuttall    and    six    other     brethren,    one 
carriage    and   two     wagons     on   board. 
Bishop     Lorenzo       W.       Roundy     was 
drowned,    the    others    were   all     saved. 
The   carriage  and   one  baggage   wagon 
was  lost,  so  that  ten  of  the  party  went 
on  and  the  balance  returned  home.     In 
December,      1876,      Elder      Nuttall    was 
called  by  Pres.   Brigham  Young  to  at- 
tend the  dedicatory  services  of  the  St. 
George   Temple,    in   which   he   was   ap- 
pointed   to      labor      and    was    recorder 
therein  for  over  three  months.       Hav- 
ing been  called  to  preside  in  the  Kanab 
Stake,  he  left  St.  George     in  company 
with    Anostles    John      Taylor,    Lorenzo 
Snow,    Erastus    Snow    and    others     for 
Kanab,  and  on  April  17,  1877,  the  Kanab 
Stake   of  Zion  was  organized,   with  L. 
John  Nuttall  as  president;    Howard  O. 
Spencer  and   James  L.   Bunting,   coun- 
selors.      He  magnified  his  calling    and 
continued  in  this  position  until  June  4, 
1884,   when  he  was  honorably  released, 
having  been  called  to  labor  as  private 
secretary   to   Pres.   John   Taylor.     Sep- 
tember 10,  1878,  in  company  with  Apos- 


clerk  of  the  legislative  council;  he  also  tie  Erastus  Snow  and  others,  he  left 
served  in  the  same  position  in  the  21st 
session  (1874),  the  23rd  session  (1878), 
and  the  25th  session  (1882).  June  29, 
1874,  his  health  having  become  much 
impaired  and  having  been  appointed 
to  take  a  mission  to  Great  Britain,  he 
left  home  in  company  with  Elders  Da- 
vid McKenzie,  John  Henry  Smith  and 
Peter  Sinclair;  they  sailed  from  New 
York  Julv  14th,  and  arrived  at  Liver- 
pool, July  26,  1874.  Elder  Nuttall  la- 
bored in  the  Durham  and  Newcastle 
conferences,   also   in   the   Liverpool   of- 


h'^  home  at  Kanab  to  visit  the  settle- 
ments of  the  Saints  in  Arizona.  The 
company  consisted  of  Erastus  Snow,  L. 
John  Nuttall,  Ira  N.  Hinckley,  Jesse 
N.  Smith,  Edward  A.  Noble,  Charles 
H.  Oliphant,  Bateman  Williams  and 
John  Starley;  also  three  horses,  ten 
mules  and  three  wagons.  The  com- 
pany visited  each  colony,  organized 
Wards,  preached  to  and  encouraged  the 
Saints,  and  returned  to  Kanab  Nov.  2, 
1878.  June  14,  1879,  Elder  Nuttall  was 
called  bv  Pres.  John  Taylor  to  act  as 


fice.  42  Islington,   uider  the  presidency     his  private    secretary.       Elder     George 


of  Pres.  Joseph  F.  Smith.  In  August, 
1875,  Elder  Nuttall  was  ordained  a 
Bishop  and  set  apart  as  Bishop  of  the 
Kanab  Ward,  and  to  preside  over  the 
six   adjoining  Wards.       He   left   Provo 


Reynolds  who  had  previously  served 
in  that  capacity,  having  been  sentenced 
to  pricon  for  conscience  s-^ke:  Elder 
Nuttall  served  in  that  position  for 
eight  years;   he  was  with  Pres.  Taylor 


for  this  field  of  labor  in  November,  1875,     during  the  years  of  his  exile,  and  was 


358 


LATTER-DAY  SAINT 


at  his  bedside  at  the  time  of  his  death, 
July  25.   1SS7.       He  continued     in     this 
office,    as    pri\ate    secretary      to    Pres. 
"Wilford    Woodruff   until    the   spring   of 
1892,  when,  in  consequence  of  ill  health, 
he  was   released   to   perform  other  du- 
ties that  would  give  him  more  outside 
exercise.        Feb.    24,    1892,     he    was    ap- 
pointed  by   Pres.   Wilford  Woodruff   to 
take  charge  of  the   Church   and  Ward 
real   estate   matters  and   to   look   after 
the  legal  interests  of  the  Relief  Socie- 
ties  of  the   Church,   in   which   work  he 
has  since  been  actively  engaged.    Feb. 
20,  1880,  he  was  elected  a  regent  of  the 
Deseret  University   and   held   his  posi- 
tion  for   several   years.       Sept.   2,    1880, 
he  became  an  incorporator  and  stock- 
holder   of   the    "Deseret    News"      com- 
pany.    His  mother  died  at  Wallsburg, 
Utah,  April  27,  1880,  aged  81  years  and 
4  months.      Aug.  1,  1881,  he  was  elected 
Territorial    superintendent      of    district 
schools  for  Utah  Territory,  and  was  re- 
elected in  1883  and  1885.      April  24,  1882, 
he  met  in    convention  with   the  super- 
intendents of  district   schools  for     the 
selection  of  school  books,  etc.,  and  was 
elected  president.     Seven  sessions  were 
held.       April   21,    1883,    he   was     elected 
a  director  of  the  Salt  Lake  City  Rail- 
way Company,  also  one  of  the  auditing 
comn.ittee.      July  12,  1883,  he  was  elect- 
ed a  director  of  the  Deseret  Telegraph 
Compan^'   and   continued  in   that    office 
during  the  existence    of     the  company 
until  the  spring  of  1900.       Nov.  23,  1883. 
he   was  elected   secretary  and  member 
of   the   executive   board   of  Zion's   Sav- 
ings Bank  &  Trust     Co.       During     the 
year  1884,  in  company  with   Pres.  John 
Taylor  and  party,  he  made  an  extended 
trip   to   the  settlements  of  the     Saints, 
as   far   south   as   St.    George,   returning 
by    way   of   Sevier    and    Sanpete    coun- 
ties,   thence    north    by    way    of    Logan, 
Bear  Lake  and  Snake  river  country,  at 
which    time    (November)    the    Bannock 
Stake  "IS  organized.      Nov.  22,  1887^  he 
was  appointed   to   assist   Hon.   John   T. 
Caine,   delegate   from   Utah,    at  Wash- 
ington.  D.   C.   in   his  labors  in  the   in- 
terest  of   Utah    during   the  years   1888 
and   1S90.       Nov.   11.   1897.   he  was     ap- 
pointed an  aid.  and  afterwards  a  mem- 
ber   of    the      Deseret      Sunday    School 
Union  Board.       He  now   holds  the  po- 
sition of     director     in     Zion's   Savings 
Bank  <t-  Trust  Company,  the  Salt  Lake 
&  Los  Angeles  Railway  Company  and 
the    Saltair   Beach      Company.       Elder 


Nuttall  Is  one  of  the  busiest  men  In 
the  Church,  and  has  discharged  every 
duty  Imposed  upon  him  with  that  zeal 
and  fidelity  which  characterizes  God's 
faithful  servants. 

WOOLLEY,     Kdward     Dilworth, 

second  President  of  the  Kanab  Stake  of 
Zion,  is  the  son  of  Edwin  D.  WooUey 
and  Mary  Wickersham,  and  was  born 
April  30,  1845,  in  Nauvoo,  Hancock 
county.  111.  As  an  infant  he  left  Nau- 
voo with  his  parents  during  the  exodus 
of  1846.  and  arrived  in  Great  Salt  Lake 
valley  in  September,  1848.  He  was 
raised  in  Salt  Lake  City,  where  his 
father  acted  as  Bishop  of  the  13th 
Ward,  and  he  was  baptized  by  his  fa- 
ther when  he  was  about  eight  years  old. 


In  1860  he  went  back  to  the  Missouri 
river  as  a  teamster.  He  was  married 
in  1S67,  and  moved  to  St.  George,  south- 
ern Utah,  that  same  year.  Here  he 
served  as  constable,  alderman,  police- 
man, etc.,  and  participated  in  a  number 
of  Indian  expeditions,  during  which  he 
exhibited  that  heroism  and  bravery 
which  were  characteristic  of  the  "Mor- 
mon" boys  of  those  early  pioneer  days. 
In  1866  he  took  an  active  part  in  recov- 
ering the  bodies  of  James  M.  Whlt- 
more  and  Robert  Mclntire,  who  were 
killed  by  Piede  Indians  near  the  Pipe 
Springs  ranch.  Kane  county.  During 
the  Blackhawk  war  Bro.  WooUey 
served  in  Sanpete  county  under  Col. 
Kimball.  Having  been  ordained  a  Sev- 
enty he  filled  a  short  mission  to  Great 


BIOGRAPHICAL    ENOYCLOPEDIA. 


359 


Britain  in  1877.      He  removed  to  Upper 
Kanab,   Kane   county,     in     1882.       Two 
years  later  (1884)  he  was  called  to  suc- 
ceed   L.   John    Nuttall   as   president   of 
the  Kanab     Stake    of      Zion,     and    he 
changed     his    place    of      residence     to 
Lower  Kanab  in  1889.      Having-  yielded 
obedience    to    the    law    of    plural    mar- 
riage he  was  arrested  on  the  charge  of 
unlawful  cohabitation  in  October,  1887, 
but   after   a     preliminary    examination 
before  a  U.   S.   commissioner,  at  Silver 
Reef,   he  was  acquitted.       He  was  ar- 
rested   a    second     time     on     a   similar 
charge  in  September,  1890,  but  the  case 
was  thrown   out   by  the  grand  jury  at 
Beaver  for  lack  of  evidence.      President 
Woolley  has  exhibited  noble  character- 
istics  as    a    presiding   officer,    and    has 
won    the   love    and    confidence     of    the 
Saints   generally   in   his   field  of   labor. 
During  the   sixteen   years   he   has   pre- 
sided over  the  Kanab  Stake,  many  im- 
provements have  been  made     in     that 
part  of  the  country,  and  union  and  good 
will   are   predominant   features     of  the 
condition  among     the       Saints     in  the 
Kanab  Stake  of  Zion.      The  settlements 
in  the  Kanab  Stake  being  widely  scat- 
tered, Pres.  Woolley  has  to  travel  about 
three   thousand   miles     annually  to   at- 
tend the  different  "Ward  conferences  and 
other  meetings  in  the  Stake. 

HATCH,  Abrani,  president  of  the 
Wasatch  Stake  of  Zion  from  1877  to  1901. 
is  the  son  of  Hezekiah  Hatch  and 
Aldura  Sumner,  and  was  born  Jan.  3, 
1830,  in  Lincoln,  Addison  county,  Ver- 
mont, in  a  pleasant  farm  house  near 
the  foot  hill  of  the  Green  Mountains. 
He  is  the  fourth  sqn  of  a  family  of 
five  sons  and  two  daughters.  His 
grandfather  (Jeremiah  Hatch)  was  a 
soldier  of  the  Revolution  and  served 
under  General  Washington.  Abram 
received  a  common  school  education  in 
the  rural  district  schools  of  Lincoln 
and  Bristol,  and  had  reached  the  age 
of  ten  years  when  Elder  Peletiah 
Brown  came  to  that  section  of  coun- 
try, preaching  "Mormonism."  The  en- 
tire family,  consisting  of  his  grand- 
father and  grandmother,  father,  mother 
and  their  children,  joined  the  Church. 
His  mother  died  in  1840,  and  in  the  fall 
of  that  year  the  family  moved  to  Nau- 
voo,  where  his  father  bought  property, 
opened  up  a  farm  on  the  prairie  and 
built  a  brick  house  on  Mulholland 
street,  in  the  city,  three  blocks  east  of 


the   Temple;    he   died   in   1841.       Abram 
became  a  member  of   the  Nauvoo   Le- 
gion and   served  with  the  posse  under 
Col.  Stephen  Markham  and  Sheriff  Jacob 
Backenstos  in  1845.      During  the  exodus 
of  1846  he  rendered  efficient  service  as 
captain  of  the  numerous    flat-bottomed 
ferry  boats  employed  to  cross  the  Mis- 
sissippi river  carrying  the  fleeing  mul- 
titude.     He  was  also  in  the  first  com- 
pany  that  moved     west     in   the   main 
"Camp  of  Israel"  which  made  its  ren- 
desvouz  on  Sugar  creek,  and  he  drove 
a  wagon  for  Joseph  C.  Kingsbury.  He 
assisted  to  build  the  temporary  settle- 
ment   of    Garden    Grove,    visited    Mis- 
souri, and  later  made  a  trip  to  Penn- 
sylvania  to   see   some   or  his   relatives 
who  had  identified  themselves  with  the 
Rigdonite  movement.      He  again  joined 
the     exiled     Saints    at    Council  Bluffs, 
Iowa,  and  assisted  his  brother  Lorenzo 
to     harvest      a     crop     on     "Brigham's 
Farm,"    near   Winter    Quarters,     after 
which    he   went   to   the   settlements   of 
Missouri  and  there  helped  his  brothers 
to   earn   a  traveling   outfit  with   which 
they    with    their    families    crossed    the 
plains  in  1850.      Having  spent  the  win- 
ter in  Salt  Lake  City,  Abram  moved  to 
Lehi,   Utah   county,   in   1851,     and     as- 
sisted to  build  a  grist  mill  at  the  mouth 
of    American    Fork    canyon.        Dec.    2, 
1852,    he   married   Miss   Permelia     Jane 
Lott,    after   which    he   made    his    home 
in  Lehi  till  1867  and  assisted  materially 
in  the   development  of  the  place.       He 
engaged  in   farming  and  stock-raising, 
and    also    kept    a   hotel.       Ir>    1861,     in 
company   with   Captain   John   R.    IVfur- 
dock,  he  made  a  trip  to  the  States  for 
the    purpose    of    bringing      immigrants 
across     the     plains     and     buying     and 
freighting   merchandise     for   his   store. 
They    also    freighted   goods   for   others, 
and  found  it  a  profitable  business.      In 
1863,    he   again  went  back   to   the    Mis- 
souri   river   for    the    same    purpose    as 
in    1861.       On    both    trips    he    drove     a 
mule  team  in  the  train.      Altogether  he 
has    made    eleven     trips     between    the 
Missouri    river    and    Utah.       In    1864-67 
he  filled  a  mission     to     Great     Britain, 
where  he  labored  as  a  traveling  Elder 
in  the  Birmingham  conference,  later  as 
president  of  the  Manchester  pastorate, 
and  still  later  as  president  of  the  Bir- 
mingham  pastorate.       He    also    visited 
Switzerland,  Germany  and  Holland.  Re- 
turning to  America,  he  crossed  the  At- 
lantic   ocean    in    the    steamship    "Great 


360 


LATTER-DAY    SAINT 


Eastern."  He  arrived  home  In  August, 
1867,  and  a  few  weeks  afterwards  he 
was  called  by  Pres.  Brigham  Young  to 
go  to  Wasatch  county  to  act  as  pre- 
siding Bishop.  He  was  ordained  and 
set  apart  to  that  office  Dec.  2,  1867.  Un- 
der his  wise  and  practical  management 
Wasatch  county  soon  became  a  pros- 
perous and  desirable  locality  and  Heber 
City  especially  grew  to  be  a  town  of 
Importance.  When  the  settlements  of 
the  Saints  in  Provo  valley,  or  Wasatch 
county,  were  organized  into  a  Stake 
of  Zion,  In  1877,  Abram  Hatch  was  ap- 
pointed its  president,  and  in  that  ca- 
pacity he  served  about  a  quarter  of  a 
century.  His  duties  as  president  were 
neecssarily  various,  active  and  con- 
tinuous. "He  took  a  leading  part  in  all 
measures  adopted  for  the  development 
of  the  resources  of  the  county,  and 
utilized  them  for  building  up  the  Stake 
and  promoting  both  the  material, moral 
and  spiritual  welfare  of  the  people,  in 
Improving  Church  property,  superin- 
tending, the  erection  of  public  edifices, 
building  roads,  bridges,  irrigating  ca- 
nals, etc."  He  also  established  a 
ranch  in  Ashley  valley,  where  settle- 
ments of  the  Saints,  that  have  since 
grown  into  a  Stake  of  Zion,  were 
founded.  Pres.  Hatch  has  served 
several  times  in  the  Utah  legislature, 
has  acted  as  probate  judge  of  Wasatch 
county  and  been  elected  to  many  other 
offices  within  the  gifts  of  the  people. 
(See  also  Tullidge's  Histories,  Vol.  2, 
Bio.  p.  187.) 

SMAllT,  AVilliaiii  Henry  president 
of  the  Wasatch  Stake  of  Zion,  is  the 
son  of  Thomas  S.  Smart  and  Ann  Hay- 
ter,  and  was  born  April  6,  1862,  at 
Franklin.  Oneida  county,  Idaho.  His 
father  was  one  of  the  founders  of 
Fianklin,  having  moved  from  Provo  to 
Idaho  in  ISGO:  and  it  was  here  that  the 
days  of  William's  boyhood  and  early 
youth  were  passed,  and  his  early  school 
training  received.  He  was  baptized  in 
1872.  ordained  a  Teacher  Sept.  23,  1877, 
and  acted  as  second  and  later  as  first 
counselor  to  the  president  of  his  quo- 
rum. When  seventeen  years  of  age 
he  entered  the  Brigham  Young  College 
at  Logan,  then  in  its  infancy.  Here 
he  spent  two  years,  and  then  entered 
the  normal  department  of  the  Univer- 
sit'-  of  Utah,  from  which  he  graduated 
in  the  spring  of  1883.  Returning  to 
Logan,  he  was  engaged  as  an  instruc- 


tor in  the  B.  Y.  College,  entering  upon 
his  duties  Sept.  1,  1883.  While  here  he 
was,  for  part  of  the  time,  assistant 
treasurer  of  the  college  and  was  the 
first  teacher  of  theology  in  this  insti- 
tution. Eight  years  of  his  life  as  a 
teacher  were  spent  in  the  college  and 
two  as  the  principal  of  the  schools  of 
his  native  town.  July  20,  1886,  he,  in 
company  with  his  father,  was  set  apart 
to  visit  their  relatives  in  England,  and 
to  obtain  genealogies.       He  was  given 


the  genealogical  labor  by  his  father, 
and  was  remarkably  successful  in  being 
liermitted  to  examine,  almost  gratuit- 
ously, the  records  of  some  fourteen 
parishes,  and  of  obtaining  genealogies 
of  many  relatives,  for  whom,  under  his 
direction,  vicarious  work  has  since  been 
(lone  by  the  Smart  family.  Oct.  3, 
1888,  he  was  united  in  marriage  to  Miss 
Anna  Haines  in  the  Logan  Temple,  and 
the  following  spring  he  was  called  on  a 
mission  to  Europe.  The  fore  part  of 
this  mission  was  spent  in  Turkey.  Be- 
ing poorly  in  health,  he  was  transferred 
to  the  London  conference,  England. 
After  laboring  here,  tracting  and 
preaching  under  great  physical  diffi- 
culties for  about  two  months,  his  presi- 
dent, Jos.  W.  McMurrin,  ordered  his 
release,  and  he  arrived  home  late  in 
the  spring  of  1889.  Both  before  this 
mission  and  following  it  he  performed 
various  spiritual  labors  in  the  com- 
munities in  which  he  lived,  such  as 
Ward  teacher,  worker  in  the  mutual 
improvement  cause,  religion  class 
teacher.  Ward  clerk,       Sunday     school 


BIOGRAPHICAL,    ENCYCLOPEDIA. 


361 


teacher,  and  home  missionary,  until 
April  11,  1898,  when  he  was  set  apart 
as  a  missionary  to  the  Eastern  States. 
May  5,  1898,  he  was  appointed  by  Pres. 
Alonso  P.  Kesler  as  the  first  president 
of  the  newly  organized  Brooklyn  con- 
ference which  comprised  Greater  New 
York.  He  continued  in  this  position 
until  March  11,  1899,  when  he  was  called 
to  succeed  Pres.  Alonzo  P.  Kesler  as 
president  of  the  Eastern  States  mis- 
sion; from  this  position  he  was  re- 
leased to  return  home  in  the  fall  of 
1900.  Feb.  10,  1901,  he  was  called  to 
preside  over  the  Wasatch  Stake  of 
Zion,  being  ordained  at  the  same  time 
a  Hig-h  Priest.  This  position  he  is 
holding  at  the  present  time. 

MURDOCK,  Joseph  Royal,  first 
counselor  to  Pres.  Wm.  H.  Smart  (pres- 
ident of  the  "Wasatch  Stake  of  Zion),  is 
the  son  of  Nymphas  C.  and  Sarah  M. 
Murdock,  and  was  born  Aug.  11,  1858, 
in  Salt  Lake  City,  Utah,  where  he 
remained  until  1871,  when  he  moved  to 
Charleston,  "Wasatch  county,  where  he 
has  since  resided.  He  completed  the 
common  school  course,  and  also  attend- 
ed the  B.  Y.  Academy  at  Provo  in 
1875-76.  He  was  married  to  Margaret 
"Wright,  daughter  of  "Wm.  and  Jemima 
"Wright,  Nov.  28,  1878.  Their  union  has 
been  blessed  with  ten  children,  all  of 
whom  are  living.  For  three  years  he 
taught  school  in  the  district  schools  at 


Charleston.  In  1S80-82  he  filled  a  mis- 
sion to  the  Northern  States,  laboring 
principally  in  the  State  of  Michigan. 
His  avocation  in  life  has  been  farm- 
ing, stock  raising  and  merchandising. 
In  1887  he  was  chosen  as  second  coun- 
selor to  his  father  in  the  Bishopric  of 
Charleston    Ward,    which      position    he 


held  until  Feb.  3,  1901,  when  he  was 
called  to  act  as  first  counselor  to  Pres. 
Wm.  H.  Smart  of  the  Wasatch  Stake 
of  Zion,  which  position  he  now  holds. 
He  served  as  a  member  of  the  consti- 
tutional convention  and  was  Wasatch 
county's  representative  in  the  first  two 
State  legislatures.  In  November,  1900, 
he  was  elected  senator  from  the  Fifth 
Senatorial   District. 

JENSEN,  James  C,  second  counselor 
in  the  presidency  of  the  Wasatch  Stake 
of  Zion,  is  the  son  of  Soren  Peter  and 
Kirsten  Marie  Jensen,  and  was  born 
at    Glimsholt.    Ugilt      parish,    Hjorring 


amt,  Denmark,  Sept.  9,  1863.  His  pa- 
rents embraced  the  gospel  in  1875,  and 
he  himself  was  baptized  April  14,  1877, 
in  which  year  the  family  emigrated 
with  a  company  of  Saints  which  ar- 
rived in  Salt  Lake  City,  July  14,  1877. 
His  father,  having,  previous  to  cchning 
to  Utah,  bought,  from  one  of  the  mis- 
sionaries, a  home  at  Levan,  Juab  coun- 
ty, the  family  located  there,  and  the 
children  attended  the  district  school 
the  next  winter.  In  1881-82  James  at- 
tended the  Brigham  Young  Academy  at 
Provo.  Leaving  school,  he  went  to 
Milford,  Utah,  where  for  some  time  he 
was  engaged  by  B.  F.  Grant  in  various 
clerical  positions.  Oct.  16,  1884,  he 
married  Miss  Joannah  E.  Jennings,  of 
Levan,  by  whom  he  has  up  to  this  time 
(1901)  had  four  living  children.  In  1885 
he  became  head  book-keeper  for  the 
Co-operative  Wagon  and  Machine  Com- 
pany, in  Salt  Lake  City,  which  position 
he  held  until,  1888,  when  he  resigned  to 
enter  into  co-partnership  with  Hon. 
Charles  C.  Richards,  Daniel  and  John 
Hamer  of  Ogden  in  the  abstract  busi- 
ness.      He  assisted   in  compiling  a  set 


362 


LATTER-DAY    SAINT 


of  abstract  records  of  Weber  county, 
and  later,  as  a  member  of  the  sajne 
company,  he  had  charge  of  the  com- 
pilation of  the  set  of  abstract  records 
of  Salt  I.ake  county.  The  company 
was  later  incorporated  as  the  Security 
Abstract  Co.  He  followed  the  abstract 
business  until  1S96,  when  he  was  elect- 
ed to  the  office  of  county  recorder  of 
Salt  Lake  county.  In  188S  he  was  re- 
elected, leading  his  ticket  by  several 
hundred  votes.  At  the  expiration  of 
his  second  term  of  office,  having  re- 
fused to  permit  his  name  to  be  again 
presented  for  renoinination  by  his  par- 
ty, he  engaged  as  instructor  of  pen- 
manship and  other  business  branches 
with  the  Latter-day  Saints  college.  In 
this  position  he  continued  until  released 
in  1901  to  accept  the  ecclesiastical  po- 
sition which  he  now  holds.  While  he 
has  not  had  the  privilege  of  a  mission 
abroad.  Elder  Jensen  has  nevertheless 
been  active  in  ecclesiastical  work.  He 
has  been  connected  with  Sunday 
school  work  in  every  Ward  in  which 
he  has  lived;  has  acted  as  Ward 
teacher  in  the  13th  and  19th  Wards  in 
Salt  Lake  City;  was  called  to  the  office 
of  president  of  the  Y.  M.  M.  I.  A.  of 
the  13th  Ward  in  1887,  but  because  of 
removal  from  the  Ward  did  not  act  in 
this  capacity.  He  has  been  an  officer 
in  several  of  the  mutual  improvement 
associations  In  Salt  Lake  City.  At 
the  time  of  the  organization  of  the 
Granite  Stake,  he  was  chosen  as  Stake 
secretary  of  the  Sunday  schools,  from 
■which  office,  as  well  as  from  other 
work,  in  which  he  was  at  the  time  en- 
gaged, he  was  released  to  accept  a 
call  to  act  as  second  counselor  to  Wil- 
liam H.  Smart,  president  of  the 
Wasatch  Stake,  to  which  office  he  was 
chosen  and  unanimously  sustained  by 
the  conference  at  Heber  City,  May  12, 
1901. 

PKTEKSOX,  Canute,  president  of 
the  South  Sanpete  Stake  of  Zlon,  was 
born  May  13,  1824,  in  Eidsfjord,  Har- 
danger.  Norway.  He  emigrated  with 
his  parents  to  America  In  1837  and  set- 
tled in  La  Salle  county.  111.,  where  he 
received  the  gospel  and  was  baptized 
Aug.  12.  1842.  While  on  a  visit  to 
Nauvoo,  in  1844,  he  was  ordained  a 
Seventy  and  called  Into  the  active  min- 
istry. His  first  mission  was  to  Wis- 
consin in  1844-4.1,  with  Elder  Gudmund 
Haugaas   as    a    missionary    companion. 


They  preached  the  gospel  successfully 
to  the  Norwegians  and  others  in  that 
part  of  the  country,  baptized  quite  a 
number  and  organized  a  branch  of  the 
(^hurch.  In  1849,  in  connection  with 
his  wife  Sarah  Ann,  whom  he  married 
while  on  the  journey,  he  emigrated  to 
Utah  and  located  temporarily  in  Salt 
Lake  City.  Together  with  others,  he 
was  called,  in  1850,  to  settle  Lehi,  Utah 
county;  and  it  was  while  living  there 
that  he  was  called  to  take  a  mission 
in  Norway.  In  company  with  other 
missionaries,  he  left  Utah  for  this  mis- 
sion, in  September,  1852,  and  arrived  at 
Risoer,  Norway,  together  with  Elders 
Erik  G.  M.  Hogan  and  Carl  C.  N.  Do- 
rius  (a  native  Elder  of  Denmark),  May 
10,  1853.  He  labored  in  Risoer,  Brevig 
and  Frederikstad  branches  and  also  in 
the    surrounding     country      for    a    few 


months,  and  quite  a  number  were  added 
to  the  Church.  He  was  then  chosen 
by  Pres.  Hogan  tp  go  to  Chrlstianla, 
the  capital  in  Norway,  to  open  up  the 
gospel  door  there.  After  a  great  deal 
of  labor  and  hardships,  and  much  op- 
position from  both  civil  and  ecclesias- 
tical authorities,  a  branch  of  the 
Church  was  organized  Dec.  8,  1853. 
Among  the  foremost  to  take  a  part 
with  him  in  his  missionary  labors  in 
Norway  were  Elders  Carl  C.  A.  Chris- 
tensen,  Carl  C.  N.  Dorius  and  Johan 
F.  F.  Dorius.  Although  at  first  they 
met  with  great  opposition  and  hard- 
ships, and  were  not  even  acknowledged 
as  Christians  among  the  Protestant 
dissenters,    the    Lord    blessed    their   la- 


BIOGRAPHICAL.   ENCYCLOPEDIA. 


363 


bors,  and  the  Christiania  branch  soon 
became  one  of  the  most  flourishing 
branches  in  Norway.  After  an  absence 
of  four  years,  Elder  Peterson  returned 
home  with  a  large  company  of  Scandi- 
navian, English  and  American  Saints. 
In  1867  he  was  called  to  go  to  Sanpete 
county  to  act  as  Bishop  of  Ephraim. 
At  this  time  the  Indians  were  very 
hostile,  and  carried  on  warfare  with 
the  white  settlers,  who  had  suffered 
much  from  their  ravages.  This  war 
lasted  for  several  years.  In  August, 
1868,  ten  of  the  leading  Indians  came 
to  Bishop  Peterson's  house,  to  talk  over 
the  condition  of  affairs,  which  resulted 
in  an  agreement  of  peace  that  has 
never  been  broken.  Pres.  Peterson  is 
now  known  among  the  Indians  as  their 
"White  Father."  In  1871,  he  was  called 
by  Pres.  Brigham  Young  to  take  an- 
other mission  to  Europe,  to  preside  over 
the  Scandinavian  mission.  With  the 
assistance  of  the  many  good  and  faith- 
ful Elders,  who  labored  under  him,  the 
mission  prospered  very  much.  He  re- 
turned to  Utah  July  24,  1873,  bringing 
with  him  a  large  company  of  Scandina- 
vian emigrants.  In  1877  he  was  chosen 
and  set  apart  by  Pres.  Brigham  Young 
to  preside  over  the  Sanpete  Stake  of 
Zion,  which  position  he  held  till  De- 
cember, 1900,  when  Sanpete  county  was 
divided  into  two  Stakes,  and  Canute 
Peterson  was  appointed  to  preside  over 
South  Sanpete  Stake.  Several  years 
ago  Pres.  Peterson  was  ordained  to  the 
ofl^ice  of  a  Patriarch. 

LAYTON,  Christopher,  president 
of  the  St.  Joseph  Stake  of  Zion  from 
1883  to  1898,  was  th.e  son  of  Samuel  and 
Isabel  Layton,  and  was  born  March  8, 
1821,  in  the  little  town  of  Thorncut, 
Northhill,  Bedfordshire,  England.  He 
was  the  youngest  of  the  family  of  five 
children  and  was  reared  in  very  hum- 
ble circumstances.  Owing  to  this  con- 
dition he  went  to  work  when  about 
eight  years  of  age  for  33  cents  a  week, 
to  help  support  the  family,  gradually 
advancing  to  responsible  positions  as 
he  grew  older.  During  those  days  ther>i 
were  no  schools  in  the  rural  districts 
of  England;  consequently  the  education 
given  the  children  was  mainly  by  their 
parents.  Though  education  of  a  tem- 
poral benefit  was  neglected,  the  spirit- 
ual was  evidently  provided,  for  at  the 
age  of  about  twenty-one  years  the  doc- 
trines of  the  Church  of  Jesus  Christ  of 


Latter-day  Saints  were  accepted  as  the 
best,  by  the  young  investigator.  To- 
gether with  Mary  Matthews,  who  after- 
ward became  his  wife,  he  was  baptized 
Jan.  1,  1842,  by  Elder  »amuel  Howard. 
In  the  following  July  they  were  mar- 
ried at  Thorncut,  England,  where  they 
then  lived  six  months.  In  January, 
1843,  he  and  his  wife  embarked  on  the 
ship  "Swanton,"  to  cross  the  briny 
deep  with  a  company  of  Latter-day 
Saints  who  emigrated  from  England  to 
the  headquarters  of  the  Church  which 
were  then  in  Illinois.  The  company 
numbered  212  souls,  led  by  Elder  Lo- 
renzo Snow.  They  were  seven  weeks 
on  the  waters  of  the  Atlantic,  and 
landed  in  America  in  March,  1843. 
Christopher  Layton  and  wife  met  the 
Prophet  Joseph  Smith  for  the  first  time 
on  the  banks  of  the  Mississippi  river. 


in  Nauvoo,  April  12,  1843;  a  sojourn  of 
a  few  days  was  made  at  the  home  of 
Philemon  C.  Merrill.  They,  with  the 
Church,  passed  through  all  the  trying 
ordeals  and  persecutions  which  fol- 
lowed, from  1843  to  1846,  in  Nauvoo  and 
neighborhood.  Along  with  the  other 
trials,  the  Lord  called  Bro.  Layton  to 
part  with  his  beloved  wife  and  com- 
panion, and  he  was  left  penniless  to 
care  for  an  eighteen  months  old  baby. 
Just  as  the  Saints  were  moving  west 
the  government  called  on  the  "Mor- 
mons" for  five  hundred  soldiers  to 
fight  in  the  Mexican  war.  Christopher 
Layton  was  one  of  the  first  to  volun- 


364 


LATTER-DAT    SAINT 


teer.  He  started  on  the  famous  march 
to  California,  July  16,  1846,  and  served 
In  the  Mormon  Battalion  until  he  was 
honorably  discharged  in  Los  Angeles, 
Cal.,  July  15.  1847.  After  his  discharge 
he  was  employed  by  Mr.  Sutter,  a 
rancher  near  Sacramento.  While  there, 
gold  was  discovered,  by  members  of  the 
Mormon  Battalion.  There  being  at 
that  time  a  demand  for  horses,  Chris- 
topher Layton  returned  to  Los  Angeles 
and  bought  some;  he  took  them  to  San 
Francisco,  where  he  sold  them  with 
considerable  profit.  The  means  thus 
earned  he  sent  to  the  Bank  of  England. 
While  at  San  Francisco,  he  had  the 
misfortune  to  break  his  leg;  but  as  soon 
as  he  was  able  he  set  sail  for  England, 
landing  there  in  March,  1850.  After 
paving  his  tithing  on  the  money  earned, 
to  the  presiding  Elder  (Apostle  Orson 
Pratt),  he  went  home  and  there  re- 
ceived the  sad  news  of  the  death  of 
his  mother,  only  two  weeks  before  his 
arrival.  Soon  after  reaching  home,  he 
married  Sarah  Martin;  in  1850  he  re- 
turned to  America  with  his  wife  and 
six  relatives  and  forty-six  friends,  pay- 
ing the  passage  for  all  of  them.  A 
two  years'  stay  was  made  at  St.  Louis, 
Mo.,  and  then  he  continued  his  journey 
to  Salt  Lake  City.  A  part  of  his 
means  was  spent  in  assisting  the  new 
emigrants  to  cross  the  plains.  He  was 
appointed  assistant  to  Captain  Abra- 
ham O.  Smoot;  but  as  Bro.  Smoot  took 
sick,  the  office  of  captain  fell  to  the 
lot  of  Bro.  Layton.  The  company, 
consisting  of  52  wagons,  reached  Salt 
Lake  City,  Sept.  3,  1852.  in  a  better  con- 
dition than  any  company  which  up  to 
that  time  had  crossed  the  plains.  Some 
of  the  first  machinery  ever  brought  to 
U.ah  was  taken  there  by  Christopher 
Layton.  In  the  spring  of  1856,  he  went 
to  Carson  valley,  Nevada,  where  he 
figured  prominently  among  the  Saints, 
who  weie  endeavoring  to  build  up  a 
Stake  of  Zion  in  that  part  of  the 
country.  He  returned  to  Utah  in  the 
fall  of  1857,  and  became  a  permanent 
settler  in  Kaysville,  Davis  county, 
where  he  was  universally  known  as  a 
mojt  successful  farmer.  He  was  the 
first  man  who  introduced  dry  farming 
in  Davis  county.  On  one  occasion  he 
raised  21,000  bushels  of  grain,  which  is 
the  largest  cut  of  grain  ever  raised  by 
any  one  man  in  Utah  in  one  season. 
As  a  financier  he  had  but  few  equals 
and  he  ranked  high  as  a  public-spirited 


man.  He  was  a  life  member  of  the 
Deseret  Agricultural  &  Manufacturing 
Society  (according  to  a  certificate  given 
him  March  1,  1864)  and  a  shareholder 
in  the  Weber  Canyon  Road  Company. 
In  1866  he  was  appointed  brigade  quar- 
termaster, in  the  first  brigade  of  the 
Nauvoo  Legion,  in  Davis  Military  Dis- 
trict, Utah.  He  was  a  stockholder  in 
and  a  director  of  the  Utah  Central 
Railway,  and  of  the  Kaysville  Farmers' 
Union.  In  1876  he  was  elected  a  direc- 
tor of  Zion's  Co-operative  Mercantile 
Institution,  Salt  Lake  City.  He  also 
served  a  term  in  the  Territorial  legisla- 
ture (1866-67).  Christopher  Layton  acted 
as  Bishop  of  Kaysville  for  seventeen 
years,  and  when  the  Davis  Stake  of 
Zion  was  organized  in  1877,  he  was 
chosen  first  counselor  to  Wm.  R.  Smith, 
president  of  the  Stake.  He  held  that 
position  for  several  years,  after  which 
he  was  called  to  Arizona  to  preside 
over  the  St.  Joseph  Stake,  which  was 
organized  in  1883.  He  presided  there 
for  fifteen  years,  or  until  1898,  when  he 
was  released  on  account  of  ill  health. 
Jan.  29,  1898,  he  was  ordained  a  Patri- 
arch by  Apostle  John  Henry  Smith.  In 
June,  1898,  he  went  to  Utah  and  under- 
went an  operation,  from  the  effects  of 
which  he  died  Aug.  7,  1898,  77  years,  4 
months  and  29  days  old.  Christopher 
I^ayton  was  the  father  of  sixty  children, 
of  whom  fifty-one  were  living  at  the 
time  of  his  death,  and  all  are  members 
of  the  Church  of  Jesus  Christ  of  Lat- 
ter-day Saints.  March  8,  1898,  a  mem- 
ber of  the  family  met  and  effected  a 
family  organization,  on  which  occasion 
a  committee  was  appointed  to  hunt  up 
(genealogy  and  write  a  biog^-aphy  of 
Christopher  Layton.  The  committer* 
has  nearly  completed  its  work,  and  the 
book,  when  published,  will  show  that 
Christopher  Layton  was  one  of  the 
most  remarkable  men  that  ever  figured 
in  the  history  of  the  "Mormon"  Church. 

KIMItAUi,  Andrew,  president  of 
the  St.  Joseph  Stake  of  Zion,  is  a  son  of 
the  late  Heber  C.  Kimball  and  Ann  A. 
Gheen,  and  was  born  Sept.  6,  1858,  in  a 
house  which  stood  northeast  of  the 
Temple  Block,  Salt  Lake  City.  At  the 
time  of  his  birth  his  mother  added  two 
to  the  family  (Alice  A.  and  Andrew), 
thent  known  as  Annie's  bouncing  twins. 
During  Andrew's  early  life  his  mother 
changed  place  of  residence  a  number  of 
limes,    the    last    time      he    removed    to 


BIOGRAPHICAL    ENCYCLOPEDIA. 


365 


the  old  Hendricks  place  in  the  Nine- 
teenth Ward,  wheie  Andrew  resided  for 
many  years.  Sept.  20,  1S66,  Pres.  He- 
ber  C.  Kimball  took  a  goodly  number 
of  his  children  to  City  creek,  opposite 
the  old  mill,  where  the  Patent  Roller 
Mill  stood  later,  and  bajUized  one  of 
them  himself,  showing-  the  example, and 
then  called  upon  David  P.  and  Charles 
S.,  his  oldest  sons,  to  finish  baptizing 
the  group  of  ready  children  who  were 
all  over  eight  years  of  age.  Andrew 
was  among  the  number  baptized.  When 
Pres.  Kimball  died  June  22,  1868,  An- 
drew's mother  was  lying  at  the  point  of 
death,  but  recovered  after  a  short  time. 
Andrew  attended  school  during  the 
winter     seasons      and     worked  around 


home,  looking  after  his  mother,  until 
he  was  about  sixteen  years  of  age, when 
he  set  out  to  earn  means  to  support 
his  mother  and  two  sisters  (Alice  and 
Sarah),  his  two  elder  brothers  (Samuel 
H.  and  Daniel  H.)  having  left  home  to 
do  for  themselves.  His  employment 
consisted  of  railroading,  ranching,  farm 
work  and  finally  tanning  at  the  Co-op 
Tannery,  where  he  was  employed  when 
his  mother  died,  Oct.  12,  1879.  In  Janu- 
ary, 1880,  he  commenced  work  as  fire- 
man on  a  locomotive  for  the  Utah  Cen- 
tral Ry.  Co.  In  September,  1878,  he 
was  ordained  a  Deacon  by  Bishop 
Richard  V.  Morris.  He  was  ordained 
an  Elder  April  9,  1880,  by  Thomas 
Slight  and  received  his  endowments  the 
same  day.  In  the  fall  of  that  year 
he  was  chosen  first  counselor  to  Joseph 


R.   Matthews  in   the  presidency  of  the 
7th  quorum  of  Elders.      June  9,  1884,  he 
was    ordained    a      Seventy      by      Lewis 
Perkins,    and   chosen   and   set   apart  as 
one  of  the  presidents  of  th.-  .",0th   quo- 
rum ])y  Wm.  W.  Taylor.       In  May,  1881, 
he    was    badly    scalded    while    firing   on 
Engine   No.   3   between    Salt   Lake   City 
and  Juab;  after  his  recovery  he  worked 
in    the   U.    C.    Ry.     shops,    learning   the 
machinist's  trade.      In  a  Ward  capacity 
he  acted   as   a   Blo^k     Teacher,     as     a 
Teacher   in   the    Sunday   School,    as   an 
officer  in  the  young  people's  mutual  im- 
provement associations,  and  as  trustee 
in  the  19th  school  district.      Feb.  2,  1882 
he  married   Olive  Woolley,   a  daughter 
of  Bishop  Edwin  D.  and  Mary  A.  Wool- 
ley,  of  the  Thirteenth  Ward.  Salt  Lake 
City,  by  whom  he  has  had  seven  chil- 
dren.     Being  called  on  a  mission  to  the 
Indian  Territory,  he  left  home  Jan.  28, 
1885,   in  company  with  James  G.  West, 
leaving  a  wife  and  a  three  months  old 
babe.      He  labored  zealously  among  the 
Cherokee  Indian.s,  and  the  white  people 
living  in  their  country.      In  September 
Elder  West   was     released     and   came 
home,    leaving     Elder     Kimball    alone, 
there  being  no  other  Elders  in  the  Ter- 
ritory and  but  a  few  scattered  Saints. 
Jan.   21,   1886,   he   was  joined   by  Elders 
Ammon    Green,   jun.,    of   West    Weber, 
and   Ammon   Allen,   of  Huntsville,   and 
on  May  3,  1886,  by  Elder  David  Shand, 
of   Manti,    Sanpete   county,       The    four 
missionaries    then    divided    up    in    twos 
and  traversed  the  greater  portion  of  the 
country  occupied  by  the  Cherokee  na- 
tion   and    also    extended    their   travels 
into    the    Creek   and    Choctaw    nations. 
They  distributed   tracts,   circulated  the 
Book  of  Mormon,  pamphlets  and  copies 
of  the  "Deseret  News"  and  preached  in 
nearly  all  the  settlements,     but     made 
only  a  few  converts.though  they  gained 
many  friends  and  were  the  instruments 
in    the    hands    of    the    Lord    in    putting 
down   prejudice   and    laying  a   founda- 
tion for  a  good  work  in  the  future.  El- 
der   Kimball    suffered    from    the    chills 
over  three  months,  a  part  of  which  time 
he   was  alone,   but  was  kindly   treated 
by    the   Indians     and     also     by   many 
friends  among   the   Whites.       He   bap- 
tized three  persons  and  blessed  several 
children.       In  the  spring  of  1SS7  he  re- 
ceived his  release,  only  temporary,  how- 
over,  as  he  was  still  kept  in  charge  of 
the    Indian      Territory      mission.        He 
parted   with   the   Elders  and   their  kind 


366 


LATTER-DAY    SAINT 


friend.  Mr.  Wm.  ri.  Hendricks,  who 
had  made  a  home  for  the  Elders  for 
three  or  four  years.  When  Elder  Kim- 
ball thanked  him  for  this  kindness,  he 
said:  "Not  at  all,  Mr.  Kimball,  you 
have  done  more  for  me  and  my  people 
than  I  ever  did  for  you."  Brother 
Kimball,  accompanied  by  Elder  Am- 
nion Allen,  who  was  released  because 
of  ill  health,  arrived  home  April  24, 
1SS7.  and  a  few  days  later  commenced 
work  at  Woolley.  Young-  and  Hardy 
Co.'s  store.  May  11,  1887,  he  was  set 
apart  to  labor  as  a'  home  missionary 
in  the  Salt  Lake  Stake  of  Zion.  Elder 
Kimball  remained  in  charge  of  the  In- 
dian Territory  mission  until  the  spring 
of  1S9T.  Under  his  presidency  (for 
twelve  years)  the  mission  grew  from 
one  Elder  fhimself)  to  sixty-one  El- 
ders, and  from  one  tribe  of  the  Indian 
Territory  to  five  States  and  Territories, 
which  is  now  known  as  the  South- 
western States  mission.  When  the  22nd 
T\'ard  in  Salt  Lake  Stake  was  organ- 
ized. Elder  Kimball  was  chosen  first 
counselor  to  Bishop  Alfred  Solomon. 
but  afterwards  released  on  account  of 
his  missionary  labors.  Elder  Kimball 
was  also  active  in  local  affairs;  he 
served  most  of  two  terms  as  district 
school  trustee,  represented  his  people 
in  county  and  city  conventions,  was  a 
member  of  the  city  council  of  Brigham 
City,  while  residing  a  short  time  in 
Box  Elder  county.  Utah,  and  was  a 
member  of  one  of  the  constitutional 
conventions.  After  returning  from  his 
first  mission  in  1887,  he  engaged  in 
mercantile  pursuits,  working  for  dif- 
ferent firms  in  Salt  Lake  and  Brigham 
City:  later  he  represented  various  home 
industries,  traveling  for  several  years 
throughout  the  intermountain  west. 
■U'hiU-  thus  engaged,  he  was  energetic 
in  prr-pf  hing  the  gospel  and  laboring  in 
the  inti-re«ts  of  the  Sunday  Schools 
through  tho  various  Stakes  of  Zion.  At 
the  Sunday  School  conference  held  Oct. 
3.  isrt7.  Eld<'r  Kimball  was  sustained  as 
a  mrmbor  of  the  Deseret  Sunday  School 
I'nion  Board,  and  is  still  a  member.  In 
the  President's  office  Salt  Lake  City. 
T'tah.  Jan.  22.  ISOS.  he  was  set  apart  as 
president  of  the  St  Joseph  Stake  by 
Pres.  Joseph  F.  Smith,  assisted  by 
Apostle  John  Hpiiry  Smith,  and  at  .a 
special  Priesthood  nif^eting  and  confer- 
ence held  in  Thatcher,  Arizona,  Jan. 
29th  and  30th.  ISOS.  he  was  installed  in 
his    new    office,    Aiioslles     John    Henry 


Smith  and  John  W.  Taylor  being  in 
charge.  The  Stake  was  subsequently 
reorganized  in  considerable  detail  un- 
der Elder  Kimball's  management.  The 
St.  Joseph  Stake  Academy  has  grown 
under  his  supervision  into  the  Latter- 
day  Saints  Academy,  now  the  largest 
school  in  Arizona.  In  temporal  mat- 
ters Elder  Kimball  is  very  active.  He 
is  a  member  of  the  board  of  directors 
of  three  canal  companies  and  presi- 
dent of  two;  operates  with  his  partner, 
Bro.  Edward  C.  Phillips,  in  the  leading 
implement  business  in  the  Gila  valley, 
and  is  secretary  and  store  manager  of 
the  firm  of  Thatcher  Implement  and 
Mercantile  Co.  He  also  served  as  a 
member  of  the  21st  Arizona  legislature. 

JOHNSON,  William  Dydainous,  first 
counselor  in  the  presidency  of  the  St. 
Joseph  Stake  of  Zion  since  1884,  is  the 
son  of  Lorenzo  Johnson  and  Mary  Ly- 


man, and  was  born  Oct.  22,  1833,  in  the 
town  of  Haddam,  Middlesex  county, 
Co.in.  He  lemoved  with  his  parents  to 
thi-  State  of  Michigan  in  1834,  and  set- 
tled in  Oakland  county,  where  the  fami- 
ly lemained  till  1S4G,  when  they  removed 
to  Xauvoo,  111.  When  they  arrived 
there  on  March  8,  1846,  the  first  camp 
f)f  the  Saints  had  already  crossed  the 
Mississippi  river  and  was  encamped  on 
Sugar  creek.  Elder  Johnson  writes; 
"In  March,  1846.  we  crossed  the  river 
and  took  up  the  line  of  march  for  the 
wfst.  We  overtook  the  first  camp  at 
Garden  Grove,  where  we  stopped  the 
remainder  of   the   season   and   put  in  a 


BIOGRAPHICAL    ENCYCLOPEDIA. 


367 


crop      Here,  also,  I  was  baptized  April 
25.   1846.       After  our  crops  were  all  in, 
my   father   put   two   yoke   of  oxen   and 
a  wagon  on  the  road,  which  made  three 
trips   from   Garden    Grove    to   the   Mis- 
sissippi  river   after   families   of   Saints 
which  had  been  driven  out  of  Nauvoo 
by  the  mob.      In  the  spring  of  1847  we 
moved   to  Winter   Quarters,   where   we 
built  another  home  and  raised  another 
crop.       In  the  spring  of  1848     we     were 
compelled,  through  the  influence  of  In- 
dian   agents,    to    recross    the      Missouri 
river;  in  consequence  of  which  we  made 
another  home  at  Council  Bluffs.  There 
we  remained  about  four  years,  when  we 
migrated    to    Great    Salt    Lake    valley, 
arriving  there  Sept.  25,  1852.       We  set- 
tled  at    Springville,    Utah   county,     the 
same  fall,  where     I       now     resided  for 
twenty-eight  years.       When  the  Indian 
war  of  1853,  known  as  the  Walker  wai', 
broke  out,  I  was  mustered  into  military 
service  and  remained  active  in  that  ca- 
pacity till  the  war  was  ended.       I  also 
served  through  the  so-called  Tintic  war 
in  1856,  in  the  Echo  canyon  war  in  1857, 
and  the  Blackhawk  war  in  1865.      I  was 
ordained   a   Seventy   May   25,    1857,    and 
became  a  member  of  the  51st  quorum. 
In  1865  I  was  chosen  as  one  of  the  presi- 
dents of  said  quorum.       In  1880  I   was 
called  to  Arizona  and  located  at  Pima. 
Graham    county,    where    I    resided    till 
June.    1883,    when   I   was   called   to     St. 
David.  Cochise  county,  to  preside  over 
that  Ward  as  Bishop.       In  1884  I  was 
chosen   first   counselor     to    Christopher 
Layton,    president    of     the     St.    Joseph 
Stake  of  Zion.       In  1885  the  headquar- 
ters    of     the     Stake     were     moved     to 
Thatcher,    in   the   Gila  valley,   where   I 
also  located  in  1886,'  and  where  I     still 
reside.       When      the    Stake    presidency 
was  reorganized  in  January.  1898,  I  was 
chosen  first  counselor  to  Pres.  Andrew 
Kimball,  which     position     I  still  hold." 
Elder  Johnson  has  filled  every  position 
in  the  Nauvoo  Legion  from  private  to 
colonel  of  regiment,  and  in  municipali- 
ties from   police   officer   to   mayor,    and 
at  the  present  time  he  serves  as  mayor 
of   Thatcher.       He   has   also   served   as 
.justice  of  the  peace,  constable,  deputy 
sheriff,  county  assessor  and  in  numer- 
ous  other  positions.       He     has  been  a 
member  of  the  Board  of  Education   of 
the  St.  Joseph  Stake  Academy  since  its 
formation,  and  has  from  the  beginning 
been   one  of  most  active  and  energetic 
men  in  the  St.  Joseph  Stake. 


LAYTON,  Charles  Martin,  second 
counselor  in  the  presidency  of  the  St. 
Joseph  Stake  of  Zion,  is  the  son  of 
Christopher  Layton  and  Sarah  Martin, 
and  was  born  July  3,  1862,  in  Kaysville, 
Davis  county,  Utah.  He  was  baptized 
at  the  age  of  ten  years,  ordained  an 
Elder  in  September,  1883;  ordained  a 
Seventy  in  1891  and  a  High  Priest  Jan. 
29,  1898.  He  served  as  superintendent 
of  the  West  Layton  Ward  Sunday 
School  for  about  two  years.  When 
twelve  years  old  he  commenced  to  work 


in  his  father's  store  and  was  thus  em- 
ployed for  eight  years;  he  served  as  di- 
rector and  clerk  in  the  Farmers  Union 
eight  years,  was  engaged  in  the  butcher 
business  about  two  years  and  acted  as 
road  supervisor  in  Davis  county  four 
years.  In  1896,  he  was  elected  coun- 
ty commissioner  in  Davis  county.which 
position  he  held  until  1897,  when  he 
left  Utah  for  Arizona,  where  he  located 
in  the  settlements  of  the  Saints  on  the 
Gila  ri,ver.  Here  he  was  appointed 
manager  of  the  mercantile  business  and 
ice  factory  of  Layton,  Allred  &  Co., 
and  on  Jan.  29,  1898,  he  was  chosen 
second  counselor  to  Andrew  Kimball, 
I)resident  of  the  St.  Joseph  Stake  of 
Zion,  which  position  he  still  holds.  In 
1901,  he  was  called  on  a  mission  to  the 
Southern  States,  where  he  is  laboring 
at  the  present  time. 

BKXT,  Samuel,  presiding  Elder  at 
Carden  Grove,  Iowa,  in  1846,  was  the 
son  of  Joel  and  Mary  Bent,  and  was 
born  July  19,  1778,  at  Barre,  Worcester 


368 


LATTER-DAY    SAINT 


county,  Mass.  He  joined  the  Conerega- 
tionalists   when     quite     young,    was    a 
deacon  in  that  church,  and  a  professor 
of  religion  for  twenty-seven  years  pre- 
vious to  iecei\"ing  the  Latter-day  work. 
He  was  a  colonel  in  the  Massachusetts 
militia:  resided  a  few  years  in  St.  Law- 
rence  county.   New   York,   and   was     a 
distinguished    member   of    the    Presby- 
terian church  in  Hopkinton.       His  first 
knowledge  of  the  latter-day  work    was 
obtained    through    a   Book    of   Mormon, 
which  was  brought  to  Michigan  by  El- 
mira  Scobie  while  visiting  her  mother. 
During  a  fit  of  sickness  he  saw  a  vision, 
in  which  he  was  shown   that  the  full- 
ness  of   the    gospel   would    be    revealed 
in  connection  with  that  book,  and  that 
he  would  be  an  instrument  in  proclaim- 
ing   the    same.        He    was    baptized    in 
Pontiac,  Oakland  county,  Michigan,  by 
Jared    Carter,      in     January,    1S33,     or- 
dained an  Elder  on  the  day  of  his  bap- 
tism,   and    started    on   a     mission      the 
next    day.        He    raised    up    the    Huron 
branch    and    was   increasing  in   his   la- 
bors in   spreading  the  gospel.     He  vis- 
ited Kirtland  in  the  fall  of  1833,  and  in 
1S34   went   up     to     Missouri     in    Zion's 
camp.       In  1835  he  went  up  to  Kirtland 
and  attended  the  school  of  the  Proph- 
ets:   he   also    attended    the    solemn   as- 
sembly in  1836:   and  the  same  year  re- 
moved with  his  family  to  Liberty,  Clay 
county,  Missouri.      When  twenty-seven 
years  of   age.   he   married     Mary   Hll- 
bourne,    daughter  of     the   Rev.    Joseph 
HUbourne,  by  whom  he  had  three  sons, 
namely,  William  C,    Joseph      K.,     and 
Horatio  G.,  and  one  daughter,  Mary.  He 
was  tied  to  a  tree  and  whipped  by  the 
mob,    near  Liberty,    July  5,   1836.       His 
wife,    Mary,   died,   and   he   immediately 
removed    to  Far  West  and   assisted   In 
establishing  that  location.     In  Septem- 
ber,   1837,   he    married    Lettuce  Palmer, 
relict   of    Elder   Ambrose   Palmer.       In 
1838,  he  was  taken  a  prisoner  to  Rich- 
mond  jail    by   Gen.    Lucas,    and     con- 
fined about  three  weeks,   when  he  was 
released  on  bail  and  returned  to  Goose 
creek,  about  one  mile  from  Far  West, 
where  he  resided.       He  was  warned  by 
a   vision    to    leave,    which    he    did    be- 
fore  morning,   and    went   through     the 
woods,  and  by  the  wilderness,  on  foot, 
to    the   Missouri    river.       He   had    been 
gone  about  two  hours,  when  his  perse- 
cutors came  to  his  house  after  him.  He 
went    to    Illinois    and    aided    in    estab- 
lishing   Nauvoo.       Here      he    acted    as 


colonel  of  a  regiment  in  the  Nauvoo 
Legion,  a  member  of  the  High  Council, 
and  senior  member  of  the  council  of 
fifty.  In  1844  he  performed  a  mission 
through  Illinois,  Michigan  and  Indiana; 
and  he  was  captain  of  a  hundred  in 
the  exodus  from  Nauvoo.  While  the 
Saints  were  on  their  journey  westward, 
the  council  deemed  it  prudent  to  make 
a  settlement  and  station  at  Garden 
Grove.  Iowa,  where  Elder  Bent  was 
appointed  to  preside  with  Daniel  Full- 
mer and  Aaron  Johnson  for  his  coun- 
selors. Here  he  died  Aug.  16,  1846.  Af- 
ter his  decease  Elders  Fullmer  and 
Johnson  wrote  to  the  council  of  the 
Twelve:  the  following  is  extracted  from 
their  letter: — "Garden  Grove  is  left 
without  a  president,  and  a  large  circle 
of  relatives  and  friends  are  bereft  of 
an  affectionate  companion  and  friend, 
and  the  Church  has  sustained  the  loss 
of  an  undeviating  friend  to  truth  and 
righteousness.  The  glory  of  his  death 
is,  that  he  died  in  the  full  triumphs 
of  faith  and  knowledge  of  the  truth 
of  our  holy  religion,  exhorting  his 
friends  to  be  faithful;  having  three 
days  previous  received  intimations  of 
his  approaching  end  by  three  holy  mes- 
sengers from  on  high." 

HUNTINGTON,  William,  presiding 
Elder  at  Mount  Pisgah,  Iowa,  in  1846, 
was  the  son  of  William  Huntington 
and  Prescindia  Lathrop,  and  was  born 
March  28.  1784,  in  Grantham,  Cheshire 
county,  New  Hampshire.  In  1804  he 
moved  with  his  parents  to  Watertown, 
Jefferson  county.  New  York,  bein.? 
among  the  first  settlers  of  that  county. 
In  1806,  he  returned  to  New  Hampshire 
and  married  Zina  Baker,  daughter  of 
Dr.  Oliver  Baker,  Dec.  28.  1806.  Soon 
after  his  marriage  he  moved  to  Water- 
town,  N.  Y.,  where  he  lived  and  pros- 
pered in  temporal  blessings  until  1811, 
when  he  sold  out,  and  the  following 
year  war  was  declared  with  Great  Brit- 
ain, which  proved  fatal  to  his  pros- 
pects, and  coupled  with  much  sickness 
in  the  family  reduced  them  very  low* 
in  pecuniary  circumstances.  His  ser- 
vices in  the  army  were  done  with  the 
fife.  He  was  in  one  battle,  that  of 
Sacketts"  Harbour.  In  1816,  Provi- 
dence smiled  on  him  again,  and  about 
the  same  time  he  experienced  religion, 
having  an  honest  heart  before  God  and 
earnestly  enquiring  of  the  Lord  as  to 
the  truth  and  reality  of  the  history 
and  doctrines  of  the  Bible.      And  from 


BIOGRAPHICAL.   ENCYCLOPEDIA, 


369 


that  time  the  spirit  of  the  Lord  began 
to  show  him  the  right  way  to  live  and 
what  was  coming  upon  the  earth.  First, 
he  was  shown  that  intoxicating  drinks 
were  not  pleasing  to  God  and  were 
conducive  of  evil,  temporally  and  spir- 
itually. He  left  them  off  and  joined 
the  Presbyterian  church.  God  next 
showed  him  that  tobacco  was  not  good 
for  him  and  he  left  off  its  use.  Then 
his  mind  began  to  be  clear  and  his 
views  of  the  world  were  changed  by 
faithful  and  sincere  prayer  to  know 
who  and  what  was  right.  He  received 
an  answer  that  none  were  right  but 
that  he  would  live  to  see  the  true 
Church  of  Christ,  having  the  gifts  and 
graces  as  did  the  Church  in  the  Sa- 
vior's day.  He  left  the  Presbyterians 
and  proclaimed  boldly  what  God  had 
shown  him,  namely,  that  all  had  gone 
astray,  that  darkness  covered  the  peo- 
ple, and  that  whenever  the  true 
Church  of  Christ  came,  it  would  be 
adorned  with  the  gifts  of  healing, 
prophecy,  etc.  From  this  time  he  be- 
came an  outcast  in  society.  In  all  these 
prayers,  principles  and  faith,  his  wife 
was  one  with  him.  In  the  winter  of 
1832-33  he  first  heard  of  "Mormonism," 
read  the  Book  of  Mormon,  believed  it 
with  all  his  heart  and  preached  it  al- 
most every  day,  to  his  neighbors  and 
everybody  he  could  see,  or  had  the 
privilege  to  chat  with,  until  1835,  when 
he  and  wife  with  two  of  their  children 
were  baptized  by  Elder  But- 
cher. After  that  his  house  was  a 
meeting  house  and  a  home  for  all 
Saints.  May  18,  1836,  he  sent  two  of 
his  children  and  their  families,  Dimick 
and  Prescindia,  to  Kirtland,  waiting 
himself  only  to  sell  out.  Oct.  1,  1836, 
he  started  and  moved  to  Kirtland  with 
quite  a  number  of  Saints  under  the 
direction  of  Apostles  Orson  Pratt  and 
Luke  S.  Johnson,  being  ordained  an 
Elder  previous  to  starting.  He  ar- 
rived in  Kirtland  on  the  11th,  bought  a 
farm  from  Jacob  Bump  and  paid  him 
three  thousand  dollars.  Of  this  amount 
he  was  defrauded,  so  that  in  a  little 
over  one  year  he  was  compelled  to  la- 
bor by  the  day  for  a  living.  In  the 
breaking  up  of  Kirtland  the  apostates 
harrassed  him  with  law  suits  until  he 
saw  his  children  often  go  to  bed  cry- 
ing for  bread.  For  nearly  two  weeks 
he  lived  on  greens.  His  house  was  a 
hiding  place  for  Father  Joseph  Smith, 
Hyrum,   Samuel  and  Don  Carlos,  while 

Vol.  1.  No.  24. 


they  were  trying  to  escape  from  the 
persecutions  in  Kirtland.  The  Egyp- 
tian mummies  were  also  hid  In  his 
house  for  a  long  time,  and  many  of 
the  pursued  and  persecuted  Saints 
found  a  retreat  there  and  a  hiding  place 
from  apostates'  persecution.  In  Kirt- 
land he  received  his  washings  and 
anointings  in  the  Temple,  and  was  or- 
dained a  High  Priest  and  High  Coun- 
selor, in  which  ofl^ce  he  acted  until  the 
Church  left  Kirtland.  He  lost  five 
hundred  dollars  in  the  Kirtland  bank. 
May  21,  1838,  he  started  for  Far  West, 
Mo., where  he  arrived  about  two  months 
later,  and,  by  counsel,  moved  to  Adam- 
ondl-Ahman, where  he  was  chosen  com- 
missary for  the  brethren  who  armed  for 
defence;  and  after  the  mob  had  driven 
and  hemmed  In  the  scattering  breth- 
ren, he  was  commissary  for  all  the 
people  of  that  place  and  had  charge  of 
all  the  provisions  of  the  town.  After 
the  surrender  of  the  Church  in  Far 
West,  Missouri,  he  was  foreman  of  the 
committee  chosen  to  confer  with  the 
committee  chosen  by  the  mob.  These 
two  committees  were  representatives  of 
and  authorized  to  transact  all  business 
for  their  respective  committees.  He 
was  also  one  of  a  committee  chosen  to 
see  to  the  poor  and  get  them  moved 
out  of  the  State  of  Missouri,  which 
they  did  to  the  complete  satisfaction 
of  the  whole  Church,  though  with  no 
ordinary  exertion,  and  remained  him- 
self until  about  the  last  man  and  fami- 
ly. His  was  one  of  the  first  families 
that  moved  to  Commerce  (afterwards 
Nauvoo)  where  he  arrived  May  14,  1839. 
About  the  1st  of  July  his  whole  family 
was  taken  sick,  and  on  the  8th  his 
wife  died  of  sickness,  caused  by  hard- 
ships and  exposure.  At  this  time  he 
suffered  for  the  comforts  of  life.  At 
a  conference  held  in  October,  1839,  he 
was  again  chosen  to  the  office  of  High 
Counselor.  Aug.  28,  1840.  he  married 
Lydia  Partridge,  relict  of  Bishop  Ed- 
ward Partridge,  whose  maiden  name 
was  Lydia  Clisbee.  As  a  member  of 
the  High  Council  he  helped  to  lay  one 
of  the  corner  stones  of  the  Nauvoo 
Temple  April  6,  1841.  He  commenced 
immediately  upon  the  walls  of  the  Tem- 
ple and  worked  until  the  basement  was 
done:  then  he  cut  stone  until  the  top 
stone  was  laid;  and  by  particular  re- 
nuest  the  stones  which  he  cut  were  laid 
in  a  column  from  the  basement  to  the 
top  of  the  chimney  of  the  southwest 
corner.       As   soon   as   the   Temple   was 

June  15,  1901. 


370 


LATTER-DAY    SAINT 


i>ea(lv  for  giving  endowments  he  ad- 
ministered therein  until  the  building 
was  closed.  He  continued  a  member 
of  the  High  Council  until  the  expulsion 
from  Nauvoo.  In  the  move  from  Nau- 
voo  he  was  appointed  captain  of  a 
company  of  fifty  wagons  which  he 
helped  to  make,  and  to  fit  up  for  the 
company,  but  which  was  subsequently 
disorganized.  He  was  then  appointed 
a  captain  of  ten  in  Amasa  M.  Lyman's 
company,  until  the  settlement  of  Mt. 
Pisgah  was  located,  where  he  was  left 
to  preside  over  that  Stake  of  Zion,  or 
branch,  with  Charles  C.  Rich  and  Ezra 
T.  Benson  for  his  counselors.  In  this 
place  his  labors  were  extreme  and  un- 
remitting for  the  good  and  welfare  of 
the  people,  and  the  comfort  of  the  sick 
of  which  there  were  a  great  many.  Aug. 
9,  1846.  he  was  taken  sick  with  the 
chills  and  fever,  of  which  he  died  Aug. 
19.  1846.  He  died  without  a  struggle 
or  a  groan.  Wm.  Huntington  was_J.he 
father  of  six  sons  and  four  daughters, 
and  at  the  time  of  his  death  two  daugh- 
ters and  four  sons  were  in  the  Church. 
In  life  he  was  beloved  by  all  the 
Paints.  His  love  and  zeal  for  the  cause 
of  Cod  were  unsurpassed  by  any.  His 
judgment  was  respected  and  his  con- 
duct never  questioned;  he  never  had  a 
trial  or  difficulty  with  any  person  in 
the  Church. 

MATSON,  Peter,  first  counselor  in 
the  Stake  presidency  of  the  North 
Sanpete  Stake  of  Zion.  was  born  March 
3.  ISol.  in  Herslof.  Malmohus  Ian.  Swe- 
den. His  parents  moved  in  the  humbler 
walks  of  life,  and  belonged  to  the  re- 
spectable working  class;  thus  the  sub- 
ject of  this  sketch  was  taught  early  in 
life  to  work  for  a  livelihood,  and  he 
learned  the  trade  of  a  shoemaker  from 
a  brother  in  the  Church.  He  was  bap 
tized  by  Elder  P.  T.  Xystrom  May  22, 
1SC4;  was  ordained  a  Deacon.  Priest  and 
Killer  successively,  and  labored  as  a  lo- 
<!il  missiDnary  in  the  Malmo  branch. 
V..'h(  n  eighteen  years  of  age  he  was 
sent  out  as  a  regular  missionary,  and 
as  such  he  labored  for  four  years  in 
different  branches  in  the  Skone  confer- 
ence, Sweden.  He  emigrated  to  Utah  in 
].<-T3.  arriving  in  Salt  Lake  City  July  24, 
1S73.  Having  safely  landed  in  Zion  and 
l.eing  lakfn  home  by  some  friends  who 
lived  in  the  Twentieth  Ward,  his  first 
thoughts  were  to  get  a  wife.     He  had 


brought  with  him  from  Malmo  Mathilda 
Liljedahl,  who,  true  to  her  promise,  be- 
came his  wife,  in  the  Endowment 
House,  July  28.  1873,  four  days  after 
their  arrival  in  Utah.  In  1874  he  located 
in  Mount  Pleasant,  Sanpete  county, 
where  he  has  resided  ever  since.  He  was 
ordained  a  Seventy  August  7.  1884,  and 
became  a  member  of  the  66th  Quorum; 
filled  a  mission  to  Sweden  in  1885-87,  la- 
boring in  the  Skone  conference  part  of 
the  time  as  president  of  the  Christian- 


stad  branch,  and  later  as  president  of 
the  Skone  conference.  After  his  return 
home  he  was  ordained  a  High  Priest 
by  Heber  J.  Grant,  and  set  apart  .as 
first  counselor  in  the  Bishopric  in  the 
Mount  Pleasant  Ward,  May  20,  1890, 
which  position  he  held  until  December 
9,  1900,  at  which  time  he  was  set  apart 
as  first  counselor  in  the  Stake  presi- 
dency of  the  North  Sanpete  Stake  of 
Zion.  During  the  years  1896-97  he  suc- 
cessfully presided  as  acting  Bishop  in 
the  Mount  Pleasant  Ward  during  the 
absence  of  Bishop  Christian  N.Lund.  He 
was  elected  a  councilman  in  Mount 
Pleasant  City  November  7,  1893.  and  a 
precinct  justice  in  and  for  Mount  Pleas- 
ant precinct  November  6,  1900. 

CHRiSTKNSKX,  George,  second 
counselor  to  Pres.  Christian  N.  Lund, 
of  the  North  Sanpete  Stake  of  Zion,  is 
the  son  of  Emanuel  Christensen  and 
Kasmine  Rasmussen,  and  was  born 
Feb.  24.  1866  in  Aarhus.  Denmark,  be- 
ing the  youngest  of  eight  children.    He 


BIOGRAPHICAL   ENCYCLOPEDIA. 


371 


emigrated  with  his  parents  to  Utah  In 
June,  1873,  located  in  Brig-ham  City, 
but  removed  to  Mt.  Pleasant  in  No- 
vember, 1874.  Here  George  attended 
school  a  few  winters,  and  also  assisted 
his  father  in  the  work  of  tanning.  At 
the  age  of  sixteen  years  he  entered 
the  employ  of  George  Farnsworth  as 
clerk  in  his  store,  and  has  been  more 
or  less  connected  with  business  pursuits 
ever  since.  He  was  a  student  at  the 
B.  Y.  Academy  for  two  years,  gradu- 
ating from  that  institution  in  June, 
1889,  as  No.  1  in  his  class;  was  prin- 
cipal of  the  L.  D.  S.  Seminary  at  Mt. 
Pleasant  for   three  years;    principal  of 


the  Sanpete  Stake  Academy  at  Eph- 
raim  for  one  year,  and  principal  of  the 
public  school  at  Mt.  Pleasant  for  sev- 
eral years.  He  has  held  the  following 
business  positions:  Secretary  and 
treasurer  of  Mt.  Pleasant  Co-op;  sec- 
retary and  treasurer  of  the  Union 
Wool  and  Live  Stock  Commission,  and 
of  the  Union  Mercantile  Co.;  manager 
of  George  Christensen  and  Co.'s  busi- 
ness, and  at  present  secretary  and 
treasurer  of  the  Wasatch  Mercantile 
Co.  He  has  held  a  number  of  civil 
offices,  viz:  City  councilman,  treasurer 
of  Sanpete  county,  justice  of  the  peace, 
and  is  at  present  referee  in  bankruptcy 
for  Sanpete  county,  and  county  super- 
intendent of  schools.  He  was  elected 
mayor  of  Mt.  Pleasant  Nov.  5,  1901.  His 
ecclesiastical  positions  have  been  as 
follows:  He  was  baptized  at  Brig- 
ham   City,  Box  Elder  county,   in  June, 


1874,  ordained  a  Deacon  when  about 
fourteen  years  of  age;  was  secretary  of 
the  primary  association  of  Mt.  Pleas- 
ant for  several  years;  secretary  of  the 
Y.  M.  M.  I.  A.  for  two  years,  and  pres- 
ident of  the  Y.  M.  M.  I.  A.  for  two  and 
a  half  years.  He  served  successively 
as  superintendent  of  the  South  Ward 
Sunday  school,  superintendent  of  Mt. 
Pleasant  Sunday  school,  united,  and 
Stake  superintendent  of  the  Sunday 
schools  of  Sanpete  Stake;  was  ordained 
a  Seventy,  Aug.  6,  1884.  by  Jens  Han- 
sen; and  ordained  a  High  Priest,  Nov, 
13,  1893,  by  Apostle  John  Henry  Smith. 
May  8,  1896,  he  was  set  apart  by 
Apostle  John  Henry  Smith  for  a  mis- 
sion to  Scandinavia,  where  he  labored 
as  a  traveling  Elder  in  the  Copenhagen 
branch  until  Aug.  15,  1896,  when  he  was 
called  to  preside  over  the  Copenhagen 
conference.  In  June,  1897,  he  was 
appointed  translator  for  "Scandinaviens 
Stjerne,"  and  on  May  10,  1898,  he  suc- 
ceeded Pres.  Christian  N.  Lund  as 
president  of  the  Scandinavian  mission 
Upon  his  return  home  in  October,  1898, 
he  was  appointed  Stake  superintendent 
of  Y.  M.  M.  I.  A.  in  Sanpete  Stake, 
which  position  he  held  until  Dec.  9, 
1900,  when,  at  the  organization  of  the 
North  Sanpete  Stake  of  Zion,  he  was 
called  as  second  counselor  to  Stake 
President  Christian  N.  Lund, for  which 
position  he  was  set  apart  by  Apostle 
John  Henry  Smith.  JDec.  31,  1890,  El- 
der Christensen  married  Miss  Dorthea 
M.  Mogensen  in  the  Manti  Temple. 
Three  children  blessed  this  union, 
namely:  Ethelinda,  George  Q.  and  Mine 
Dorthea.  His  wife  died  Sept.  1,  1899, 
followed  shortly  after  by  her  babe. 
Mine  Dorthea,  for  whose  existence  she 
gave  her  own  life.  Being  the  only 
surviving  child  of  his  parents  in  Amer- 
ica, Elder  Christensen  was  early  in 
life  thrown  upon  his  own  resources  and 
at  the  age  of  sixteen  the  care  of  his 
aged  parents  devolved  upon  him:  he 
has  had  to  make  his  own  way  in  the 
world. 

CLUPF,  Harvey  Harris,  president 
of  the  losepa  colony  of  Hawaiian 
Saints  from  1889  to  March  1901.  is  the 
son  of  David  Cluff,  senior,  and  Betsy 
Hall,  and  was  born  January  9.  1836,  at 
Kirtland.  Geauga  county,  Ohio.  He 
is  the  seventh  child  of  a  family  of 
twelve  children,  eleven  sons  and  one 
daughter,  and  descends  from  illustrious 


372 


LATTER-DAT    SAINT 


ancestry,  which  came  to  America  with 
the  early  colonists  and  settled  in  the 
States  of  Massachusetts  and  New 
Hampshire.  The  family  of  Cluffs 
moved  from  New  Hampshire  to  Kirt- 
land,  Ohio,  where  they  became  Identi- 
fied as  members  of  the  Church  of  Jesus 
Christ  of  Latter-day  Saints;  thence 
they  removed  to  Nauvoo,  in  1840,  where 
they  remained  until  the  expulsion  of 
the  Saints  in  1846.  Leaving  Nauvoo  as 
exiles  in  1846.  the  family  reached  Mt. 
Pisgah,  in  Iowa.  Two  years  recuper- 
ating prepared  the  family  for  the  jour- 
ney to  Council  Bluffs,  thence  to  Utah 
in  the  spring  of  1850,  arriving  at  Salt 
Lake  on  the  3rd  day  of  October.  Provo, 
Utah  county,  was  selected  for  a  per- 
manent home  and  here  the  family  join- 
ed the  few  settlers  who  preceded  them 
in   building  a   log  fort,   of  four  angles, 


the  houses  all  facing  a  square.  Oc- 
tober 6,  1856.  at  a  semi-annual  confer- 
ence held  in  Salt  Lake  Citv  Harvey 
H.  offered  his  services  at  the  call  of 
President  Brigham  Young  to  go  back 
on  the  plains  and  assist  the  belated 
hand-cart  companies.  He  started  the 
following  day,  with  other  volunteers, 
and  22  four-mule  teams  loaded  with 
supplies,  and  was  gone  three  months. 
Arriving  home  he  woed  and  won  Miss 
Margaret  Ann  Foster;  their  marriage 
took  place  in  Provo,  Jan.  24,  1S57.  In 
May  he  was  ordained  a  Seventy  of  the 
45th  quorum  and  afterwards  he  became 
one  of  the  presidents  of  that  quorum. 
He  served  in  the  "Echo  canyon"  war 
and       became     one     of   the   "Standing 


army."  He  served  three  terms  as  a 
member  of  the  city  council  of  Provo 
cit"  and  in  1860  joined  four  of  his 
brothers  in  the  erection  of  a  large  two- 
.story  furniture,  dancing  and  theatrical 
building,  in  which  Harvey  distinguish- 
ed himself  in  personating  the  charac- 
ter of  Claud  Melnot,  John  Mildmay. 
Don  Caesar  de  Bazan  and  the  Yankee 
in  Cuba.  He  went  to  England  on  a 
mission  in  the  spring  of  1865,  leaving 
his  wife  with  the  only  surviving  child, 
a  daughter,  Margaret,  three  years  old; 
their  three  sons,  Harvey  H.,  Seth  M. 
and  George  H.  had  died  a  few  years 
previously.  After  laboring  six  months 
in  the  Manchester  conference,  he  was 
appointed  president  of  the  Glasgow 
conference  and  Scottish  district,  which 
positions  he  held  when  released  to  re- 
turn home  in  1868.  He  was  appointed 
captain  of  the  company  of  Saints  which 
sailed  from  Liverpool,  England,  in  the 
ship  "Constitution,"  and  after  his  ar- 
rival home,  he  was  admitted  into  the 
"School  of  the  Prophets."  In  1869  he 
was  called  to  go  on  a  mission  to  the 
Sandwich  islands,  accompanied  by  h's 
wife,  who  had  lost  her  last  child  lust 
irevious  to  nis  return  from  Europe. 
Ho  labored  en  the  Lc^ie  cu^ar  works 
during  the  five  years,  except  six  weeks, 
when  he  went  to  the  island  of  Hawaii, 
rturning  home  in  1874.  After  his  return 
he  clerked  in  the  Provo  co-op,  became 
business  manager  of  the  "Utah  County 
Times  Publishing  Co.,"  a  director  in 
the  "United  Order"  organization,  and 
assessor  and   collector  of  Utah   county 

and  Provo  city.  Thu?  he  was  employed 
until  1879.  In  August,  1875,  he  was 
ordained  a  Bishop  by  President  Young 
and  called  to  preside  over  the  Fourth 
Ward  of  Provo,  and  on  June  2,  1877,  he 
was  chosen  second  counselor  to  the  pres- 
ident of  Utah  Stake.  He  entered  into 
celestial  marriage  July  6.  1877.  In  1879, 
while  in  the  presidency  of  Utah  Stake, 
he  went,  agreable  to  call,  to  the  Sand- 
wich islands  to  preside  over  that  mis- 
sion, accompanied  by  his  wife,  Mar- 
garet. While  visiting  in  Honolulu, 
Queen  Kapiolani  desired  the  presence 
of  Pres.  Cluff  and  wife  at  the  palace, 
ostensibly  for  the  purpose  of  receiving 
a  blessing  under  his  hands,  which  was 
granted.  A  new  meeting  house  was 
commenced  at  Laie,  the  chief  corner 
stone  of  which  was  laid  by  King  David 
Kalakaua   and    Pres.    Cluff,    the    latter 

offering  the  dedicatory  prayer.  Church 


BIOGRAPHICAL.    ENCYCLOPEDIA. 


373 


records  were  deposited  in  the  southeast 
corner.       Mr.   Nagasaki,   the  envoy   of 
Japan,    was   also   present.       Returning 
home  with  eiffht  natives  in  1882.     Pres. 
CIufE  resumed  his  duties  in  the  presi- 
dency of  Utah  Stake  and  became»man- 
ager  of  the  Prove  Lumber  and  Building 
Co.,  and  superintendent  of  the  erection 
of   the    Stake    tabernacle.       September 
20,    1883,    Margaret     A.      Cluff    died    in 
Provo,  which  was  the  saddest  blow  in 
all  the  trials  of  his  life.  He  was  elect- 
ed  a  director     of     the  Pirst   National 
bank  of  Provo,  and  of  the  Provo  Co-op 
Institution  and  director  and  treasurer 
of       the       Church  association  of  Utah 
Stake.      April  30,  1887,  he  was  arrested 
on  the  charge  of  unlawful  cohabitation 
with    his    wives    and    on    the    14th    of 
April  of  the  following  year  he  was  sen- 
tenced to  six  months  imprisonment  in 
the  penitentiary,   and  to  pay   ?300   fine 
and  costs.      After  serving  five  months, 
he  was  honorably  released.      He  acted 
as  superintendent  of  the  erection  of  the 
Brigham    Young    academy    new    build- 
ing,  which  received  the  school  Jan.   1, 
1889.       In    August    of    this    year,    Pres. 
Wilford   Woodruff   sent   a   message    to 
Pres.   Cluff  that  it  was  the  mind  and 
will  of  the  Lord   that  he  should   "col- 
onize the  Hawaiian  Saints  in  Skull  val- 
ley and  preside  over  them."      His  wife, 
Emily,  was  set  apart  to  the  same  mis- 
sion.     On  the  28th  of  the  same  month, 
the  colony  was,  under  Pres.   Cluff,   lo- 
cated in  Skull  valley  and  the  place  was 
named   losepa.       A   townsite  was   sur- 
veyed,  lots  drawn  and   Church  organ- 
izations  effected.       In   1890,    Presidents 
Woodruff,    Cannon    and    Smith    visited 
the  colony  and  dedicated  the  valley  for 
a  gathering  place  for  the  Saints   from 
the  Islands  of  the  Sea.      A  new  meet- 
ing house  was  commenced  in  1900,  and 
the  beginning  of  the  new  century  found 
Pres.  Cluff,  presiding  over  the  Hawai- 
ian colony.     He  is  now  over  sixty-five 
years  of  age,  the  father  of  sixteen  chil- 
dren,   having  spent   nearly   twenty-one 
years  of  his   life  among   the   islanders 
and   four  years   in   the   European  mis- 
sion. 

PHELPS,  >r<)rri.s,  a  Patriarch  in  the 
Church,  was  a  son  of  Spencer  Phelps 
and  Mary  Miller,  and  was  born  Dec.  20, 
1805,  in  Northampton,  Hampshire  coun- 
ty, Mass.  His  father  removed  to  Geau- 
ga    (now     Lake)     county,  Ohio,   in  tho 


early  days  of  its  settlement.  When 
about  nineteen  years  of  age,  with  the 
consent  of  his  parents,  he  went  to  the 
southwestern  part  of  Uinoils,  to  visit 
some  relatives,  when  he  became  ac- 
quainted with  Laura  Clark,  to  whom 
he  was  married  March  28,  1826,  and  af- 
terwards removed  to  Tazwell  county, 
111.,  settling  at  Willow  Springs.  From 
thence  he  removed  to  the  northern 
part  of  the  State,  where  he  first  heard 
the  gospel  preached  by  Lyman  Wight 
and  John  Correll.  He  opened  his  house 
for  holding  meetings  and  was  baptized 
in  August,  1831,  by  Sanford  Porter,  sen. 
Shortly  afterwards  he  was  ordained  an 
Elder.  He  sold  his  possessions  in  Illi- 
nois and  started  for  Jackson  county, 
Mo..  Oct.  14,  1831,  arriving  at  Indepen- 
dence March  6,  1832,  where  he  continued 
laboring  with  the  Saints  until  driven 
out  by  the  mob,  in  1833.  He  next  locat- 
ed his  family  in  Clay  county.  Mo.  From 


there  he  performed  several  missions  to 
different  parts  of  the  State,  laboring  al- 
so on  the  Kirtland  Temple  as  a  carpen- 
ter in  the  winter  of  1835-36.  At  Kirt- 
land he  was  ordained  a  High  Priest. 
When  Caldwell  county.  Mo.,  was  set- 
tled by  the  Saints,  he  removed  his  fam- 
ily to  Far  West,  from  which  place  they 
were  driven  by  the  exterminating  order 
of  Governor  Lilburn  W.  Boggs.  At  this 
time  Brother  Phelps  was  cast  in  prison, 
together  with  Parley  P.  Pratt  and  oth- 
ers. After  several  months'  confinement 
in  the  Richmond  jail,  in  Ray  county, 
they  were  taken  by  a  change  of  venue 
to   Columbia   jail,    Boone   county,    from 


374 


LATTER-DAY   SAINT 


which  place  Brothers  Pratt  an^  Phelps 
succeeded  in  making  their  escape  July 
4.  1830,  and  after  much  suffering 
reached  Illinois,  where  they  found  their 
families,  who  had  preceded  them. 
Shortly  after  this  he  preformed  a  mis- 
sion to  the  Eastern  States,  and  on  his 
return  settled  in  Macedonia  (Ramus), 
Hancock  county,  111.  Here  his  wife  died 
and  he  removed  to  Nauvoo,  where  he 
labored  on  the  Temple,  and  was  finally 
driven  out  with  the  Saints.  In  1851  he 
came  to  Utah  and  settled  in  Alpine, 
Utah  county,  where  he  remained  until 
1S64,  when  he  removed  to  Bear  Lake 
valley,  and  there  became  one  of  the 
pioneer  settlers  of  Montpelier.  He  was 
ordained  a  Patriarch  under  the  hands 
of  President  Brlgham  Young  and  oth- 
ers, and  died  May  22,  1876,  surrounded 
by  his  family  and  friends.  All  his  chil- 
dren with  one  exception  were  present 
at  his  death-bed.  He  left  seven  living 
children,  fifty-one  grandchildren  and 
nine  great  grandchildren. 

FOOTE,  David,  a  veteran  in  the 
Church,  was  born  Aug.  7,  1768,  in  Har- 
winton,  Litchfield  county,  Conn.  He 
was  the  fourth  son  of  Ebenezer  Foote 
and  Rebecca  Barker,  and  the  fifth  in 
the  line  of  descent  from  Nathaniel  and 
Elizabeth  Deming  Foote,  who  came 
from  England  about  the  year  1633  and 
settled  at  Wethersfield,  Conn.,  in  1635. 
David's  father  was  a  soldier  in  the 
army  of  the  Revolution.  He  died 
while  in  the  army  at  Mud  Fort,  Horse 
Neck.  Conn.,  in  June,  1778.  when  David 
was  in  the  tenth  year  of  his  age.  His 
mother  married  Ezekiel  Sanford  Jan. 
1,  1781,  who  was  also  a  soldier  in  the 
revolution,  and  a  widower.  Soon  after 
peace  was  declared  with  Great  Britain, 
the  family  emigrated  to  Windsor, 
Broome  county,  N.  Y.  At  this  place 
David  married  Miss  Irene  Lane,  daugh- 
ter of  Nathan  Lane,  Esq.,  a  pioneer  set- 
tler of  Windsor.  Mr.  Lane  was  a 
soldier  in  the  Army  of  the  Revolution 
and  a  descendant  of  William  Lane, 
who  came  from  Dorchester,  England, 
in  1635.  and  settled  in  Dorchester,  Mass. 
Nathan  Lane's  wife's  maiden  name  was 
Dorcas  Muscroft.  Much  of  David's 
time  was  occupied,  with  others,  in  cut- 
ting saw  logs  and  rafting  down  the 
Susquehannah  river,  until  1798,  when, 
in  company  with  his  step-father  and 
brother-in-law,  he  removed  to  Dryden, 
Cayuga  mow  Tompkins)  county,  N.  Y. 


The  following  is  an  extract  from  the 
Centennial  History  of  the  town  of 
Dryden  N.  Y.,  published  1897:  "In 
the  fall  of  1798,  three  families  settled 
at  Willow  Glen  (Dryden).  They  con- 
sisted of  Ezekiel  Sanford,  his  wife  and 
one  son,  David  Foote,  his  wife  and 
three  daughters,  Ebenezer  Clauson,  his 
wife,  one  son  and  two  daughters,  mak- 
ing in  all  a  party  of  thirteen  persons. 
They  came  from  Windsor  (60  miles  dis- 
tantl  witb  a  single  team  of  oxen  draw- 
ing a  heavy  ox  sled  of  the  olden  times, 
which  was  made  with  wooden  shoes 
and  a  heavy  split  pole  for  tongue.  This 
conveyance  carried  all  the  household 
furniture  of  the  three  families,  which 
from  that  fact  could  not  have  been 
very  rich  in  housekeeping  materials. 
.  .  .  They  are  said  to  have  passed  a 
very  'comfortable  winter,'  subsisting 
largely  upon  the  abundant  game  found 
in  the  new  country,  the  oxen  being  sup- 
plied with  plenty  of  browse  from  the 
trees."  This  country  was  a  dense 
forest,  and  there  were  but  two  fami- 
lies in  Dryden,  when  the  foregoing 
named  families  arrived  there.  After  a 
sufl!icient  number  of  families  arrived  in 
the  settlement,  a  Methodist  religious 
class  was  organized,  and  David  made 
class  leader.  Although  his  scholastic 
education  was  very  limited,  the  Bible 
was  his  chief  study.  He  became  dis- 
satisfied with  the  creeds  of  the  various 
sects,  and  sought  to  find  the  true 
church  of  Christ,  as  it  existed  in  the 
Apostles'  days.  While  his  mind  was 
very  much  exercised  with  regard  to  re- 
ligious matters,  he  had  what  he  termed 
a  vision,  in  which  it  was  told  to  him, 
among  other  things,  that  the  true 
church  of  Christ  would  soon  be  estab- 
lished on  earth  as  it  was  anciently.  A 
number  of  religious  'reformers'  came 
out  from  the  churches  about  this  tinne, 
claiming  to  be  the  true  church.  David 
investigated  their  claims,  but  none  of 
them  satisfied  him.  In  the  spring  of 
1830,  he  borrowed  a  Book  of  Mormon 
of  a  neighbor  and  read  it  carefully  and 
testified  that  it  was  a  true  record.  But 
no  Elder  came  to  Dryden,  and  he  knew 
nothing  concerning  the  doctrine  they 
preached.  In  the  spring  of  1832  he 
removed  to  Greenwood,  Steuben  coun- 
ty. N.  Y.  In  the  fall  of  1833.  two  men 
professing  to  be  "Mormon"  Elders  came 
to  Greenwood  from  Geneseo,  Livings- 
ton county,  N.  Y.  They  held  one  or 
two   meetings,    and    invited   David   and 


BIOGRAPHICAL    ENCYCLOPEDIA. 


375 


others  to  visit  them  at  Genesee.  Ac- 
cordingly, David  and  his  brother-in- 
law  (Josiah  Richardson),  and  his 
nephew  (Moses  Clauson),  went  to  Gen- 
eseo  in  November,  1833,  for  the  purpose 
of  investigating  the  new  religion.  On 
arriving  there,  they  found  the  large 
branch  of  the  Saints  somewhat  divided, 
and  some  had  been  cut  off  from  the 
Church,  and  among  them  the  two  El- 
ders who  came  to  Greenwood,  and  El- 
der John  Murdock  was  presiding  over 
the  branch.  (The  trouble  in  the  branch 
arose  with  regard  to  the  vision  of  Jo- 
seph Smith  and  Sidney  Rigdon  of  the 
three  "glories.  Some  could  not  receive 
it  as  from  the  Lord.)  After  Elder  Mur- 
dock had  expounded  the  gospel  to  Da- 
vid, to  his  satisfaction,  he  was  bap- 
tized and  returned  home  rejoicing  that 
he  had  found  the  true  Church  of  Christ, 
as  it  was  promised  in  his  vision  several 
years  previously.  In  the  spring  of  1834 
Elders  Orson  Pratt  and  John  Murdock 
came  to  Greenwood  and  stayed  with 
David  two  or  three  days  and  preached 
in  the  neighborhood,  and  explained  the 
gospel  more  fully  to  him.  In  the  fol- 
lowing August  he  visited  Geneseo 
again,  and  was  ordained  an  Elder  by 
Joseph  Young,  Aug.  17,  1834.  He  now 
began  to  pi-each  the  gospel  to  his  neigh- 
bors, some  of  whom  began  to  investi- 
gate, and  one  was  baptized  by  him.  In 
the  latter  part  of  the  winter  following. 
Elders  John  Gould  and  Amos  Babcock 
came  to  Greenwood,  and  held  several 
meetings,  and  baptized  a  few.  In 
April,  1835,  David  attended  a  confer- 
ence of  the  Church  at  Freedom,  Cat- 
teraugus  county,  N.  Y.  He  presented 
his  certificate  of  ordination  by  Joseph 
Young,  and  received  an  Elder's  license, 
signed  by  Sidney  Rigdon,  moderator, 
and  Warren  A.  Cowdery,  secretary. 
During  the  spring  and  summer,  several 
Elders  visited  Greenwood  and  a  branch 
of  about  twenty  members  was  organ- 
ized, and  David  was  appointed  presi- 
dent. In  the  fall  he,  in  company  with 
his  brother-in-law  (Josiah  Richardson, 
who  had  been  ordained  an  Elder),  took 
a  mission  to  Dryden,  and  preached  the 
gospel  to  his  old  neighbors,  and  was 
successful  in  baptizing  his  daughter 
Betrey,  and  her  husband,  Thomas  Clem- 
ent. In  the  spring  of  1836,  the  most  of 
the  Saints  in  Greenwood  emigrated  to 
Kirtland,  and  some  to  Missouri.  David 
went  to  Kirtland  and  became  acquaint- 
ed with  the  Prophet  Joseph  Smith,  and 


received  a  patriarchal  blessing  by  Pa- 
triarch Joseph  Smith.  He  returned  to 
Greenwood  in  the  fall,  and  in  May, 
1836,  again  went  to  Kirtland,  and  re- 
turned the  latter  part  of  the  summer, 
preaching  by  the  way.  In  October,  fol- 
lowing, he  with  his  family  (which  now 
consisted  of  his  wife,  one  daughter  and 
one  son,  only),  removed  to  Kirtland, 
and  obtained  a  house  for  the  winter  of 
Stephen  Markham  in  Chester  township, 
seven  miles  from  Kirtland,  May  26,  1838. 
David  with  his  family  started  for  Mis- 
souri, in  company  with  Stephen  Mark- 
ham  and  family  and  some  others.  Da- 
vid and  family  arrived  at  his  brother- 
in-law's  place,  ten  miles  east  of  Far 
West,  Aug.  30,  1838.  He  passed  through 
the  mobbings  safely  and  only  sustained 
a  loss  of  property,  and  on  the  first  day 
of  April,  in  company  with  Stephen 
Markham's  family,  and  two  others, 
started  for  Quincy,  111.,  where  they  ar- 
rived the  14th.  He  located  at  a  point 
twelve  miles  east  of  Quincy.  He  was 
ordained  a  High  Priest  at  a  conference 
held  at  Nauvoo  April  6,  1844.  He  was 
a  member  of  the  Freedom  branch  of  the 
Church,  until  the  spring  of  1845,  when 
he  removed  into  Hancock  county,  in 
obedience  to  the  proclamation  of  the 
Twelve  Apostles.  He  located  in  a  lit- 
tle branch  of  the  Church  called  Monte- 
bello,  twelve  miles  south  of  Nauvoo. 
In  August  he  took  the-  chills  and  fever, 
and  passed  peacefully  away  in  a  pro- 
found sleep  in  the  night  of  Aug.  22, 
1845.  His  wife  followed  him  to  the 
spirit  world  March  5,  1846.  They  wei-e 
both  buried  in  the  Nauvoo  cemetery. 
David  was  77  years  and  15  days  old 
when  he  died,  and  his  wife  was  71  years 
4  months  and  3  days  old  at  her  demise. 
David  Foote  was  a  stout,  robust  man 
about  5  feet  8  inches  tall,  very  compact- 
ly built,  and  his  average  weight  was 
about  175  pounds.  He  was  very  faith- 
ful in  the  Church,  and  in  keeping  the 
law  of  the  gospel,  the  Word  of  Wis- 
dom, etc.  He  enjoyed  the  gift  of  heal- 
ing in  a  remarkable  degree,  through  the 
anointing  with  oil  and  the  laying  on 
of  hands.  He  was  honest  and  upright 
in  all  his  dealings  and  would  suffer 
wrong  rather  than  do  wrong,  and  al- 
ways had  the  good  will  of  his  neigh- 
bors." 

FOOTE,    Warren,      a   Patriarch    in 

the  Church,   is  the  eleventh  child     and 
third    son    of    David    Foote    and     Irene 


376 


LATTER-DAY    SAINT 


Lane,  and  was  born  Aug.  10,  1817,  in 
the  town  of  Dryden,  Tompkins  county, 
N.  Y.  The  following  is  an  autobio- 
graphical sketch  of  his  life:  "I  was 
educated  in  all  the  branches  of  learning 
as  taught  in  the  common  schools  in  the 
State  of  New  York.  I  delighted  in 
reading  history,  but  as  books  were 
scarce  at  that  time,  I  read  the  Bible 
and  became  so  interested  in  it,  that  I 
read  it  from  Genesis  to  Revelations 
three  times  before  I  was  sixteen  years 
old.  My  mother  was  a  member  of 
the  Presbyterian  church  at  that  time 
and  I  was  sent  to  the  Sunday  school 
of  that  denomination.  We  were  re- 
quired to  commit  to  memory  ten  verses 
in  the  New  Testament  every  week,  and 
recite  them  in  school.  After  becom- 
ing familiar  with  the  New  Testament, 
I  began  to  wonder  why  there  was  no 
Apostles,  Prophets  or  spiritual  gifts  in 
the  churches  now,  as  well  as  in  ancient 
days.      I  was  a  firm  believer  in  the  Bi- 


ble and  often  wished  that  I  lived  in 
the  days  of  Jesus,  and  been  one  of  His 
disciples.  I  had  no  faith  in  the  relig- 
ious teachings  of  the  various  sects,  and 
their  revivals  and  shouting  meetings, 
made  no  serious  impressions  on  my 
mind.  I  could  not  believe  that  the 
Church  of  Christ  was  divided  into 
creeds  and  sects,  and  I  resolved  that  I 
would  not  have  anything  to  do  with 
any  of  them,  but  frequently  prayed  to 
the  Lord  in  secret  to  guide  me  in  the 
right  way.  In  the  spring  of  1830,  my  fa- 
ther borrowed  a  Book  of  Mormon  from 
a  neighbor;    I   read   it  and   believed   it 


to  be  a  true  record,  but  I  knew  noth- 
ing regarding   the    purposes   for   which 
it  was  revealed,  as  no  Elder    came  to 
Dryden  to  preach.      In  March  1832,  my 
father  removed  to  Greenwood,  Steuben 
county,  N.  Y.      In  the  fall  of  1833,  two 
Elders     came     to       Greenwood;      they 
preached  mostly  on  the  subject  of  the 
gathering  of  Israel     in   the   last  days. 
This  was  the  first  sermon  I  ever  heard 
on    'Mormonism,'    and  I  believed  it.    In 
November,  1833.  father  went  to  Geneseo 
to   investigate   the    new   religion.       He 
became  convinced  that  it  was  the  true 
church  of  Christ    and  was  baptized  by 
Elder  John  Murdock.       He     brought  a 
Book  of  Mormon  home  with  him,  which 
I  read  carefully,  comparing  it  with  the 
Bible.       A   branch   of   the   Church   was 
raised    up    in    Greenwood,    through    the 
preaching   of   Elders     who    came    from 
Kirtland.        Two      of    my    sisters    were 
baptized,  and  the  branch  now  consist- 
ed  of   about   twenty   members.       I   at- 
tended all  their  meetings,  and  fully  be- 
lieved  the  gospel  as   it  was  taught  by 
them.       In  May,   1837,   I  went  with   my 
father  to  Kirtland,  Ohio.       On  the  13th 
we  went  to  Joseph  Smith's  house,  and 
had  a  short  interview  with  him.     This 
was    the   first     time     I     ever   saw   the 
Prophet.        (Father     had     become    ac- 
quainted  with   him  the  year  previous- 
ly.)    Father  Joseph   Smith,   sen.,   went 
with  us,  and  others,  to  the  Temple,  and 
showed  us  the  four  Egyptian  mummies 
and  the  record  that  was  found  with  one 
of  them.      I  gazed  upon  those  writings 
with  intense  interest.      I  stayed  in  Kirt- 
land  ten   days,    and   then   returned     to 
Greenwood.       The     following     October 
(1837),  we  removed  to  Kirtland,  and  ob- 
tained a  house  from  Stephen  Markham, 
in  Chester,  to  live  In  through  the  win- 
ter.     This  place  was  seven  miles  from 
Kirtland.      I  taught  a  school  this  win- 
ter  in   the  western     part     of  Kirtland 
township.   May   26,   1838,   we   started   on 
our  journey  to  Missouri,   in     company 
with  Stephen  Markham  and  family  and 
eight  other  families.       On  arriving  six 
miles  east  of  Jacksonville,  111.,  the  funds 
being  exhausted,  they  stopped  to  work 
at  harvesting  to  recruit.    A  dissatisfac- 
tion  arose    in    the   company   here,    and 
the   company    was   broken   up.       From 
this  place     father,     my  brother-in-law 
(Geo.  Gates)   and  myself  pursued     our 
journey  alone  with   an  ox  team.      We 
arrived  safely  at  our  destination  Aug. 
30,    1838,   just   in    time   to   pass   through 


BIOGRAPHICAL,    ENCYCLOPEDIA. 


377 


the  mobbings.      We     spent   the  winter 
eig-ht  miles  east  of  Far  West  on  Shoal 
creek.       In   April,    1839,   we   started   for 
Quincy,  111.,  in  company  with  Mr.  Mark- 
ham's    family    and    two    others.    After 
wading  through  mudholes  and   muddy 
roads,   we  arrived   in   Quincy   April  14, 
1839.      We  located   at  a  point  12  miles 
east   of   that    place   in   Adams   county. 
I  attended  the  first  conference  held  af- 
ter Joseph   Smith   escaped   from     Mis- 
souri, in  the  old  Presbyterian  meeting 
house,  near  Quincy,  and  also  attended 
a  conference  held   in  Nauvoo   in,  Octo- 
ber,  1841,    I   saw   Joseph   Smith   deposit 
the  manuscript  of  the  Book  of  Mormon 
in  the  corner     stone     of     the     Nauvoo 
House.      March  24,  1842,  I  was  baptized 
into    the    Church    by   Daniel    A.    Miller, 
who  presided  over  the  Freedom  branch 
in  Adams  county.   111.       June  4,   1842,   I 
was  ordained  an  Elder  under  the  hands 
of  Jacob  Myers,  president  of  the  Free- 
dom branch,  and  Heman  Hyde,     at     a 
conference  held  at  Elder  Hyde's  house. 
June  8,  1843,  I  was  united  in  marriage 
to  Miss  Artemisia   S.   Myers     by  Elder 
Amos   Jackson,    at    her   father's   house 
in  Adam's  county,  111.      Miss  Myers  was 
a  daughter  of  Jacob  Myers  and  Sarah 
Coleman,    and   was   born   Jan.   24,    1829. 
Her   parents   joined    the    Church    about 
the  year  of   1833   in     Richland   county, 
Ohio.       They  passed   through   the  per- 
secutions in  Missouri  in  1838-39.      At  a 
conference   of     Seventies     held   in    the 
Seventies'  Hall  in  Nauvoo  Oct.  27,  1844, 
I   was   ordained   a   Seventy   under   the 
hands  of  Joseph  Young  and  Henry  Ja- 
cobs,   and   was   admitted    into   the   9th 
quorum.      In  the  spring  of  1845,  in  com- 
pany with  my  father  and  mother,  I  re- 
moved  into   Hancock  county,   12   miles 
south  of  Nauvoo,  at  a  place  called  Mon- 
tebello.      At  this  place  my  father  and 
mother  died.       All   that   prevented   the 
mobbers  from  burning  our  houses  after 
burning  all   the   houses   of     the   Saints 
south  of  us,  was  the  timely  interference 
of  Sheriff  Backenstos  with  a  posse  from 
Nauvoo   under   Col.    Markham.       I   at- 
tended  the  general  conference  held  in 
the  Temple  at  Nauvoo  in  October,  1845, 
at     which     conference     it     was     voted 
unanimously     to     move  en  masse  from 
the  United  States  to  some  place  where 
we   could   live   in    peace.       I    spent   the 
following  winter  getting  wagon  timber, 
and  making  a   wagon,     and   preparing 
for  the  exodus  in  the  spring.      Jan.  23, 
1846,    my   wife   and   I   received   our   en- 


dowments in  the  Nauvoo  Temple.  May 
4,  1846,  I  started  in  company  with  eight 
families  (my  wife's  father,  Jacob  My- 
ers and  family  being  one  of  them)  for 
some  place  in  the  west, — we  knew  not 
where,  neither  did  we  much  care,  so 
that  we  could  get  out  of  the  reach  of 
the  mobbers.  After  a  wearisome  jour- 
ney through  storms  and  mud,  much  of 
the  way,  we  arrived  at  John  Taylor's 
camp,  near  the  Missouri  river.  Father 
Myers  and  I  located  at  a  little  Indian 
village,  which  was  afterwards  named 
Kanesville.  Father  Myers,  being  a 
millwright  by  trade,  got  a  job  of  build- 
ing a  saw-mill  for  a  Mr.  Hildreth,  who 
was  living  with  the  Indians  and  had  a 
respectable  Indian  woman  for  a  wife. 
I  worked  some  on  the  mill  with  him. 
by  which  means  we  obtained  provisions 
for  the  winter.  I  was  wonderfully 
blest  of  the  Lord  during  the  four 
years  of  my  stay  in  Kanesville.  In 
the  spring  of  1850  I  had  very  poor 
health,  and  I  began  to  think  seriously 
about  going  to  the  Valley.  I  made  it 
a  subject  of  earnest  prayer  to  the  Lord, 
and  it  was  made  known  to  me  that  it 
was  the  will  of  the  Lord  that  I  should 
go  that  season,  and  that  I,  and  my 
family,  should  be  preserved  to  reach 
that  place  in  safety.  After  receiving 
this  assurance,  I  set  about  preparing 
for  the  journey,  and  in  three  weeeks 
from  that  time  I  was  ready  to  start. 
June  11,  1850,  in  company  with  three 
other  families,  I  started  for  the  place 
appointed  for  the  organization  of  the 
company  which  was  eighteen  miles  be- 
low Kanesville,  where  we  arrived  on 
the  12th,  and  Elder  Orson  Hyde  pro- 
ceeded to  organize  the  company  pf  one 
hundred.  He  nominated  me  for  cap- 
tain of  the  hundred,  and  Otis  L.  Terry 
and  Wm.  Wall  captains  of  fifty.  The 
company  started  from  the  Missouri 
river  June  17,  1850,  and  after  a  weari- 
some journey  of  101  days  we  arrived 
in  Salt  Lake  City  Sept.  26,  1850.  There 
was  about  twenty  deaths  in  the  com- 
pany (nearly  all  from  the  cholera)  in 
the  forepart  of  the  journey.  I  event- 
ually located  in  Little  Cottonwood 
Ward,  12  miles  south  of  Salt  Lake  City. 
In  the  summer  of  1853,  this  Ward  was 
ordered  to  gather  into  a  fort  on  ac- 
count of  Indian  Chief  Walker's  enmity. 
Accordingly,  a  fort  was  located,  con- 
taining ten  acres,  and  surrounded  by 
a  mud  wall,  which  was  called  Union, 
and  all  moved  into  it.      I  lived  in  this 


378 


LATTER-DAY    SAINT 


Ward  until  the  fall  of  1863,  During 
this  time  I  was  elected  justice  of  the 
peace  for  three  terms,  and  in  a  military 
capacity  I  served  in  the  Cottonwood 
and  Willow  Creek  Military  District  as 
first  sergeant,  second  lieutenant  and 
major.  And  In  the  new  organization 
of  the  Nauvoo  Legion,  I  was  elected 
major's  adjutant,  and  afterwards  major 
of  fifth  battalion,  second  regiment,  sec- 
ond brigade,  Nauvoo  Legion.  Bishop 
Silas  Richards  chose  me  for  his  first 
coun.selor  to  fill  the  vacancy  caused  by 
Jehu  Cox.  who  had  removed  to  Sanpete 
county.  I  also  served  as  postmaster 
of  Union  for  about  four  years.  In  the 
fall  of  1S6.3  I  prepared  to  move  to  Round 
valley,  Millard  county,  and  the  follow- 
ing winter  I  moved  all  my  family.  To- 
gether with  four  other  families  I  was 
one  of  the  first  to  locate  on  the  town- 
site  of  Scipio.  In  the  winter  of  1864-65, 
the  First  Presidency  called  for  volun- 
teers to  settle  the  Muddy  valley,  Ari- 
zona (now  Nevada),  I  responded  to 
the  call  and  arrived  with  several  other 
families  at  the  crossing  of  the  Muddy 
creek,  on  the  old  California  road.  May 
22,  1865.  Thomas  S.  Smith,  president 
of  the  mission,  met  with  us  here  for 
the  purpose  of  organizing  and  locating 
the  people.  In  the  afternoon  of  May 
28,  1865  (about  thirty  families  having 
arrived),  Pres.  Smith  proceeded  to  or- 
ganize. He  nominated  me  for  presi- 
dent of  the  branch,  which  was  unani- 
mously sustained.  But  instead  of  lo- 
cating at  the  Upper  Muddy,  he  thought 
it  would  be  best  to  locate  nearer  to  St. 
Thomas.  Accordingly  we  all  moved 
down  to  within  nine  miles  above  that 
place  and  surveyed  about  sixty  town 
lots  and  named  the  place  St.  Joseph. 
In  July  I  returned  to  Scipio,  and  in 
November  I  moved  my  family  to  the 
Muddy.  In  June.  1866,  Apostle  Erastus 
Snow  came  down  from  St.  George,  to- 
gether with  others,  and  counseled  the 
Saints  to  gather  to  one  place  on  ac- 
count of  the  Black  Hawk  war.  St. 
Joseph  was  broken  up.  and  I  moved  to 
St.  Thomas.  Pres.  Smith  chose  me  for 
his  second  coun.selor.  When  he  was 
released  from  the  mission  and  James 
Leithead  was  made  Bishop  of  the  mis- 
sion, he  called  me  to  continue  to  act 
as  second  counselor,  Andrew  S.  Gib- 
bons being  first  counselor.  When  the 
Muddy  mission  was  broken  up  in  the 
winter  of  1870-71,  the  St.  Thomas  Ward 
removed  en  masse  to  Long  valley,  Kane 


county,  Utah,  with  the  same  Ward  or- 
ganization, and  named  their  town 
Glendale.  Aug.  5,  1877,  I  was  ordained 
a  High  Priest  and  set  apart  to  be  a 
High  Councilor  in  the  Kanab  Stake  of 
Zion,  under  the  hands  of  Apostle 
Erastus  Snow,  L.  J.  Nuttall  and  How- 
ard O.  Spencer.  I  was  released  from 
this  position  and  ordained  a  Patriarch 
by  Apostle  Moses  Thatcher,  March  24, 
1889,  at  Kanab.  My  labors  in  the  min- 
istry have  been  with  the  Saints  in  the 
settlements  where  I  have  resided.  Sixty 
three  years  of  my  life  have  been  spent 
with  the  Church.  I  have  never  been 
called  to  go  on  foreign  missions  to 
preach  the  gospel,  but  I  have  done  con- 
siderable preaching  by  letters  to  my 
relatives  and  friends.  I  entered  into 
the  order  of  plural  marriage  with  Miss 
Eliza  Maria  Ivie,  who  was  sealed  to  me 
by  Pres.  Brigham  Young  March  2,  1858, 
I  have  endeavored  to  respond  to  every 
duty  required  of  me,  whether  ecclesi- 
astical, civil  or  military,  to  the  best  of 
my  ability.  I  have  done  quite  an 
amount  of  work  in  the  Temples  for  my 
dead  relatives.  As  regards  my  fami- 
ly, I  have  at  the  present  time  five  sons 
and  five  daughters  living,  and  seven 
sons  and  one  daughter  dead.  I  have 
sixty-one  grandchildren  living  and 
eight  dead,  also,  thirteen  great-grand- 
children living,  and  three  dead." 

CHRISTENSEN,  Carl  Christian 
Anthon,  a  Patriarch  in  the  Church, 
was  born  in  Copenhagen,  Denmark, 
Nov.  28,  1831,  of  poor,  but  respectable 
and  honest  parents.  His  father's 
name  was  Mads  Christensen,  born  in 
the  neighborhood  of  Skive,  in  Jutland, 
1798;  and  his  mother,  Dorthca  Chris- 
tiane  Christensen,  was  born  in  Copen- 
hagen Nov.  16,  1806.  On  account  of 
losing  both  her  parents  when  a  child, 
she  was  early  in  life  thrown  among 
strangers, and  sometimes  suffered  much 
unkind  treatment;  but  this  misfortune 
turned  her  mind  to  God  and  religion, 
and  had  subsequently  much  to  do  with 
moulding  the  temperament  of  her  chil- 
dren, as  she  trained  them  in  the  fear 
of  the  Lord  to  the  best  of  her  under- 
standing. About  the  year  1848,  she 
joined  the  Baptist  denomination,  but 
this  only  made  her  four  sons  more  un- 
certain as  to  which  of  the  religious  de- 
nominations was  the  right  one.  When 
Apostle  Erastus  Snow  and  the  other 
Elders  came  with  the   true  gospel,   she 


BIOGRAPHICAL.    ENCYCLOPEDIA. 


379 


was  among  the  first  to  embrace  It  and 
join  the  Church;  she  was  baptized  by 
Elder  Geo.  P.  Dykes,  Aug.  17,  1850,  and 
on  the  26th  of  September  of  the  same 
year  her  oldest  son,  the  subject  of  this 
sketch,  was  also  baptized  by  the  same 
Elder;  her  other  three  sons  joined  the 
Church  soon  afterwards  and  finally 
emigrated  to  Zion.  She  left  Denmark 
in  December,  1853,  taking  her  son  Fred- 
erik  with  her.  Her  youngest  son,  Wil- 
liam, had  preceded  her  to  Utaii,  but 
her  husband,  who  would  not  embrace 
the  gospel,  remained  behind  and  died 
in  Copenhagen  in  1864;  the  mother  died 
in  Salt  Lake  City  in  1855.  In  January, 
1853,  Carl  C.  A.  Christensen,  who  had 
been  ordained  a  Priest,  was  sent  on  his 
first    mission,    in    the    district    of   West 


f* 
# 


Zealand,  where  he  labored  with  much 
success  together  with  Elder  Knud  H. 
Bruun,  from  January  till  July  of  that 
year.  At  a  conference  held  in  Copen- 
hagen in  October,  1853,  he  was  called 
to  labor  as  a  missionary  in  Norway, 
having  previously  been  ordained  an  El- 
der. He  left  his  native  land,  Oct.  19, 
1853,  and  arrived  in  the  city  of  Frede- 
rikstad,  Norway,  on  the  21st.  There 
he  met  Pres.  Erik  G.  M.  Hougan  and 
many  of  the  Saints.  At  a  meeting  held 
that  same  evening,  he  was  appointed 
to  go  to  Christiania,  the  capital  of  Nor- 
way, to  assist  Elder  Canute  Peterson, 
who  had  gone  to  that  city  a  few  days 
before.  He  journeyed  thither  on  foot, 
a  distance  of  about  sixty  miles,  accom- 
panied by  Elder  Carl  C.  N.  Dorius.who 


was  appointed  to  commence  a  mission 
in  the  city  of  Drammen;  they  arrived 
in  Christiania  Oct.  30,  1853.  Elder  Peter- 
son had  already  formed  the  acquaint- 
ance of  some  men,  who  worked  in  an 
iron  foundry,  and  one  of  these  had  been 
baptized;  still.  Elder  Peterson  felt  ra- 
ther discouraged  with  the  prospects  of 
successful  missionary  work  in  the 
capital,  and  as  his  means  of  subsist- 
ence were  getting  very  low,  he  did  not 
feel  very  happy  over  any  new  arrival 
at  that  time  under  the  circumstances; 
but  when  Elder  Christensen  succeedeLl 
in  obtaining  some  money  by  selling  his 
watch,  he  became  more  reconciled. 
From  that  time  they  labored  together 
with  success,  and  a  branch  of  the 
Church  was  finally  organized  in  Chris- 
tiania Dec.  8,  1853,  consisting  of  nine 
members.  Being  appointed  to  assist 
Elder  Carl  C.  N.  Dorius  in  Drammen, 
Elder  Christensen  went  to  that  town 
in  January,  1854.  These  two  Elders, 
who  were  very  intimate  friends,  labored 
in  Drammen  with  success  till  they 
both  were  arrested  and  imprisoned  for 
preaching.  This  was  on  March  3,  1854, 
and  they  remained  in  prison  till  March 
22nd  following,  when  they  were  liberat- 
ed on  bail,  awaiting  final  sentence. 
April  21st,  Elder  Christensen  re-entered 
his  former  prison-room  to  atone  for 
his  offense,  by  living  on  dry  bread  and 
cold  water  during  five  days.  Instead  of 
paying  a  fine  of  ten  specie-daler  (about 
ten  dollars).  As  soon  as  this  little 
deviation  from  the  regular  diet  was 
over,  the  Elders  went  to  Christiania, 
where  the  Saints  received  them  with 
great  joy.  Elder  Christensen  was  then 
appointed  to  go  to  the  city  of  Frede- 
rikshald,  where  some  brethren  had 
made  visits  during  the  winter  from  the 
neighboring  city,  Frederikstad,  and 
where  they  had  found  some  people 
friendly  disposed  to  the  gospel;  one 
man  had  been  baptized.  Elder  Chris- 
tensen arrived  there  May  19,  1854,  and 
as  it  was  necessary  to  have  the  means 
to  subsist  on,  he  obtained  employment 
as  a  painter  and  was  thus  able  to  pay 
for  his  board  and  lodgings.  This, 
however,  hindered  him  from  doing  as 
much  missionary  work  as  he  would 
like  to  have  done.  Nevertheless,  he 
used  his  spare  time  to  as  good  advan- 
tage as  possible,  holding  meetings  on 
Sundays  and  at  other  times,  as  the 
opportunity  presented  itself;  but  al- 
though   he    made    some    converts,    only 


380 


LATTER-DAY  SAINT 


one  person  was  baptized  during  his  stay 
In  that  city.  In  September  ho  was  called 
back  to  Chrlstlania, where  he  now  la- 
bored during  the  fall  and  winter  of  1854- 
55.  In  December,  1854, a  company  of  Lat- 
ter-day Saint  emigrants  were  forced  to 
seek  shelter  in  a  haven  near  Mandal, 
on  the  south  coast  of  Norway,  where 
they  remained  about  a  week;  many  of 
the  emigrants  went  on  shore,  preach- 
ing "Mormonism"  to  the  people,  but  at 
the  same  time  they  indulged  in  a  great 
deal  of  dancing  and  other  frivolities, 
and,  besides,  they  spent  a  good  deal  of 
money  for  extra  provisions.  The  people 
liked  "Mormon"  money  very  well  and 
seemed  on  the  very  edge  of  being  con- 
verted, when  the  company  went  away. 
On  account  of  an  erroneous  report,  that 
a  splendid  opening  had  been  made  for 
introducing  the  gospel  in  that  city,  it 
was  decided  that  Elder  Christensen 
should  go  there  at  once,  although  it 
was  then  mid-winter  and  about  three 
hundred  miles  had  to  be  traveled  on 
foot  through  snow  and  ice.  He  went 
to  the  police  office  to  obtain  his  pass- 
port, but  instead  of  obtaining  what  he 
asked  for,  he  was  put  in  prison  for 
havin?  preached  and  baptized  again. 
The  next  day,  when  the  regular  trial 
took  place,  he  was  given  his  liberty 
within  the  city  limits,  by  giving  securi- 
ty for  his  appearance  in  court  when 
wanted.  The  police  authorities  hav- 
ing obtained  a  better  understanding 
of  the  personal  character  of  the  mis- 
sionaries and  their  converts,  by  what 
had  been  brought  out  at  the  examina- 
tion of  the  missionary  prisoner  and 
some  witnesses,  a  new  mode  of  prosecu- 
tion was  adopted  by  the  police,  and 
some  learned  men  were  sent  to  oppose 
the  Elders  in  their  meetings  by  scrip- 
tural arguments  and  common  reason; 
this  lead  to  some  public  debates  being 
held  in  a  large  public  school  room, 
where  Elders  Canute  Peterson  and 
Christensen  successfully  vindicated 
"Moimonism,"  and  opened  the  under- 
standing of  many  people,  of  whom 
several  afterwards  joined  the  Church. 
By  this  means,  also,  the  authorities  be- 
came very  friendly  and  have  continued 
thus  in  many  instances,  even  to  the 
present  time.  Towards  the  close  of 
March,  Elder  Christensen  had  once 
more  gained  unrestricted  liberty  to 
travel,  after  again  being  imprisoned  for 
five  days  on  bread  and  water  diet.  It 
was   still   winter,    and    he   had    to   start 


with  his  luggage  in  a  carpet  bag  tied 
to  a  small  sleigh,  given,  him  by  a  boy. 
The  nights  were  very  cold,  but  the 
sun  in  the  daytime  having  some  pow- 
er would  melt  the  Ice  and  snow  in  the 
roads,  which  made  traveling  In  that 
way  very  hard  and  dangerous.  When 
he  reached  Osterrisor,  some  165  miles 
from  Christiania,  the  Saints  there  urged 
him  to  rest  a  few  days,  which  he  did, 
after  which  he  took  the  first  steamer 
bound  for  his  destination,  Mandal, 
where  he  arrived  in  May,  1855.  But  he 
found  no  opening  for  the  gospel.  Nev- 
ertheless, he  left  his  missionary  com- 
panion, a  brother  Lars  Petersen,  there 
because  he  could  find  employment  at 
his  trade  as  a  wheel-maker.  Elder 
Christensen  then  returned  to  the  larger 
city  of  Christiansand,  which  was  also 
included  in  his  missionary  field,  and 
there  he  found  employment  as  a 
painter,  spending  all  his  spare  time  in 
trying  to  promulgate  the  gospel;  but  he 
only  succeeded  in  bringing  one  family 
into  the  Church  after  spending  four 
months  there  and  in  Mandal.  A  son 
of  this  family,  Anthon  Andersen,  has 
since  been  honored  with  the  mayorship 
of  Logan,  Utah,  while  branches  of  the 
same  family  are  numerous  in  other 
parts  of  the  State  of  Utah.  In  Septem- 
ber, 1855,  Elder  Christensen  was  again 
called  to  Christiania,  this  time  to  suc- 
ceed Elder  Canute  Peterson  as  presi- 
dent of  the  conference,  which  included 
all  of  Norway.  This  position  he  filled 
till  April,  1857,  when  he  left  Norway  to 
emigrate  to  Utah.  On  the  way  (in 
Liverpool)  he  married  Miss  Elise  Haar- 
by,  the  first  woman  baptized  in  Fred- 
erikshald.  He  acted  as  Stewart  while 
crossing  the  sea,  and  as  a  division 
captain  while  crossing  the  plains  and 
mountains  with  a  hand-cart,  his  young 
bride  helping  him  to  pull  the  hand-cart 
about  thirteen  hundred  miles,  from 
Iowa  City  to  Salt  Lake  City,  where 
they  arrived  Sept.  13.  1857,  destitute  of 
everything  except  faith  in  God  and  the 
hope  for  better  days.  Although  El- 
der Christensen  had  studied  to  be- 
come an  artist-painter,  he  now  com- 
menced to  labor  as  a  hod-carrier;  later 
he  advanced  to  become  a  charcoal- 
burner,  a  farmer,  a  house  painter  and 
a  scene  painter, working  several  winters 
as  such  in  the  Salt  Lake  City  Theatre; 
he  also  became  recognized  as  an  artist 
and  was  awarded  premiums  at  two  of 
the   annual   fairs   in   earlier  days.       In 


BIOGRAPHICAL    ENCYCLOPEDIA. 


381 


1865  to  1868  he  performed  a  mission  to 
Scandinavia  and  presided  over  the  con- 
ference in  Norway.  After  his  return 
he  was  chosen  one  of  the  presidents 
of  the  47th  quorum  of  Seventy,  which 
position  he  filled  for  many  years.  In 
1887-89  he  filled  another  mission  to 
Scandinavia;  this  time  he  labored  as 
writer  and  translator  at  the  mission 
office  in  Copenhagen,  Denmark,  and  in 
1896  he  was  called,  tog-ether  with  other 
Elders,  to  take  a  mission  to  Chicago, 
Illinois,  but  this  call  was  rescinded  af- 
ter he  had  made  all  preparations  to  go, 
because  it  was  thought  that  his  age 
and  health  was  not  favorable.  In 
March,  1900,  he  was  ordained  a  High 
Priest  and  Patriarch  by  Apostle  Fran- 
cis M.  Lyman,  and  since  September, 
1901,  he  has  been  employed  in  the  His- 
torian's Office,  assisting  in  compiling 
material  for  a  history  of  the  Scandina- 
vian mission.  As  a  writer  of  both 
prose  and  poetry  he  is  universally 
known  among  the  Scandinavians,  both 
at  home  and  abroad.  The  Danish 
Latter-day  Saint  hymn  book  abounds 
with  sacred  poetical  productions  from 
his  pen,  and  for  twenty-six  years  he 
has  been  a  constant  contributor  to  "Bi- 
kuben,"  the  Church  organ  in  the  Dan- 
ish-Norwegian language  in  America. 
As  the  originator  of  the  Church  pano- 
rama, which  has  been  exhibited  in  most 
of  the  settlements  of  the  Saints  in  Utah 
and  some  in  Idaho,  and  also  as  the  ori- 
ginator of  the  first  set  of  Sunday  School 
Book  of  Mormon  charts,  his  name  has 
become  generally  and  favorably  known 
throughout    the    entire    Church. 


having  returned  on  account  of  Father 
Bitner's  sickness,  which  soon  resulted 
in  his  death.  During  her  second 
widowhood,  "Mormon"  Elders  preached 
in  Mrs.  Bitner's  neighborhood  and  con- 
verted her  to  their  faith,  and  in  1846 
she  and  her  family  moved  to  Nauvoo, 
only  to  find  the  city  deserted  by  the 
main  body  of  the  Saints,  who  had  be- 
gun their  western  exodus.  With  the 
remnant,  who  were  too  poor  to  move, 
the  widow  and  her  children  were  driven 
across  the  Mississippi  river  into  Iowa 
by  the  mob.  Mr.  Musser  was  one  of 
the  youthful  defenders  of  Nauvoo  and 
was  within  a  few  feet  of  Capt.  William 
Anderson    and    his    son,    Augustus,    at 


MUSSER,  Amos  Milton,  traveling 
Bishop  in  the  Church  from  1858  to  1876, 
is  the  son  of  Samuel  Musser  and  Ann 
Barr,  and  was  born  in  Donegal  town- 
ship, Lancaster  county,  Pennsylvania, 
May  20,  1830.  He  was  only  about  two 
years  old  when  his  father  died,  leaving 
a  widow  with  four  children.  As  soon 
as  he  was  old  enough  he  went  to  work 
to  help  support  the  family,  and  was 
thus  prevented  from  attending  school 
as  much  as  he  desired.  He  had  a 
bright  mind,  however,  and  at  every  op- 
portunity picked  up  useful  knowledge 
and  stored  it  away  in  his  retentive 
memory.  About  the  year  1837,  the 
mother  having  married  Abraham  Bit- 
ner,  the  family  removed  to  Illinois  and 
settled  near  Quincy.  A  few  years  later 
they  were  again  found  in  Pennsylvania, 


the  moment  (on  September  12,  1S46) 
when  they  were  shot  down  by  the  mob. 
Young  Musser,  on  reaching  Eddyville, 
Iowa,  found  employment  as  clerk  in  a 
store,  and  remained  there  until  the 
spring  of  1851,  when  he  started  for 
Utah.  While  on  the  way,  at  Kanes- 
ville,  Iowa,  May  24,  1851,  he  became  a 
member  of  the  Church  of  Jesus  Christ 
of  Latter-day  Saints,  being  baptized 
by  Elder  James  Allred  and  confirmed 
by  Apostle  Orson  Hyde.  He  had  been 
nominally  a  member  for  some  years 
previous  to  baptism.  He  reached  Salt 
Lake  City  in  the  fall.  A  few  days  af- 
ter his  arrival  here  he  accepted  a  po- 
sition offered  him  by  Pres.  Brigham 
Young,  as  clerk  and  scribe  in  the  gen- 
eral tithing  office.  The  following  year 
he   was   appointed   upon   a   mission     to 


382 


LATTER-DAT    SAINT 


Hindoostan.  being  blessed  and  set  apart 
for  it  by  Joseph  Young.  Lorenzo  Snow 
and  AVilford  Woodruff,  October  16,  1852. 
He  was  soon  on  his  way  with  other  El- 
ders to  Calcutta,  arriving  there  in  the 
spring  of  1853.  He  labored  in  Calcutta 
about  eight  months  and  then  with  El- 
der Truman  Leonard  joined  Elder 
Hugh  Findlay  in  Bombay.  Thence  he 
was  sent  to  Kurrachee,  Scinde.  where 
he  remained  until  summoned  home  by 
Pres.  Young.  Sailing  from  India  early 
in  1856,  he  reached  London  too  late  to 
accompany  the  season's  emigration  to 
Utah.  He  labored  In  England  and 
Wales  until  the  spring  of  1857,  when  he 
again  set  out  for  home,  reaching  here 
In  the  fall.  He  had  been  absent  five 
years  and  had  circumscribed  the  earth; 
traveling  at  the  outset  from  Salt  Lake 
City  via  southern  Utah  by  team  to  San 
Pedro,  thence  to  San  Francisco  by  wa- 
ter, thence  over  the  Pacific  ocean 
sighting  Hawaii  and  Luzon,  through 
the  China  sea  and  the  Straits  of  Ma- 
lacca, into  the  Indian  ocean  and  Sea 
of  Bengal,  to  Calcutta,  thence  around 
Ceylon  to  Bombay,  and  over  the  Arabi- 
an Sea  to  Kurrachee,  Scinde,  where 
he  labored  nineteen  months.  From 
there  he  returned  to  Calcutta  via  Bom- 
bay; thence  over  the  Indian  Ocean, 
around  the  Cape  of  Good  Hope  and 
over  the  South  and  North  Atlantic 
Oceans  to  London;  thence  via  Liverpool 
to  Boston;  and  from  there  via  New 
York.  Iowa  City,  St.  Louis  and  Omaha 
to  Salt  Lake  City.  The  long  mission 
was  performed,  literally,  "without  purse 
or  scrip,"  this  being  the  manner  in 
which  "Mormon"  Elders  were  directed 
to  travel.  Elder  Musser  says  that  at  no 
time  during  this  journey  around  the 
world  and  his  sojourn  abroad,  had  he 
occasion  to  beg  for  food,  clothing, 
lodging  or  means  of  transportation, all 
of  which  were  seasonably  furnished  by 
friends  raised  up  by  Providence.  He 
again  entered  the  General  Tithing  Of- 
fice, where  he  remained  until  the  fol- 
lowing year,  when  he  was  given  by  the 
First  Presidency  an  appointment  as 
Traveling  Bishop  of  the  Church,  which 
position  he  held  without  intermission 
from  IRF.S  to  1876.  His  duty  was  :o 
visit  the  various  Stakes  and  Wards, 
with  instructions  to  attend  to  all  mat- 
ters pertaining  to  (he  collecting,  for- 
warding and  reportin.g  of  the  tithes  and 
offeiings  of  the  Saints;  to  collect  mon- 
«;ys  rluc  the  Church  and   the  Perpetual 


Emigrating  fund,  and  attend  to  other 
Church  business  under  the  general  di- 
rection of  the  First  Presidency  and  the 
Presiding  Bishopric.  His  labors  ex- 
tended to  all  the  Wards  of  the  Church 
in  Utah  and  neighboring  Territories, 
then  numbering  over  three  hundred.  On 
Dec.  1,  1866.  the  Deseret  telegraph  line 
was  opened  between  Salt  Lake  City 
and  Ogden,  and  on  Jan.  I'S,  1867,  the 
Deseret  Telegraph  Company  was  in- 
corporated. Bishop  Musser  was  one 
of  the  ten  incorporators.  About  a 
month  later  he  was  placed  in  charge  of 
the  company's  affairs  as  general  su- 
perintendent. This  position  with  that 
of  director,  he  held  for  over  nine  years, 
ar-'  under  his  superintendency  the 
company's  lines  were  greatly  improved 
and  extended  in  many  directions.  In 
1868  the  gross  receipts  from  tolls 
amounted  to  $8,462.23.  In  1873  they  were 
$75,620.62;  the  Pioche,  Nevada,  office  re- 
ceipts alone  being  $33,478.83  for  that 
year.  Some  years  after  retiring  from 
the  management  of  the  Deseret  Tele- 
graph Company,  Bishop  Musser  in- 
troduced the  telephone  into  Salt  Lake 
City  and  established  several  short  cir- 
cuits; still  later  he  introduced  the 
phonograph.  In  April,  1873,  he  was 
appointed  an  assistant  trustee-in-trust 
for  the  Church.  Three  and  a  half  years 
later  he  was  assigned  a  mission  to  the 
Eastern  States,  his  labors  being  con- 
fined to  his  native  State  Pennsylvania, 
where  he  visited  the  scenes  of  his  boy- 
hood, preached  wherever  opportunity 
offered  and  published  several  gospel 
pamphlets,  concerning  one  of  which 
Apostle  Orson  Hyde  wrote  from  Spring 
City,  Utah,  to  Elder  Musser  in  Penn- 
sylvania: "I  read  with  intense  interest 
your  circular  embodying  our  faith  in 
clear  and  graphic  style;  also  your  ar- 
guments in  favor  of  plural  marriage, 
and  must  Say  that  I  feel  thankful  to 
the  giver  of  all  good  that  we  are  blessed 
with  such  a  production.  After  I  read 
it,  I  said,  multum  in  parvo.  Without 
any  design  to  flatter,  I  pronounced  it 
one  of  the  most  able  arguments  on  the 
subject  that  I  ever  read,  and  could 
vish  that  every  member  of  our  govern- 
ment could  have  it  laid  before  him.  Ig- 
norance cannot  answer  it  and  intelli- 
gence will  not  try."  After  his  return 
from  the  East,  Bishop  Musser  was  em- 
ployed in  the  President's  office  for  a 
time;  after  which  he  was  given  an  ap- 
pointment  in     the     Church   Historian's 


BIOGRAPHICAL    ENCYCLOPEDIA. 


383 


office,   with  a  special  commission   from 
the  First  Presidency   to  keep  a  record 
of  all  persecutive  acts,  and  the  names 
of  the  perpetrators  of  those  acts, against 
the  Church   of  Jesus  Christ  of  Latter- 
day  Saints.  That  he  has  well  and  faith- 
fully performed  this  duty,  the  well  kept 
records  of  his  ofRce  testify.       He     has 
written    much   for   the  public   press   on 
practical  subjects  and  is  the  author  of 
several   valuable   works,    mostly   issued 
in    pamphlet    form.       His      "Fruits     of 
Mormonism,"    published     in     1878,    had 
wide    circulation    and    in   the    hands   of 
the  missionaries  it  has  done  great  good; 
while  yet  in  manuscript  it  received  the 
following  endorsement     from   Apostles 
Orson  Pratt  and  Joseph  F.  Smith:  "We 
are  anxious  that  a  copy  of  your    pamph- 
let     entitled,      "P'ruits    of    Mormonism, 
by  Non-Mormon  Witnesses,'   be  placed 
in    the    hands    of    every    officer    of    the 
Government,  member  of  Congress,  gov- 
ernor,   and   ruler    in   Christendom.       In 
the   possession   of   our  missionaries     it 
will  be  a  valuable  work,  and  it  should 
be  circulated  as  widely  as  possible."  In 
November,  1879,  Elder  Musser  launched 
the  initial  number  of  the  "Utah  Farm- 
er,"    which     received    the     hearty    en- 
dorsement   of    the    presiding    Bishopric 
of   the   Church    and   the   president   and 
board  of  the  Deseret  Agricultural    and 
Manufacturing     Society.         The     most 
unique  of  Elder  Musser's  literary  ven- 
tures  was    "The    Palantic,"    a   monthly 
serial   on  miscellaneous   subjects,   mak- 
ing the  defense  of  the  Saints  and  their 
laith  the  paramount  issue.      Of  the  first 
number  of  this  paper,   which  appeared 
in  October.  1887.  Apostle  Lorenzo  Snow 
wrote:       "I  read  your  paper  with  great 
interest.       I   like  the   forcible  way  you 
show   up   the  enemy.     I  wish  you   suc- 
cess."'      Apostle    Joseph    F.    Smith,      in 
writing  to  Bishop  Musser  from  Wash- 
ington,  D.    C,   says:      "I  have  received 
two  numbers  of  the  "Palantic'  and  find 
them     multum     in     parvo — the     kernel 
without  the  husk    or  very  much  shell."' 
A    host    of   other   friends   also    heartily 
endorsed    it.       His   style   is   terse,    sen- 
tentious and  caustic,  particularly  when 
provoked  in  defense  of  his  religion  and 
friends.       For  a  number  of  years  and 
until  he  entered  the  High  Priests'  quo- 
rum. April  25,   1874,  he  was  one  of  the 
seven  presidents  of  the  57th  quorum  of 
Seventy.       Elder  Musser  has  ever  been 
a  staunch  defender- of  the  principle  of 
plural   marriage.       He   had   four   wives 


sealed   to   him   in   the   following    order: 
Ann  Leaver,  by  Pres.  Brigham  Young, 
Jan.  9    1858;   Mary  Elizabeth  White,  by 
Pres.    Heber    C.    Kimball,    Oct.    1,    1864; 
Belinda     Pratt,       by       Pres.     Brigham 
Young,  Sept.  4,  1872;   Annie  Seegmiller, 
by  Pres.  Daniel  H.  Wells,  Jan.  30,  1874! 
These  ladies,  who  are  the  peers  of  their 
sex  in  all   the  virtues  and  graces   that 
adorn  true  womanhood,  are  the  moth- 
ers of  twenty  sons  and  fifteen  daugh- 
ters, who  in  mental,  physical  and  moral 
qualities  reflect  credit  upon   their  par- 
entage.      Bishop  Musser  is  an  earnest 
advocate  of  the  science  of  stirpiculture. 
He    believes    that   the   status   of   man- 
hood, physically,  mentally  and  morally, 
is  deplorably  low;  and  that  by  the  rigid 
observance    of   the   laws   of  life   it   can 
be   raised  until  a  more  perfect  type  is 
attained.       Living,  as  he  says,     in     the 
center    of     the     intellectual     and     pro- 
gressive zone  of  the  world,  surrounded 
by  lofty  mountains,  with  the  purest  of 
air  and  water,  and  the  best  religion  un- 
der the  sun,  the  Latter-day  Saints,  in 
the   true   spirit     of     regeneration,     are 
capable  of  producing  the  brightest,  best 
and  noblest  types  of  manhood  and  wo- 
manhood.     After  the  passage  by  Con- 
gress   of    the    anti-polygamy      law      of 
1862,  when  a  case  was  needed   to     test 
the    constitutionality    of     that    statute. 
Elder  Musser  volunteered  for  the  pur- 
pose,  it  being  his   intention  to  furnish 
evidence   for  his   own   conviction;     but 
instead  the  case  of  Elder  George  Rey- 
nolds  was  taken.     At  the  outbreak  of 
the  anti-polygamy  crusade   under     the 
Edmunds  law,  Elder  Musser's  case  was 
one     of     the     earliest     that     found**  its 
way  into  court.      He  was  arrested  April 
1,    1885,    charged   with   unlawful   cohab- 
itation,  that    is,   living  with  his  plural 
wives.      His  case  came  to  trial  on  April 
30th.      A  verdict  of  guilty  was  rendered 
and  on   the  9th   of  May  the   defendant 
was  sentenced  by  Chief  Justice  Charles 
S.  Zane  to  pay  a  fine  of  $300  and  to  be 
imprisoned    in    the    penitentiary    for    a 
period  of  six  months.       This,  for  hold- 
ing  out    to    the    world    more    than    one 
woman  as  his  wives,  or  rather  for  ac- 
knowledging and  supporting  his  wives 
and  children,  for  nothing  else  had  been 
pro\'ed   against   him.       He   served     his 
full  time  in  prison,  minus  the  time  re- 
mitted by  law  on  account    of    good  be- 
havior.    At     the   time   of   his    sentence 
Elder  Musser   submitted    the   following 
letter:— "Salt  Lake  City,  May  9,  1SS5.  To 


384 


LATTER-DAT  SAINT 


his  Honor.Chief  Justice  Charles  S.Zane. 
Third  Judicial  Court,  Utah  Territory. 
Dear  Sir: — In  view  of  my  having  done 
In  the  past,  according  to  my  best  un- 
derstanding all  that  I  thought  was  re- 
ouiied  of  me  as  a  law-abiding  citizen 
by  conveying  to  my  wives  and  their 
heirs  and  assigns,  respectively,  their 
separate  homes  and  homesteads,  ^nd 
now  finding  that  my  conduct  in  this 
and  other  regards  has  not  had  the  war- 
rant of  your  honor's  endorsement,  I 
feel  that  I  am  justified  in  asking  the 
court  for  the  personal  peace  and  safe- 
ty of  myself  and  my  dear  family,  to 
definitely  and  specifically  define  what 
line  of  conduct  it  will  be  the  correct 
one  for  me  to  follow  when  I  am  re- 
leased from  the  penitentiary,  where  I 
cheerfully  go  for  the  inestimable  privi- 
lege I  have  heretofore  enjoyed  in  "hold- 
ing out"  my  several  wives  before  the 
public,  without  the  least  attempt  to 
conceal  the  holy  relations.  I  would  al- 
so call  your  honor's  attention  to  the 
noonday  fact  that  my  wives  and  child- 
ren, individually  and  collectively,  are 
as  dear  to  me  as  your  honor's  wife  and 
children  can  possibly  be  to  you,  and 
that  they  have  equal  claims  upon  me, 
under  the  holy  covenant  I  have  made, 
to  love,  cherish,  honor  and  tenderly 
care  for  them;  all  of  which  I  have  done 
to  the  best  of  my  ability,  and,  as  far  as 
I  know,  to  their  entire  satisfaction;  al- 
so that  my  obligations  to  each  and  all 
of  them  are  of  the  most  sacred,  binding, 
and,  as  they  and  I  firmly  believe,  eter- 
nal character.  I  now  desire  to  have 
it  clearly  defined  what  course  will  be 
the  safe  and  proper  one  for  me  to  pur- 
sue to  keep  my  contracts  honorably 
with  them,  and  yet  live  within  the  law 
as  interpreted  by  your  honor  during  my 
trial,  which  rulings  seem  to  me  to  be 
very  oppressive  and  cruel,  not  to  say 
subversive  to  good  morals  and  law. Hav- 
ing used  my  very  best  judg-nent  all 
through  life  respecting  these  vital  mat- 
ters, and  it  now  being  deemed  unsound 
by  your  honor,  as  witnessed  by  my  po- 
sition bffore  the  court  today  as  a  crim- 
inal, I  most  anxiously  desire  to  obtain 
an  expression  from  the  chief  justice 
of  Utah,  at  this  juncture  of  the  court's 
proceedings  in  my  case,  respecting  my 
definite  and  specific  duties,  as  to  what 
I  am  to  do  as  a  husband,  father  and 
good  citizen,  after  I  emerge  from  the 
I'.astile,  where  I  suppose  the  court  will 
send   me   for  having  openly  and   affec- 


tionately 'held  out'  and  cared  for  my 
lovable  wives  and  children,  who  in  all 
the  mental  and  physical  graces  and 
endowments,  natural  and  acquired,  are 
the  peers  of  their  sisters  elsewhere;  for 
I  cannot  persuade  myself  to  believe 
that  this  mighty  and  magnanimous  re- 
public, which  your  honor  represents  in 
such  a  dignified,  distinguished  and  ob- 
viously impartial  manner,  would  wit- 
tingly punish  its  citizens  who  in  every 
other  respect  are  law-abiding  and  up- 
right. Very  respectfully  submitted  by 
your  humble  servant,  A.  Milton  Mua- 
ser."  During  a  somewhat  protracted  col- 
loquy that  followed  this  communication 
between  Judge  Zane  and  Bishop  Mus- 
ser,  and  in  answer  to  queries  by  the 
latter,  the  following  are  a  few  of  the 
instructions  the  judge  tendered  the 
Bishop  as  to  what  his  conduct  should 
be  to  avoid  future  troubles:  "It  is 
necessary  for  you  to  live  with  but  one 
wife.  The  law  does  not  forbid  you  to 
support  your  other  wives,  but  the  law 
wont  allow  you  to  live  with  them  os- 
tensibly as  your  wives.  The  law  per- 
mits you  to  bring  up  your  children  the 
best  you  can,  but  it  will  not  permit  you 
to  live  with  but  one  of  these  women 
as  your  wife,  and  to  live  with  more 
than  one  as  a  wife  is  a  crime,  no  mat- 
ter what  your  religious  belief  may  be 
about  it.  You  may  live  with  either 
one;  it  would  not  be  a  violation  of  law 
if  you  were  to  live  with  one,  even 
though  she  might  not  be  your  lawful 
wife."  Elder  Musser  closed  his  side 
of  the  conference  in  these  words: 
"Well,  you  can  see,  Judge  Zane,  from 
my  communication,  that  I  cannot  make 
such  concessions.  My  family  is  too  dear 
to  me  to  accept  any  terms  of  the  char- 
acter your  suggestions  impose.  With 
all  due  respect  to  your  honor's  judg- 
ment, it  will  be  impossible  for  me  to 
comply  with  such  demands.  It  would 
be  utterly  impossible.  If  a  gentleman 
should  meet  me  on  the  street  and  ask 
me  to  make  the  concessions  you  ask, 
I  would  regard  it  as  a  personal  insult. 
If  he  should  propose  that  I  abandon 
my  wives — divorce  them  by  implica- 
tion or  by  direct  act,  legal  or  other- 
wise— I  would  feel  grossly  Insulted,  and 
should  tell  him  that  he  might  as  well 
ask  me  how  much  money  I  would  take 
for  my  mother,  or  at  what  price  I 
would  sell  one  of  my  sons  or  daugh- 
ters, or  for  how  much  money  I  would 
sell  one  of  my  wives.       I   cannot  con- 


BIOGRAPHICAL    ENCYCLOPEDIA. 


385 


sent  to  anytlMng  of  the  kind,  and  am 
willing  to  mer.t  any  consequences  the 
court  feels  to  impose."  Bishop  Mus- 
ser  maintains  that  these  anti-polygamy 
prosecutions  were  instituted  in  malice 
and  hypocrisy,  or  were  based  upon  a 
gross  misconception  of  the  facts.  Says 
he:  "The  makers  and  enforcers  of  the 
law  decided  without  investigation  that 
the  polygamous  practices  of  the  Mor- 
mons were  base  and  immoral,  whereas 
the  very  reverse  of  this  is  the  truth.  If 
licentiousness  had  been  the  underlying 
motive,  how  foolish  of  the  Mormons  to 
assume  the  perplexing  and  costly  re- 
sponsibilities of  rearing  large  families 
of  children  (for  which  they  are  noted) ; 
of  educating,  training  and  providing 
homes  for  them  and  their  mothers,  in 
face  of  the  intense  odium  and  hatred 
thereby  engendered;  to  say  nothing  of 
fines,  imprisonments,  mobbings,  driv- 
ings, etc.;  and  all  this  simply  to  pander 
to  a  depraved  appetite,  which  could 
easily  be  sated  by  adopting  the  diabol- 
ical arts  and  practices  of  a  very  large 
percentum  of  the  anti-Mormon  crusad- 
ers, who,  assuming  no  responsibility, 
and  at  trifling  expense,  practice  all 
manner  of  abominations,  such  as  flour- 
ish in  every  community  throughout 
Christendom.  The  average  anti-Mor- 
mon, judging  the  Saints  by  his  own 
standard,  cannot  grasp  the  sublime 
idea  that  with  us  the  basic  aim  and 
divine  purpose  of  marriage,  either 
plural  or  single,  is  children;  next  to 
eternal  salvation  the  most  precious  of 
all  the  blessings  our  Heavenly  Father 
has  to  bestow  upon  His  sons  and 
daughters.  The  successful  husband 
and  father,  wife  and  mother,  will  be 
esteemed  by  the  final  Judge  pre- 
eminently the  greatest  of  all  the  bene- 
factors of  the  human  race."  Bishop 
Musser  is  a  thorough-going  "Mormon," 
proud  of  his  religion  and  church  mem- 
bership and  of  the  sacred  authority 
which  he  holds  in  connection  therewith. 
That  authority  he  thus  traces  to  its 
primal  source.  Elder  A.  Milton  Mus- 
ser was  ordained  a  Seventy  and  was 
blessed  and  set  apart  for  the  Hindoo- 
stan  mission,  Oct.  16,  1852,  by  the  lay- 
ing on  of  the  hands  of  Joseph  Young 
(senior  president  of  the  Seventies)  and 
by  the  Apostle  Lorenzo  Snow  and  Wil- 
ford  Woodruff.  Joseph  Young  had 
been  ordained  a  Seventy  by  the 
Prophet  Joseph  Smith,  who  received  his 
authority    from      angelic      messengers. 

Vol.  1,  No.  25. 


namely  the  Aaronic  Priesthood  from 
John  the  Baptist,  and  the  Melchisedek 
Priesthood  from  Peter,  James  and 
John;  these  three  Apostles  being  com- 
missioned by  the  Son  of  God,  as  noted 
in  the  10th  chapter  of  Matthew.  Again, 
Lorenzo  Snow  was  ordained  an  Apos- 
tle by  Heber  C.  Kimball;  Wilford 
Woodruff  an  Apostle  by  Brigham 
Young;  Brigham  Young  and  Heber 
C.  Kimball  were  ordained  Apostles  by 
Oliver  Cowdery,  David  Whitmer  and 
Martin  Harris,  the  three  witnesses  to 
the  Book  of  Mormon;  Oliver  Cowdery 
having  recived  the  two  Priesthoods, 
with  Joseph  Smith,  under  the  hands  of 
the  heavenly  messengers.  Elder  Mus- 
ser's  name  will  live  in  the  history  of 
Utah  for  its  connection  with  some  of 
the  most  important  enterprises  that 
have  built  up  the  Territory  and  the 
State.  As  an  advocate  and  promoter 
of  such  enterprises  he  has  ever  stood 
in  the  front  rank,  laboring  with  his 
might  and  means  for  their  advance- 
ment. He  was  one  of  the  incorpora- 
tors of  Zion's  Savings  Bank  and  Trust 
Company  and  of  the  State  Bank  of 
Utah;  a  first  subscriber  to  and  pro- 
moter of  the  Great  Western  Iron  com- 
pany and  the  Utah  Eastern,  Salt  Lake 
&  Fort  Douglas,  and  Juab,  Sanpete  and 
Sevier  Valley  railroads;  also  one  of  the 
incorporators  of  the  Desei-et  Telegraph 
company,  and  for  a  period  of  nine 
years  a  director  and  the  general  super- 
intendent of  that  company.  He  intro- 
duced the  telephone  and  subsequently 
the  phonograph  into  Salt  Lake  City. 
For  years  he  was  prominently  connect- 
ed with  the  Deseret  Agricultural  and 
Manufacturing  Society,  being  a  direc- 
tor, the  secretary,  treasurer  and  gen- 
eral traveling  agent  of  the  same;  he 
was  also  director,  secretary  and  treas- 
urer of  the  Utah  Silk  Association  anl 
president  of  the  Deseret  Bee  Associa- 
tion. For  nearly  two  decades  prior 
and  up  to  Statehood  he  held  the  office 
of  Fish  and  Game  Commissioner,  and 
planted  in  the  public  waters  of  Utah 
many  millions  of  choice  fish  and  fish 
fry.  He  is  a  very  practical  man  and 
has  rendered  valuable  and  substantial 
aid  in  emigration  matters,  in  Temple, 
fort,  and  telegraph  building,  in  colo- 
nization, co-operation,  irrigation,  in  the 
placation  of  savage  tribes,  in  foreign 
and  home  missions,  in  the  organization 
of  new  Wards  and  the  promotion  of 
numerous  home   industries.       He  is  an 

June    21,    1901. 


386 


LATTER-DAT    SAINT 


able  speaker  and  writer,  and  haf  em- 
ployed both  tongue  and  pen,  at  home 
and  abroad,  in  behalf  of  the  spiritual 
and  material  interests  of  the  communi- 
ty with  which  he  has  been  so  long  ani 
prominently  identified.— Orson  F.  "Whit- 
ney. 

TILLING,  Richard,  Bishop  of  the 
;Etna  Ward,  Alberta,  Canada,  from  1893 
to  1899,  was  the  fourth  son  of  John 
Pilling  and  Peggy  Banks,  and  was  born 
Nov.  28.  1833,  in  Waddington,  York- 
shire. England.  His  parents  were 
among  the  first  who  embraced  the  gos- 
pel in  Great  Britain.  Richard  was 
baptized  about  1849  by  Elder  Isaac  Gar- 
rer  and  emigrated  with  his  parents  to 
America  in  1850.  The  family  remained 
in  St.  Louis,  Mo.,  about  six  months,  ai- 
ter  which  they  went  to  Kanesville  (now 
Council  Bluffs),  where  Richard  assisted 
in  building  a  printing  oflTice  under  the 
direction  of  Apostle  Orson  Hyde.  Sub- 
sequently he,  together  with  others, went 
up  the  Bayer  river  to  build  houses  for 
the  poor  Saints  who  were  coming  in 
from  the  East  and  from  Europe.  They 
built  sixty  houses  under  the  direction 
of  Bishops  Lane,  Bigler  and  Burbanks. 
Richard  then  worked  at  various  occu- 
pations for  three  years,  by  which  time 
he  and  his  father  had  accumulated 
enough  means  to  fit  themselves  out  for 
the  journey  across  the  plains.  They 
secured  two  yoke  of  oxen,  some  cows, 
a  wagon,  and  such  other  things  as  were 
necessary  for  the  trip  and  started  for 
the  Valley  in  the  spring  of  1853.  The 
water  was  very  high  that  season;  the 
Missouri  river  was  overflowing  its 
banks,  and  the  low  places  between 
Kanesville  and  the  river  were  fillei 
with  water,  which  made  traveling  very 
difficult.  The  pilgrims  had  to  make 
lafts,  on  which  they  placed  their  wag- 
ons, one  at  a  time,  and  then  the  men 
had  to  wade  and  push  the  raft  through 
the  water,  which  in  some  places  was 
neck  deep.  Often  they  had  to  double 
teams,  as  the  wagons  would  sometimes 
sink  very  deep  in  the  mud.  The  Pill- 
ings  had  met  with  the  misfortune  of 
breaking  their  wagon  before  reaching 
the  river  and  had  to  take  a  wheel  back 
to  Kanesville  for  repair.  Stopping  to 
help  quite  a  number  of  people  to  land 
on  the  river  bank,  they  were  left  them- 
selves: but  fortunately  they  fell  in  with 
a  family  by  the  name  of  Atchison, 
which  had  three  wagons  with  them.  The 


two  families  joined,  but  when  they  ar- 
rived on  the  west  bank  of  th6  river, 
the  company  that  they  had  intended  to 
travel  with  had  gone;  so  the  two  fami- 
lies decided  to  go  by  themselves,  and 
they  crossed  the  plains  in  a  company 
of  four  wagons.  This  was  considered 
very  dangerous  in  those  days;  but  they 
got  through  in  safety,  and  their  cattle 
also  did  well  by  being  only  a  few  in 
number;  but  it  brought  the  young  men 
of  the  company  alm^ost  constantly  on 
guard,  and  they  had  to  contend  with 
high  water  nearly  all  the  way,  often 
building  rafts  on  which  to  cross  the 
wagons,  while  the  cattle  would  swim 
across  the  streams.  Richard  was  now 
in  his  twentieth  year;  he  had  been  of 
great  service  to  his  parents,  and  was 
at  this  time  their  only  son  in  America, 
his  younger  brother  (Joseph)  having 
died  in  Kanesville  with  the  cholera-  Two 
of  the  older  brothers  had  died  in  Eng- 


land, and  another  son  was  still  there. 
Richard  shouldered  a  large  share  of 
the  responsibilities  of  the  journey,  go- 
ing out  with  the  cattle  at  night,  driv- 
ing teams  and  sometimes  hunting  game 
in  the  day,  and  attending  to  such  other 
duties  as  were  required  in  crossing  the 
plains  in  those  days  of  ox-teams.  After 
eight  weeks  of  this  kind  of  labor  the 
little  company  arrived  in  Salt  Lake 
City,  Sept.  13.  1853.  After  staying  in 
the  city  for  a  short  time,  Richard  went 
with  his  father  to  Kaysward  (now 
called  Kaysville),  in  Davis  county, 
where  he  assisted  in  building  a  new 
home,    and    in    fencing    and    making    a 


BIOGRAPHICAL    ENCYCLOPEDIA. 


387 


lann:    he  also  snared   in  all   the   hard- 
ships  incident   to  pioneer  life,   such  as 
fighting  grasshoppers,  crickets  and  the 
dry  climate.      In  the  year  1857,  he  mar- 
ried   Miss   Catharine   Adams,    daughter 
of  Elias  Adams,  sen.,  of  Kaysville,  ©ne 
of  the  veterans  of  the  war  of  1812.      In 
the  fall  of  this  year  Richard  was  called 
to  take  part  in  the  military  operations 
in  the  defense  of  the  people,  who  were 
then   threatened   with     destruction     by 
Johnston's  army.       He  did  military  du- 
ty in  Echo  canyon,  on  Lost  creek,  and 
at  other  places,  during  this  campaign, 
being  a  member  of  the  standing  army 
which    was    called    out    to    defend    the 
lives    of   the   people.       He    went   south 
at  the  time  of  the  "move,"  taking  with 
him  his  wife  and  the  rest  of  his  earth- 
ly possessions  in  a  cart.  His  team  con- 
sisted of  a  horse,     a     cow,  and  an  ox. 
Having  gone   as   far   south   as   Spring- 
vlUe,   he   there  put  in  some  grain,  and 
then    returned     north     to    irrigate    the 
crops    he    had    planted    before    leaving 
home.       He  also  worked  on   the  Provo 
canyon    road    which     was    being   made 
through    Provo    canyon    at    that    time. 
In    the  fall  of  1858,   he  returned   to  his 
former    home    in    Kaysville,    where    he 
resided  until  May,  1889,  when  he  moved 
to  Alberta,  Canada    taking  most  of  his 
larsre    family    with    him.       He    was   or- 
dained   a    Seventy    in    1858    by    Samuel 
Henderson    and    became    a    member    of 
the   55th  quorum   of  Seventy.       In   189." 
he    was    ordained    a    High    Priest     and 
Bishop  over  the  ^tna  Ward  (now  part 
of   the   Alberta   Stake).       He  served  in 
that   capacity  until  1899,   when  he   was 
called  to  act  as  a  High  Councilor  in  th  - 
Stake,    which    position    he    still    holds. 
Elder  Pilling  is  now  occupying  a  com- 
fortable   home   near     the    beautiful    St. 
Mary's  river,  about  eight  miles  south- 
east of  Cardston.     All  his  children,  ex- 
cept one,  are  living  in  the  same  neigh- 
borhood.      He  has  five  sons  and  three 
daughters,    who   are   married,    and   one 
unmarried  son  who  lives   with   his  pa- 
rents.       The    Pilling    family    is    much 
honored   and  beloved  by  all  who  know 
them,  and   many   take   pleasure  in  tes- 
tifying to  the  great  kindness  and  hos- 
pitality of  Richard  Pilling  and  his  most 
affable  and  faithful  wife. 

BHAXDIiEY,  Theodore,  Bishop  of 
the  Stirling  Ward.  Alberta,  Canada, 
was  boin  Dec.  7,  1851,  at  Stafa,  Canton 
Zuri.-h,   Switzerland,    the  son   r,f  Henry 


Brandley  and  Anna  Meier.  When  six 
years  of  age  he  commenced  his  edu- 
cation in  the  public  school  and  gradu- 
ated from  the  same  when  sixteen  years 
old.  The  parents  of  Brother  Brand- 
ley  were  well  respected,  good  and  hon- 
est people,  who  had  joined  the  Latter- 
day  Saints  in  the  year  1867.  Aug.  1, 
1868,  Theodore  also  joined  the  Church, 
being  baptized  in  the  River  Limat  at 
Zurich  by  Elder  Karl  G.  Maeser.  April 
14,  1869,  he  was  ordained  an  Elder  by 
Elder  Maeser,  and  on  April  17th  he  left 
his  parental  home  for  the  first  time  in 
his  life  to  fill  a  mission  as  traveling 
Elder  in  the  Swiss  and  German  mis- 
sion, from  which  he  received  an  honor- 
able release  in  Mav,  1872.  June  4,  1872, 
he  emigrated  from  Zurich,  with  his  pa- 
rents, two  brothers  and  one  sister, 
all  members  of  the  Church,  and  ar- 
rived   in    Salt   Lake   City,    July   4,    1872. 


Here  he  married  Sister  Marie  E.  Xage- 
ly.  formerly  from  Altnau,  Thurgau. 
Switzerland.  They  remained  in  Salt 
Lake  City  until  October,  1874,  during 
which  time  there  was  born  to  them  a 
daughter  (who  died  when  eight  months 
old),  and  a  son.  Here  also  Brother 
Brandley  lost  his  mother  by  death.  In 
October,  1874,  Bro.  Brandley  removed 
with  his  little  family  to  Richfield,  Se- 
yicr  county,  where  they  joined  the 
I'nited  Order.  On  April  9.  1875.  he  was 
called  on  a  mission  to  Switzerland  and 
Germany,  and  he  was  ordained  a  Sev- 
enty and  set  apart  for  his  mission  by 
Apostle  Orson  Pratt,   May  21.   1875.     He 


388 


LATTER-DAY  SAINT 


started  on  this  mission  in  May  follow- 
ing, and  arrived  at  Heme,  Switzerland, 
June  6,  1ST5.  He  was  appointed  to  pre- 
side over  the  German  conference  and 
at  the  same  time  assistant  editor  of 
the  "Stern."  Thus  he  labored  for  about 
a  year,  and  was  then  appointed  presi- 
dent over  the  Berne  conference  and 
secretary  of  the  mission.  June  8,  1878, 
he  received  an  honorable  release  from 
this  mission  and  was  appointed  leader 
of  a  company  of  emigrating  Saints 
which  reached  Salt  Lake  City  on  July 
4,  1878,  Jan.  14,  1879,  Elder  Brandley 
was  ordained  a  High  Priest  and  set 
apart  to  act  as  second  counselor  to 
Jos.  S.  Home,  Bishop  of  the  Second 
Ward,  of  Richfield,  by  Apostle  Wilford 
Woodruff.  In  the  spring  of  1884,  Elder 
Brandley  received  a  call  to  fill  a  mis- 
sion among  a  people  called  Mennonites, 
who  were  scattered  over  the  States  of 
Kansas.  Minnesota  and  the  Dakotas,  as 
well  as  in  Manitoba,  Canada.  He  left 
his  home  again  May  5,  1884,  and  trav- 
eled in  company  with  Elder  Samuel 
Witmore  through  the  places  named, 
ineaching  the  gospel  to  that  peculiar 
people,  as  well  as  to  many  others,  with 
out  any  apparent  success  (as  far  as  the 
Mennonites  were  concerned).  He  re- 
ceived an  honorable  release  and  re- 
turned to  his  home  in  Richfield  Oct.  22, 
1885.  Soon  afterwards  he  was  appoint- 
ed president  of  the  High  Priests'  quo- 
rum, and  clerk  of  the  Sevier  Stake  of 
Zion.  In  October,  1888,  Elder  Brandley 
was  again  called  to  fill  a  mission  in  his 
native  land.  His  father  was  called  at 
the  same  time,  and  together  they  joined 
a  company  of  many  other  Elders  called 
to  Europe  on  missions.  Elder  Brand- 
ley  was  appointed  to  labor  as  secretary 
of  the  mission  and  editor  of  the 
"Stern."  In  September,  1889,  he  was 
called  to  succeed  Elder  J.  W.  Stucky 
as  president  over  the  Swiss  and  German 
mission,  which  position  he  filled  until 
he  was  honorably  released  Sept.  26, 
1890.  He  leached  his  home  and  family 
in  Richfield  late  in  October.  In  Febru- 
ary, 189J,  Elder  Brandley  lost  his  father 
through  death.  In  March.  1892,  he  wag 
appointed  superintendent  of  the  Sun- 
day schools  in  Sevier  Stake.  Dec.  29, 
1892,  he  was  called  to  part  with  his 
beloved  wife  Mary,  who  died  on  that 
day  in  full  faith,  leaving  him  with  six 
children  to  mourn  the  sad  loss.  Aug. 
21.  1893.  Elder  Brandley  was  ordained 
a   Pati'iarfh.  under  the  hands  of  Apos- 


tle John  Henry  Smith,  and  when  the 
two  Wards  of  Richfield  wei^e  united 
into  one.  Elder  Brandley  was  called  to 
be  Bishop.  To  that  office  he  was  or- 
dained by  Apostle  Francis  M.  Lyman. 
The  people  of  the  city  of  Richfield  elect- 
ed Elder  Brandley  assessor  and  collec- 
tor, also  mayor  of  Richfield,  which  po- 
sition he  occupied  for  three  successive 
terms.  Jan.  14,  1894,  he  was  called  to 
mourn  the  loss  of  his  second  oldest  son, 
Rulon,  who  died  while  spending  his 
vacation  from  the  B.  Y.  A.  at  his  home. 
He  died  at  the  age  of  18.  In  Novem- 
ber, 1894,  Elder  Brandley  was  elected 
a  member  of  the  Constitutional  Con- 
vention, which  commenced  and  drafted 
the  constitution  for  the  State  of  Utah. 
In  August,  1898.  he  was  called  to  as- 
sist in  colonizing  in  the  Alberta  Stake 
of  Zion,  in  the  northwestern  terri- 
tories of  Canada.  In  May,  1899,  he  re- 
moved with  a  portion  of  his  family  to 
Alberta,  where  he  at  once  commenced 
the  building  of  what  is  now  known  as 
the  Stirling  Ward,  over  which  he  was 
called  to  preside  as  Bishop.  This  po- 
sition he  still  occupies. 

TOLiMAN,Jud8on  Adonnirun?,  Bishop 
of  Chesterfield  Ward,  Bannock  county, 
Idaho,  is  the  son  of  Judson  Tolman  and 
Sarah  L.  Holbrook,  and  was  born  Feb. 
25.  1850,  in  Tooele,  Tooele  county,  Utah, 


being  the  first  white  child  born  in  Too- 
ele, where  his  parents  resided  until 
ibout  1858,  when  they  removed  to  Boun- 
tiful, Davis  county.  Judson  was  bap- 
tized when  about  eight  years  old     and 


BIOGRAPHICAL    ENCYCLOPEDIA. 


389 


lived  with  his  parents  till  he  was  twen- 
ty-two years  old.  In  1868  he  went 
east  as  far  as  Laramie  after  immigrat- 
ing Saints,  and  in  1872  he  married 
Mary  Ann  Howard,  with  whom  he  has 
had  eleven  children.  He  resided  in 
Utah  until  early  in  1881,  when  he  re- 
moved to  Chesterfield,  Idaho,  being  one 
of  the  first  Latter-day  Saint  settlers 
at  that  place.  In  June  of  that  year  the 
Saints  in  the  new  settlement  concluded 
to  hold  meetings,  and  Elder  Tolman 
was  called  to  preside;  he  took  charge 
of  the  meetings  about  one  year.  Bishop 
"VVm.  B.  Preston  visited  Chesterfield  and 
held  meetings  with  the  Saints  there 
Nov.  27,  1883,  in  Elder  Tolman's  house. 
On  this  occasion  the  Saints  at  Chester- 
field were  organized  into  a  branch  with 
Elder  Tolman  as  president.  When  the 
branch  was  organized  as  a  Ward  June 
5.  1884,  Judson  A.  Tolman  was  chosen 
second  counselor  to  Bishop  Parley  P. 
"Willey.  In  1890,  when  Bishop  Willey 
removed  to  Bountiful.  Utah,  Elder  Tol- 
man succeeded  him  in  taking  charge  of 
the  Ward.  He  was  ordained  a  Bishop 
by  Apostle  Francis  M.  Lyman,  Oct.  26, 
1891,  which  office  he  still  holds. 

SNOW,  Oliver  G.,  first  president  of 
the  Box  Elder  Stake  of  Zion,  is  the  son 
of  Lorenzo  Snow^  and  Adeline  God- 
dard.  and  was  born  Feb.  20,  1849,  in 
Salt  Lake  City,  Utah.  In  early  youth 
he  removed  with  his  parents  to  Brig- 
ham  City,  where  he  was  raised  and 
where  he  was  baptized  when  eight 
years  old.  He  was  ordained  a  Seventy 
in  1864  and  became  a  member  of  the 
58th  quorum  of  that  body  of  the  Priest- 
hood. At  the  reorganization  of  the 
Territorial  militia  he  was  called  to  act 
as  standard  bearer  in  Col.  Loveland's 
staff.  In  1868  he  went  east  to  assist  in 
bringing  a  company  of  Saints  across 
the  plains.  During  the  following  au- 
tumn and  spring  he  assisted  in  build- 
ing the  great  transcontinental  rail- 
way; and  during  the  summer  of  1839 
he  studied  in  the  University  of  Deseret 
under  Prof.  John  R.  Park.  In  1870-72 
he  filled  a  mission  to  Great  Britain,  la- 
boring as  a  traveling  Elder  in  the  Man- 
chester conference,  and  later  as  presi- 
dent of  the  Leeds  conference.  Oct. 
13,  1S73,  he  married  Mary  B.  Peirce.  In 
187.5  he  filled  a  short  mission  to  the 
Eastern  States,  and  when  the  Box  El- 
der Stake  of  Zion  was  organized  in 
1877,  he  was  chosen  as  president  of  the 


same,  which  position  he  held  till  1888. 
In  August,  1880,  he  wis  elected  a  rep- 
resentative to  the  24th  session  of  the 
Utah  legislature.  He  also  served  in 
the  25th  and  26th  sessions.  Of  late 
years  he  has  been  engaged  in  secular 
pursuits. 

KELLY,  Charles,  president  of  the 
Box  Elder  Stake  of  Zion,  is  the  son  of 
John  Philip  Kelly  and  Eliza  Long,  and 
was  born  June  9,  1841,  in  the  city  of 
Hereford,  England.  His  parents  joined 
the  Church  in  1859,  and  Charles  was 
baptized  July  5,  1860,  by  Joseph  Dil- 
worth.  in  the  parish  of  Bishop-Frome, 
Herefordshire,  Nov.  22,  1860,  he  mar- 
ried Emma  Price.  He  was  ordained  a 
Priest  in  April,  1862,  by  Elder  Wm. 
Thurgood,  and  in  1866  he  emigrated  to 
Utah,  together  with  his  wife  and  four 
children,  crossing  the  sea  in  a  sailing 
vessel  ("St.  Mark"),  which  arrived  in 
New  York  July  26,  1866,  The  family 
crossed  the  plains  in  Capt.  Andrew  H. 
Scott's  ox  train,  which  arrived  in  Salt 
Lake  City,   Oct.  8,  1866.       On  the  over- 


land journey  two  of  Bro.  Kelly's  chil- 
dren died,  and  his  wife  gave  birth  to  a 
child  near  Coalville,  Utah.  Oct.  4,  1866. 
Bro.  Kelly  located  with  his  family  in 
American  Fork,  Utah  county,  where  his 
parents  had  resided  since  1862.  Here 
Bro.  Kelly,  who  was  ordained  an  Elder 
by  Alonzo  H.  Raleigh  in  1868,  took  an 
active  part  in  Church  affairs  and  acted 
as  a  Teacher  in  the  Sabbath  school.  In 
1868  and  1869  he  worked  on  the  Union 
Pacific    Railroad.       In    March,    1869.    he 


390 


LATTER-DAT    SAINT 


changed  his  place  of  residence  to  Brig- 
ham  City,  Box  Elder  county,  where  he 
became  an  important  factor  in  the  Unit- 
ed Order.  He  collected  all  the  shoe- 
makers of  Brigham  City  together  and 
started  a  United  Order  boot  and  shoe 
department,  having  previously  assisted 
in  gathering  pine  bark  to  start  a  co- 
op, tannery.  He  acted  as  superinten- 
dent of  the  shoe  department  for  ten 
years,  during  which  time  about  $250,- 
000  worth  of  boots  and  shoes  were 
manufactured,  mostly  from  leather 
tanned  in  the  co-op.  tannery  of  Brig- 
ham  City.  In  1874,  having  acted  as 
a  teacher  in  the  Brigham  City  Sabbath 
school  since  1869,  he  was  set  apart  as 
second  superintendent  of  the  school 
Some  time  afterwards  he  became  an 
officer  in  the  Y.  M.  M.  I.  A.  of  Brigham 
City.  When  the  Box  Elder  Stake  of 
Zion  was  organized  in  1877,  he  was  set 
apart  as  second  counselor  to  Hans  Pe- 
ter Jensen  in  the  presidency  of  the 
High  Priests'  quorum,  and  later  he  was 
set  apart  as  Stake  superintendent  of 
the  Y.  M.  M.  I.  A.,  which  position  he 
occupied  for  seventeen  years.  After 
the  death  of  Hans  Peter  Jensen,  in 
1883,  he  was  chosen  as  president  of  the 
High  Priests'  quorum.  In  1885-87  he 
filled  a  mission  to  Great  Britain  and 
labored  in  the  Birmingham  conference. 
After  his  return  he  spent  eleven 
months  in  seclusion  at  Rockland,  Ida- 
ho, in  order  to  avoid  U.  S.  deputy  mar- 
shals, who  sought  his  arrest  for  in- 
fractions of  the  Edmunds  law.  After 
his  return  to  Brigham  City  in  1888,  he 
was  arrested  three  times  on  the  charge 
of  unlawful  cohabitation,  and  was  tried 
and  acquitted  each  time.  At  the  quar- 
terly conference  held  at  Brigham  City, 
in  April,  1888,  he  was  chosen  as  second 
counselor  to  Rudger  Clawson,  president 
of  the  Box  Elder  Stake,  which  position 
he  held  until  April  26,  1897,  when  he 
became  first  counselor,  succeeding  El- 
der Adolph  Madsen  in  that  position. 
President  Rudger  Clawson  having  been 
called  to  the  Apostleship.  Elder  Kelly 
was  chosen  and  set  apart  as  president 
of  the  Box  Elder  Stake,  Nov.  20,  1899, 
which  position  he  now  occupies.  Be- 
sides the  positions  named  in  the  fore- 
going.Pres.  Kelly  has  filled  many  minor 
positions  both  of  an  ecclesiastical  and 
civil  nature.  He  is  also  the  father  of 
24  children  by  three  wives,  as  follows: 
By  Emma  Price  (whom  he  married  in 
England  Nov.  22,  1860),  eleven  sons  and 


four  daughters;  by  Marie  Christine 
Thomsen  (whom  he  married  Oct.  13, 
1873,  in  Salt  Lake  City),  three  sons  and 
two  daughters;  and  by  Sarah  Ann 
Wrighton  (whom  he  married  in  Salt 
Lake  City  Oct.  8,  1883),  one  son  and 
three  daughters. 

PETT,  James,  a  member  of  the 
High  Council  of  the  Box  Elder  Stake 
of  Zion,  is  the  son  of  William  Pett  and 
Hannah  Gaskin,  and  was  born  at  Eat- 
ington,    county    of   Warwick,    England, 


March  31,  1827.  He  was  baptized  May 
12.  1851,  in  Birmingham,  England;  con 
firmed  by  Elder  Thomas  Jones,  and 
ordained  a  Priest  by  Elder  James 
Adams  in  the  fall  of  1852, and  emigrated 
to  America  in  1853,  sailing  from  Eng- 
land in  February  of  that  year.  Land- 
ing at  New  Orleans,  he  came  up  to 
Council  Bluffs,  where  he  stopped  till 
1856,  when  he  crossed  the  plains  in  a 
Scandinavian  company  of  Saints  trav- 
eling with  ox  teams.  Elder  Canute 
Peterson  was  captain  of  the  company, 
which  arrived  in  Salt  Lake  City  Sept. 
20,  1856.  Bro.  Pett  moved  to  Brigham 
City,  Box  Elder  county,  in  November, 
of  the  same  year.  He  was  ordained  a 
Seventy  by  Pres.  J.  D.  Reese  in  1865, 
and  became  a  member  of  the  58th  quo- 
rum of  Seventy;  remained  a  member  of 
that  quorum  until  the  organization  of 
the  Box  Elder  Stake  of  Zion,  Aug.  19, 
1877,  wh«n  he  was  ordained  a  High 
Priest  and  set  apart  to  be  a  member  of 
the  High  Council  by  Pres.  Lorenzo 
Snow.      This  office  he  still  holds.      Dur- 


BIOGRAPHICAL,    ENCYCLOPEDIA. 


391 


ine  his  residence  in  Brigham  City  he 
has  assisted  in  building  up  that  place 
in  particular  and  Box  Elder  county  in 
general,  being  a  builder  by  trade.  He 
has  been  connected  with  the  erection 
of  public  as  well  as  a  great  many 
private  buildings,  roads  and  bridges, 
which  are  se&n  in  Box  Elder  county  on 
every  hand.  He  was  superintendent 
of  the  Brigham  City  Woolen  mills  for 
seven  years,  served  as  a  member  of  the 
city  council  for  one  term,  and  was 
county  selectman  for  twenty-two  years. 
He  worked  in  these  various  offices  and 
callings  under  the  direction,  counsel 
and  advice  of  Pres.  Lorenzo  Snow, 
whom  he  calls  "a  brother  and  a  frieni 
indeed." 

CRAWFORD,  John,  a  member  of  the 
Hieh  Council  in  the  Box  Elder  Stake  of 
Zion,  is  the  son  of  Joseph  Crawford 
and  Catharine  McMillen,  was  born  Feb. 
17,  1832,  in  Paisley,  Renfrewshire,  Scot- 
land; baptized  March  16,  1849,  in  the 
Ardrie   branch,    Lanarkshire,    Scotland; 


ordained  an  Elder  in  1862;  appointed 
president  of  the  Glasgow  branch  in 
1863,  and  emigrated  to  Utah  in  1864, 
crossing  the  Atlantic  in  the  ship  "Hud- 
son," which  sailed  from  London  June 
3,  1864.  Crossing  the  plains,  he  trav- 
eled in  Warren  Snow's  company  to  Fort 
Kearney,  where  he  was  transferred  to 
a  government  train  loaded  with 
blankets  for  the  Indians.  After  his  ar- 
rival in  Utah,  he  located  in  Ogden. 
where  he  was  ordained  a  Seventy  in 
1873,  and  became  a  member  of  the  53rd 


quorum.  In  1882-83  he  filled  a  mission 
to  Scotland.  After  his  return,  he  was 
chosen  and  set  apart  as  a  president  of 
the  53rd  quorum  of  Seventy,  and  ha 
became  senior  president  of  the  77th 
quorum  of  Seventy  in  1884.  In  1890  he 
moved  to  Box  Elder  county,  where  he 
became  a  member  of  the  58th  quorum 
of  Seventy.  He  was  one  of  the  first 
who  worked  on  the  Salt  Lake  City  Tem- 
ple for  the  dead  after  the  dedication  of 
that  edifice  in  1893.  In  1895  he  filled  a 
short  mission  to  Cache  valley  in  the 
interest  of  Sunday  schools.  In  1897  he 
was  sent  on  a  short  mission  through 
the  northwestern  part  of  the  Box  El- 
der Stake.  In  1898,  together  with  five 
others,  he  filled  a  special  mission  to  Se- 
vier and  Emery  Stakes,  in  the  interest 
of  mutual  improvement  work.  In  18S0 
he  was  chosen  as  a  member  of  the  High 
Council  in  the  Box  Elder  Stake,  having 
previously  been  ordained  a  High  Priest. 
Elder  Crawford  has  labored  for  many 
years  as  a  home  missionary,  both  in 
the  Weber  and  the  Box  Elder  Stakes, 
and  in  the  winter  of  1900-91  he  labored 
as  a  special  missionary  in  the  Box  El- 
der Stake,  making  house-to-house  vis- 
its among  both  Saints  and  strangers. 

GOODLIFFE,  Arnold,  Bishop  of 
Snowville,  Box  Elder  county,  Utah,  is 
the  younger  child  of  James  Goodliffe 
and  Caroline  Elizabeth  Andrews,  and 
was  born  April  2,  1837,  in  Barrowden, 
Rutlandshire,  England,  Following  is 
the  Bishop's  own  narrative:  "I  came 
of  goodly  parentage,  my  father  and 
mother's  antecedents  being  staunch 
Christians,  who  defended  their  religion 
with  their  lives,  many  of  them  being 
burned  at  the  stake,  cast  into  dun- 
geons, etc.,  in  the  days  of  the  awful 
crusade  in  England  by  the  Roman 
Catholics.  My  mother  died  when  I  was 
quite  a  small  child,  My  father,  how- 
ever, was  blessed  in  his  second  marriage 
with  a  good  woman,  who  proved  a  no- 
ble mother  to  his  children,  and  we  al- 
ways bless  her  memory.  My  parents 
were  Baptists;  in  fact,  all  the  Good- 
liffes  descend  from  the  early  reformers, 
and  have  helped  to  build  and  endow 
seven  chapels.  My  father  was  a  firm 
believer  in  religious  freedom  and  would 
defend  the  rights  of  a  "Mormon"  Elder 
as  quickly  as  those  of  the  Baptist  de- 
nomination. I  became  acquainted  with 
the  gospel  when  but  a  boy  and  believed 
with    my   whole    soul;    but     my    father 


392 


LATTER-DAY     SAINT 


thought  I  was  too  young  to  fully  realize 
what  I  was  doing;  and  so  I  was  not 
permitted  to  be  baptized.  I  was  sent 
to  live  with  my  uncle,  Arnold  Good- 
liffe.  a  merchant,  of  Nottingham,  to 
divert  my  attention,  and  I  was  in  Not- 
tingham one  year  before  I  learned  of 
any  Saints,  and  I  had  some  difficulty  in 
getting  to  their  meetings;  but  by  at- 
tending morning  service  in  my  uncle's 
church,  I  was  allowed  to  go  to  the 
Saints'  meetings  on  Sunday  and  week- 
day evenings.  I  was  baptized  June 
27,  1853,  being  over  sixteen  years  old. 
My  first  church  donation  was  to  the 
Salt  Lake  Temple.  My  great  desire 
and  anxiety  now,  having  been  baptized, 
was  to  go  to  Zion,  and  I  prayed  to  God 
earnestly  that  my  way  might  be 
opened.  God  moved  upon  my  relatives, 
and  my  brother  proposed  that  I  should 
go  to  America,  and  they  would  furnish 
all  the  money  necessary.  After  a  short 
visit  among  my  relatives,  I  went  to 
Liverpool,  paid  my  passage,  set  sail  in 
the  ship  "Siddons"  for  Philadelphia, 
with  a  company  of  Saints,  bidding  fare- 
well to  father,  kindred,  home  and 
friends.  Pres.  John  Taylor  met  us 
in  Philadelphia,  where  we  landed  April 
20,  1855,  and  gave  me  my  first  meal  in 
America.  I  possessed  only  twenty-four 
cents  when  I  landed  in  America.  We 
traveled  by  rail  and  steamboat  to  At- 
chison, Kansas.  Here  the  cholera  broke 
out  in  our  company,  and  I  gained  quite 
an  experience  with  this  dreaded  dis- 
ease, as  I  nursed  the  sick.  I  was  told 
that  the  afflicted  ones  must  not  have 
a  drop  of  water— nothing  but  liquor  and 
hot  pepper  teas.  But  I  gave  them  all 
the  pure  water  I  could,  and  had  the 
pleasure  of  seeing  them  recover  and 
removed  to  Mormon  Grove.  From  here 
I  traveled  in  Capt.  Richard  Ballantyne's 
company,  and  was  appointed  clerk  to 
the  captain  of  the  guard.  On  the 
road  I  took  quite  sick,  my  life  being 
despaired  of.  Bro.  Robert  Baxter  and 
family  rnow  of  Wellsville)  were  very 
kind  to  me  and  did  all  they  could  for 
me.  God  heard  my  prayers,  and  my 
life  was  spared.  We  arrived  in  Salt 
Lake  City  Sept.  25,  1855.  and  I  hired  out 
to  Clark  Ames,  for  my  board,  who  said 
to  me:  "I  see  you  are  not  able  to  work, 
but  you  can  chore  for  me,  and  I  will 
learn  you  how  to  get  along,  but  we 
have  only  provisions  to  last  about  four 
months."  I  told  him  that  I  would  go, 
and   remarked,   that   when   I   was   con- 


firmed a  member  of  the  Church,  I  was 
promised  that  I  should  not  want  for 
bread;  to  which  he  repUed,  'Come  along; 
you  are  the  man  to  live  with  this  year.' 
This  was  in  1855.  Before  he  reached 
his  home  in  Kaysville,  he  was  enabled 
to  get  breadstuff  enough  to  last  for 
twelve  months,  the  man  from  whom  he 
obtained  it  telling  him,  he  could  not 
render  any  help;  but  he  finally  let  him 
have  the  wheat  because  of  his  mag^ia- 
nimity  in  taking  in  a  poor,  lone  boy  at 
such  a  time.  We  had  bread  to  last  us 
until  harvest  and  some  to  spare.  Af- 
ter harvest  I  came  to  Salt  Lake  with 
Bro.  Ames,  and  assisted  in  building  a 
grist  mill  in  the  19th  Ward  (the  old 
Pugsley  mill   of  today).       I  lived   with 


Bro.  Ira  Ames,  sen.,  from  whom  I 
learned  to  be  a  miller.  While  here,  I 
was  taken  very  ill  with  mountain  fever. 
Bishop  Alonzo  H.  Raleigh  came  to  see 
me,  ordained  me  a  Deacon,  and  blessed 
me;  this  was  in  1856.  Again  I  was 
healed  by  the  power  of  God.  I  was 
ordained  into  the  9th  quorum  of  Seven- 
ty in  1857,  and  I  also  labored  as  a  Ward 
teacher.  In  1857  I  married  Miss  Mary 
Robbins,  daughter  of  Edward  Robbina 
and  Agnes  McAllister,  a  young  Saint, 
and  like  myself  alone.  All  we  had  to 
begin  housekeeping  with  was  our  pov- 
erty. I  was  called  to  go  out  to  Echo 
canyon;  was  made  captain  of  ten  and 
was  present  when  Gov.  Cummings 
made    his    famous      speech      of    Fellow 


BIOGRAPHICAL    ENCYCLOPEDIA. 


393 


Citizens.  I  was  also  one  of  those  ap- 
pointed to  guard  Salt  Lake  City,  after 
the  people  had  moved  south.  After  the 
"move"  I  went  to  Kaysville,  where  I 
ran  the  Waynall  mill.  From  there  I 
went  to  help  settle  Cache  valley  and 
located  where  Franklin  now  stands. 
There  were  about  forty  families  there 
at  the  time.  I  drove  the  team  hitched 
to  the  plow  that  broke  the  first  furrow 
at  that  place.  Bro.  Samuel  Parkinson 
held  the  plow.  At  a  meeting-,  pre- 
sided over  by  Bro.  Peter  Maughan,  we 
named  the  place  Franklin,  in  honor  of 
Apostle  Franklin  D.  Richards.  I  had 
some  valuable  experience  and  trouble 
with  Indians,  and  my  wife  Mary  and 
an  old  gentleman  on  one  occasion  fed 
Indians  on  bread  and  buttermilk  until 
the  men  returned  to  the  fort.  It  took 
all  the  bread  in  the  settlement,  but  it 
prevented  bloodshed  and  murder  and 
demonstrated  the  truth  of  Pres.  Brig- 
ham  Young's  saying  that  it  was  cheaper 
to  feed  Indians  than  to  fight  them.  I 
was  called  to  Logan  by  Elder  Ezra  T. 
Benson  to  look  after  a  grist  mill  there. 
Mills  and  millers  were  both  scarce  in 
those  days.  I  stayed  in  Logan  two 
years,  after  which  I  was  called  to  Bear 
Lake  valley;  where  I  helped  to  lay  off 
and  settle  Bloomington.  In  July,  1864, 
all  my  worldly  goods  were  burned  up. 
I  was  appointed  by  Apostle  Charles  C. 
Rich  to  preside  in  Bloomington,  and 
I  raised  the  first  potatoes  produced 
in  that  settlement.  In  the  winter  of 
1865-66  I  built  a  mill  to  grind  and  chop 
wheat;  this  was  the  first  mill  in  Bear 
Lake  valley,  except  the  coffee  mill, 
which  had  been  used  for  grinding 
wheat.  Bro.  D.  B.  Dille  helped  me  to 
get  the  stones  from  the  hills  above 
Bloomington,  and  we  used  raw  hide 
for  belting,  and  did  bolting  by  hand. 
Our  mill  was  considered  a  grand  suc- 
cess and  a  big  improvement  on  the 
coffee  mill.  The  next  year  (1866)  Bro. 
David  Taylor,  of  Salt  Lake  City,  built 
a  mill  in  St.  Charles,  and  I  was  called 
to  go  and  run  it.  When  I  got  to  St. 
Charles,  Bro.  Taylor  was  sick  and 
quite  discouraged,  as  they  thought  his 
mill  a  failure,  but  I  took  possession 
and  ran  the  mill  successfully  for  two 
years.  Finding  Bear  Lake  valley  too 
cold  for  me,  I  next  went  to  Malad  city 
to  live.  There  I  labored  for  co-opera- 
tion, and  was  elected  and  re-elected  di- 
rector of  the  Malad  Co-op.  store.  I 
was   also    made    superintendent    of    the 


Sunday  school  in  Malad  valley  and  fin- 
ally was  elected  superintendent  of 
Malad  Co-op.  in  1872,  which  position  I 
held  until  I  was  called  on  a  mission  to 
England  in  April,  1875.  I  was  re- 
leased and  returned  home  from  that 
mission  on  account  of  extreme  ill  health 
in  May,  1876.  On  arriving  in  Brigham 
City,  Apostle  Lorenzo  Snow  requested 
me  to  take  p  trip  to  Curlew  valley,  ex- 
plore the  same  and  report.  I  com- 
plied with  his  request,  which  resulted 
in  my  being  called  to  make  my  home 
in  Curlew  valley.  Soon  after  locating 
there  with  my  family,  we  were  visited 
by  Apostle  Lorenzo  Snow,  Judge  Sam- 
uel Smith  and  Bishops  Alva  Nichols 
and  Jonah  Evans,  when  I  was  sus- 
tained as  president  of  the  Curlew 
branch.  This  was  on  Aug.  13,  1876. 
In  1877  I  was  called  to  act  as  Bishop 
of  Snowville,  being  ordained  a  High 
Priest  and  Bishop  by  Apostle  Lorenzo 
Snow  Oct.  21,  1877.  I  have  embraced 
the  principle  of  plural  marriage,  and 
have  endeavored  to  obey  it,  as  well  as 
every  other  law  and  ordinance  of  God's 
house.  I  am  proud  to  say,  that  I  am 
numbered  among  those  who  were  per- 
secuted, hunted  and  driven  during  the 
recent  raid  on  polygamists.  I  was  ar- 
rested in  the  fall  of  1890,  on  the  charge 
of  unlawful  cohabitation,  taken  to  Og- 
den  and  tried-  but  finally  acauaitted. 
though  one  of  the  indictments  charged 
me  with  having  "seven  wives  known 
and  numerous  others  unknown  to  the 
jury." 

FORSGREN,      Peter    Adolph,     the 

first  man  baptized  into  the  Church  of 
Jesus  Christ  of  Latter-day  Saints  in 
Sweden,  is  the  son  of  Johan  O.  Fors- 
gren  and  Anna  Christina  Olson,  and 
was  born  July  20,  1826.  in  Gefle,  Gefle- 
bor^s  Ian,  Sweden.  Early  in  life  he 
learned  the  trade  of  a  weaver.  He  was 
baptized  by  his  brother.  John  E.  Fors- 
gren,  July  26,  1850,  as  the  first  convert 
to  "Mormonism"  in  Sweden,  his  bap- 
tism taking  place  nearly  a  month  be- 
fore Erastus  Snow  commenced  to  bap- 
tize in  Copenhagen,  Denmark.  He  emi- 
grated to  Utah  in  1852-53,  crossing  the 
ocean  in  the  ship  "Forest  Monarch ;'" 
while  on  the  journey  he  married  Chris- 
tina Knudson,  Sept.  30,  1853,  at  Keokuk. 
Iowa.  After  his  arrival  in  Utah,  he 
located  at  Brigham  City,  Box  Elder 
county,  being  the  first  Scandin.-ivian 
family  who  settled    north    of  Salt  Lake 


394 


LATTER-DAY    SAINT 


City;  and  there  he  passed  through  all 
the  trials  and  hardships  incident  to 
pioneer  life.  He  also  made  the  first 
loom  in  Brigham  City  and  commenced 
\veaving  on  it  in  an  early  day.  He 
has  been  weaving  ever  since;  and  some 
of  the  dress  patterns  manufactured  by 
him  and  his  family  were  on  exhibition 
at  the  World's  fair  in  Chicago  in  1893. 
March  20,  1ST9,  he  married  Eliza  Caro- 
line Thomsen,  as  a  plural  wife,  which 
subsequently  led  to  his  arrest  in  1888 
on  the  charge  of  unlawful  cohabitation. 
Being  convicted  he  served  a  term  in 
the    Utah    penitentiary,     from    Dec.    13, 


1888,  to  March,  1889.  In  1885-86  he  filled 
a  mission  to  Sweden,  laboring  in  the 
Stockholm  conference;  after  his  return 
he  was  chosen  first  counselor  to  Bishop 
Henry  Tingey,  of  the  Brigham  City 
1st  Ward,  which  position  he  filled  with 
honor  and  ability  until  the  Bishop's 
death  in  1895.  Previous  to  this  he  had 
acted  as  a  counselor  to  Wm.  Watkins 
in  the  presidency  over  the  Elders  in 
Brigham  City.  His  first  wife  died 
March  13,  1895.  Elder  Forsgren  is 
still  hale  and  hearty  and  is  numbered 
among  the  faithful  veterans  of  the 
Church. 

STOHIi,  Ole  Nilwoii,  president  of 
Scandinavian  meetings  in  the  Box 
Elder  Stake  pf  Zion,  was  born  Nov. 
9,  183.^,  in  Malmohus  Ian,  Sweden.  In 
December,  1853,  he  first  heard  the  gos- 
pel preachei  by  his  brother, Nils  Nilson, 
in  the  home  of  his  father,  and  was  bap- 
tized   in    Malmo,    Jan.    15.    1854.      In    the 


early   spring   of   1854    he    left   his   home 
and   the  land  of  his  birth  and  went  to 
Copenhagen,  Denmark,  where  he  unit- 
ed   himself  with    the   members   of     the 
Church   to  which   he   belonged.     There, 
also,  he  was  ordained  a  Deacon  March 
5,  1855.  and  a  Priest  Sept.  21,  1855.  That 
year  he  was  sent  on  a  mission  to   the 
southeastern  part  of  Zealand.       In  the 
latter  part  of  April,  1856,  he  received  a 
call    from    Pres.    Hector   C.    Haight     to 
take  a  mission   to   Stockholm,    Sweden. 
A  few  days  later  he  arrived  in  Copen- 
hagen, and  on  May  1,  1856,  he  was  or- 
dained an  Elder  by  Ola  N.  Liljenquist. 
The  same  day  he  and  Elder  Gustaf  Ol- 
son  took  steamer  for  Stockholm.       On 
their  arrival   in  that  city  they  learned 
that   Elder    Chr.    A.    Madsen,    president 
of  the  Stockholm  conference,  had  been 
banished  from  Sweden.       In  May,  1856, 
Bro.  Stohl  was  sent  to  labor  in  West- 
manland.       Though  opposed  by  priests 
and  officials,   and   subjected  to  the  an- 
noyance  of    arrest    by   the   officials,    he 
and  his  missionary  companion  succeed- 
ed in  baptizing  a  number  of  people  and 
organizing  a   branch   of  the  Church  in 
Westmanland.      On  his  return  to  Stock- 
holm  be   had    the   pleasure   of    meeting 
Apostle    Ezra    T.    Benson,      John    Kay, 
Pres.  Carl  Widerborg  and  Lars  Nilson, 
his  brother,  who  had  been  appointed  to 
preside  over  the  Stockholm  conference. 
In    the    fall    of    1856,    Elder    Stohl    was 
called   to   preside   over   the   Norrkoping 
branch,    which   at    that    time   belonged 
o  the  Stockholm  conference.    He  found 
in  this  branch,  on  his  arrival,  only  four 
members  of  the  Church.      In  May,  1858, 
the  Stockholm  conference  was  divided, 
and   a   new   conference     known   as   the 
Norrkoping  conference     was  organized 
with  Elder  Stohl  as  president.  He  pre- 
sided in  that  capacity  until  the  spring 
of  1862,   when, he  was  released  from     a 
mission  of  more   than   six   years,   with 
the  privilege  of  going  to  Zion.      At  the 
time  he  emigrated,  the  Norrkoping  con- 
ference  consisted    of    several    branches 
and  the  membership  had  increased  from 
four  souls  to  hundreds.     Together  with 
many    other    Saints     Elder     Stohl    left 
Copenhagen  April  14,  1862,  and  crossed 
the    Atlantic    on      the    ship    "Electric." 
The  company  was  nine  weeks  crossing 
the  ocean,  and  after  a  dreary  journey 
across    the    plains,    the   emigrants     ar- 
rived in  Salt  Lake  City,   Sept.  22,   1862. 
Two  months  later  (Nov.  19,  1862),   Bro. 
Stohl  was  ordained  a  Seventy  and  be- 


BIOGRAPHICAL,    ENCYCLOPEDIA. 


395 


came  a  member  of  the  65th  quorum  of 
Seventy.  April  16,  1864,  he  married 
Christina  Johnson,  who  embraced  the 
gospel  in  Malmo,  Sweden,  in  1854.  In 
October,  1866,  he  and  family  moved 
from  Salt  Lake  City  to  Brigham  City, 
where  he  has  resided  ever  since.  From 
1874  to  1879  he  was  actively  engaged  in 
the  United  Order,  which  was  then  car- 
ried on  at  Brigham  City,  under  the  su- 
pervision of  Pres.  Lorenzo  Snow.  In 
October,  1879,  he  left  his  home  on  a 
mission  to  Scandinavia.  On  his  arrival 
in  Copenhagen,  he  was  sent  to  his  old 
field  of  labor,  the  Gothenburg  confer- 
ence,and  during  the  last  year  of  his  la- 
bors in  that  conference  acted  as  presi- 
dent    of       the       same.        In       August, 


1S81,  he  was  released  from  his  labors 
as  a  missionary  and  returned  to  his 
family  and  friends  in  September  of  that 
year.  Since  his  return  from  this  mis- 
sion, he  has  been  honored  with  positions 
of  trust  and  responsibility  of  both  a 
political  and  religious  nature;  but 
above  all  he  feels  to  rejoice  in  the  fact 
that  he  early  in  life  was  permitted  to 
hear  the  sound  of  the  everlasting  gos- 
pel, and  was  honored  by  being  one  of 
the  first  who  carried  the  tidings  of  joy 
and  salvation  to  many  of  his  fellow- 
men  in  the  land  of  his  nativity.  Noth- 
ing gives  Brother  Stohl  greater  pleas- 
ure than  to  testify  of  the  goodness  of 
the  Lord  towards  him  since  he  received 
a  knowledge  of  "  the  gospel  of  Jesus 
Christ. 


JEPPSOX,  Jeppe,  a  High  Councilor, 
and  first  counselor  to  Ola  N.  Stohl  in 
the  presidency  of  the  Scandinavian 
meetings,  in  the  Box  Elder  Stake  of 
Zion,  is  the  son  of  Hans  Jeppson  and 
Martha  Hanson,  and  was  born  Nov.  1.3, 
1832,  in  Trelleborg,  Malmohus  Ian,  Swe- 
den; he  went  to  Copenhagen,  Denmark, 
in  1848,  and  there  learned  the  trade  of 
a  cabinetmaker,  and  embraced  the  gos- 
pel, being  baptized  April  21,  1853.  by  O. 
C.  Olsen,  and  confirmed  the  following 
day  by  Christian  J.  Larsen.  Soon  af- 
terwards he  was  ordained  a  Teacher 
and  appointed  to  labor  among  the 
Saints  in  Copenhagen.  Oct.  6,  1853,  he 
was  ordained  a  Priest  and  called  on  a 
mission  to  Sweden.  At  a  conference 
held  in  Malmo,  Sweden,  he  was  sent 
to  labor  in  Gothenburg  and  vicinity,  be- 
ing the  first  Latter-day  Saint  mission- 
ary to  labor  in  that  part  of  Sweden. 
Traveling  on  foot  all  alone  to  and  from 
Gothenburg,  he  did  missionary  work 
along  the  road.  Returning  to  Copen- 
hagen toward  the  close  of  1853,  he  was 
released  from  further  missionary  labors 
and  permitted  to  emigrate  to  Zion,  as 
his  services  were  needed  as  an  inter- 
preter with  a  company  of  Saints  which 
left  Copenhagen  in  December,  1853,  un- 
der the  direqtion  of  Hans  Peter  Olsen. 
On  the  road  he  acted  as  Teacher  among 
the  Saints,  and  arrived  in  Salt  Lake 
City,  Oct.  5,  1854.  Having  married 
Gunild  Marie  Hansen,  a  Norwegian 
girl,  he  located  at  Brigham  City,  being 
one  of  the  fifty  families  called  to  set- 
tle at  that  place  under  the  direotion  of 
Lorenzo  Snow.  This  has  been  his 
home  ever  since,  and  here  he  has  from 
that  time  until  the  present  labored 
faithfully  and  true  for  the  upbuilding 
of  the  kingdom  of  God.  Among  the 
many  local  positions  which  he  has  filled 
with  credit  and  honor  to  himself  and 
all  concerned,  it  may  be  mentioned  that 
he  has  labored  as  Ward  teacher,  coun- 
selor in  the  presidency  of  the  Priests' 
quorum,  water  master,  janitqr.  and 
police  of  public  buildings,  etc.  He  was 
ordained  an  Elder  in  1855,  and  a  High 
Priest  Nov.  25,  1856,  by  Lorenzo  Snow, 
and  for  many  years  he  acted  as  a  coun- 
selor to  Charles  Kelley  in  the  presi- 
dency of  the  High  Priests'  quorum  in 
the  Box  Elder  Stake.  In  1884-86  he 
filled  a  mission  to  Scandinavia,  his  field 
of  labor  being  his  native  land,  Sweden. 


306 


LATTER-DAY    SAINT 


After  his  return  home  he  was  chosen 
and  set  apart  as  a  High  Councilor  in 
the  Rox  Elder  Stake,  which  position  he 
still  holds.  In  April,  1899,  he  was  set 
apart  as  first  counselor  to  Elder  Ola  N. 
Stohl   in   the  presidency  of  the  Scandi- 


navian meetings  in  Brigham  City.  In 
regard  to  his  family  affairs  Elder 
Jeppson  writes:  "I  married  Gunild 
Marie  Hansen  Oct.  11,  1854,  and  Chris- 
tina Persson,  in  January,  1865.  They 
are  both  still  living.  By  my  first  wife 
I  have  had  ten  children,  of  whom 
seven  are  now  alive;  by  my  second  wife 
I  have  had  fourteen  children,  of  whom 
eleven  are  alive.  Thus  I  have  18  liv- 
ing children;  also  61  grandchildren  and 
three  great-grandchildren.  During  the 
late  raid  on  polygamists,  I  was  hound- 
ed and  driven  from  pillar  to  post  by 
U.  S.  deputy  marshals  for  about  three 
years  and  finally  lodged  in  prison.  I 
served  a  term  in  the  Utah  Peniten- 
yary  from  Oct.  13,  1888.  to  Feb.  26, 
1889."  Elder  Jeppson  is  indeed  a 
veteran  in  the  Church,  being  numbered 
among  the  most  faitful  of  its  Elders. 
He  has  trained  his  large  posterity  in 
the  fear  of  the  Lord,  and  has  already 
seen  four  of  his  sons  fill  foreign  mis- 
sions. 

CHKISTIANSKX,    Hans    Christian, 

counselor  to  Ola  N.  Stohl,  president  of 
the  Scandinavian  meetings  in  Box  El- 
der Stake  of  Zion,  is  the  son  of  Jens 
F.  Christiansen  and  Kirstine  Petersen, 
and  was  born  April  18,  1846,  in  Nykjo- 
bing  on  Falster,  Denmark;  he  embraced 


the  gospel  in  his  native  town,  being 
baptized  Aug.  13,  1864,  by  Rasmus  Hen- 
ningsen;  soon  afterwards  he  was  or- 
dained a  Teacher,  later  a  Priest,  and 
still  later  (early  in  1866)  an  Elder  and 
appointed  to  preside  over  the  Falster 
branch  of  the  Islands  (Oernes)  confer- 
ence. Two  months  later  (May,  1866) 
he  was  called  to  labor  as  a  missionary 
on  the  island  of  Lolland.  He  labored 
in  the  field  about  four  months;  but 
owing  to  lameness  in  the  leg,  he  was 
unable  to  travel,  and  being  a  tailor  by 
profession,  he  obtained  employment  as 
such  in  the  city  of  Nakskov,  where  he 
became  an  instrument  in  the  hands  of 
the  Lord  to  convert  two  young  men. 
One  of  these  was  Oluf  B.  Andersen, 
who  now  acts  as  Bishop  of  North  Mor- 
gan Ward,  Morgan  county,  Utah.  The 
conversation  of  these  two  men  exasper- 
ated the  people  of  Nakskov,  and  Bro. 
Christiansen  was  forced  to  leave  the 
city.  He  next  went  to  the  island  of 
Fyen,  and  while  laboring  in  Odense  as 
a  tailor,  he  was  closely  associated  with 
the  branch  of  the  Church  there,  for 
which  he  acted  as  clerk.  After  labor- 
inp-  at  his  trade  at  a  number  of  other 
places,  he  came  to  Slagelse,  on  the  is- 
land of  Zealand,  and  there  presided  in 
a  district,  and  married  Anna  Andersen 
in  1873.      Two  years  later  he  emigrated 


to  Utah  with  his  wife  and  one  child  and 
located  in  Brigham  City,  where  he  has 
lived  ever  since.  Here  he  has  acted 
as  counselor  in  the  presidency  of  the 
1st  quorum  of  Elders  and  Ward  Teach- 
er.     He  was  ordained  a  High  Priest  in 


BIOGRAPHICAL    ENCYCLOPEDIA. 


397 


1895,  and  since  October,  1895,  he  has 
acted  as  counselor  to  Ola  N.  Stohl, 
president  of  the  Scandinavian  meetings 
in  Brigham  City. 

NYE,  John,  senior  president  of  the 
5th  quorum  of  Seventy,  was  born  Oct. 
28,  1835,  in  the  parish  of  Leigh,  county 
Kent,  England.  About  the  time  of  the 
so-called  gold  fever,  in  Australia,  he 
emigrated  to  that  country  with  his 
father's  family.  Here  he  heard  the 
gospel  preached  by  "Mormon"  Elders, 
believed,  and  was  baptized  July  11,  1858, 
by  Thos.  S.  Johnson,  an  Elder  from 
Utah,  at  Kyneton,  colony  of  Victoria. 
Soon  afterwards  he  was  ordained  a 
Priest  by  the  same  Elder.  Emigrat- 
ing to  America,  he  sailed  from  Mel- 
bourne, Australia,  Dec.  28,  1858,  on  the 
American  ship  "Milwaukee,"  and  ar- 
rived in  San  Francisco  March  9,  1859. 
He  and  two  of  his  brothers  worked 
their  passage  before  the  mast.  In  Sep- 
tember, 1860,  he  left  California  for  Utah, 


arriving  there  about  the  middle  of  Oc- 
tober. Most  of  the  family  settled  in 
Ogden.  John  was  ordained  a  Seventy 
Dec.  17,  1861,  by  John  Thompson,  and 
became  identified  with  the  54th  quorum. 
In  March.  1863,  he  married  Miss  Elisa 
Fay,  a  native  of  England,  and  soon 
afterwards  he  located  with  his  wife  in 
Brigham  City;  in  1867  he  moved  to  Lo- 
gan, Cache  county,  and  in  1869  settled 
in  Call's  Fort,  Box  Elder  county.  Jan. 
3,  1886,  he  was  set  apart  as  president  of 
the  5th  quorum  of  Seventy,  and  he  be- 
came senior  president   of  that   quorum 


Feb.  12,  1880.  From  1873  to  1894  he 
was  associated  with  the  Call's  Fort 
Sunday  school,  most  of  the  time  as 
superintendent.  He  also  acted  as  Ward 
teacher  for  about  twenty  years  and 
served  as  justice  of  the  peace  three 
terms.  In  1894-96  he  filled  a  mission  to 
Great  Britain,  laboring  as  a  traveling 
Elder  in  the  Norwich  an'd  afterwards 
in  the  London  conference.  Elder  Nye 
writes:  "I  have  not  been  a  money 
maker  in  my  days,  but  I  have  endeav- 
ored to  practice  the  principles  of  right- 
eousness, which  have  always  appeared 
more  desirable  to  me  than  the  riches  of 
the  world.  I  have  been  married  only 
once;  my  wife  has  borne  me  six  chil- 
dren, four  of  whom  (two  sons  and  two 
daughters)  are  now  alive.  My  youngest 
son  is  filling  a  mission  to  the  Northern 
States  at  the  present  time.  I  have  an 
abiding  testimony  of  the  truth  of  the 
gospel  as  revealed  through  the  instru- 
mentality of  the  Prophet  Joseph  Smith, 
and  firmly  believe  that  his  teachings 
will  save  and  exalt  all  who  will  render 
obedience  to  them  in  the  celestial  king- 
dom of  God." 

MORTENSEN,     Morten     Christian 

one  of  the  presidents  of  the  5th  quorum 
of  Seventy,  was  born  in  Little  R orbsek, 
Snodstrup  parish,  Frederiksborg  amt, 
Denmark,  June  3,  1846,  the  son  of  Knud 
Mortensen  and  Karen  Marie  Eriksen. 
He  Avas  baptized  in  Copenhagen,  Den- 
mark, March  20,  1857,  by  Elder  Ole  Lar- 
sen,  and  emigrated  to  Utah  as  one  of 
his  father's  family  in  1863,  crossing  the 
Atlantic  in  the  ship  "B.  S.  Kimball," 
and  the  plains  in  Capt.  John  P.  San- 
ders' ox-train.  Together  with  his  fa- 
ther and  mother  he  became  one  of  th? 
first  settlers  of  Bear  River  City,  Box 
Elder  county,  in  January,  1866,  and 
passed  through  the  hard  struggle  which 
the  early  settlers  of  that  place  experi- 
enced on  account  of  bad  water  and 
other  drawbacks.  He  was  ordained 
a  Deacon  in  1864,  and  an  Elder  Nov. 
8,  1869,  on  which  day  he  also  married 
Ane  Christine  Knudsen.  He  served 
as  a  counselor  in  the  presidency  of  the 
4th  quorum  of  Elders  in  the  Box  Elder 
Stake  for  a  number  of  years,  and  from 
1881  to  1890  he  acted  as  the  president  of 
said  quorum.  In  1890  he  was  ordained 
a  Seventy  by  Pres.  Christian  D.  Fjeld- 
sted  and  set  apat  as  a  president  of  the 
nth  quorum  of  Seventy.  In  1895-97  he 
filled  a  mission  to   Scandinavia,   labor- 


398 


LATTER-DAY    SAINT 


ing  as  a  traveling  Elder  in  the  Copen- 
hagen conference  and  later  as  presi- 
dent of  the  Aarhus  conference.  Dur- 
ing his  i)i-«sidency  in  Aarhus,  he  reor- 
ganized three  branches  (Horsens,  Silke- 
borg  and  Grenaa).  which  had  been  dis- 


was  constantly  thrown  into  the  com- 
pany of  wicked  men,  he  kept  himself 
pure  and  led  a  virtuous  life.  April  27, 
1S79,  he  married  Miss  Sariah  J.  Ra- 
leigh, daughter  of  Bishop  Alonzo  H. 
Ilaleigh,  having  previously  been  or- 
dained an  Elder,  Dec.  21,  1884,  he  was 
ordained  a  Seventy  by  Lorenzo  Huns- 
aker  and  became  identified  with  the 
rth  quorum;  subsequently  he  became  a 
president  of  said  quorum.  For  many 
years  he  labored  as  a  Ward  Teacher 
in  the  Park  Valley  Ward,  became  an 
officer  in  the  Y.  M.  M.  I.  A.,  and  super- 
intendent of  the  Park  Valley  Sunday 
school.  In  1899  he  was  called  on  a 
mission  to  the  Eastern  States,  from 
which  he  has  not  yet  returned.  Elder 
Campbell  writes:  "I  have  a  nice  fami- 
ly, consisting  of  a  wife  and  ten  chil- 
dren, of  whom  I  feel  justly  proud.  My 
children  have  all  been  taught  the  true 
gospel,  and  they  have  faith  in  God. 
They  are  all  healthy  and  strong,  and 
I  have  never  had  a  doctor  in  my  house 
since  I  became  the  head  of  a  family." 
Besides  his  positions  in  the  Church,  El- 
der  Campbell   has   filled   a   number     of 


continued  by  foi-mer  presidents.  At 
home  he  has  been  a  Sunday  school 
worker  for  26  years,  and  a  home  mis- 
sionary in  the  Box  Elder  Stake  for  a 
number  of  years.  In  a  civil  or  political 
capacity  he  has  served  as  justice  of 
the  peace,  school  trustee,  water  master, 
trustee  and  president  of  the  town 
board,  etc.,  and  has  always  been  a  lead- 
ing and  active  man  in  public  affairs 
generally. 

CAMPBKLIj,     Jonathan,    one  of  the 

presidents  of  the  5th  quorum  of  Sev- 
enty, is  the  son  of  Jonathan  Campbell 
and  Lucinda  Shipman,  and  was  born 
Nov.  14.  1853,  in  North  Ogden.  Weber 
county,  Utah-.  His  father  was  ac- 
quainted with  the  Prophet  Joseph 
^;mith.  worked  on  the  Nauvoo  Temple, 
and  was  a  member  of  the  famous  Mor- 
mon Battalion.  Jonathan  was  bap- 
tized when  about  eight  years  old,  re- 
ceived a  limited  education  and  was 
raised  a  farmer.  After  an  unsuccess- 
ful attempt  at  farming  in  Malad  val- 
ley, he  went  to  Park  Valley,  Box  Elder 
county,  in  1871,  and  became  the  first 
settler  in  what  is  now  called  Rosette, 
in  the  west  end  of  the  valley;  he  also 
engaged  in  freighting,  between  Kelton 
station  and  Boise  City,  Idaho,  and 
oih-r    northern    points;    but    though   he 


stcular  offices.  Thus  he  was  the  first 
postmaster  in  Rosette,  and  had  the 
honor  of  naming  the  office.  He  has 
also  served  as  precinct  constable  and 
road  supervisor. 

irSK.N,  Alvin,  one  of  the  presidents 
(if  the  5th  quorum  of  Seventy,  was  born 
Jan.  9,  1871,  in  Bear  River  City,  Box 
Elder  county.  Utah.      His  parents  were 


BIOGRAPHICAL    ENCYCLOPEDIA. 


399 


among  the  -early  pioneers  of  Utah  and 
passed  through  many  of  the  hardships 
of  early  days.  He  attended  the  dis- 
trict school  in  his  own  little  town,  and 
spent  two  years  at  the  B.  Y.  College 
of  Logan.  He  passed  through  the  dif- 
ferent grades  of  the  Priesthood,  being 
at  one  time  the  president  of  the  Dea- 
cons' quorum.  In  1890  he  was  ordained 
an  Elder,  and  in  1896  received  a  call  to 
take  a  mission  to  the  Southern  States. 
May  16,  1896,  he  was  ordained  a  Seven- 
ty under  the  hands  of  Apostle  John 
Henry  Smith  and  set  apart  for  a  mis- 


sion to  the  Southern  States.  In  com- 
pany with  twenty-six  other  Elders  he 
arrived  at  Chattanooga  May  26,  1896, 
where  the  company  was  met  by  Pres. 
Elias  Kimball,  and  assigned  their  fields 
of  labor.  Elder  Ipsen  was  assigned  to 
the  State  of  Kentucky,  where  he  la- 
bored for  thirty-one  months,  making 
many  friends  and  baptizing  a  few  into 
the  Church.  He  returned  home  Dec. 
17,  1898.  May  17,  1900,  he  married  Miss 
Viola  Sweeney,  daughter  of  Jonathan 
and  Mary  Sweeney,  of  Kentucky,  whom 
he  met  while  in  his  mission  field.  In 
January,  1901,  he  was  ordained  one  of 
the  seven  presidents  of  the  5th  quorum 
of  Seventy.  He  is  also  one  of  the 
Stake  Board  of  mutual  improvement 
work,  and  superintendent  of  the  Reli- 
gion class  work  in  Bear  River  City. 

DAA'IS,  George,  a  president  of  the 
ri9th  quorum  of  Seventy,  is  the  son  of 
James    Davis   and    Elizabeth    Goodwin, 


and  was  born  Dec.  8,  1834,  in  Worcester- 
shire, England.  He  was  baptized  in 
1849  by  Edwin  Bryant,  ordained  an 
Elder  Jan.  9,  1853,  and  emigrated  to 
Utah  in  1854,  crossing  the  Atlantic  in 
the  ship  "Golconda."  He  settled  in 
Salt  Lake  City  and  worked  for  four 
years  on  the  Temple  Block;  afterwards 
he  located  in  Clarkston,  Cache  county, 
and  since  1876  his  home  has  been  in 
Three  Mile  Creek,  Box  Elder  county. 
He  participated  in  the  so-called  Echo 
Canyon  war  in  1857-58.  Having  yielded 
obedience  to  the  principle  of  plural  mar- 
riage, he  was  arrested  on  a  charge  of 
unlawful  cohabitation,  and  sentenced, 
De<".  1,  1888,  to  three  and  a  half  months' 
imprisonment  in  the  Utah  penitentiary 
for  living  with  his  wives.  He  served 
his  term,  and  was  restored  to  liberty 
March  12,  IS89.  In  March,  1900,  he 
left  home  on  a  mission  to  Great  Britain, 
from  which  he  has  not  yet  returned. 
Elder  Davis  is  universally  known  as 
one  of  the  most  energetic  and  faithful 
men  in  the  Church.  His  natural  hos- 
pitality and  kindness  has  made  him 
a  host  of  friends  both  at  home  and 
abroad. 

JENSEN,  Hyrum,  first  president  of 
the  Bergen  conference,  Norway,  is  the 
son    of   Peter   Jensen    and    Ane     Marie 


Hansen,  and  was  born  in  Mantua,  Box 
Elder  county,  Utah,  May  2,  1866.  He 
spent  his  boyhood  days  on  the  farm, 
and  attended  the  common  schools  and 
the  University  of  Deseret,  after  which 


400 


LATTER-DAY    SAINT 


he  taught  school  for  a  number  of  years. 
In  1S97  he  was  called  on  a  mission  to 
Scandinavia.  He  was  ordained  a  Sev- 
enty and  set  apart  for  this  mission 
July  30,  1897,  by  Seymour  B.  Young. 
After  visiting  Stockholm,  Sweden,  he 
labored  seven  months  in  the  Laurvik 
branch,  Norway;  later  he  labored  in 
the  Drammen  branch.  Early  in  1899 
he  was  called  to  preside  over  the  Ber- 
gen conference,  which  was  organized 
at  that  time,  with  branches  of  the 
Church  which  formerly  belonged  to  the 
Christiania  conference.  He  presided 
in  Bergen  about  one  year.  Receiving 
an  honorable  release,  he  returned  home, 
after  visiting  relatives  in  Denmark, and 
the  world's  exposition  in  Paris.  He 
returned  to  Brigham  City  June  18,  1900. 

MERRILL,  Alma,  first  counselor  in 
the  presidency  of  the  Benson  Stake  of 
Zion,  is  the  son  of  Apostle  Marriner 
W.  Merrill  and  Sarah  Ann  Atkinson 
and  was  born  Nov.  9,  1861,  in  Richmond, 
Cache  county,  Utah.  He  was  baptized 
July  25,  1875,  by  Wallace  K.  Burnham 
and  ordained  a  Deacon  when  a  young 
boy.       April   10,   1884,   he   was  ordained 


an  Elder  by  Louis  P.  Svendsen;  and  he 
was  ordained  a  High  Priest  and  set 
apart  to  act  as  first  counselor  to  Wm. 
H.  Lewis,  of  the  Ben.son  Stake  of  Zion. 
by  Apostle  Abraham  O.  Woodruff  May 
1.  1901.  He  has  always  been  diligent 
in  Church  affairs.  For  about  three 
years  he  acted  as  president  of  the  Y.  M. 
M.  I.  A.  in  Richmond,  and  he  presided 


over  the  9th  quorum  of  Elders  in  the 
Cache  Stake  from  April,  1897,  to  April, 
1901.  He  was  educated  in  the  district 
schools  and  at  the  B.  Y.  College, 
Logan.  In  his  earlier  youth  he  worked 
on  the  farm,  in  the  store  and  as  a 
sub-contractor  on  the  Oregon  Railroad 
and  Navigation  company,  and  later 
worked  in  the  Richmond  Co-op.  In  1892, 
when  the  Cache  Valley  Dairy  company 
was  organized,  he  was  chosen  as  its 
manager,  and  has  since  that  time  suc- 
cessfully conducted  that  business.  At 
present  he  is  managing  his  own  farm 
at  Richmond.  Elder  Merrill  married 
Esmerilda  Hendricks,  daughter  of  Pres. 
Wm.  D.  Hendricks  and  Almira  Daven- 
port, March  19,  1885;  with  her  he  has 
had  eight  children,  all  of  whom  are 
living  except  one.  He  also  yielded  obe- 
dience to  the  law  of  plural  marriage, 
marrying  Rebecca  Hendricks,  the  issue 
of  which  union  is  seven  children,  six 
of  whom  are  living. 

ROSKELLEY,  Samuel,  president  of 
the  High  Priests'  quorum  in  the  Ben- 
son Stake  of  Zion,  is  the  son  of  Thomas 
Roskelley  and  Ann  Kitt,  and  was  born 
Jan.  1,  1837,  at  Devonport,  Devonshire, 
England.  He  was  the  youngest  of  six 
children,  and  received  a  fair  educa- 
tion, preparing  for  a  position  under  the 
British  government.  Attracted  by  the 
singing  of  the  Latter-day  Saints,  in  the 
fall  of  1851,  he  came  to  their  meetings 
and  was  soon  convinced  that  they 
taught  Bible  truths,  and  he  was  con- 
sequently baptized  Dec.  3,  1851,  by  El- 
der James  Caffall;  confirmed  Dec.  7, 
1851.  by  Elder  William  G.  Mills.  Al- 
though but  a  boy,  he  took  much  inter- 
est in  the  doctrines  of  the  gospel,  and 
accompanied  the  Elders  and  Priests  in 
visiting  other  towns  and  villages  to 
preach.  Ordinations  to  the  oflfices  of 
Deacon  and  Priest  soon  followed,  and 
by  endeavoring  to  magnify  these  oflfices 
he  won  the  love  and  esteem  of  the 
Elders  and  Saints  and  the  ill  will  of 
his  parents  and  relatives.  He  filled 
the  positions  of  branch  clerk,  confer- 
ence clerk  and  book  agent,  until  he  was 
ordained  an  Elder  March  15,  1853,  by 
Joseph  Hall,  preparatory  to  leaving 
England  for  Zion,  on  the  ship  "Falcon." 
He  sailed  from  Liverpool  March  26, 
1853,  and  landed  at  New  Orleans;  thence 
the  journey  was  continued  to  Keokuk, 
Iowa,  and  he  crossed  that  State  and 
the  great  plains  in  Appleton     M.     Har- 


BIOGRAPHICAL.   ENCYCLOPEDIA. 


401 


mon's  company,  arriving  in  Salt  Lake 
City,  Oct.  16,  1853,  without  kindred,  or 
friends,  save  those  in  the  company  he 
came  with.  In  the  spring  of  1854  he 
hired  out  lo  Pres.  Brigham  Young  as 
a  teamster,  and  boarded  with  his  fami- 
ly; he  was  ordained  a  Seventy  July  1, 
1855,  by  Pres.  Lewis  Robbins,  and  was 
received  the  same  day  as  a  member  of 
the  2nd  quorum  of  Seventy.  He  accom- 
panied Bryant  Stringam,  Andrew  Mof- 
fatt  and  others  to  Cache  valley,  to  put 
up  hay  for  Church  stock,  arriving 
there  July  28,  1855.  Being  called  by 
Pres.  Brigham  Young,  he  left  Salt 
Lake  City  Sept.  12,  1856,  to  fill  a  mission 
to  Great  Britain,  and  he  crossed  the 
plains  with  a  missionary  company,  in 
charge  of  Apostle  Parley.  P.  Pratt.    Af- 


ter his  arrival  in  Liverpool  he  was  ap- 
pointed to  the  Welsh  mission.  May  16, 
1857,  he  was  appointed  to  organize  and 
preside  over  the  Cardiff  conference, and 
he  labored  with  zeal  in  that  position 
until  he  was  released  to  return  home 
with  European,  Canadian  and  United 
States  missionaries  during  the  Buchan- 
an army  invasion  of  Utah.  Together 
with  Elder  John  L.  Smith  he  arrived 
in  Salt  Lake  City  June  22,  1858,  in  ad- 
vance of  the  company,  with  dispatches 
for  Pres.  Brigham  Young.  July  22,  185S, 
he  married  Rebecca  Hendricks,  of  Salt 
Lake  City,  Pres.  Brigham  Young  offi- 
ciating. He  moved  to  Richmond,  Cache 
valley,  and  took  up  land  for  a  home- 
stead in  April,  1860,  and  succeeded 
Stephen  Goddard  as  leader  of  the  Rich- 


Vol.  1,  No.  26. 


mend  choir  in  May  of  that  year.  The 
choir  gained  much  public  favor  by 
singing  "Hard  times  come  again  no 
more"  and  other  songs  of  like  nature. 
Elder  Roskelley  assisted  in  getting  out 
water  ditches,hunting  and  guarding  In- 
dians, protecting  and  preserving  horses 
and  horned  stock  from  the  raids  of 
hostiles,  driving  grasshoppers  and 
burning  them  by  millions,  erecting 
public  buildings,  and  all  other  labors 
incident  to  setting  up  a  new  country. 
He  was  ordained  a  High  Priest  and 
Bishop  and  set  apart  to  preside  in 
Smithfleld  Ward,  Cache  county,  Nov.  30, 
1862,  by  Apostle  Ezra  T.  Benson,  and 
Peter  Maughan.  Afterwards  he  was 
elected  to  offices  of  trust  in  the  co- 
operative and  canal  companies,in  which 
the  people  of  the  Ward  were  interested. 
He  also  acted  in  the  following  military 
offices,  viz:  captain  of  company  C,  1st 
regiment  of  infantry;  major  of  4th  bat- 
talion, first  regiment  of  infantry;  com- 
missary of  1st  regiment  infantry,  and 
chaplain  of  Cache  Valley  Brigade.  He 
was  elected  and  filled  the  important 
office  of  county  superintendent  of  dis- 
trict schools  for  three  terms,  and  as- 
sisted in  obtaining  city  charter  for 
Smithfield  City  and  presided  over  its 
affairs  for  three  terms  as  mayor;  served 
as  director  in  the  construction  of  the 
U.  &  N.  R.  R.  company,  and  operated 
as  subcontractor  in  the  construction  of 
the  S.  P.  R.  R.  With  twelve  days' 
notice  he  left  Ogden  April  13,  1880,  pur- 
suant to  a  call  from  Pres.  John  Taylor, 
as  a  missionary  to  Great  Britain.  After 
his  arrival  in  Liverpool  April  29,  1880, 
he  was  appointed  to  labor  as  travelffig 
Elder,  and  succeeded  Elder  George 
H.  Taylor  as  president  of  the  London 
conference,  introducing  the  gospel  into 
many  new  localities.  Being  released 
to  return  to  Zion,  he  left  Liverpool 
June  25,  1881,  in  charge  of  775  Saints 
on  the  steamship  "Wyorning,"  and  ar- 
rived at  Ogden  with  the  company  July 
15,  18S1.  Aug.  6,  1882,  he  was  set 
apart  ty  Pres.  Joseph  F.  Smith  as 
president  of  the  High  Priests'  quorum 
in  Cache  Valley  Stake.  At  the  same 
conference  he  was  called  as  a  mission- 
ary worker  to  the  St.  George  Temple. 
After  filling  that  mission,  he  returned 
to  Cache  valley.  March  9,  1884,  he  was 
appointed  assistant  to  superintendent 
Charles  O.  Card  in  fitting  up  the  Logan 
Temple  for  ordinance  work,  and  on 
May  21,  1884,  he  was  set  apart  by  Pres. 

June  28,  1901. 


402 


LATTER-DAY    SAINT 


George  Q.  Cannon  as  recorder  of  the 
Logan  Temple.  He  passed  through 
many  unjileasant  circumstances  during 
the  anti-polygamy  raid,  and  was  ar- 
rested Jan.  S,  1S89,  by  Deputy  Marshal 
Hudson,  charged  with  having  many 
wives  and  children— more  than  the  law 
allowed— but  having  at  the  time  four 
living  wives  and  22  living  children.  Cir- 
cumstantial evidence,  however,  were 
sufficient  in  the  hands  of  a  competent 
attorney  to  secure  an  acquittal.  When 
the  Cache  Valley  Stake  was  divided,  in 
1901.  Elder  Roskelley's  home  became  a 
part  of  the  Benson  Stake,  and  at  the 
first  Stake  conference  held  Aug.  4,  1901, 
he  was  sustained  and  set  apart  as  presi- 
dent of  the  High  Priests'  quorum  of 
said    Stake. 

HAIjE,  Alma  Helaman,  a  member 
of  the  High  Council  of  the  Benson 
Stake  of  Zion,  is  the  son  of  Jonathan 
H.  Hale  and  Olive  Boynton,  and  wa^ 
born  April  24,  1836,  in  Groveland,  Essex 
county,  Mass.  When  six  weeks  old  he 
started  for  Kirtland,  Ohio,  with  his 
parents,  and  came  to  Utah  in  1848, where 
he  lived  six  years.  At  the  age  of  eigh- 
teen years  he  moved  to  Grantsville, 
Tooele  county,  and  was  married  in  1857. 
He  participated  in  the  Echo  canyon  ex- 
pedition in  1857,  and  did  considerable 
service  as  a  gnard  during  "the  move" 
of  1S58.  In  1862  he  made  a  trip  to  the 
Missouri  river  after  the  poor,  serving 
as  captain  of  the  night  guard  in  Capt. 
Joseph  Home's  company.  On  the  re- 
turn trip  he  also  acted  as  wagon  master 
and  commissary.  During  the  reforma- 
tion he  officiated  in  nearly  all  the  bap- 
tismal ordinances,  and  continued  to  do 
so  until  1888.  In  1871,  he  filled  a  mis- 
sion to  the  Eastern  States,  chiefly  in 
search  of  genealogy.  He  assisted  in 
organizing  the  first  Sunday  school  in 
('■rantsville  and  acted  as  teacher  in  the 
same;  later  he  acted  as  Stake  super- 
intendent of  Sunday  schools,  which  of- 
fice he  held  until  he  removed  to  Cache 
valley.  In  a  secular  capacity  he  was 
superintendent  of  the  Tooele  County 
<"o-op  Grist  Mill,  and  served  as  con- 
siable  and  city  marshal.  In  an  early 
day  he  was  commissioned  by  Gov. 
Durkee  as  a  captain's  adjutant  in  the 
Territoiial  militia.  He  was  ordained 
a  Seventy, and  acted  for  several  years  as 
ii  president  of  the  31st  quorum  of  Sev- 
enty. Afterwards  he  was  chosen  as  a 
president    of    the    17th    quorum,    which 


office  he  held  till  Aug.  4,  1901,  when  he 
was  ordained  a  High  Priest  and  set 
apart  as  a  High  Councilor.  In  1888  he 
removed  to  Smithfield,  Cache  county, 
in  order  to  be  near  the  Temple,  where 
he  is  engaged  in  working  for  the  dead. 

AVOODKUFF,  Newton,  Bishop  of 
Smithfield,  Cache  county,  Utah,  is  the 
son  of  Pres.  Wilford  Woodruff  and 
Sarah  Brown,  and  was  born  in  Salt 
Lake  City,  Utah,  Nov.  3,  1863.  He  was 
baptized  at  the  age  of  nine  years  by 
Elder  Wm.  Rex.  About  1880  he  was 
ordained  a  Teacher  in  Smithfield  by 
Elder  John  J.  Plowman,  and  a  Priest, 
June  6,  1883,  by  the  same  Elder.  He 
was  ordained  an  Elder  by  his  father 
Nov.  2,   1884,  a  High  Priest  by  Apostle 


Moses  Thatcher  June  13,  1892,  and  a 
Bishop  by  Apostle  Francis  M.  Lyman. 
April  30,  1900.  On  the  same  occasion 
he  was  set  apart  to  preside  over  the 
Smithfield  Ward.  Elder  Woodruff  has 
always  been  an  active  Church  member; 
he  served  as  a  Ward  teacher  from  1880 
to  1S92,  in  Smithfield;  as  second  coun- 
selor to  the  president  of  the  8th  quo- 
rum of  Elders  in  the  Cache  Stake  for 
five  years,  and  as  second  counselor  to 
Bishop  Geo.  L.  Farrell,  in  the  Smith- 
field  Ward  from  1892  to  1900.  In  1897- 
99  he  filled  a  mission  to  the  Southern 
States,  doing  very  successful  missionary 
work  in  the  East  Kentucky  conference. 
He  married  Catherine  Amelia  Parting- 
ton Nov.  12,  1884,  with  whom  he  has 
had  seven  chil  Iren,  all  of  whom  are  liv- 
ing.     Bishop  Woodruff  is  a  thrifty  citi- 


BIOGRAPHICAL.  ENCYCLOPEDIA. 


403 


zen  and  has  always  been  active  in  fur- 
thering the  interests  of  the  community 
in  Avhich  he  has  lived.  He  has  held 
several  secular  positions  of  trust  and 
honor  in  Smithfleld,  and  has  filled  them 
with  marked  ability.  Thus  it  may.be 
mentioned  that  he  served  as  city  coun- 
cilman in  Smithfleld  from  1895  to  1896, 
and  was  elected  mayor  of  the  city  in 
1899.  Elder  Woodruff  is  interested  in 
the  industries  and  development  of  the 
resources  of  the  county,  being  at  pres- 
ent eng'aged  in  farming  and  stock  rais- 
ing. He  was  also  director  in  the 
Young  Men's  Co-op,  and  also  a  director 
in  the  Farmers'  Union  Mill,  both  of 
Smithfleld. 

SKIDMORE,        William       Liobark, 

Bishop  of  Richmond,  Cache  county, 
Utah,  from  1879  to  1900,  is  the  son  of 
Charles  Skidmore  and  Harriet  H 
Shrieder,   and   was  born   Sept.   22,   1844, 


in  Philadelphia,  Penn.,  where  he  spent 
his  early  childhood  and  between  the 
ages  of  six  and  ten  attended  the  free 
schools  of  the  city.  He  was  baptized 
when  about  eight  years  old,  by  his 
brother,  Henry  Skidmore,  in  the  Dela- 
ware river,  and,  together  with  his 
mother,  two  brothers,  a  sister,  a  sister- 
in-law  and  a  niece,  he  emigrated  to 
Utah  in  1855.  They  traveled  by  rail  to 
Pittsburg;  thence  by  steamboats  on 
the  rivers  to  Atchison,  Kansas,  whence 
they  traveled  with  an  ox  team  across 
the  plains,  in  Captain  John  Hendry's 
train  of  46  wagons,  arriving  in  Salt 
Lake  City  Sept.  3,  1855.      The  following 


winter  was  spent  in  the  city,  and  the 
family  passed  through  the  experience 
of  living  on  short  rations;  a  little  corn 
bread,  molasses,  potatoes  and  meat 
were  enjoyed  till  the  spring  of  1856,  af- 
ter which  they  subsisted  mainly  on 
greens  and  roots  for  several  weeks.  In 
May,  1856,  William  became  a  member  of 
the  household  of  Reason  Lewis,  who 
promised  to  care  for  him  as  if  he  were 
his  own  child.  William  was  then  only 
eleven  years  old,  and  though  he  found 
it  hard  to  separate  from  his  father 
and  mother,  he  enjoyed,  on  the  other 
hand,  the  change  from  starvation  diet 
to  plenty  of  food.  His  time  was  spent 
in  the  service  of  his  benefactor  on  a 
ranch  situated  at  the  point  of  the 
mountain,  about  twelve  miles  west  of 
Salt  Lake  City.  In  May,  1858,  he  re- 
moved with  the  Lewis  family  to  Span- 
ish Fork,  Utah  county,  where  he  herd- 
ed cattle  until  they  moved  back  to  the 
ranch  in  the  latter  part  of  the  summer. 
William's  time  at  the  ranch  was  em- 
ployed in  caring  for  cattle  and  horses; 
amonj;  others  the  animals  used  in  car- 
rying the  Eastern  mail  were  commit- 
ted to  his  care,  when  they  needed  re- 
cruiting. In  April,  1860,  he  removed 
with  the  fannily  to  Cache  valley,  and 
thus  became  one  of  the  first  settlers  of 
Richmond.  In  the  spring  of  1861  he 
was  sent  to  take  charge  of  a  farm  on 
Three  Mile  creek.  Box  Elder  county, 
owned  by  Reason  Lewis,  but  returned 
to  Richmond  the  following  spring.  Dec. 
20,  1862,  he  was  ordained  a  Seventy 
by  Wm.  F.  Rigby.  In  1863,  together 
with  other  young  men  from  Richmoiid, 
he  made  a  trip  to  the  Missouri  river  as 
a  Church  teamster  in  Capt.  Wm.  B. 
Preston's  company.  After  his  return 
he  became  a  member  of  the  Richmond 
Dramatic  company,  and  for  ten  years, 
in  the  winter  season  he  took  an  active 
part  in  the  plays.  March  28,  1868,  he 
married  Sarah  Armina  Knapp,  and 
then  left  the  paternal  roof  of  Reason 
Lewis.  In  1876  he  was  elected  justice 
of  the  peace  and  served  two  years  in 
that  capacity.  About  the  same  time 
he  was  appointed  superintendent  of  the 
Richmond  Sunday  school.  In  1877  he 
became  an  officer  in  the  local  Y.  M.  M. 
I.  A.  In  the  winter  of  1878  he  hauled 
lumber  from  the  Temple  mill  in  Logan 
canyon,  for  the  Temple,  and  in  the  win- 
ter of  1879  he  hauled  rock  for  the  Tem- 
ple. Aside  from  the  appointments  here 
mentioned,   he  filled   many  Ward  posi- 


404 


LATTER-DAY  SAINT 


tions  in  obedience  to  the  call  of  Bishop 
Marriner  W.  Merrill.  May  4,  1879,  he 
was  ordained  a  High  Priest  and  Bishop 
and  set  apart  to  preside  over  the  Rich- 
mond Ward,  by  Apostle  F.  D.  Rich- 
ard. Christian  Hyer  and  Wallace  K. 
Burnham,  respectively,  were  set  apart 
as  his  counselors.  Feb.  19,  1885,  he 
married  Charlotte  W.  Pearson;  his 
wife  Sarah  A.  died  Nov.  14,  1891,  hav- 
ing- borne  to  him  eight  sons  and  four 
daueK.ers.  In  1900,  having  with  his 
counselors  carried  the  burden  of  presi- 
dency with  its  cares  and  its  joys  for 
nearly  twenty-one  years,  he  was  hon- 
orably released  from  the  Bishopric,  and 
on  Aug.  4,  1901,  set  apart  as  senior 
High  Councilor  in  the  Benson  Stake 
of  Zion,  by  Apostle  Rudger  Clawson. 

MERRILiIj,  Thoma.s  Hazen,  Bishop 
of  the  Richmond  Ward  since  April  23, 
1900,  is  the  son  of  Apostle  Marriner  W. 
Merrill  and  Sarah  Atkinson,  and  was 
born  June  11,  1859,  at  Bountiful,  Davis 


county,  Utah.  He  was  baptized  -when 
aoout  eight  years  old.  With  his  pa- 
rents he  moved  to  Richmond,  Cache 
county,  in  1860,  where  he  has  resided 
ever  since.  He  was  ordained  a  Deacon 
when  a  boy.  and  later  he  was  ordained 
an  Elder.  About  the  year  1885,  he  was 
ordained  a  High  Priest,  and  on  April 
23,  1900,  ordained  a  Bishop  and  set  apart 
to  preside  over  the  Richmond  Ward  by 
Apostle  Francis  M  Lyman.  Brother 
Merrill  has  always  taken  an  active  part 
in  Church  work, having  filled  the  follow- 


ing positions  of  trust  and  honor:  Presi- 
dent of  the  Deacons'  quorum,  president 
of  the  Y.  M.  M.  I.  A.,  teacher,  assistant 
superintendent,  and  superintendent  of 
the  Richmond  Sunday  school,  etc.  From 
1881  to  1883,  Elder  Merrill  performed 
successful  missionary  work  in  the 
Southern  States,  and  presided  over  the 
West  Tennessee  conference.  April  7, 
1881,  he  married  Emma  B.  Olsen,  by 
whom  he  has  had  six  children;  five 
of  these  are  now  alive.  Later,  he 
yielded  obedience  to  the  principle  of 
plural  marriage  by  taking  to  wife  Mag- 
gie W.  Thomson,  who  has  borne  him 
eight  children,  four  of  whom  are  living. 
In  a  secular  capacity  Elder  Merrill  has 
served  one  term  as  a  member  of  tho 
Richmond  city  council.  He  was  educat- 
ed in  the  common  schools  of  Utah,  tho 
B.  Y.  College,  at  Logan,  and  the  Uni- 
versity of  Utah.  For  twelve  years 
he  followed  the  avocation  of  a  school 
teacher  in  Logan  and  Richmond.  In 
a  military  capacity  he  has  served  as  a 
lieutenant  in  the  State  militia.  At 
present  he  is  successfully  managing  the 
business  of  the  Richmond  Mercantile 
Co-operative    Institution. 

GRIFFIN,  William- Hyrum,  Bishop 
of  Newton,  Cache  county,  Utah,  is  the 
son  of  William  Griffin  and  Mary  Pitts, 
and  was  born  Nov.  8,  1848,  at  Naunton 
Beachamp,  Worcestershire,  England. 
His  boyhood  days  were  spent  in  his 
native  land;  he  commenced  to  work 
when  only  eight  years  old  and  his  edu- 
cation  was   limited     to   what   little   he 


BIOGRAPHICAL,    ENCYCLOPEDIA. 


405 


learned  in  the  Church  of  England  Sun- 
day schools.  He  was  baptized  at  the 
age  of  eight  years  and  emigrated  to 
Utah  In  1864.  After  residing  for  some 
time  in  Clarkston,  Cache  county,  he  lo- 
cated in  Newton  in  1870,  where  he  still 
resides.  In  October,  1870,  he  married 
Bessie  Trehern.  From  June,  1877,  to 
1884,  he  acted  as  second  counselor  to 
Bishop  Wm.  F.  Rigby;  subsequently 
he  acted  as  first  counselor  to  Bishop 
Hans  Funk,  whom  he  succeeded  as 
Bishop  of  Newton  Ward,  Feb.  5,  1893. 
For  having  obeyed  the  law  of  plural 
marriage  and  for  living  with  his  wives 
he  was  imprisoned  in  the  Utah  peni- 
tentiary from  Feb.  12,  1888,  to  June  13, 
1888. 

BENSON,  Jens  Peter,  first  coun- 
selor in  the  Bishopric  of  the  Newton 
Ward,  from  1884  to  1898,  was  the  son 
of  Jeppe  and  Maren  Christine  Bentzen 
and  was  born  April  26,  1830,  in  Aaker 
parish,   Bornholm,  Denmark.       He  was 


baptized  July  10,  1851,  by  Priest  An- 
dreas Aagren,  and  confirmed  July  27, 
LS51,  by  Hans  Peter  Jensen,  being  one 
of  the  first  who  embraced  the  gospel 
as  revealed  through  Joseph  Smith  on 
the  island  of  Bornholm.  In  November, 
1852,  he  left  his  native  island  to  emi- 
grate to  Zioa,  At  Copenhagen  he 
joined  a  large  company  of  emigrating 
Saints  which  sailed  from  that  city  Dec. 
20.  1852,  crossed  the  Atlantic  in  the  ship 
"Forest  Monarch,"  and  arrived  in  Salt 
Lake  City  Sept.  30,  1853.      The  following 


year  he  was  ordained  a  Seventy  and 
became  a  member  of  the  39th  quorum  of 
Se^'enty.  April  8,  1854,  he  married 
Mathie  Christine  Eriksen,  in  Salt 
Lake  City,  where  he  lived  till  1856,when 
he  removed  to  Lehi,  Utah  county,  and 
there  followed  his  trade  as  a  wheel- 
wright and  carpenter.  Nov.  1,  1857, 
he  married  Kirsten  Eriksen,  a  sister  of 
his  first  wife.  In  1869  he  removed  to 
Clarkston,  Cache  county,  and  in  1875  to 
Newton,  where  he  resided  until  his 
death.  His  first  wife  died  in  1876,  and 
he  married  Christine  Nielsen,  of  New- 
ton, Nov.  12,  1879.  He  was  ordained 
a  High  Priest  and  set  apart  as  second 
counselor  to  Bishop  Hans  Funk,  June 
23,  1884,  by  Orson  Smith,  and  occupied 
that  position  till  the  death  of  Bishop 
Funk.  From  Feb.  5,  1893,  until  his 
death,  which  occurred  in  Newton  June 
21,  1898,  Elder  Benson  acted  as  first 
counselor  to  Bishop  Wm.  H.  Griflin.  As 
the  husband  of  three  wives,  he  became 
the  father  of  24  children,  namely  thir- 
teen boys  and  eleven  girls.  Elder  Ben- 
son was  known  as  an  upright  and  hon- 
est man;  he  was  always  ready  to  lend 
a  helping  hand  in  public  affairs  and  was 
kind  to  the  poor.  He  was  a  diligent 
Temple  worker  and  filled  several  home 
missions. 

JENKINS,  John,  first  counselor  to 
Bishop  Wm.  H. Griffin  of  Newton  Ward, 
is  the  oldest  child  of  Evan  and  Ann 
Jenkins,  and  was  born  May  8,  1845,  in 
Cowbridge,  South  Wales.  Together 
with  his  parents  he  emigrated  to  Amer- 
ica in  the  spring  of  1850,  arriving  in 
Council  Bluffs,  Iowa,  in  May  of  the 
same  year.  Here  the  family  remained 
until  June,  1861,  when  the  journey  to 
the  AVest  was  continued.  They  travel- 
ed in  an  independent  company  under 
Capt.  Homer  Duncan,  arriving  in  Utah 
in  September,  1861,  and  located  at 
Farmington,  Davis  county.  In  the 
spring  of  1863  Bro.  Jenkins  went  to  the 
Missouri  river,  to  meet  the  emigrants 
in  Capt.  Thomas  Ricks'  ox-train.  He 
made  a  similar  trip  in  1864  under  Capt. 
Israel  Canfield,  and  again  under  Hor- 
ton  D.  Haight  in  1866;  on  the  two  lat- 
ter trips  he  drove  the  lead  wagon  in 
the  train.  He  took  part  in  the  so- 
called  Morrisite  war  in  1862.  Dec.  28, 
1S67,  he  married  Mary  Oviatt.  In  June. 
1869,  he  removed  to  Cache  valley  and 
located  with  the  first  settlers  at  New- 
ton.     He  married  Ann  Clarke  Sept.  22, 


406 


LATTER-DAT  SAINT 


1S73.  In  the  summer  of  1882  he  was 
called  on  a  mission  to  Europe;  upon 
his  departure  he  married  Marie  Jensen, 
Oct.  12,  1SS2.  On  his  arrival  in  Liver- 
pool he  was  appointed  to  labor  in  South 
Wales,  the  land  of  his  birth.  Owing 
to  ill  health  he  was  released  to  return 
home  in  August,  1883.  In  the  fall  of 
1887  he  was  arrested  on  the  charge  of 
unlawful  cohabitation,  for  which  he 
served  six  months  in  the  Territorial 
penUentiary,  and  paid  a  fine  of  $300 
and  costs.  Jan.  30,  1899,  he  was  or- 
dained a  High  Priest  and  set  apart  ae 
first  counselor  to  Bishop  Wm.  H.  Grif- 
fin in  the  Newton  Ward,  which  position 
he  still  holds. 

liARSEX,  Christian,  second  coun- 
selor to  Bishop  Wm.  H.  Griffin  of  New- 
ton Ward,  Cache  county,  Utah,  is  the 
son  of  Hans  Larsen  and  Karen  Peter- 
sen, and  was  born  Jan.  30,  1844.  at 
Melby,  Frederiksborg  amt,  Denmark. 
He  was  baptized  Jan.  1,  1865,  by  Chris- 
tian Meyer.  Soon  afterwards  he  was 
ordained  a  Deacon  and  sent  out  to  la- 
bor as  a  Sunday  missionary.  Later,  h^ 
was  ordained  an  Elder  and  appointed 
to  labor  in  the  North  Zealand  branch: 
he  emigrated  to  Utah  in  1868  and  locat- 
ed in  Brigharri  City,  where  he  married 
Mary  Ann  Larsen,  who  had  emigrated 
from  Denmark  in  his  company.  In 
1871  he  removed  to  Newton,  Cache 
county,  from  which  place  he  was  called 
on  a  mission  to  southern  Utah  in  1875. 
After  laboring  one  year  on  the  Church 
farm  at  Moccasin  springs,  in  Arizona, 
he  resided  eight  years  in  Kanab,  Utah, 
where  he  gained  an  extensive  experi- 
ence in  battling  with  the  elementj  in 
a  dry,  sandy  country.  Being  released 
from  this  mission  he  returned  to  New- 
ton, Cache  county,  in  1881,  where  he 
afterwards  became  an  assistant  super- 
intendent of  the  Sabbath  school,  and 
still  later  second  counselor  in  the 
Bishopric.  During  the  past  seven  years 
he  has  spent  the  greater  part  of  his 
time  as  a  worker  in  the  Logan  Tem- 
ple. 

HANSKN,  Jens  Nielsen,  a  leading 
Elder  in  the  Newton  Ward,  Cache  coun- 
ty, Utah,  was  born  June  16,  1842,  in 
Axelholm,  Holbaek  amt,  Denmark. 
AVhen  he  was  six  years  old  his  mother 
died,  but  in  his  father's  second  mar- 
iage  he  was  blessed  with  a  good  step- 
mother.     He  obtained  a  common  school 


education  and  studied  music  for  two 
years.  In  1864,  1865  and  1866  he  per- 
formed military  service  in  the  interest 
of  his  native  country.  April  19,  1867, 
he  married  Karen  Marie  Christensen, 
who  subsequently  bore  him  ten  chil- 
dren. Becoming  a  convert  to  "Mor- 
monism,"  he  was  baptized  April  20, 
1868;  he  was  ordained  a  Teacher  Sept. 
12,  1869,  and  labored  in  that  office  until 
Aug.  31,  1872,  when  he  was  ordained  an 
Elder  by  Niels  Nielsen  and  called  to 
preside  over  a  branch  of  the  Church 
on  the  island  of  Zealand.  He  emigrat- 
ed with  his  wife  and  three  children  to 
Utah  in  1875  and  settled  in  Newton, 
Cache  county,  where  he  has  since  resid- 
ed. The  next  year  he  became  a  mem- 
ber of  the  Newton  choir  as  a  tenor 
singer,  and    he  is  still  performing  that 


duty.  In  1877,  he  was  called  to  act 
as  a  Ward  teacher.  Nov.  15,  1878,  he 
yielded  obedience  to  the  law  of  plural 
marriage  by  taking  to  wife  Ane  Mar- 
grethe  Sorensen,  by  whom  he  has  had 
three  children.  From  1879  to  1899  he 
labored  as  a  Sunday  school  teacher. 
Oct.  25,  1885,  he  was  ordained  a  Seven- 
ty by  Andrew  Higgie,  of  Clarkston. 
During  the  anti-polygamy  raid  he  was 
forced  on  the  "underground"  and  en- 
dured much  hardship  and  exposure; 
and  was  finally  arrested  March  27.  1889, 
on  the  charge  of  unlawful  cohabitation. 
After  trial,  he  was  convicted  and 
served  in  the  Utah  penitentiary  from 
May  25,  1889,  to  Aug.  24.  1889.  In  a 
secular  capacity  Elder  Hansen  has  act- 
ed as  school  trusteee,  postmaster,  vice 


BIOGRAPHICAL.    ENCYCLOPEDIA. 


407 


president  in  the  Newton  Irrigation 
company,  member  of  the  town  board, 
etc.,  and  has  always  taken  an  active 
part  in  public  affairs  generally. 

SMITH,  Orson,  president  of  the 
Cache  Stake  of  Zion.is  the  son  of  Bishop 
Thomas  X.  Smith  and  Margaret  Gour- 
ney,  and  was  born  July  4,  1853,  in  Iowa, 
while  his  parents  were  traveling  to- 
ward Utah,  having  emigrated  from 
England  that  year.  After  arriving  in 
the  valley,  the  family  located  in  Farm- 
ington,  Davis  county,  where  Orson 
was  partly  raised,  but  they  settled  in 
Logan,  Cache  county,  in  1860.  Orson 
was  ordained  an  Elder  Sept.  13,  1868, 
and  later  sent  to  Iron  county  with  a 
co-op  sheepherd,  on  which  trip  he  was 
gone  ten  months.  In  1875  he  was  called 
to  preside  as  Bishop  in  Paradise  and 
moved  his  family  to  that  place  in 
December,  1875.  He  acted  as  Bishop 
there  until  May  17,  1883,   when  he  was 


chosen  and  sot  apart  as  second  coun- 
selor to  Charles  O.  Card  in  the  presi- 
dency of  the  Cache  Stake  of  Zion.  Aug. 
3.  1890,  he  was  set  apart  by  President 
Wilford  Woodruff  as  president  of  the 
Stake,  which  position  he  held  until  1899. 

3fORRELIj,  Joseph,  president  of 
the  Cache  Stake  of  Zion,  was  born  in 
London,  England,  Feb.  11,  1856,  son  of 
Thomas  Merrill  and  Selina  Johnson. 
He  emigrated  to  Utah  with  his  parents 
and  became  a  resident  of  Logan,  Cache 
county;  was  baptized  July  2,  1868,  by 
Frederick  W.  Hurst,  and  subsequently 


ordained  an  Elder.  In  his  younger 
years  he  worked  on  the  farm,  and  in 
the  canyons,  logging  for  saw  mills, 
burning  coal,  working  on  brick  yards 
and  doing  almost  anything  which  he 
could  find  to  do.  His  education  was 
very    limited.        His    father    being    sick 


ten  years,  Joseph  had  to  assist  in  sup- 
porting the  family  from  the  time  he 
was  sixteen  until  he  was  twenty-six 
years  old.  From  June,  1876,  to  Septem- 
ber, 1879,  he  worked  for  the  W.  O.  M. 
&  B.  Co.  of  Logan  as  clerk  in  the  store. 
Feb.  20,  1879,  he  married  Margaret 
Rowland,  with  whom  he  has  had  seven 
children.  From  1879  to  1882  he  worked 
in  the  wholesale  department  of  Z.  C.  M. 
I.,  in  Logan,  after  which  he  went  into 
business  with  Robert  L.  Campbell— a 
business  which  they  are  still  carrying 
on.  From  1880  to  1883  he  was  an  offi- 
cer in  the  Y.  M.  M.  I.  A.  In  1883-84, 
he  filled  a  mission  to  the  Southern 
States,  laboring  principally  in  the  State 
of  Mississippi.  After  his  return  he  was 
called  to  labor  as  acting  Bishop  of  the 
Third  Ward  in  Logan,  filling  that  posi- 
tion from  1885  to  1888,  after  which  he 
acted  as  second  counselor  to  the  presi- 
dent of  the  High  Priests'  quorum  and 
as  a  High  Councilor  in  the  Cache  Stake 
of  Zion.  Subsequently,  he  acted  as 
first  counselor  to  Apostle  Marriner  W. 
Merrill,  in  the  presidency  of  the  Cache 
Stake,  and  since  the  division  of  the 
Stake,  in  May,  1901,  he  has  filled  the 
important  position  of  president  of  that 
part  of  Cache  valley  which  was  con- 
tinued under  the  old  name. 


408 


LATTER-DAY    SAINT 


MOIiEX,       Simpson     Montgomery, 

first  counselor  in  the  presidency  of  the 
Cache'  Stake  of  Zion,  was  the  second 
son  of  Jesse  Molen  and  Lieurany  Huff- 
aker,  and  was  born  Sept.  14,  1832,  in 
Jacksonville,  Morgan  county.  111.  When 
Simpson  was  but  a  mere  child  his  pa- 
rents left  Jacksonville,  and  moved  to 
Bureau  county,  in  the  same  State,  and 
which  at  that  time  was  the  frontiers. 
Here  they  purchased  a  large  tract  of 
land,  and  at  once  commenced  to  fence 
and  put  it  under  cultivation  and  ar- 
range for  making  it  their  permanent 
home.  By  dint  of  steady  industry 
they,  in  the  course  of  a  short  time, 
made  that  wilderness  a  lovely  and  de- 
sirable place.  But  they  had  heard  the 
Elders  preach  and  expound  the  doc- 
trines of  the  Church  of  Jesus  Christ  of 
Latter-day  Saints,   which,   to  them,   at 


^.*«w  wTttf:^ 


first  seemed  strange  and  new.  However, 
the  Elders  spoke  with  great  power,  and 
the  spirit  that  accompanied  their  ut- 
terances carried  conviction  to  the 
hearts  of  the  Molen  family,  and  every 
member  thereof  embraced  their  doc- 
trines. As  soon  as  it  was  known  that 
the  Molens  had  accepted  the  principles 
of  "Mormonism,"  their  names  were 
"cast  out  as  evil;"  and,  in  common  with 
all  the  Latter-day  Saints,  they  were 
persecuted  for  the  gospel's  sake;  but 
hitherto  they  had  suffered  no  particular 
violence.  They  were  somewhat  seques- 
tered, and  felt  a  great  desire  to  gather 
with  the  body  of  their  own  people,  who 
were  then  located  in  the  city  of  Nau- 
voo.  111.      Young  Simpson  was  foremost, 


and  very  persistent,  in  urging  his  pa- 
rents to  sell  the  homestead  and  move 
to  Nauvoo.  They  sold  their  property 
in  the  spring  of  1845  at  a  considerable 
sacrifice,  as  real  estate  was  held  at  a 
low  price  at  that  period,  and  moved 
to  a  place  called  Camp  Creeek,  in  Han- 
cock county,  thirteen  miles  north  of 
Nauvoo.  Here  they  purchased  a  new 
home  and  made  many  improvements. 
But  they  were  not  destined  to  rest  in 
peace  in  their  new  location.  The  anti- 
Mormons  were  active  and  very  vindic- 
tive, and  in  the  fall  of  that  year  they 
committed  many  depredations  on  the 
"Mormon"  people  in  and  around  Camp 
Creek.  The  mob  assembled  from  time 
to  time  in  the  settlement  and  burned 
dwelling  houses,  barns,  hay  and  grain 
stacks,  forcing  the  people  from  their 
homes,  or  killing  those  who  were  un- 
willing to  leave  or  deny  their  faith. 
This  latter  the  Molen  family  could  not 
do;  they  were  convinced  that  the  gos- 
pel which  they  had  embraced  was  true 
—that  it  was  revealed  from  heaven  by 
the  Almighty  God.  Hence,  they  were 
willing  to  take  joyfully  the  "spoiling  of 
their  goods,"  and  suffer  all  that  was 
needful  for  them  to  suffer  for  Christ's 
sake.  The  family  fled  to  Nauvoo, 
where  they  remained  until  they,  in 
common  with  thousands  of  other  Lat- 
ter-day Saints,  were  expelled  by  the 
ruthless  mob  from  their  peaceful  homes 
to  find  shelter  in  the  winter  season 
among  the  red  men  in  the  wilderness. 
Their  property  at  Camp  Creek  was 
worth  $2,000,  but  all  they  could  obtain 
for  it  was  two  yoke  of  cattle  and  an 
old  wagon.  At  this  time  of  the  exodus, 
Simpson  and  several  other  members  of 
the  family  were  prostrated  with  fever 
and  ague.  With  their  outfit  they  com- 
menced their  journey  westward.  They 
traveled  on  until  they  reached  the  vi- 
cinity of  Oskaloosa,  Iowa.  Here  they 
went  into  winter  quarters.  In  the 
spring  of  1847,  they  resumed  their  drea- 
ry march  and,  on  reaching  what  was 
then  called  Winter  Quarters,  they 
joined  the  main  body  of  the  "Mormon" 
emigrants,  with  whom  they  traveled 
to  Great  Salt  Lake  valley.  On  arriv- 
ing in  the  Valley  they  pitched  their 
tents  on  what  is  now  the  western  part 
of  Salt  Lake  City.  This  was  in  the 
fall  of  the  year  1847.  Young  Simpson 
and  his  parents  may  therefore  be  num- 
bered among  the  pioneers  and  founders 
of  Utah.       Shortly    after  reaching  this 


BIOGRAPHICAL.   ENCYCLOPEDIA. 


409 


haven  of  rest — finding  that  bread  and 
flour  were  very  scarce,  they,  by  the  ad- 
vice of  the  authorities  of  the  Church, 
weighed  up  their  supplies  and  put 
themselves  on  rations,  that  there  might 
be  sufficient  food  to  last  them  until  a 
harvest  replenished  their  stores.  To 
this  end  the  number  of  days  were  cal- 
culated, when  they  discovered  to  their 
great  surprise,  if  not  alarm,  that  they 
had  only  about  one  ounce  of  flour  per 
day  for  each  member  of  their  family, 
and  they  had  no  milk,  no  meat,  fruits 
or  vegetables  to  help  out  this  scanty  al- 
lowance. The  children  were  hale  and 
hearty,  and  to  be  suddenly  reduced  to 
such  short  rations  was  the  source  of 
much  suffering  to  them;  indeed,  it 
seemed  almost  like  starvation.  For- 
tunately, the  winter  was  mild  and 
open,  and  the  family  sought  for  and 
dug  thistle  roots,  which  were  sub- 
stituted as  an  article  of  food  to  save 
the  bread.  The  roots,  however,  while 
they  appeased  the  cravings  of  hunger, 
furnished  but  little  nutriment.  When 
the  next  spring  opened,  other  roots 
were  found  which  were  more  nutritious. 
These  roots,  with  "greens"  and  the  milk 
from  a  few  cows,  enabled  them  to 
"keep  body  and  soul  together,"  until 
a  kind  Providence  blessed  them  with 
a  harvest  of  wheat  and  vegetables.  But 
a  long  time  elapsed,  even  after  food 
became  plentiful,  ere  the  cravings  of 
hunger  could  be  satisfied  by  eating  a 
hearty  meal.  In  1848,  young  Molen's 
elder  brother  Alexander  was  sent  out  to 
drive  a  team  to  meet  and  assist  in  the 
emigration;  but  when  he  met  them,  he 
continued  his  journey  to  the  States.  In 
consequence  of  this  course  of  the  elder 
brother,  as  Father  Molen's  health  was 
failing,  much  of  the  responsibility  of 
providing  for  this  large  family  fell  upon 
young  Simpson.  On  account  of  the  un- 
settled condition  of  the  family,  Simp- 
son hitherto  had  but  little  opportunity 
of  acquiring  an  education.  He  attend- 
ed school  about  three  months  in  the 
winter  of  each  year,  and  the  remainder 
he  worked  to  earn  means  to  assist  in 
supporting  the  family.  In  the  spring 
of  18-52  the  father  died,  which  sad  event 
very  much  increased  the  care  and  re- 
sponsibility of  the  young  man.  With 
the  assistance  of  his  younger  brothers, 
he  Vjuilt  a  comfortable  house  for  the 
family.  Labor  was  their  only  capital, 
and  with  it  they  paid  for  all  the  ma- 
terials necessary  for  the  erection  of  the 


dwelling.  At  the  general  conference 
held  in  Salt  Lake  City  in  April,  1854, 
he  was  called  to  go  on  a  mission  to  the 
Sandwich  Islands;  and  on  the  4th  of 
May  he  left  his  mountain  home,  in 
company  with  other  missionaries,  for 
his  field  of  labor.  They  traveled  by 
team  from  Utah  to  San  Pedro,  Califor- 
nia, and  thence  up  the  coast  by  steam- 
ship to  San  Francisco.  At  the  last 
named  place  they  embarked  for  the  Is- 
lands on  board  a  sailing  vessel,  and 
were  on  the  sea  nineteen  days  before 
they  reached  their  destination.  '  While 
on  this  mission  Simpson  M.  Molen,  who 
was  now  an  Elder,  acquired  a  knowl- 
edge of  the  Hawaiian  language.  He 
traveled  a  great  deal  and  preached  to 
the  natives  in  their  own  language.  He 
suffered  many  hardships  during  his 
ministry  on  the  Islands,  enduring  hun- 
ger and  fatigue.  In  the  spring  of  1858 
he  returned  to  Utah,  and  for  some  time 
made  his  home  at  Lehi,  in  Utah  county. 
While  there  he  became  acquainted  with 
Miss  Jane  E.  Hyde,  daughter  of  the 
late  Hon.  William  Hyde,  probate  judge 
of  Cache  county,  and  married  her  Aug. 
7,  1859.  In  the  spring  of  1860  he  moved 
with  his  father-in-law  to  Cache  valley, 
and  settled  on  a  plain  five  miles  north 
of  Logan.  This  place  was  afterwards 
named  Hyde  Park,  in  honor  of  the  man 
(William  Hyde)  who  first  settled  there. 
Elder  Molen  was  therefore  one  of  the 
founders  of  Hyde  Park.  He  was  also 
first  counselor  to  Bishop  William  Hyde 
of  the  same  place.  In  1860  the  militicj 
was  organized  in  Cache  county,  with 
which  Elder  Molen  became  identified. 
He  was  earnest  and  energetic  in  dis- 
charging his  duties  as  a  citizen  soldier. 
Aug.  5,  1860,  he  was  elected  lieutenant- 
colonel  of  the  first  regiment  of  infan- 
try, first  brigade  of  the  Nauvoo  Le- 
gion. He  was  commissioned  by  Gover- 
nor Charles  Durkee  in  1868.  Col.  Molen 
was  an  efficient  officer,  and  held  that 
military  position  until  September,  1870, 
when  Governor  Shaeffer  issued  a  proc- 
lamation forbidding  any  further  mili- 
tary exercises  by  the  officers  and  mem- 
bers of  the  Nauvoo  Legion.  In  1864 
Elder  Molen  went  to  Illinois  to  settle 
some  business  pertaining  to  the  family 
estate.  While  in  the  east  at  the  time 
he  purchased,  on  commission,  a  large 
amount  of  merchandise  which  he 
freighted  through  to  Salt  Lake  City. 
In  1S68  he  was  chosen  to  take  charge  of 
a  large  emigration  train,   consisting  of 


410 


LATTER-DAY    SAINT 


ox-teams  and  sixty  wagons  sent  from 
Utah  to  the  terminus  of  the  Union  Pa- 
cific railroad.  This  mission  he  per- 
formed to  the  entire  satisfaction  of 
the  authorities  of  the  Church,  the 
owners  of  the  teams  and  five  hundred 
emigrants,  whom  he  brought  in  on  his 
return  to  Utah.  At  the  October  con- 
ference, in  1874,  he  w'as  called  on  an- 
other mission  to  the  States.  He  trav- 
eled in  Iowa,  Illinois  and  Kentucky, 
held  many  meetings  and  preached  the 
gospel  to  all  who  would  listen  to  him. 
He  also  visited  many  of  his  relatives 
in  the  East,  from  whom  he  gathered 
much  information  of  the  genealogy  of 
his  ancestors.  He  returned  home  in 
1875,  but  in  the  spring  of  1876.  he  was 
appointed  to  take  another  mission  to 
the  Sandwich  Islands.  He  took  with 
him  a  part  of  his  family,  and  remained 
in  the  ministry,  on  the  Islands,  this 
time  three  years  and  three  months.  The 
latter  part  of  the  time  he  presided  over 
the  mission  and  superintended  the 
works  on  the  Church  farm  and  sugar 
plantation.  He  also  became  acquaint- 
ed with  a  number  of  the  leading  men 
of  the  Hawaiian  nation  and  with  some 
of  the  members  of  the  royal  family. 
Among  the  latter  were  their  Majesties 
Queen  Kapiolani  and  ex-Queen  Emma, 
whom  he  had  the  honor  to  entertain  at 
the  plantation.  In  1879  Elder  Molen 
returned  to  Hyde  Park,  Utah,  and 
shortly  afterwards  was  set  apart  as 
first  counselor  to  Bishop  Daines  of 
that  place.  He  had  not  been  long  at 
home  before  he  met  with  a  serious  ac- 
cident in  jumping  from  the  cars  in  the 
dark  while  the  train  was  in  motion. 
He  broke  one  arm  and  was  otherwise 
severely  bruised  in  several  parts  of  his 
body.  At  the  election  held  in  August, 
1879,  he  was  elected  assessor  and  col- 
lector for  Cache  county,  which  office 
he  filled  to  the  satisfaction  of  the  peo- 
ple. Sept.  10,  1882,  he  was  ordained 
Bishop  and  appointed  to  succeed  Bishop 
O.  N.  Liljenquist,  of  Hyrum,  in  the 
Cache  Stake  of  Zion.  This  position 
he  held  until  1890,  when  he  was  called 
and  set  apart  as  first  counselor  to  Or- 
son Smith,  in  the  presidency  of  the 
Cache  Valley  Stake  of  Zion.  After  an 
eventful  and  useful  career,  he  died  at 
his  home  in  Hyrum,  Cache  county,  Nov. 
29,  1900,  highly  respected  by  all  who 
knew  him.  President  Molen  may  be 
described  as  a  type  of  the  American 
citizen    of    olden    times,    and    was     de- 


cidedly a  progressive  man.  He  lead 
out  in  all  public  enterprises  and  in- 
vited the  people  to  follow  him.  In 
building  bridges,  making  new  roads, 
building  meeting  houses  and  other  pub- 
lic buildings  he  always  did  his  fuil 
share  of  the  work,  and  was  throughout 
a  public-spirited  man. 

SMITH,  Isaac,  counselor  in  the  presi- 
dency of  the  Cache  Stake  of  Zion  since 
1890,  is  the  son  of  Samuel  Smith  and 
Sarah  Jane  Ingraham,  and  was  born 
Dec  31,  1858,  in  Brigham  City,  Box  El- 
der county,  Utah.  His  father  was  a 
native  of  London,  and  his  mother  of 
Worcester,  England.  August  14,  1869, 
Isaac  was  baptized  in  Brigham  <rity, 
and  he  was  ordained  a  Priest  by  W'm. 
Box.  Feb.  13,  1876.    At  the  age  of  four- 


teen he  had  pretty  well  mastered  the 
cabinetmaker's  trade,  when  he  went 
out  with  a  surveying  party  as  peg  boy. 
He  soon  rose,  however,  to  rod  man. 
Next  he  went  with  Jos.  A.  West  as  ro'l- 
man,  when  the  U.  &  N.  R.  R.  mado  its 
survey  through  Bear  river  canyon  to 
Soda  Springs.  When  about  sixteen 
years  of  age  he  had  charge  of  the  level 
party  under  Jos.  A.  West,  in  making 
the  preliminary  survey  of  the  railr^-ad 
to  Black  Rock  and  E.  T.  City,  west  of 
Salt  Lake  City.  On  his  return  to  Brig- 
ham City,  Isaac  Smith  was  given 
charge  of  the  B.  C.  Co-op  lumber 
yard,  which  position  he  held  until  the 
fall  of  1876,  when  he  went  to  Salt  Lake 
City  to  attend  the  University.  During 
his   labors   in    the   lumber  yard,     being 


BIOGRAPHICAL,    ENCYCLOPEDIA. 


411 


anxious  to  get  an  education,  he  com- 
pleted Ray's  higher  arithmetic  and  the 
elementary  algebra;  this  latter  was  ac- 
complished by  going  to  school  during 
his  noon  hour  and  many  times  missing 
his  dinner.  He  also  attended  night 
school,  where  he  studied  grammar, 
spelling  and  book-keeping;  the  latter 
he  also  studied  at  home,  and  in  this 
way  he  obtained  a  good  knowledge  of 
the  principles  of  book-keeping.  At 
the  University  he  attended  the  first 
and  last  quarter,  teaching  school  the 
two  winter  quarters,  in  order  to  get 
means  to  pay  his  expenses,  and  he 
studied  at  home  to  keep  up  with  his 
classes;  in  this  way  he  passed  in  the 
studies  he  commenced  the  first  year; 
but  the  strain  was  too  much,  and  in 
the  spring  of  the  second  year  he  had 
to  abandon  his  school  and  also  his 
studies  and  seek  out-door  work  to  re- 
gain his  health.  During  that  summer 
he  worked  at  the  B.  C.  Co-op  steam 
mill,  shipping  lumber  and  keeping 
books.  Aug.  11,  1877,  the  Box  Elder 
Stake  was  organized  with  Oliver  G. 
Snow  as  president  and  Elder  Box  as 
first  and  Isaac  Smith  as  second  coun- 
selor. At  that  time  Bro.  Smith  was 
ordained  a  High  Priest  and  set  apart  to 
the  position  named  by  Apostle  Lorenzo 
Snow.  Before  this  time  Elder  Smith 
had  held  several  Church  positions,  such 
as  assistant  superintendent  in  the 
Ward  Sunday  school,  assistant  super- 
intendent in  the  Stake  superintendency 
of  Y.  M.  M.  I.  A.,  and  president  of 
the  Ward  Y.  M.  M.  I.  A.  The  re- 
mainder of  the  fall  of  1877  he  spent  in 
the  canyon,  at  the  mill,  and  in  the 
winter  entered  the  school  room  again 
as   assistant    to    E.    A.    Box.       Dec.    28, 

1877,  he  married  Harriet  Camilla  En- 
sign, daughter  of  M.  L..  Ensign  and 
Mary  Dunn.      At  the  April  conference, 

1878,  he  was  called  on  a  mission  to 
Great  Britain,  and  departed  on  the 
same  May  5th.  On  his  arrival  in  Eng- 
land he  was  assigned  to  the  Hertford- 
shire and  Bedfordshire  districts.  Here 
he  labored  until  the  spring  of  1879, when 
he  was  sent  to  the  Channel  Islands.  He 
spent  about  three  months  on  the  is- 
land of  Jersey,  but  owing  to  the  ex- 
tremes of  climate,  caused  by  the  ocean 
currents,  his  health  failed,  and  he  was 
released  to  come  home.  But  after  ar- 
riving in  London,  he  wrote  to  the  presi- 
dent, stating  that  his  health  was  much 
improved,  and  that  if  sickness  was  the 


cause  of  his  release,  he  was  ready  to 
renew  his  labors.  Accordingly,  he  was 
assigned  to  his  old  field  and  made  one 
circuit,  and  when  he  returned  to  the 
conference  house,  he  was  informed  of 
his  appointment  as  president  of  the 
Leeds  conference.  Here  he  remained 
until  his  release  came  to  sail  with  the 
company  leaving  England  April  10,  1880. 
In  the  spring  of  1881  he  removed  from 
Brigham  City  to  Logan,  to  clerk  in  the 
wholesale  department  of  Z.  C.  M.  I. 
June  5,  1884,  when  the  Logan  First 
Ward  was  divided  into  three  Wards, 
Isaac  Smith  was  appointed  Bishop  of 
the  Seventh  Ward,  with  Nils  P.  Lin- 
delof  and  Ephraim  Mikkelsen  as  his 
counselors.  The  Ward  then  numbered 
35  families;  the  people  commenced  the 
erection  of  a  meeting  house  and  had 
it  completed  in  about  four  months  at  a 
cost  of  $600.  The  membership  of  the 
Ward  increasing,  this  house  was  found 
too  small;  hence,  a  new  concrete  build- 
ing was  erected  at  a  cost  of  $1,600.  The 
Ward  had  increased  to  75  families. 
During  his  labors  with  the  Z.  C.  M.  I. 
Elder  Smith  was  invoice  clerk,  had 
charge  of  the  grocery,  hardware  and 
crockery  departments  and  later  the 
clothing  department.  He  was  on  the 
road  as  general  salesman  for  about 
five  years,  after  which  he  ran  a  branch 
store  for  the  institution  on  Main 
Street,  Logan.  Aug.  3,  1890,  he  was 
sustained  as  second  counselor  to  Orson 
Smith,  president  of  the  Cache  Stake, 
and  was  set  apart  by  Apostle  Franklin 
D.  Richards.  In  February,  1891,  he  was 
given  the  management  of  the  Logan 
branch  of  Z.  C.  M.  I.,  which  position 
he  held  until  the  institution  closed  out 
its  business  in  1897.  Owing  to  absence 
from  home,  Pres.  Orson  Smith  was  re- 
leased in  1899  from  the  presidency  of 
Cache  Stake,  and  Apostle  Merrill  was 
sustained  and  set  apart  Aug.  30,  1899. 
Isaac  Smith  was  sustained  as  his  sec- 
ond counselor  and  set  apart  by  Apostle 
John  H.  Smith.  Owing  to  the  many 
other  duties  of  Apostle  Merrill  he  was 
relieved  from  his  duties  as  president 
in  Cache  Valley,  at  the  quarterly  con- 
ference held  in  Logan  May  3,  1901; 
Bro.  Jos.  Morrell,  his  first  counselor, 
was  chosen  president,  and  Isaac  Smith 
and  Wm.  W.  Maughan  were  chosen  as 
counselors.  Elder  Smith  was  set  apart 
to  this  position  by  Apostle  Mathias  F. 
Cowley. 


412 


LATTER-DAY    SAINT 


"WILSON,  Joseph  Kllis,  clerk  of 
ihe  Cache  Stake  of  Zion,  is  the  tenth 
and  youngest  child  of  Wellington  Paul 
Wilson  and  Elizabeth  Boardsman 
Smith,  and  was  born  May  2,  1858,  on 
Soap  creek,  Monroe  county,  Iowa.  His 
parents  both  came  of  old  Massachusetts 
stock  and  were  numbered  among  the 
early  converts  to  the  Church  in  Kirt- 
land,  Ohio.  They  came  to  Utah  in 
1864,  and  soon  after  separated.  Jo- 
seph went  with  his  mother  and  two 
brothers  to  Harrisville,  Weber  county, 
where  he  lived  for  several  years.  From 
this  time  forward  he  was  destined  to 
have  but  little  of  a  mother's  care  and 
scarcely  a  father's  acquaintance,  yet 
to  be  fortunate  in  having  his  lot  cast 
among  people  who  were  good  and  kind. 
In  the  summer  of  1868  he  received  an 
injury  to  his  right  ankle,  which  caused 
him  much  suffering,  but  probably  led 
to  his  getting  an  education  and  chang- 
ing his  whole  course  of  life.  Being 
partly  crippled,  Pres.  George  A.  Smith, 
to  whom  his  mother  had  been  sealed, 
gave  him  a  home  and  sent  him  to 
school.  Joseph  resided  with  Mrs. 
Bathsheba  W.  Smith,  her  home  being 
the  present  Historian's  Office  building, 
in  Salt  Lake  City.  Early  in  1871  he 
entered  the  school  of  Mrs.  Randall  in 
Pres.  Young's  school  house,  and  later 
Miss  Cook's  school  at  the  Social  Hall. 
In  due  course  of  time  he  was  advanced 
to  the  University  proper  under  Dr. 
John  R.  Park,  at  the  Council  House. 
He  was  studious  and  usually  stood  well 
in  his  classes.  In  the  spring  of  1875 
he  was  taken  from  school  with  a  /lew 
of  giving  him  an  apprenticeship  in 
printing  at  the  "Deseret  News"  office. 
The  opening  did  not  occur  at  said  office 
as  soon  as  expected.  His  benefactor 
died  in  the  following  August  and  left 
him  on  his  own  resources  to  battle  with 
the  world  at  the  age  of  seventeeen.  In 
casting  about  for  employment,  Bishop 
Hunter  advised  him  to  teach  school 
and  he  made  the  attempt.  Passing 
examination  under  Dr.  Park,  he  ob- 
tained a  first  grade  teacher's  certificate 
and  taught  that  winter  at  Taylorsville, 
Salt  Lake  county.  The  folowing  win- 
ter found  him  teaching  school  at  Clif- 
ton, Idaho,  where  he  had  a  number  of 
relatives  who  had  moved  there  from 
Harrisville.  In  June,  1877,  when  the 
Clifton  Ward  was  organized,  he  was 
chosen  second  counselor  to  Bishop  Har- 
vey   Dixon,     having     been     ordained  a 


High  Priest  and  set  apart  to  that  office 
by  Moses  Thatcher,  then  president  of 
Cache  Stake.  July  22,  1877,  he  mar- 
ried Lerona  A.  Monroe,  daughter  of 
Major  Marcellus  Monroe-Martin.  From 
this  union  has  sprung  twelve  children, 
all  living,  the  oldest,  Joseph  E.  Jr.,  hav- 
ing filled  an  honorable  mission  to  the 
Northern  States.  In  the  winter  of  1878- 
79  Elder  Wilson  taught  school  at  Rich- 
mond, being  assigned  to  the  highest  of 
three  grades.  The  summer  of  1879  he 
spent  working  on  the  Logan  Temple; 
then,  for  one  year,  he  assisted  in  start- 
ing the  first  newspaper  of  Cache  coun- 
ty, the  "Logan  Leader,"  and  estab- 
lished his  home  in  Logan.  Early  in 
1881  he  was  engaged  as  bookkeeper  at 
the  Temple,  where  he  remained  three 
years,  and  was  then  called  to  be  Stake 
tithing  clerk.  He  was  for  two  years 
president  of  the  Logan  First  Ward  Y. 
M.  M.  I.  A.,  and  in  May,  1884,  was  set 
apart  to  be  second  counselor  to  Bishop 
B.  M.  Lewis,  of  the  same  Ward,  which 
position  he  held  for  about  seven  years. 
After  that  he  filled  the  position  of  first 
counselor  seven  years  longer.  In  1887 
through  failure  of  his  eyesight,  he  was 
released  from  his  position  as  tithing 
clerk,  and  casting  about  for  some  out- 
door occupation,  he  engaged  in  the 
nursery  business.  He  started  in  1888 
what  has  developed  into  the  Logan  nur- 
series, but  financial  reverses  prevented 
him  from  continuing  in  the  business. 
He  served  two  terms  as  city  recorder 
of  Logan,  and  one  term  as  school  trus- 
tee. During  the  troublous  anti-poly- 
gamy times  he  took  to  wife  Esther  A. 
Ricks,  youngest  child  of  Patriarch  Joel 
Ricks,  who  has  borne  him  five  children, 
all  living.  After  he  had  resided  a 
short  time  in  Logan,  he  was  called  to  be 
clerk  of  the  High  Council,  which  place 
he  has  filled,  except  at  intervals,  until 
the  present  time.  In  January,  1894, 
he  was  called  to  the  position  of  Stake 
clerk,  which  place  he  continues  to  fill. 
On  removing  to  the  Fifth  Ward  (Lo- 
gan) and  being  released  as  counselor  to 
Bishop  Lewis,  he  was  chosen  an  alter- 
nate member  of  the  High  Council  in 
February,  1898  .He  served  as  book- 
keeper in  Z.  C.  M.  I.,  Logan,  from  1895 
to  the  time  the  branch  closed,  and  in 
July,  1897,  accepted  a  position  at  the 
Agricultural  College  as  secretary  and 
instructor  in  penmanship.  This  posi- 
tion he  filled  until  March,  1900,  when 
the  anti-polygamy     agitation     made  it 


BIOGRAPHICAL,    ENCYCLOPEDIA. 


413 


fiecessary  for  him  to  resign.  Just  at 
this  juncture  he  was  called  again  to  be 
Stake  tithine  clerk,  he  being  the  unani- 
mous choice  of  the  twenty-six  Bishops 
of  the  Stake  and  the  Stake  presidency. 
Elder  Wilson  has  been  temperal^e  in  all 
his  habits,  keeping  the  Word  of  Wis- 
dom from  his  youth  up,  has  been  a 
Sunday  school  worker  almost  constant- 
ly from  the  days  he  attended  the  Thir- 
teenth Ward  (Salt  Lake  City)  Sunday 
school  under  the  superintendency  of 
George  Goddard  in  the  early  70's.  Pa- 
triarch John  Smith  promised  him  in  his 
youth  that  through  the  prayer  of  faith 
he  should  be  mighty  in  healing  the  sick. 
This  has  been  fulfilled,  as  many  can 
testify.  While  slow  in  physical  and 
mental  action,  he  is  possessed  of  de- 
votion to  duty  and  tenacity  of  purpose, 
and  very  seldom  yields  to  discourage- 
ment. Among  his  boyhood  associations 
in  school  and  otherwise  he  remembers 
with  pleasure  six  who  have  since  be- 
come Apostles,  viz.  John  Henry  Smith, 
Heber  J.  Grant,  Abraham  H.  Cannon, 
Rudger  Clawson,  Mathias  F.  Cowley 
and  John  W.  Taylor,  all  but  the  first 
being  near  his  own  age.  The  wise 
counsels  and  correct  example  given  by 
Pres.  George  A.  Smith  have  been  a 
source  of  strength  and  encouragement 
to  the  boy  and  the  man.  For  those  as- 
sociations and  many  others  he  feels  to 
thank  a  kind  Providence  that  has  guid- 
ed him. 

CARDON,         Joseph  Emanuel. 

Bishop  of  Logan  First  Ward,  Cache 
county,  Utah,  is  the  son  of  John  Paul 
Cardon  and  Susannah  Goudin,  and  was 
born  Oct.  28,  1S72,  in  Logan,  Cache 
county,  Utah.  He  was  baptized  Sept. 
1,  1881,  and  on  the  same  day  confirmed 
a  member  of  the  Church  of  Jesus 
Christ  of  Latter-day  Saints.  Dec.  2o, 
1889,  he  was  ordained  a  Deacon  and  set 
apart  as  first  counselor  in  said  quorum. 
He  was  also  appointed  a  teacher  in 
the  Logan  Foyrth  Ward  Sabbath 
school.  Feb.  13,  1892,  he  was  appoint- 
ed president  of  the  above  named  Dea- 
con's quorum,  which  position  he  held 
for  several  years,  during  which  time 
he  had  charge  of  the  Ward  meeting 
house.  In  the  fall  of  1889  he  was  appoint- 
ed librarian  in  the  Y.  M.  M.  I.  A.,  and 
held  this  and  other  positions  in  said  as- 
sociation for  a  number  of  years.  Jan. 
S,  1S94,  he  was  ordained  an  Elder  by 
B'shop  Thomas  X.  Smith,  but  was  still 


retained  as  president  of  the  Deacon's 
quorum.  He  graduated  from  the 
district  schools  in  1889,  and  in  the  fall 
of  the  same  year  he  entered  the  Brig- 
ham  Young  College,  from  which  insti- 
tution he  graduated  in  1894.  During 
the  time  of  attendance  he  held  a  num- 
ber of  important  positions,  among 
them  that  of  president  of  the  "Philo- 
matic  Library  Society,"  and  also  of  the 
College  Alumni  Association  during 
1894-95.  He  taught  in  the  Logan  City 
public  schools  (Woodruff  building) 
during  1894-96.  Aug.  1,  1895,  he  was 
appointed  secretary  of  the  Cache  Stake 
Sunday  schools.  Aug.  19,  1896,  he  was 
called  to  fill  a  mission  to  the  Northern 
States,  which  call  he  immediately  ac- 
cepted, after  resigning  his  position  as 
teacher  in  the  public  schools  and  a 
number  of  business  positions  which  he 
held.  Sept.  16,  1896,  Elder  Cardon 
married    Miss   Sophia  Wilson,    and     on 


Oct.  4,  1896,  he  left  home  to  go  on  his 
mission.  Oct.  7,  1896,  he  was  ordained 
a  Seventy  and  set  apart  as  a  mission- 
ary. He  was  appointed  to  labor  with 
Elder  John  H.  Stout,  to  open  up  the 
field  in  the  city  of  Indianapolis,  In- 
diana, and  succeeded  in  organizing  a 
branch  of  the  Church.  July  5,  1897,  he 
was  appointed  president  of  the  North- 
ern Indiana  conference,  which  position 
he  held  until  Nov.  15th,  of  the  same 
year,  when  he  was  called  by  the  presi- 
dent of  the  mission  (Louis  A.  Kelsh)  to 
act  as  secretary  of  the  mission,  with 
headquarters  at  Chicago,  111.  He  acted 
in  this  capacity  until  April,  1899,  when 
he  was  honorably  released  to  return 
home.  During  his  mission,  Elder  Car- 
don assisted  in  holding  twenty-five 
conferences  in  Indiana,  Ohio,  Michi- 
gan, Illinois,  Missouri,  Wisconsin,  Iowa 
and  Nebraska.  Upon  his  return  home 
he  was  appointed  to  labor  as  a  home 
missionary  and  assistant  in  the  Logan 


414 


LATTER-DAY    SAINT 


Fourth  Ward  Sunday  school.  He  act- 
ed in  the  latter  position  until  March, 
1900.  when  he  was  called  as  an  aid  in 
the  Cache  Stake  Sunday  school  board. 
He  was  also  chosen  a  counselor  in  the 
y.  M.  M.  I.  A.  in  1899.  Jan.  12,  1900, 
he  was  set  apart  as  one  of  the  seven 
presidents  of  the  64th  quorum  of  Sev- 
enty, which  position  he  held  until  Feb. 
S.  1901,  when  he  was  ordained  a  High 
Priest  and  Bishop  of  the  Logan  First 
AVard  by  Apostle  Marriner  W.  Merrill, 
to  succeed  Benjamin  M.  Lewis,  who 
had  acted  in  the  capacity  of  Bishop  of 
said  Ward  for  forty  years.  Elder  Car- 
don  was  appointed  deputy  city  recorder 
during  the  summer  of  1900.  In  Septem- 
ber, of  that  year,  he,  together  with 
Melvin  J.  Ballard,  commenced  manu- 
facturing knit  goods,  and  at  the  pres- 
ent time  they  have  agents  throughout 
L'^tah,  Idaho,  Montana,  Oregon  and 
Wyoming,  and  give  employment  to 
about  fifty  persons. 

NEEDHAM,  John,  a  prominent  El- 
der in  the  Church,  was  the  son  of 
James  Needham  and  Mary  Armitage, 
and  was  born  April  1,  1819,  in  Leeds, 
Yorkshire,  England.  Following  is  a 
life  sketch  from  his  own  pen,  which 
was  read  at  the  eightieth  anniversary 
of  his  birthday:  "When  I  was  very 
young,  my  father  and  mother,  with 
four  children,  moved  to  Warrington, 
in  Lancashire.  When  a  little  over  three 
years  old,  a  drunken  man  on  a  horse 
run  me  down  and  nearly  killed  me. 
For  years,  I  went  to  a  select  school, 
kept  by  Rev.  Doctor  Symson.  When 
fourteen  years  old,  I  was  appren- 
ticed for  seven  years  in  a  large  drap- 
ery emporium,  kept  by  Cross  &  Pier- 
pont.  After  serving  them  for  nearly 
three  years,  they  sold  out  and  gave  me 
my  free  papers,  and  I  moved  to  Liver- 
pool and  Preston,  working  as  a  jour- 
neyman. I  was  engaged  as  clerk  in 
a  store  at  Preston,  when  Pres.  Hebef 
r. Kimball, Orson  Hyde  and  other  Elders 
came  there  to  preach  the  gospel.  I 
heard  the  first  gospel  sermon  in  Preston 
from  Ax)ostle  Orson  Hyde,  in  the  year 
1R.37,  and  I  believed  it  with  all  my  soul. 
My  father  came  and  took  me  to  my 
homp  in  Warrington  and  was  very  bit- 
ter against  the  Church.  In  a  few  weeks, 
he  obtained  a  situation  for  me  in  Man- 
chester, but  in  a  short  time  I  was  with 
the  Saints  again  and  preaching  the 
gospel,  though  only  a  boy  in  my  teens. 


Again  my  father  took  me  home,  and 
in  a  few  weeks  placed  me  in  a  situation 
in  Staffordshire,  but  wherever  I  went, 
the  gospel  seemed  to  come  also.  This 
time  Apostle  George  A.  Smith  came  to 
Staffordshire,  and  I  labored  under  his 
direction  and  traveled  a  great  deal  with 
him.  At  last  my  father  left  me  severe- 
ly alone  and  forbid  me  visiting  my 
mother,  brothers  and  sisters.  I  la- 
bored p  few  months  in  Dudley,  near 
Birmingham,  and  in  a  small  place 
called  Great  Green.  I  was  very  poor 
and  destitute, not  having  enough  money 
to  buy  ink  and  paper;  the  few  Saints 
in  the  Church  were  also  very  poor.  One 
morning,  when  I  answered  a  knock  at 
the  door  where  I  was  staying,  a  young 
woman  asked  if  a  minister  of  the  gos- 
pel was  staying  there,  named  the  Rev- 


erend John  Needham.  I  told  her  that 
Elder  John  Needham  was  my  name. 
She  then  gave  me  some  silver  money, 
and  told  me  that  her  lady  had  a  dream, 
in  which  she  was  told  to  give  me  some 
cash,  and  that  I  was  a  servant  of 
God  and  needed  help.  This  is  only  one 
case  out  of  a  hundred  similar  blessings 
which  I  received  from  our  Heavenly 
Father  during  a  five  years'  mission, 
and  while  I  traveled  practically  with- 
out money.  All  the  means  I  obtained 
was  given  me  by  those  I  baptized  and 
organized  into  branches  of  the  Church. 
In  1840  I  went  to  Monmouthshire  and 
Wales,  and  with  God's  blessing  was 
enabled  to  do  a  great  work  there,  for 
the  people  were  quite  ready  to  receive 
the  gospel,  and  I  had  a  blessed,  happy 


BIOGRAPHICAL.   ENCYCLOPEDIA. 


415 


time  with  them.  At  that  time  I  was 
called  to  preside  over  a  conference. 
The  Elders  being  scarce  during-  the 
first  few  years  in  England,  we  general- 
ly traveled  alone,  and  not  in  pairs.  I 
will  give  a  sample  of  how  I  introduced 
the  gospel  in  several  towns  and  cities, 
by  referring  to  my  first  visit  in  Aber- 
gavenny, in  Monmouthshire.  I  stood 
up  in  the  Market  place,  sang  a  hymn, 
prayed  and  then  preached  the  gospel 
of  Jesus  Christ  in  my  own  simple  way, 
but  with  great  zeal  and  •  onfidence  in 
my  Savior's  help.  After  I  had  finished 
speaking, I  remarked  that  I  was  preach- 
ing the  gospel  without  purse  or  scrip, 
had  no  salary  but  put  my  trust  in 
God.  This  moved  the  hearts  of  my 
hearers  to  feed  me  and  give  me  a 
night's  entertainment.  In  a  few  mo- 
ments a  very  young  woman  came  to  me 
and  said  that  I  could  go  home  with 
her.  As  she  looked  so  very  young,  I 
remarked  that  perhaps  her  parents 
would  not  like  it.  She  told  me  that 
she  was  married  and  had  two  children, 
and  therefore  had  a  right  to  ask  me. 
Of  course,  I  went,  and  in  a  very  short 
time  I  baptized  her  and  her  husband, 
and  in  a  few  weeks  I  had  a  flourishing 
branch  of  the  Church  started.  Making 
that  my  headquarters,  I  organized 
many  branches  of  the  Church  in  Mon- 
mouthshire and  "Wales,  getting  help 
from  other  Elders  and  many  that  I 
ordained  and  sent  out  to  preach.  In 
the  winter  of  1842-43  I  left  my  native 
land.  My  father  gave  me  a  very  good 
fitout  to  cross  the  sea  and  to  go  to 
Nauvoo,  as  he  now  felt  more  kind  to- 
ward the  Saints.  A  few  years  later 
I  baptized  my  father  and  others  of  my 
family,  in  fulfilment  of  prophecy,  in 
which  it  was  promised  me  that  I  should 
be  a  Joseph  to  my  father's  house.  I 
sailed  from  Liverpool  on  the  ship 
"Yorkshire,"  Elder  Thomas  Bullock  be- 
ing president  of  the  company.  We  had 
a  nine  weeks'  very  stormy  voyage  and 
were,  on.  one  occasion,  told  by  the  sail- 
ors that  in  a  few  days  we  should  all 
be  either  in  heaven  or  hell.  We  got 
into  New  Orleans  without  a  mast  on 
the  vessel,  except  a  short  one  which 
was  made  when  we  were  in  distress. 
Not  one  Saint,  however,  had  any  fear, 
for  we  had  been  promised  that  we 
should  get  over  safe  and  well,  but  that 
we  should  have  a  very  rough  voyage. 
The  "Yorkshire"  was  lost  in  the  re- 
turn voyage.       On  my  arrival  in  Nau- 


voo   I    was    introduced    to    Joseph    the 
Prophet,   his   brother   Hyrum    (the   Pa- 
triarch), and  many  of  the  leading  men 
of   the   city.       I   enjoyed   their   counsel 
and  preachingfor  years.      In  the  fall  of 
1843,    Sarah   Ann   Booth    was    sealed   to 
me  for  time  and  all  eternity  by  Patri- 
arch  Hyrum   Smith.       God  gave  me  a 
jewel,   for  she  was  one  of  God's  noble 
women    and    was    filled    with    goodness 
and  love  to  God;  her  life  was  spent  in 
doing    good,    and    thousands    can    bear 
that   testimony;    my    three    wives    will 
say  that  she  was  a  mother  and  sister  to 
us  all.       I  know  that  the  Prophet  Jo- 
seph Smith  expected  the  Saints  to  go  to 
the  Rocky  Mountains.  I  never  can  for- 
get   the   burning   words   of   those   men 
filled    with    the    Holy     Ghost    and    tht» 
revelations  of  God  given  unto  them.  I 
knew  them  well  and  loved  them.  I  knew 
them  to  be  the  Prophets  of  God  clothed 
with   almighty   power,    and   I   know    it 
by  the  power  of  God  and   the  revela- 
tions of  Jesus  Christ  unto  me,  and  this 
is  my  testimony  to  my  children,   rela- 
tions and  dear  friends.  After  the  death 
of  Joseph  and  Hyrum,     I    had  a  stock 
of  goods  for  sale  at  Nauvoo.  I  succeeded 
in  moving  them  two  days  before  the  mob 
got   into   the   city,   and   thereby     saved 
them  from  destruction.      I  fought  with 
the  mob  in  defense  of  Nauvoo.    When 
I  1-cft  the  city  in  1846,  I  made  my  home 
for  a  time  in  St.   Louis,   Mo.,   where  I 
kept   a   store   at   the   corner     of   Third 
and  Pine   streets.       Later,   I   opened   a 
store  in  Kanesville,  Iowa,  and  another 
at    Council   Point.       At   that   time    my 
father    wrote   to   me   that   his   circum- 
stances were  very  bad  and  reduced.    -Vs 
I  had  means  I  sent  my  brother  James 
to   England   with   the   necessary   funds 
to  bring  the  family  to  Zion.       He  did 
so  and  it  was  at  that  time  that  I  bap- 
tized my  father.      In  1851  I  sold  out  my 
business  and  came  to  Great  Salt  Lake 
City,    bringing    my    father     and    sister 
Eliza  with  me;   the  rest  of  the  family 
came  afterwards.       A  few   years   later 
my  father  went  to  St.  Louis,  Mo.,  on  a 
visit,  and  died  in  that  city.       My  dear 
mother  died,  in  coming  up  the  Missis- 
sippi    river,     bound     for      Nauvoo.     In 
the    fall    of      1860,     I      was    called    on 
a  mission  to  England  and  left  my  busi- 
ness in  the  care  of  my  brother  James 
and  Mr.  Whitmore.      Elder  Staines,  my 
partner    in    business,    was    called    on    a 
mission  at  the  same  time.       When  we 
returned,  all  our  goods  were  sold,  and 


416 


LATTER-DAY    SAINT 


we  had  no  business.  I  was  released  to 
return  home  in  1S63  and  was  given  ihe 
charge  of  a  large  company  of  Saints 
on  the  shin  "Antarctic."  I  saw  them 
safe  in  Salt  Lake  City,  but  on  our  ar- 
rival I  was  very  sick,  being  nearly  tired 
out  with  the  constant  care  of  so  many 
people  on  the  sea  and  on  the  plains. 
I  was  called  to  assist  in  organizing  Z. 
C.  M.  I.  in  Salt  Lake  City  and  in  buy- 
ing out  all  stores  of  business  that 
would  sell.  For  several  years  I  had 
charge  of  the  Z.  C.  M.  I.  clothing  de- 
partment. In  1890,  together  with  my 
wife  Rose  and  our  three  children,  I 
moved  to  Logan,  Cache  county,  in  or- 
der to  improve  my  health  and  improve 
my  circumstances.  In  a  few  years  I 
had  lost  by  death  my  wife  Sarah  Ann 
and  Martha,  my  son  Charles  Albert, 
my  brother  James  and  several  near 
relatives.  I  felt  the  burdens  and  trials 
were  almost  more  than  I  could  bear 
and  therefore  left  the  city,  believing 
it  to  be  the  best  for  me.  In  July,  1890, 
while  in  Logan,  I  was  taken  very  sick 
with  la  grippe  and  was  confined  to  my 
bed  for  over  two  months.  In  1896,  I 
was  taken  sick  again  with  the  greatest 
and  most  fearful  of  maladies,  a  large 
swelling  on  the  body,  being  covered 
with  cancers.  The  doctors  insisted  that 
my  only  chance  for  life  was  in  going 
through  an  operation,  and  that  might 
be  death,  but  all  the  medicine  and 
operations  I  had  was  consecrated  oil 
and  the  laying  on  of  hands,  and  by  the 
power  of  God  I  was  restored  to  health. 
When  I  married  my  first  wife,  Sarah 
Ann  Both,  we  were  both  very  poor  as 
regards  this  world's  goods.  We  had 
no  house  and  no  furniture.  My  wife 
worked  out  in  a  family  as  help  and  I 
worked  on  a  steamboat,  in  the  foundry 
and  with  whatever  I  could  find  to  do. 
I  have  worked  many,  many  days  for  50 
cents  a  day.  In  time  we  saved  a  little 
money  and  went  to  housekeer-ing,  an<l 
the  first  furniture  we  had  I  made  with 
an  augur  and  hatchet.  We  had  boxes 
for  chairs,  had  no  stove  but  a  bake- 
kettle  and  a  spider  (a  kind  of  frying 
pan).  We  had  one  small  room  for 
kitchen,  bed-room  and  parlor,  and  was 
never  happier  in  my  life,  because  we 
had  to  be  contented,  and  always  paid 
for  what  we  got.  In  a  short  time  I 
obtained  a  situation  as  clerk  in  a  store, 
and  in  less  than  a  year  I  rented  the 
same  store  and  went  into  business  for 
myself.       My  wife   was  my  first  clerk, 


and  in  a  year's  time  I  had  three  stores, 
all  doing  well,  and  did  considerable 
building.  I  look  back  with  pleasure 
upon  many  of  my  good  deeds  and  re- 
pent of  all  my  shortcomings  and  sins 
of  omission.  I  do  not  remember  the 
time  in  my  life,  young  or  old,  that  I 
did  not  have  the  fear  of  God  before 
me;  yet  like  all  others,  I  feel  the 
weakness  of  humanity,  old  as.  I  am,  and 
expect  I  always  shall.  During  my 
stay  in  Kanesville,  I  became  acquainted 
with  Oliver  Cowdery.  I  heard  him 
preach  several  times,  and  listened  to 
his  powerful  testimony  with  regard  to 
the  work  of  God,  Joseph  Smith  the 
Prophet,  and  the  great  events  he  took 
part  in."  Elder  Needham  died  at  Lo- 
gan June  14,  1901;  his  remains  were 
taken  to  Salt  Lake  City  for  burial. 

STEWART,  James  Z„  a  member  of 
the  High  Council  in  the  Cache  Stake 
of  Zion,  was  born  in  Adams  county, 
111.,  Oct.  31,  1844,  son  of  Isaac  M.  Stew- 
art and  Matilda  J.  Downs,  and  grand- 


son of  Bickley  Stewart,  who  served 
under  Ceorge  Washington  in  the  war 
of  the  Revolution.  His  parents  shared 
with  the  Saints  in  their  persecutions 
;ind  mobbings  in  the  States,  emigrated 
to  Utah  in  1852  and  located  in  South 
Willow  creek,  afterwards  called  Draper. 


BIOGRAPHICAL    ENCYCLOPEDIA. 


417 


in  Salt  Lake  county.  His  early  educa- 
tion was  acquired  in  the  schools  of  that 
county,  principally  at  Draper,  under 
the  instruction  of  Dr.  John  R.  Park; 
and  when  Dr.  Park  was  called  to  take 
chargre  of  the  University,  on  his  recom- 
mendation, James  Z.  Stewart  was  en- 
gaged to  take  his  place  at  the  head  of 
the  Draper  schools.  Later  he  took  a 
two  years'  course  in  the  higher 
branches  at  the  University  of  Deseret, 
at  the  conclusion  of  which  he  was  of- 
fered a  position  as  teacher  in  that  in- 
stitution. This  offer  he  declined, how- 
ever, and  returned  to  Draper,  where  he 
taught  school  until  the  fall  of  1873, when 
he  acepted  the  principalship  of  the 
Cache  Seminary  at  Logan.  In  the  sum- 
mer of  1875  he  was  called  by  Pres.  Brig- 
ham  Young  to  take  a  mission  to  Mexi- 
co, in  company  with  Elders  Daniel  W. 
Jones,  Helaman  Pratt,  Robert  H. 
Smith,  Anthony  W.  Ivins,  Ammon  M. 
Tenney  and  Wiley  C.  Jones.  He  was 
set  apart  Sept.  14,  1875,  by  Apostle  Wil- 
ford  Woodruff,  and  left  home  Sept.  16, 
1875.  This  was  an  exploring  mission, 
as  well  as  a  mission  to  preach  the  gos- 
pel to  the  Mexicans  and  Indians,  and 
it  was  necessary  that  the  jorney  should 
be  made  on  horseback  and  with  pack 
animals.  At  the  expiration  of  about 
ten  months'  traveling  through  Arizona, 
New  Mexico,  Texas  and  Chihuahua 
(old  Mexico),  the  Elders  were  all  re- 
leased to  return  to  Utah,  and  Elder 
Stewart  reached  his  home  July  3,  187 
A  few  days  later  Pres.  Brigham  Youn^ 
called  Elder  Stewart  to  take  another 
mission  to  Mexico,  and  on  Oct.  18.  1876, 
in  company  with  Helaman  Pratt,  Isaac 
J.  Stewart,  Meliton  G.  Trejo,  Louis 
Garff  and  George  Terry,  he  started 
again  for  Mexico,  but  this  time  with 
horse  teams.  Elder  Stewart  labored 
principally  in  southern  Arizona.  Texas 
and  in  the  State  of  Sonora  (old  Mexi- 
co), and  was  released  to  return  home  in 
the  fall  of  1877.  A  few  weeks  later  El- 
der Stewart  was  called  on  another  mis- 
sion, for  which  he  was  set  apart  March 
20,  1878,  by  Apostle  Orson  Piatt  and 
started  next  day.  While  on  this 
mission  he  selceted  the  sites  of  Eph- 
raim  and  Manassa,  in  the  southern  part 
of  Colorado,  and  located  some  of  the 
Saints  from  the  Southern  States  in 
that  locality.  Oct.  3,  1879.  Elder  Stew- 
art was  called  to  accompany  Apostle 
Moses  Thatcher  and  Elder  Meliton  G. 
Trejo  on  a  mission  to  Old  Mexico.     He 

Vol.  1,  No.  27. 


was  set  apart  by  Apostle  Erastus  Snow 
and  left  home  Oct.  27,  1879,  for  the  city 
of  Mexico,  where  he  arrived  with  the 
other  brethren  Nov.  15,  1879.  Elder 
Stewart  labored  in  the  city  of  Mexico, 
the  States  of  Hidalgo,  Morelus,  Quere- 
taro  and  adjoining  States  for  about  two 
years,  during  which  time  he  assisted 
in  translating  and  publishing  the 
"Voice  of  Warning"  and  several 
pamphlets  in  the  Spanish  language  and 
wrote  many  articles  regarding  the  Lat- 
ter-day Saints  and  their  faith,  which 
were  published  in  the  leading  papers 
in  the  citv  of  Mexico.  Apostle  Thatcher 
was  anxious  to  know  the  condition  of 
the  country  between  the  city  of  Mex- 
ico and  Acapulco,  to  determine  whether 
it  would  be  practicable  for  the  Elders 
of  the  Church  to  come  and  return  by 
that  route,  during  the  seasons  of  the 
year  when  it  would  be  dangerous  to 
travel  by  way  of  Vera  Cruz  on  ac- 
count of  yellow  fever  and  other  con- 
tageous  diseases,  and  he  requested  El- 
der Stewart  to  cross  the  country  on 
horseback,  a  distance  of  350  miles  from 
the  city  of  Mexico  to  the  coast,  which 
he  did  on  his  return  home,  making  the 
trip  in  about  thirteen  days.  Upon  re- 
turning home  he  went  to  Logan  and 
accepted  a  position  as  assistant  teacher 
in  the  Brigham  Young  College  for  two 
years.  In  the  fall  of  1883  Apostle  Mo- 
ses Thatcher  was  instructed  to  have 
the  Book  of  Mormon  translated  into  the 
Spanish  language;  the  responsibility  of 
this  work  was  placed  upon  Elder  Stew- 
art, and  he  was  told  by  Apostle 
Thatcher  that  he  would  hold  him  per- 
sonally responsible  for  the  acctlracy 
and  general  character  of  the  transla- 
tion. The  translation  was  made  dur- 
ing the  winter  by  him  and  Elder  Meli- 
ton G.  Trejo,  and  it  was  afterwards 
printed  at  the  "Deseret  News"  office 
under  his  watchcare.  Elder  Stewart 
was  counselor  to  Bishop  Benjamin  M. 
L<=wis  of  the  First  Ward  of  Logan,  un- 
till  he  was  called  to  be  a  member  of 
the  High  Council  of  Cache  Stake,  to 
which  office  he  was  set  apart  by  Apos- 
tle Moses  Thatcher  May  19,  1884,  which 
position  he  now  holds.  Elder  Stewart 
has  also  filled  several  prominent  po- 
litical positions  in  Cache  county.  He 
was  a  member  of  the  city  council  for 
six  years,  and  was  probate  judge  of 
the  county  several  terms,  and  for  a 
'^umber  of  years  was  president  of  the 
faculty  of  the  Brigham  Young  College. 

July  6,  1901. 


418 


LATTER-DAT    SAINT 


In  all  the  positions  of  trust  which  he 
has  filled  he  has  acquitted  himself  with 
credit  and  to  the  satisfaction  of  those 
whom  he  was  called  to  serve. 

CROCKETT,  Alvin,  a  member  of 
the  Hieh  Council  of  the  Cache  Stake  of 
Zion.  was  born  Oct.  19,  1831,  on  Fox 
Islands,  Maine,  eldest  child  of  David 
Crockett  and  Lydia  Young.  At  the 
age  of  eitrht  years  he  was  baptized  in- 
to the  Church  of  Jesus  Christ  of  Lat- 
ter-day Saints,  in  emulation  of  the  ex- 
ample his  parents  had  set  some  years 
previouslv.  In  the  year  1841.  actuated 
by  a  strong  desire  for  association  with 
the  main  body  of  the  Saints,  the  entire 
family,  with  team  and  wagon,  started 
for  Nauvoo,  at  which  place  they  ar- 
rived in  October  of  the  same  year.  In 
Nauvoo  they  were  eye  witnesses  to  and 
sharers  of  the  manifold  hardships  that 
obtained  from  the  year  mentioned  un- 
til the  great  exodus  in  1846.  During 
their  stav  in  Nauvoo,  for  one  entire 
winter,  Alvin.  though  but  a  mere  lad 
of  twelve  years,  was  brought  face  to 
face  with  the  great  lesponsibility  of 
caring  for  the  remainder  of  the  family. 
They  were  all  confined  to  their  beds 
with  the  fever  excepting  him,  and  while 
he  was  not  in  the  woods  with  ax  and 
wagon  getting  fuel  to  keep  them  warm, 
he  was  at  their  bedsides  administering 
to  their  various  wants.  This  duty  was 
discharped  manfully.  Subsequent  to 
the  banishment  from  Nauvoo, the  fami- 
ly' settled  in  Davis  county,  Iowa,  where 
they  made  their  living  by  farming  on 
shares  until  the  soring  of  1849.  In 
Anril  of  that  year  they  traveled  to  the 
Missouri  river,  where  they  remained  in 
camp  until  July  4,  1849,  when  thev  bid 
farp"o''  f^  the  unsymo^thetic  States 
r^yri  took  ihMr  departure  for  Great  Salt 
Lake  valle--  where  they  arrived  Oct. 
19  184?»  Sin°-ular  enough,  that  day 
was  Alvi"-?  birthday.  His  father  lo- 
cated in  the  First  Ward,  and  after  a 
great  strue^gle  he  was  successful  in 
building  up  a  comparatively  comforta- 
ble home.  The  tendency  among  some 
of  the  Saints  at  this  time  to  explore 
the  gold  fields  in  California  had  its  ef- 
fect upon  the  subject  of  this  sketch. 
Accordinp-ly.  shortly  after  his  arrival 
in  Salt  Lake  City,  he  set  out  in  com- 
pany with  .several  other  men  for  the 
fields  of  gold.  It  proved  a  very  valuable 
experience  to  him,  although  he  returned 
two  years  later  with  but  very  little  of 


the  object  of  his  visit.  June  26,  1851, 
he  married  Sophia  Reed  and  settled  in 
Payson,  Utah  county,  where  for  several 
years  he  w-as  known  as  a  useful  and 
a  prominent  citizen,  both  from  a  social 
and  a  religious  standpoint.  He  dis- 
tinguished himself  in  the  military  or- 
ganization of  that  day,  which  organi- 
zation w-as  effected  to  protect  the 
whites  from  the  ravages  and  fierce  at- 
tacks of  the  red  man.  He  had  held 
the  position  of  colonel  for  twelve  years 
before  circumstances  ceased  to  require 
his  military  services.  In  1861  he  moved 
to  Cache  valley  and  became  one  of  its 
early  settlers  of  Logan.  In  1863  he 
was  sustained  as  a  member  of  the 
High  Council,  which  position  he  oc- 
cupies with  honor  at  the  time  of  this 
writing.  Nov.  29,  1867,  he  took  unto 
himself  a  second  wife  in  the  person  of 
Annie  Naomi  Peel.  The  Lord  blessed 
him  with  two  noble  women,  who  bore 
him  eighteen  children,  Sophia  twelve 
and  Naomi  six,  all  of  whom,  excepting 
two,  are  alive  today,  and  honor  him 
with  upwards  of  sixty  grandchildren. 
Two  of  his  sons  (Ozro  and  Fred,  the 
former  of  the  first  and  the  latter  of  the 
second  wife)  have  performed  foreign 
missions.  In  1872  he  left  for  a  mission 
to  preach  the  gospel  to  his  relatives 
and  friends  on  the  Fox  Islands.  And 
while  he  was  received  very  coldly  and 
was  not  successful  in  bringing  many  to 
a  knowledge  of  the  gospel,  yet,  it  is 
not  unfrequent  that  the  islanders  will 
tell  the  missionaries  of  later  dates  of 
the  little  Crockett  boy  who  left  them, 
and  later  on,  when  a  grown  man,  re- 
turned, and  with  what  assiduousness 
and  diligence  he  proclaimed  the  doc- 
trines of  Joseph  Smith.  He  was  the 
first  mayor  of  Logan  city,  in  which 
capacity  he  served  the  second  term: 
was  also  .sheriff  of  Cache  county  for  up- 
wards of  fifteen  years.  In  all  these 
varied  vocations  not  one  evidence  can 
be  successfully  adduced  wherein  he 
was  unfaithful  to  his  duty,  or  disloyal 
to  the  f)eople  of  whom  he  was  the  rep- 
resentative. In  1888  he  was  arrested 
on  the  charge  of  unlawful  cohabitation. 
Boldly  and  prayerfully  he  faced  his 
.sentence  to  six  months'  incarceration 
in  the  penitentiary,  believing  in  his 
very  heart,  even  as  he  believes  to  this 
day,  that  this  persecution,  in  connec- 
tion with  that  of  many  of  his  breth- 
len,  was  simply  a  repetition  of  the  old 
tale,  a  worldy  effort  to  prevent  the  ex- 


BIOGRAPHICAL   ENCYCLOPEDIA. 


419 


ecution  of  a  divine  command.  In  1898, 
however,  commenced  the  real  and  most 
painful  period  of  his  life,  leaving  on 
his  heart  a  weight  which  will  be  more 
or  less  felt  as  long-  as  his  heart  beats. 
Marking  the  commencement  of  thts  pe- 
riod was  the  death  of  his  second  wife. 
Annie  Naomi,  after  a  protracted  illness 
of  several  years.  She  died  March  24, 
1898,  and  one  year  later  the  hand  of  fate 
was  laid  upon  the  first  wife;  thus  leav- 
ing him  on  the  brink  of  his  three  score 
and  ten  years  alone,  at  least  as  far  as 
the  care  and  company  of  a  loving  wife 
was  concerned.  Though  now^  in  his 
seventieth  year  he  is.  comparatively 
speaking,  a  monument  of  physical 
strength  and  preservation.  He  is  still 
a  counselor  to  his  children  and  grand- 
children, all  of  whom  have  "grow^n  to 
love  and  revere  him,  and  who  should 
hold,  even  dearer  than  they  hold  their 
own  lives,  the  example  his  life  teaches 
— a  life  devoid  of  ostentation,  inoffen- 
sive and  harmless,  yet  useful  in  the 
highest  degree — a  life  devoted  prin- 
cipally to  the  development  of  the  king- 
dom of  God.— Fred  W.  Crockett. 

BALLARD,  Henry,  Bishoo  of  the 
Second  Ward,  Logan,  Cache  county, 
Utah,  from  1861  to  1900,  was  born  Jan. 
27.  1832.  in  Thatcham,  Berkshire,  Eng- 
land, the  fourth  son  of  William  Ballard 
and  Hannah  Russell.  He  was  bap- 
tized in  February,  1849,  at  his  birth- 
place, by  Elder  Joseph  Kimber.  About 
nine  months  later  he  was  almost  in- 
stantaneously healed  by  the  power  of 
God  from  a  severe  attack  of  typhoid 
fever.  Emigrating  to  Zion  he  sailed 
from  Liverpool  Jan.  10,  1852,  on  the 
ship  "Kennebec,"  and  in  going  up  the 
rivers  from  New  Orleans  to  the  fron- 
tiers he  was  blown  up  and  severely 
hurt  in  the  explosion  of  the  steamboat 
"Saluda,"  April  9.  1852,  at  Lexington. 
Mo.,  in  which  catastrophe  a  number  of 
emigrating  Saints  lost  their  lives.  Hen- 
ry arrived  in  Salt  Lake  City  Oct.  16, 
1852.  In  the  fall  of  1857  he  joined  the 
expedition  sent  out  to  intercept  Johns- 
ton's army:  he  served  in  Orrin  P.  Rock- 
well's company  and  remained  out  ten 
weeKs.  He  participated  in  a  similar 
expedition  early  in  1858,  after  which 
he  went  south  during  "the  move."  May 
10,  1859,  he  arrived  in  Cache  valley  as 
one  of  the  first  permanent  settlers  in 
that  part  of  the  country,  and  he  located 
in    Logan    July    20th    following.       Here 


he  has  resided  ever  since.  April  14, 
1861,  he  was  called  to  act  as  Bishop 
of  the  Logan  Second  Ward,  which  po- 
sition he  filled  for  39  years  with  un- 
abated zeal  and  faithfulness.  In  1864 
he  made  a  trip  to  the  Missouri  river 
after  immigrating  S-iints  in  Capt.  Wm. 
B.  Preston's  company.  In  1886-89  he 
filled  a  mission  to  Great  Britain,  where 
he  first  labored  as  traveling  Elder  in 
and  afterwards  as  president  of  the 
London  conference.  After  his  return 
home   in   1889,   he   was  arrested   on   the 


charge  of  unlawful  cohabitation,  tried 
and  convicted  and  imprisoned  in  the 
Utah  penitentiary  from  Feb.  8,  1889.  to 
April  8,  1889.  April  26,  1900,  he  was 
honorably  released  from  his  position  as 
Bishop  of  Logan  Second  Ward,  on  ac- 
count of  failing  health,  and  on  April 
30th  following  he  was  ordained  a  Pa- 
triarch by  Apostle  Marriner  W.  Mer- 
rill. 

BALLARD,  Melvin  Joseph,  coun- 
selor in  the  Bishopric  of  the  Second 
Ward,  Logan,  Cache  county,  L'tah,  is 
the  son  of  Henry  Ballard  and  Margaret 
McNeal,  and  was  born  Feb.  9,  1873,  in 
Logan,  Cache  county,  L'tah.  He  was 
baptized  and  confirmed  Feb.  9,  1881,  by 
Henry  Ballard,  ordained  a  Deacon  in 
1884  and  a  Priest  Dec.  27,  1891,  by  Hen- 
ry Ballard;  ordained  an  Elder  Feb.  5, 
1895,  by  Wm.  "Worley;  graduated  from 
Brigham  Young  College  in  1894;  mar- 
ried Martha  A.  Jones  June  17,  1896,  and 
was  ordained  a  Seventy  July  6,  1896,  by 
Apostle    John    Henry    Smith.       He    left 


420 


L.ATTBR-DAY   SAINT 


his  father,  three  brothers  and  sister,  he 
left  home  once  more,  for  Oregon,  where 
they  had  taken  a  contract  for  railroad 
work.  Louis  labored  there  and  in 
Washington  until  the  fall  of  1889,  when 
returning  home  in  De-  he  returned  to  Cache  county,  Utah.  In 
the  fall  of  1891  he  entered  the  Brig- 
ham  Young  College,  at  Logan,  this  be- 
ing the  first  school  he  a,ttended  since 
he  was  thirteen  years  of  age;  he  found 
it  very  difficult  to  keep  up  in  the  work 
_  with  his  companions,  who  had  enjoyed 

D.      Condit,      of     the 


Utah  July  T,  1896,  together  with  Brig- 
ham  H.  Roberts  and  Geo.  D.  Pyper  on 
a  special  mission  to  the  large  cities  of 
the  Eastern  States;  and  he  finished  his 
missionary  labors  in  the  Northern 
States  mission, 

cember,  1898.  In  1899.  together  with 
Joseph  E.  Cardon,  he  organized  the  Lo- 
gan Knitting  Factory,  which  is  one  of 
the  most  important  manufacturing  in- 
stitutions in  the  State.  In  January, 
1900,  he  held  a  discussion  at  Logan  with  ^      ^      .   ,   ^ 

Reorganized     better  advantages;    but  by  hard   labor 


S. 

Church,  on  the  subject  of  succession, 
which  is  known  locally  as  the  great  de- 
bate. He  was  ordained  a  High  Priest 
April  23,  1900,  by  Apostle  Francis  M. 
Lyman  and  set  apart  as  a  counselor  to 
the  Bishop  of  the  Logan  Second  Ward. 

CAllDON,  Louis  Samuel,  a  promi- 
nent Elder  of  the  Second  Ward,  Logan, 
Cache  county,  Utah,  was  born  June  23, 
1869,  in  Logan,  third  son  of  John  Paul 
Cardon  and  Susannah  Goudin.  His 
childhood  was  spent  at  home;  and  at 
the  proper  age  he  began  attending  the 
public    schools.       He   was   baptized   at 


the  age  of  eight  years,  and  was  or- 
dained a  Deacon  when  fourteen  years 
old.  When  he  was  seventeen  years 
of  age  he  accompanied  his  father  (who 
was  obliged  to  leave  home  on  account 
of  his  religious  convictions)  to  Monta- 
na, where  they  worked  on  the  railroad. 
In  the  winter  of  1887,  Louis  returned 
home  with  the  intention  of  entering 
school,  but  circumstances  ruled  other- 
wise.     In  March,  1888,  in  company  with 


and   untiring  application   to   the   work, 
he   succeeded     in     completing     a   four 
years'  normal  course.  He  taught  school 
in  Greenville  during  the  school  year  of 
1895-96,    with    much    credit    to    himself 
and  his  patrons.       Jan.  8,  1894,  he  was 
ordained  an  Elder  by  Thomas  Morgan, 
and    during    that    winter    he    acted    as 
secretary  of  the  Y.  M.  M.  I.  A.  of  the 
Fourth  Ward  Logan.       In  March,  1896, 
he  was  appointed  assistant  postmaster 
in    Logan,    which    position    he    filled    to 
the  entire  satisfaction  of  all  concerned. 
June   17,     1896,     he     married     Rebecca, 
daughter    of    Bishop    Henry    and    Mar- 
garet Ballard,  of  the  Second  Ward,  Lo- 
gan.     In  1896  he  was  chosen  first  coun- 
selor in  the  Y.  M.  M.  I.  A.  of  the  Sec- 
ond Ward,  Logan,  and  during  1897  and 
1898  he  was  president  of  said  associa- 
tion.     Having  received  a  call  to  take  a 
foreign  mission,  he  left  Logan  June  7, 
1898.   to  fulfill   the  same.       He  was  set 
apart  and  ordained  a  Seventy  the  fol- 
lowing day  in  Salt  Lake  City,  by  Chris- 
tian D.  Fjeldsted,  and  arrived  in  Bern, 
Switzerland,  July  3,  1898.  Having  stud- 
ied French  to  some  extent  at  home,  he 
expected   to   be   sent     to     labor  in   the 
French  part  of  the  Swiss  mission;   but 
the  president  of  the  mission  (Henry  B. 
Bowman)   desired  him   to  labor  in   the 
German  part,  ^nd  he  was  accordingly 
sent  to  labor  in   (Bale)   Basel.    He  en- 
tered  at   once   into     the     spirit  of   the 
work,  and,  through  the  blessings  of  the 
Lord,    soon   acquired   the   German   lan- 
guage.      Three    months    later    he    was 
placed  in  charge  of  the  Basel  branch. 
He  labored  earnestly  in  that  place  for 
thirteen   and   a   half   months,   when   he 
was  called   to  preside  over  the  Zurich 
branch,   which  was  the  largest  branch 
in  the  Swiss  mission.  Under  these  sev- 
eral appointments  he  labored  earnestly 
for  the  cause  of  truth,   and   his   whole 
soul   was   in   the   work  before   him,   as 
witnessed   by   the   improvement   of   the 
branches  over  which  he  presided.  Nov. 


BIOGRAPHICAL   ENCYCLOPEDIA. 


421 


23,  1899,  he  received  word  from  Liver- 
pool that  he  had  been  selected  to  pre- 
side over  the  Swiss  mission.  This  was 
a  great  surprise  to  him,  and  he  keenly 
sensed  the  great  responsibility;  but  he 
went  forth  humbly,  putting  his  trust 
in  God,  and  was  enabled  to  perform  a 
good  work  and  bring  many  honest 
souls  to  the  light  of  the  gospel.  Nov. 
28,  1899,  he  left  Zurich  for  Bern,  and 
after  visiting  all  the  branches  in  the 
mission  with  Pres.  Bowman,  he  took 
charge  of  the  mission.  During  his 
term  of  presidency,  the  mission  made 
wonderful  advancement  in  all  respects. 
Baptisms  were  frequent,  tithing  was 
greatly  increased,  great  improvement 
was  made  in  the  keeping  of  the  Word 
of  Wisdom,  and  missionary  labors  were 
extended  into  new  fields.  Elders  were 
sent  into  Italy,  where  they  tried  hard 
to  establish  the  work  once  more.  Elder 
Cardon  traveled  very  extensively  in  his 
efforts  to  visit  all  the  Saints  in  the 
mission;  he  also  visited  a  number  of 
the  branches  in  Germany,  visited  Italy 
and  had  the  pleasure  of  seeing  Paris, 
France,  during  the  exposition.  Dec. 
20,  1900,  he  and  other  Elders  came  down 
with  the  smallpox  and  were  compelled 
to  go  to  the  pest-house,  where  they 
were  confined  until  Jan.  12,  1901.  Feb. 
22,  1901,  Elder  Cardon  received  an  hon- 
orable release  to  return  home.  He  sailed 
from  Liverpool  Feb.  28,  1901,  and 
reached  Logan  March  15,  1901.  Soon 
after  his  return  home  he  was  set  apart 
as  assistant  superintendent  of  the  Sec- 
ond Ward  Sunday  school,  Logan.  He 
also  has  charge  of  the  lesser  Priest- 
hood of  the  Ward  and  holds  several 
other  positions. 

YEATES,  Richard,  Bishop  of  the 
Third  Ward,  Logan,  Cache  county, 
Utah,  is  the  son  of  William  and  Har- 
riet Yeates  and  was  born  July  19,  1849, 
in  Rose-Green,  Sussex,  England.  He 
was  baptized  by  William  Stoner  at 
Brighton,  England,  March  15,  1864;  emi- 
gl-ated  to  Utah  in  1868,  crossing  the  At- 
lantic in  the  ship  "Colorado,"  which 
sailed  from  Liverpool,  July  14,  1868;  he 
located  in  Logan,  Cache  county,  where 
he  still  re?iies.  July  7,  1884,  he  was 
ordained  a  Seventy.  From  1884  lo  1888 
he  held  the  position  of  assessor  and 
collector  of  Logan  city.  In  1889-90  he 
filled  a  mission  to"  England.  May  4. 
1891,  he  was  ordained  a  High  Priest  and 
set   apart   to   act   as   first   counselor    to 


Bishop  Robert  Davidson  by  Apostle 
Franklin  D.  Richards.  This  position 
he  held  until  the  Bishop's  death.  At 
the  quarterly  conference  held  in  Logan 
April  30,  1900,  he  was  ordained  a  Bishop 


and  set  apart  to  preside  over  the  Third 
Ward,  Logan,  by  Apostle  Geo.  Teas- 
dale.  On  the  same  occasion  Wm.  Wat- 
terson  and  James  Larsen  were  set 
apart  as  his  counselors. 

HYDE,  William,  junior,  Bishop  of 
the  Fifth  Ward,  Logan,  was  born  Jan. 
7,  1847,  at  Council  Bluffs,  Iowa,  the  son 
of  Wm.  Hyde  and  Elizabeth  Howe  Bul- 
lard.  His  father  figured  prominently 
in  the  early  history  of  Cache  valley, 
particularly  at  Hyde  Park,  where  he 
acted  as  Bishop.  William  was  born 
when  his  father  served  in  the  Mormon 
Battalion  and  the  Church  was  in  course 
of  migration  to  the  Rocky  Mountains. 
His  parents  come  to  Utah  in  1849,  and 
later  settled  in  Hyde  Park,  when 
William  was  but  thirteeen  years  of 
age.  There  he  grew  up  to  be  a  man 
of  the  Cache  valley  stamp,  inured  to 
hard  labor  and  coarse  fcire,  yet  warm- 
hearted, frank  and  generous  Wm.  Hyde. 
The  first  call  of  a  public  nature  made 
upon  him  was  to  fill  a  mission  to  the 
United  States  in  the  winter  of  1871-72. 
To  this  call  he  responded  cheerfully, 
visiting  the  States  of  Massachusetts, 
New  York  and  Michigan.  In  the  fall 
of  1874  he  was  called  to  preside  over 
the  Fifth  Ward,  Logan;  this  position 
he  accepted  and  has  filled  until  the 
present  time.  He  was  ordained  a  Bishop 


422 


LATTER-DA Z    SAINT 


by  George  Q.  Cannon  May  20,  1877.  He 
has  held  the  confidence  of  his  superiors 
and  the  love  of  the  people  over  whom 
he  has  presided.  Under  his  adminis- 
tration the  Ward  has  steadily  grown 
in   membership,   in   the  strength   of  its 


organization  and  the  unity  of  the  peo- 
ple, while  portions  have  been  taken  off 
three  times  to  add  to  other  Wards. 
Bishop  Hyde  has  held  various  posi- 
tions in  the  gift  of  the  people,  one  of 
which  was  that  of  a  member  of  the 
Logan  city  council,  in  which  capacity 
he  served  three  terms. 

SKAXCHY,       Anthon        Lorentzen, 

Bishop  of  the  Sixth  Ward,  Logan, 
Cache  county,  Utah,  is  the  son  of  Ell- 
ing  L.  Skanchy  and  Mine  Ansjon,  and 
was  born  Sept.  17,  1839,  in  Trondhjem, 
Norway.  He  was  baptized  Jan.  16. 
1861,  by  Elder  T.Tonnesen,  and  .soon  af- 
terwards ordained  an  Elder  by  John 
F.  F.  Doriu.s,  and  called  to  assist  El- 
der M.  A.  Hansen  in  the  ministry.  In 
the  spring  of  1863  he  traveled  nearly 
three  hundred  miles  to  Christiania, 
where  he  was  called  and  set  apart  for 
a  mission  to  Nordland,  which  included 
Namsos,  Bodo,  Vesteraalen,  Tromso, 
Ha'nn-.erfest  and  Vardo— the  extreme 
not-thern  part  of  Norway,  or  the  part 
of  the  country  Known  as  the  land  of 
the  midnight  sun.  He  traveled  from 
island  to  island,  preached  a  great  deal 
and  baptized  quite  a  number.  He  was 
arrested  seven  times  and  sentenced 
three  times  to  imprisonment  on  water 
and   bread    for  administering   the   ordi- 


nances of  the  gospel,  which  was  con- 
trary to  the  laws  of  Norway.  In  the 
fall  of  1865  he  was  called  south,  and  on 
his  travels  he  journeyed  through  Guld- 
brandsdalen,  Romsdalen,  Moldo,  Aale- 
sund,  Christiansund  and  Trondhjem.  In 
the  spring  of  1866,  he  was  called  to  take 
charge  of  Christiania  branch  under  the 
direction  of  Elder  Carl  C.  A.  Christen- 
sen,  president  of  the  conference  in  Nor- 
wav.  In  due  course  of  time  he  visited 
Kragero,  Langesund,  Brevig,  Laurvig, 
Drammen,  Svelvig,  Kongsberg,  Bergen, 
Stavanger,  Arendal,  Nummedal,  Lille- 
hammer,  Hedemarken,  Odalen,  Kongs- 
\inger  and  many  other  places.  In  the 
spring  of  1868  he  was  released  from  his 
misionary  labors  and  permitted  to  emi- 
grate to  Zion.  He  crossed  the  ocean  in 
the  ship  "John  Bright,"  and  after  his 
arrival  in  Utah  he  located  in  Logan, 
Cache  county,  where  he  has  resided 
ever  since.  In  1877.  he  was  ordained  a 
High  Priest  and  set  apart  as  a  High 
Councilor  in  the  Cache  Stake.  In  1879- 
81  he  filled  a  mission  to  Norway,  labor- 
ing principally  in  Frederikstad,  Fred- 
erikshald,  Trondhjem  and  Namsos.  Af- 
ter his  return  to  Utah  in  the  fall  of  1881, 
he  was  called  to  take  charge  of  a  dis- 
trict of  Logan  as  presiding  Priest,  and 
when  that  district  was  organized  as  a 
Ward,  June  6,  1884,  he  was  ordained  a 


Bishop  and  set  apart  to  preside  over 
the  same.  In  1886  he  was  called  on 
another  mission  to  Norway,  where  he 
first  labored  as  a  traveling  Elder  in  and 
afterwards  as  president  of  Christiania 
conference.      On  this  mission  he  visited 


BIOGRAPHICAL   ENCYCLOPEDIA. 


423 


Drammen,  Roken,  Halmestrand,  Svel- 
vlg-,  Roros,  Trondhjem,  Namsos, 
Tromso,  Christiansund,  Berg-en,  Kra- 
gero,  Laurvig  and  many  other  places. 
In  returning  to  Utah  in  the  fall  of  1889 
he  had  charge  of  a  company  of  emi- 
grating- Saints.  On  his  arrival  home 
he  resumed  his  duties  as  Bishop  of  the 
Sixth  Ward,  Logan,  and  continued  thus 
until  1901,  when  he  was  called  on  a 
third  mission  to  Scandinavia,  this  time 
to  preside  over  the  mission.  He  is 
still   laboring   in   that   capacity. 

LARSEIV,    Christian   J.,     Bishop  of 
the  Seventh  Ward,  Logan,  Cache  coun- 
ty,  Utah,   was   born   March   21,   1831,   in 
Grejs,   Vejle  amt,   Denmark.   Following 
is  the  Bishop's  own  brief  account  of  his 
life's    labor:        "I    commenced    to    work 
in   the   Grejs     Woollen   Mills  when  but 
six  years   old,   workinp-     12   hours   each 
day;    my   schooling     was   obtained    be- 
tween the  hours  of  7  and  9  p.  m.  after 
my  day's  work  was  done.      When  four- 
teen  years   old   I   started    to    learn    the 
tailor's  trade.and  when  seventeen  years 
old, on  account  of  the  war  between  Den- 
mark and  Germany,  I  moved  to  Copen- 
hagen.     Aug.  15,  1850,  I  had  the  pleas- 
ure   of    having    my    first    conversation 
on    the    first    principles    of    the    gospel, 
with  Elder  Geo.  P.  Dykes;   on  the  19th 
1  was  baptized  by  Elder  Peter  O.  Han- 
sen,    and  on  the  25th    I  was  confirmed 
by   Apostle    Erastus     Snow,     at   which 
time  the  Sacrament  was  also  adminis- 
tered for  the  first  time  in  this  dispensa- 
tion in  Denmark.       Oct.  27,  1850,  I  was 
ordained    a    Deacon    by   Elder   John    E. 
Forsgren,  and  on  March  12,  1851,  I  was 
ordained   a   Priest,  by  Apostle    Erastus 
Snow,    and    sent    ^'-'^h    Elder    Christen 
Christiansen   to  Aalborg  as  a  mission- 
ary, where  we  arrived  on  the  16th. 
labored   there   until    the   latter   part   of 
July,  when  I  was  called  back  to  Copen- 
hagen.      Aug.   17,   1851,   I   was  prdained 
an  Elder  by  Apostle  Erastus  Snow  and 
sent  to  my  native  town.      Aug.  25,  1851, 
I   preached   my   first   gospel   sermon    in 
my   father's   house,    and   the   same   day 
had    the     pleasure     of     baptizing     my 
father     mother,    oldest    sister    and    one 
stranger,  which  were  the  first  fruits  of 
the    gospel    in    that    part    of    Denmark. 
The  Lord  blesed  our  labors  so  that  by 
the  10th  of  November,  1851,  we  had  or- 
ganized three  branches  of  the  Church, 
namely,    Fredericia,    Grejs    and      Store 
Lihmp       On  the  15th,  at  a  general  con- 


ference held  in  Copenhagen,  the  south- 
ern part  of  Jutland  and  the  island  of 
Fyen  were  organized  into  a  conference, 
and  I  was  appointed  its  president.  In 
the  spring  of  1852,  by  request  of  Pres. 
Willard  Snow,  I  performed  a  short  mis- 
sion to  Falster  and  Lolland,  after 
some  of  the  brethren  had  been  very 
unmercifullv  mobbed  and  driven  from 
those  islands.  Aug.  15,  1851,  I  was  ap- 
pointed president  of  Brevig  conference, 
in  Norway.  Six  other  brethren  were 
called  to  go  with  me,  and  we  all  set 
sail  together.  We  arrived  in  Norway 
Sept.  12,  1851,  and  immediately  com- 
menced a  successful  labor  in  the  three 
branches  which  had  already  been  or- 
ganized in  that  country.  Everything 
went  well  until  the  middle  of  October, 


^^r^* 


when  we  were  all  arrested  and  impris- 
oned. I  was  finally  released  April, 
1853.  In  July  following  I  was  called 
back  to  Denmark  by  Pres.  Willard 
Snow,  and  in  August,  1853,  I  was  ap- 
pointed president  of  the  Copenhagen 
conference.  In  the  latter  part  of  No- 
vember, I  was  appointed  by  Pres.  John 
Van  Cott  to  look  after  the  interest  of 
the  first  emigration  company  of  the 
season,  and  take  charge  of  them.  Dec. 
22,  1853,  I,  with  301  emigrants,  left 
Copenhagen  for  America;  in  Gluck- 
stadt  our  company  was  increased  by  33 
German  Saints.  In  Kansas  we 
joined    the    second     company     of     that 


424 


LATTER-DAY  SAINT 


season's  eniigi-ation  from  Denmark  and 
crossed  the  plains  with  them.      We  ar- 
rived in  Salt  Lake  City  Oct.  5,  1854.     I 
settled  in  what  was  then  called  King- 
ton's  Fort,    or   South   Weber.       In   the 
fall  of  1855  I  was  called  to  act  as  sec- 
ond counselor  to  Bishop  Thomas  King- 
ton.      In    the   fall   of   1856   I   moved   to 
Ogden.      April  7,  1857,  I  was  ordained  a 
Seventy    by     Pres.       John     Van    Cott. 
Through    the   summer   and    fall   I   was 
under  arms  in  Col.  Chauncey  W.  West's 
command  and  in  what  was  called  the 
Echo  Canyon  War.       In  the  winter  of 
1857-58  I  labored  as  a  home  missionary 
in  Weber  Stake,  and  in  the  summer  of 
1858    I   had  charge  of  one  of  the  three 
small  companies  that  were  left  to  guard 
the  city.       In  November,  1858,  I  moved 
with   my    family    to     Sanpete     county, 
where   I   lived  and  passed   through  all 
the   troubles     and       difficulties     of  the 
Blackhawk  war.  Aug.  13,  1866,  together 
with    my    nine-year-old    son,    I    had    a 
most  miraculous  escape  from  an  attack 
of  about  twenty  savages,  who  emptied 
their  guns  at  us,  when  they  were  only 
about  twelve  feet  away.      In  the  spring 
of    1867,    when    the    grasshoppers    des- 
troyed our  crops   in   Sanpete  county,   I 
went  on  a  visit  to  Cache  valley,  and  on 
meeting   Apostle    Ezra   T.    Benson,     he 
persuaded    me    to    move    to    Logan.       I 
complied    with    his    wishes,      though    it 
took  me  nearly  a  year  to  get  my  family 
removed  from  Sanpete  county  to  Cache 
valley.       I  labored  as  a  home  mission- 
ary   in    Cache   Stake    from   1872    to   1884 
and    acted    as   a   High   Councilor    while 
Apostle   Brigham  Young  presided   over 
the  Stake.      When  Moses  Thatcher  be- 
came president  of  Cache  Stake,   I  was 
ordained  a  High  Priest  by  him  and  set 
apart  as  first  counselor  to   the  Bishop 
of  Logan  Second  Ward,  which  position 
I  held  until  1890.      I  officiated  as  a  mis- 
sionary laborer  in  Logan  Temple  from 
March,  1885,  to  May,  1887.      In  October, 
1890.  I  was  appointed  Bishop  of  Logan 
Seventh  Ward,  and  on  Nov.  3,  1890,  was 
ordained    a    Bishop   and    set    apart     by 
Anostle  Marriner  W.  Merrill.      This  po- 
sition  I  still   hold." 

MOURITZEX.  Mouritz,  second 
counselor  to  Bishop  Christian  J.  Lar- 
sen,  of  the  Seventh  Ward,  Logan, 
Cache  county,  Utah,  was  born  in 
Svendstrup,  Aalborg  amt,  Denmark, 
April  2,  1857,  the  son  of  Peter  Christian 
Mouritzen    and    Inger    Jorgensen.       He 


spent   his   early   life   in   that   neighbor- 
hood, working  for  farmers.      In  the  fall 
of   1876   he   heard   the   first   gospel   ser- 
mon preached  in  Anders  Jensen's  house 
in  Norretranders  and  was  immediately 
impressed   with   the  gospel   truth;    and 
after  prayer  and  farther  searching  for 
the   truth,   he  was  converted,   and  was 
baptized  in  Aalborg  Jan.  3,  1877,  by  El- 
der Anders  Frederiksen;    confirmed  by 
Elder  Soren  Poulsen.  He  was  ordained 
a  Teacher  by  Knud  H.  Bruun  March  3, 
1877,  and  in  the  fall  called  to  labor  as 
a    missionary.       He    was    ordained    an 
Elder  by  Jens  Andersen   Nov.   12,  1877, 
and  labored  the  first  six  months  in  Aal- 
borg and   Saeby   branches.       At  a  con- 
ference held  in  the  spring  of  1878  he  was 
called    to    preside     over     the     Thisted 
branch.  While  laboring  in  that  capacity 
he    baptized   and   confirmed   a   number 
of   people   and     also     administered     to 
many  sick  people  who  were  healed  un- 
der his  administration  and  rejoiced  in 
the  power  of  God.       While  laboring  in 
Thyland,  in  company  with  N.  C.   Lar- 
.=en,    he    was    arrested    and    placed    in 
jail  at  Westervig,  but  was  released  the 
next  day,  after  having  answered  many 
questions  propounded  by  the  judge, who 
decided  that  there  was  no  cause  for  ac- 
tion.      In   July,    1880,    he   was   released 
from   his   missionary  labors,   with     the 
privilege   of    emigrating    to   Zion.       He 
left  Copenhagen  July  5,   1880,   and     ar- 
rived  in    Salt   Lake   City   July   29,   1880. 
After  residing  one  year  in  Manti,  San- 
pete   county,    he    removed      to    Logan, 
Cache    county,    where    he    has    resided 
ever   since.       He   was   married   in   Salt 
Lake    City,    Oct.    27,    1881,      to     Jensine 
Jensen;    labored   in  a   Church  capacity 
as  a  Teacher  and  a  Priest,  and  was  or- 
dained a  Seventy  by  Paul  Cardon  Jan. 
22,   1884.       In   the   fall   of  1890     he    was 
chosen    to   act   'as   second   counselor   to 
Bishop    Christian    J.      Larsen     of     the 
Seventh  Ward  of  Logan.       He  was  or- 
dained a  High  Priest  and  set  apart  to 
that    position    by    Simpson      M.    Molen 
Nov.   3,   1890.       In   the   summer  of  1891, 
he  received   a  call   to   fill  a  mission  to 
Scandinavia.      On  his  arrival  in  Copen- 
hagen,   he   was   appointed    to   labor   in 
Aalborg  conference.      While    attending 
to   missionary   work   In   the   Frederiks- 
havn   branch,   he  was     accosted     by  a 
school    teacher,    who   sent   a   complaint 
against  him  to  the  police  in  Frederiks- 
havn    for    having    preached    "Mormon- 
ism."      Elder  Mouritzen  was  notified  to 


BIOGRAPHICAL   ENCYCLOPEDIA. 


425 


appear  in  court,  which,  however,  he 
decided  not  to  do,  as  he  knew  the  result 
would  be  banishment  from  the  country. 
He  left  the  city  to  labor  elsewhere, 
and  his  next  field  of  operation  was  the 
Aalborgr  branch.  After  ten  months' 
labor  there  he  was  called  to  Copen- 
hagen for  a  short  time,  but  was  re- 
turned to  Aalborg,  where  he  now  la- 
bored (part  of  the  time  as  president  of 
the  conference),  until  he  was  released  to 
return  home.  On  this  mission  he  had 
the  privilege  of  bearing  his  testimony 
to  thousands;  he  also  baptized  two  of 
his  own  sisters  and  about  twenty  oth- 
ers, and  rejoiced  greatly  in  his  labor 
as  a  minister  of  the  gospel.  Since 
his  return  home,  in  September,  1893, 
he  has  attended  faithfully  to  his  du- 
ties in  the  Bishopric  of  the  Seventh 
"Ward,    Logan. 

HENDRICKSON,   John    Anthon,     a 

prominent  Elder  in  the  Seventh  Ward, 
Logan,  Utah,  was  born  in  Frederikstad, 
Norway,  Aug.  19,  1860.  His  father,  who 
died  in  1862,  never  embraced  the  gospel; 
but  his  mother  joined  the  Church 
shortly  before  her  husband's  death.  In 
May,    1862,    when    the    subject    of    this 


sketch  was  about  one  and  a  half  years 
old,  she  emigrated  to  Zion  with  her  two 
sons.  Her  other  son  was  ten  years  old 
at  the  time.  Her  eldest  child,  a  daugh- 
ter, refused  to  come  to  Zion,  and  was 
left  in  Norway.  After  six  weeks  on 
the  Atlantic  and  about  six  months' 
traveling  altogether,  the  family  reached 
Salt    Lake    City.        Shortly    afterwards 


they  moved  to  Richmond,  Cache  coun- 
ty,   and    later   to     Plain     City,    Weber 
county,    where     the     mother     married 
Gunder  Anderson.      Shortly  afterwards 
they  moved   to  Logan,   where  John  A. 
has    since   resided.       He   was   baptized 
Aug.   19,   1869;   was  ordained  an     Elder 
and   chosen   as   first   counselor   to   An- 
dreas Peterson  in  the  Elders'   quorum. 
While    Brother    Peterson    filled    a    for- 
eign mission,  it  fell  to  his  lot  to  preside 
until    he    returned.       In    1885,    he    was 
chosen   superintendent   of   the   Seventh 
Ward    Sabbath    school,    which   position 
he  held  until  he  was  called  to  go  on  a 
foreign    mission.       In   1885,    he   married 
Mary    D.    Lloyd,    of    Wellsville,      with 
whom   he   has   had   one   daughter,    ten 
years  old.       In  1886,  he  was  ordained  a 
Seventy    by    Joseph    Quinney,    and      in 
1887   he  was  called  on  a  mission  to  Nor- 
way.      He   left  home  in   October,   1887, 
and,  after  arriving  in  Christiania,he  re- 
mained in  that  city  one  month,  study- 
ing the  language,   after  which  he  was 
appointed    to    labor    in    Bergen,    where 
he  spent  six  months.       He  returned  to 
Christiania  to  attend  conference,  after 
which    he    was    appointed     to    labor    in 
Fredrikshald;    later,   he   was   appointed 
to   return   to  Bergen.       After   laboring 
in  Norway  eighteen     months,     he  was 
sent  to  England,   to  complete  his  mis- 
sionary   work    there.        While    in    Nor- 
way, he  had  the  pleasure  of  baptizing 
sixteen    souls.        He    also    enjoyed    the 
pleasure    of    seeing    his    sister,    Matilda 
Hansen,    whom    they   had    left   twenty- 
five  years  previously,  taken  down  into 
the  waters  of  baptism.      He  laboured  in 
England,    mostly    in    Birmingham    con- 
ference, until  November,  1889,  when  he 
returned    home.        Since      then    he    has 
taught    the    theological    classes    in    his 
Ward,  presided  over  the  Y.  M.  M.  I.  A. 
and  been  one  of  the  Stake  board  of  the 
Y.  M.  M.  I.  A.,  which  position  he  still 
holds.       In  1889,  he  began  the  industry 
known   as   the   Cache   Knitting  Works, 
at  Logan,       Though  he  commenced  on 
a  very  small  and  humble  scale,  this  in- 
stitution has  grown  until  it  has  revolu- 
tionized   the    manufacturing   of   under- 
wear    and       hosiery       throughout     the 
State.       It  was  the  first  factory  which 
began    to    manufacture    union    suits    in 
the  West,  and  the  first  to  conceive  the 
idea  of  the  "knitted  garment."     It  has 
given    employment    directly    and    indi- 
rectly  to   hundreds    of   people.       Elder 
Hendrickson    is    now    the    president    of 


426 


L.ATTER-DAT    SAINT 


paid  institution  and  holds  the  greatest 
part  of  the  stock.  In  July,  1900,  he 
purchased  the  Ogden  Woolen  Mills,  and 
shortly  afterward  turned  it  into  a 
stock  company,  of  which  he  is  now  the 
president.  He  has  just  completed  a 
new  factory  on  Washing-ton  avenue, 
Ogden,  termed  the  Ogden  Knitting 
Works,  where  he  expects  to  do  general 
manufacturing  and  thus  aid  in  giving 
employment  to  the  people  in  that  part 
of  the  State.  Elder  Hendrickson  says: 
"The  Lord  has  blessed  me  in  every  un- 
dertaking, for  which  I  am  extremely 
grateful." 

BAI^I.AKD,  Henry  W.,  Bishop  of 
Benson  AVard,  Cache  county,  Utah,  was 
born  Sept.  20,  1864,  in  Logan,  Cache 
county,  Utah;  ordained  a  Deacon  June 
30,  1877,  in  which  capacity  he  later  pre- 
sided over  a  quorum  of  Deacons;  or- 
dained an  Elder  Oct.  1,  1884;  was  mar- 
lied  Oct.  2,  1884;  ordained  a  Seventy 
Jan.  4  1S86:  labored  as  a  Ward  teacher, 
a  Sunday  school  teacher  and  a  Y.  M.  M. 
I.  A.  officer  in  the  Second  Ward  of  Lo- 
gan till  March  9,  1891,  when  he  was  or- 
dained a  High  Priest  and  Bishop  and 
set  apart  to  preside  over  the  Benson 
Ward,  in  the  Cache  Stake  of  Zion. 
which  position  he  still  holds. 

DAIXKS,  Robert,  Bishop  of  Hyde 
Park.  Cache  county,  Utah,  from  1874 
to  1892,  was  born  Aug.  3,  1829,  in  the 
]>arish  of  St.  Cross,  Suffolk,  England. 
His  father  was  a  farmer,  which  occupa- 
tion was  also  followed  by  his  son  Rob- 
ert during  his  life.  The  family  owned 
no  land  in  England,  but  the  subject  of 
this  sketch,  through  his  faithfulness  to 
his  employers,  usually  held  positions  of 
trust. where  prudence  was  required,  and 
management  of  affairs  fell  largely  to 
his  lot.  At  the  age  of  nineteen  he  en- 
listed in  the  Queen's  Guards,  but  be- 
ing one-fourth  of  an  inch  short  of  the 
required  height  (six  feet),  he  was  not 
accepted  in  that  division  of  the  Eng- 
lish army.  He  was  so  situated  that  he 
received  but  very  little  school  instruc- 
tion, but  through  his  efforts,  with  the 
love  for  knowledge  as  an  incentive,  he 
gained  a  fair  education.  He  married 
Mary  Ann  Barker  Oct.  11,1851,  by  whom 
he  had  four  children,  all  of  whom  died 
in  their  infancy.  When  the  gospel  was 
brought  to  that  district  of  country 
where  they  resided,  Robert  Daines  and 


wife  were  among  the  first  to  embrace 
it;  both  were  baptized  by  Elder  Wil- 
liam Smith,  Dec.  17,  1851.  Bro.  Daines 
was  ordained  a  Priest  April  20,  1853, 
and  an  Elder  July  18,  1854.  W^ith  his 
wife  he  emigrated  together  with  many 
other  Saints,  leaving  Liverpool  Nov. 
30,  1855,  on  the  ship  "Emerald  Isle," 
which  arrived  in  New  York  Dec.  29, 
1855.  Not  having  means  to  continye 
the  journey  to  Utah, Elder  Daines  found 
employment  in  New  York  and  New  Jer- 
sey, the  ensuing  three  years.  Here  he 
lost  his  devoted  wife  by  death  and  bur- 
ied her  in  New  Jersey.  He  emigrated 
with  the  entire  branch  of  the  Church 
from  Monmouth  county.  New  Jersey,  in 
the  sprint  of  1859,  going  as  far  as  Oma- 
ha, Neb.  At  this  place  he  married 
Miss  Jemima  Seamons,  May  1,  1859,  by 
whom   he   had    twelve    children,    ten   of 


whom  are  surviving  at  the  present  writ- 
ing. Elder  Daines  and  wife  worked 
their  way  a'cros^  the  plains  by  driving 
a  Church  team  of  mules.  He  stayed  in 
Winter  Quarters  (Florence)  three 
months,  working  for  the  Church, 
breaking  cattle  and  fitting  up  wagons, 
etc.,  for  the  long  journey  before  them. 
For  this  work  Bro.  Daines  received 
only  pasage  for  himself  and  wife,  not- 
withstanding he  was  offered  $40  per 
month  by  other  parties  to  manage  their 
team  over  the  same  distance.  They  be- 
gan their  trip  July  21,  1859,  in  Fera- 
morz  Little's  company.  His  wife  did 
the  cooking  for  the  company,  and  they 
arrived  in  Salt  Lake  City  Oct.  8,  1859. 
Early  in  the  spring  of  1860,  after  spend- 


BIOGRAPHICAL   ENCYCLOPEDIA. 


427 


ing  the  winter  of  1859-60  in  Brigham 
City,  Elder  Daines  started,  in  company 
with  four  others,  to  find  a  home  in 
Cache  valley.  On  arriving  at  Logan, 
he  was  advised  by  Bishop  Wm.  B.  Pres- 
ton to  go  north  about  five  miles  and 
locate.  This  he  did,  and  arrived  on 
the  present  site  of  Hyde  Park.  April 
13,  1860.  There  he  built  the  first  habi- 
tation, which  was  a  dug-out.  "When 
the  militia  of  Cache  valley  was  organ- 
ized, he  was  elected  captain  of  com- 
pany E,  third  battalion  of  infantry, 
first  regiment,  first  brigade  of  the  Nau- 
voo  Legion.  He  received  his  appoint- 
ment Aug.  5,  1865,  from  Gov.  Chas. 
Durkee.  Afterwards  (Oct.  1,  1867,)  he 
was  promoted  to  captain  of  company  C, 
of  the  same  regiment.  He  took  a  com- 
pany of  men  to  Franklin,  Idaho,  to 
Ciuell  a  disturbance  caused  by  the  up- 
rising of  Bear  Hunter's  band  of  In- 
dians, but  the  people  were  so  quick  in 
response,  when  the  knowledge  of  the 
outbreak  reached  them,  that  the  In- 
dians were  outnumbered, and  they  scat- 
tered. Bro.  Daines  was  ordained  a 
Seventy  April  30,  1864.  Dec.  28,  1868, 
he  married  Mary  G.  Ashcroft,  by  whom 
he  had  four  children;  two  of  them  are 
now  alive.  After  the  death  of  Bishop 
Wm.  Hyde,  in  1874,  he  was  chosen  and 
ordained  Bishop  of  Hyde  Park  by 
Apostle  Charles  C.  Rich,  which  position 
he  held  until  his  death.  April  5,  1875, 
he  married  Sarah  Bates,  by  whom  he 
haci  two  children;  both  of  these  are 
still  alive.  In  1885,  at  the  time  of  the 
crusade  against  those  who  had  obeyed 
the  principle  of  plural  marriage.  Bishop 
Daines  went  to  his  native  land.  In 
this  he  attained  a  three-fold  purpose: 
He  filled  a  mission,  obtained  a  good 
genealogy,  and  escaped  prosecution.  He 
was  assigned  to  labor  in  the  Norwich 
conference.  A^fter  his  return  home,  he 
accompanied  Charles  O.  Card,  John 
Woolf  and  others  to  Alberta,  Canada, 
to  find  a  suitable  location  for  exiled 
Saints.  One  of  his  families  followed 
him  in  the  following  spring.  In  his 
traveling  and  exposure  his  constitution 
and  health  was  severely  undermined, 
and  he  never  fully  recovered  from  its 
effects.  He  returned,  however,  to  his 
Ward,  gave  himself  up  to  the  officers, 
underwent  a  hearing,  paid  a  fine,  and 
went  back  to  his  duties  in  the  Bishop- 
ric, which  he  continued  yntil  his  death 
which  occurred  at  his  home  in  Hyde 
Park,   Nov.   16,  1892.       He  passed  away 


surrounded  by  his  family  and  friends. 
Bishop  Daines  was  well  beloved  by  the 
faithful  Saint  of  his  Ward,  and  by  his 
friends  and  family.  He  was  a  man 
of  sterling  worth  as  a  pioneer,  honest 
in  his  dealings  and  anxious  to  sustain 
and  obey  those  in  authority  over  him. 
He  was  a  firm  believer  in  the  hand- 
dealings  of  God  through  his  constituted 
authorities  on  earth.  He  was  a  zealous 
laborer  in  the  Lord's  vineyard,  in  tem- 
poral as  well  as  in  spiritual  affairs,  and 
devoted  the  best  efforts  of  his  life  to 
the  upbuilding  of  Zion.  He  was  also 
a  natural  leader  of  men.  His  life's 
journey  was  fraught  with  many  trials: 
and  by  drinking  of  sorrow's  cup,  and 
passing  through  varied  and  multiple 
experiences  and  conditions,  he  devel- 
oped a  manhood  and  character  of  price- 
less value. 

PETERSEN,      Lars       Christian,      a 

prominent  Elder  of  Hyde  Park,  Cache 
county,  Utah,  was  born  in  Skibsby, 
Hjorring  amt,  Denmark,  March  6,  1839, 
the  son  of  Soren  C.  Petersen  and  Mette 
Marie  Larsen.  He  says:  "I  was 
brought  up  in  the  Lutheran  church 
and  with  a  limited  school  education. 
When  nine  years  of  age,  in  the  year 
1848,  the  school  teacher  of  the  district 
of  Hojen  came  to  my  father's  house 
with  a  petition  addressed  to  the  Dan- 
ish government,  asking  for  free  re- 
ligious exercise.  This  gentleman,  be- 
ing tired  of  his  canvass,  asked  iny 
father's  consent  to  have  me  go  and 
secure  the  people's  signature,  saying, 
'He  can  write  the  names  of  those^who 
can  not  write  their  own.'  Thus  a  small 
boy  went  on  the  errand  of  the  Lord  and 
obtained  the  necessary  names  of  that 
district,  and  when  the  different  peti- 
tions from  the  several  districts  came 
into  the  Danish  Rigsdag,  the  request 
was  granted.  Consequently,  in  the 
year  of  1850,  when  the  first  Elders  of 
the  Church  of  Jesus  Christ  of  Latter- 
day  Saints  arrived  in  Copenhagen,  Den- 
mark, they  found  religious  liberty  in 
the  land.  I  had  the  pri\-ilege  of  hear- 
ing the  gospel  in  my  boyhood  days,  as 
revealed  to  Joseph  Smith  the  Prophet, 
and  was  baptized  by  Elder  Jens  Chris- 
tensen  Terpe,  June  14,  1859.  March  6, 
1859,  at  a  district  meeting  held  in 
Hjorring,  I  was  ordained  to  the  oflfice 
of  an  Elder.  Previous  to  this,  for  a 
year  and  a  half.  I  had  traveled  with 
Jens   M.    H.    Borglum    as   an    assistant, 


428 


LATTER-DAY    SAINT 


li.Tving  been  ordained  to  the  office  of  a 
Priest.  March  26,  1859.  I  left  Aalborg 
for  Utah,  together  with  my  mother. 
We  arrived  at  Copenhagen  the  next 
morning,  whence  we  continued  the 
voyage,  April  1st,  for  England.  On 
the  North  Sea  we  encountered  a  heavy 
storm,  during  which  we  were  in  im- 
minent danger;  even  the  sailors  were 
alarmed;  but  we  arrived  safely  at 
Liverpool  by  way  of  Grimsby,  April  6, 
1859.  The  next  day  we  joined  the 
British  Saints,  went  on  board  the  sail- 
ing vessel  "William  Tapscott"  and 
sailed  on  the  11th  for  New  York,  where 
we  arrived  May  14,  1859.  Thence,  the 
company  continued  the  journey  to  Flor- 
ence, Neb.,  where  we  arrived  May  25th; 
the  plains  we  crossed  in  Capt.  Robert 
F.  Neslen's  company,  which  arrived  in 
Salt  Lake  City  Sept.  15,  1859.  I  mar- 
ried my  first  wife  Johanna  Marie  Mou- 
ritzen  Nov.  25,  1860,  in  the  Sugur  House 
Ward.  In  the  spring  of  1862  I  moved 
from  Salt  Lake  City  to  Plain  City, 
Weber  county,  and  in  March,  1865,  I 
came  to  Hyde  Park,  Cache  county, 
where  I  took  up  a  small  farm  in  the 
spring  of  1866.  In  1868  I  beame  a  mem- 
ber of  the  school  of  the  Prophets,  or- 
ganized in  Logan  Aug.  22,  1868,  with 
Apostle  Ezra  T.  Benson  as  president. 
In  1869  I  was  called  to  act  as  a  Ward 
teacher  in  Hyde  Park.  In  1875  the 
United  Order  was  established  in  the 
Ward  with  which  I  identified  myself 
and  became  its  secretary.  Feb.  7,  1878, 
I  was  appointed  Ward  clerk  of  the 
Hyde  Park  Ward,  which  position  I 
still  hold.  I  had  previously  acted  as 
an  assistant  clerk  for  several  years. 
I  was  ordained  a  High  Priest  Dec.  29, 
1878,  by  George  Thomas,  of  Bensjon 
Ward.  March  30,  1887,  I  was  arrested 
for  unlawful  cohabitation  with  my 
wives,  and  later  (June  21,  1887)  I  was 
sentenced  to  six  months'  imprisonment 
and  to  pay  a  fine  of  $50  and  costs  of 
court.  May  16,  1889,  I  was  sustained 
as  presiding  teacher  of  the  High  Priests 
in  Hyde  Park.  I  also  labored  as  an 
acting  Priest.  Dec.  2,  1889,  I  was  elect- 
ed secretary  and  treasurer  of  Hyde 
Park  Irrigation  district,  which  position 
I  occupied  for  eleven  years  in  succes- 
sion, being  re-elected  biennially.  Aug. 
9,  1891,  I  was  rele  ised  from  being  Sun- 
day school  teacher  and  called  to  take 
charge  of  the  Scandinavian  meetings  of 
the  Hyde  Park  Ward.  March  19,  1895, 
I  wa?  elected  secretary  and  tresurer  of 


the  Logan,  Hyde  Park  and  Smlthfleld 
Canal  Co.,  for  the  term  of  two  years, 
and  I  have  been  re-elected  for  three 
terms  since.  Dec.  5,  1898,  I  became 
.secretary,  treasurer  and  collector  of 
the  Logan  and  Richmond  Irrigation 
district,  which  position  I  have  held  for 
four  years,  by  the  voice  of  the  land- 
holders. At  the  close  of  1899  I  was 
appointed  chairman  of  th-e  local  old 
folks'  committee,  which  gave  the  first 
entertainment  in  honor  of  the  old  peo- 
ple of  the  Ward  Jan.   12,  1900." 

HAMMOND,  Milton  Datus,  coun- 
selor in  the  presidency  of  the  Cache 
Stake  of  Zion  from  1877  to  1879,  was 
born  Oct.  7,  1831,  at  Randolph,  Catta- 
raugus county.  New  York,  the  son  of 
Nathaniel  R.  Hammond  and  Alzina 
Spencer.      He  removed  with  his  parents 


to  Jackson  county,  Michigan,  in  1838; 
enlisted  as  a  private  in  a  Michigan 
regiment  for  the  Mexican  war  in  July, 
1847,  marched  to  'Mexico  and  returned 
in  July,  1848.  He  started  for  Califor- 
nia in  the  spring  of  1850;  but  through 
the  loss  of  teams  he  was  compelled  to 
lemain  in  Utah  the  following  winter, 
teaching  school  at  Farmlngton,  Davis 
county.  Becoming  a  convert  to  "Mor- 
monism"  he  was  baptized  March  30, 
1851,  by  Gideon  Brownell.  Consequently 
he  abandoned  the  idea  of  going  to  Cali- 
fornia, and  became  an  energetic  worker 
in  the  cause  which  he  had  now  es- 
poused. He  .married  Lovisa  Miller, 
daughter  of  Daniel  A.Miller  and  Clarisa 
Pond,    Dec.    11,    1853,     and     started    the 


BIOGRAPHICAL    ENCYCLOPEDIA. 


429 


same  day,  accompanied  by  his  wife,  on 
a  mission  to  Sanpete  cotinty,  to  assist 
in  protecting  settlers  from  Indian  dep- 
redation. He  returned  in  July,  1854. 
As  a  member  of  a  Salmon  River  com- 
pany of  settlers  he  left  Salt  LaRe  City 
in  1856,  and  presided  over  a  branch  of 
the  mission  at  a  point  known  as  the 
"Lower  Fort,"  which  was  located  two 
and  one-half  miles  north  of  Fort  Limhi. 
During  the  month  of  February,  1858,  the 
Indians  displayed  an  unfriendly  atti- 
tude, and  the  brethren,  fearing-  an  out- 
break, decided  to  remove  the  lower 
branch  to  Fort  Limhi.  This  work  was 
being  done,  when  the  Indians  made  a 
general  attack,  Feb.  25,  1858,  killing  two 
missionaries,  James  F.  Miller  and 
George  McBrlde,  and  wounding  others. 
By  order  of  Pres.  Brigham  Young,  the 
mission  was  abandoned,  the  company 
starting  on  their  return  trip  to  Utah 
March  27,  1858,  reaching  home  in  time 
to  participate  in  the  general  move 
south.  Bro.  Hammond  stopped  at  the 
present  site  of  Mona,  Juab  county.  For 
several  years  he  acted  as  secretary  of 
the  40th  quorum  of  Seventy  and  later 
as  a  president  of  said  quorum.  He 
moved  to  Cache  valley  with  his  family 
in  the  summer  of  1864.  From  1850  to 
1870  he  served  as  an  officer  in  the  Nau- 
voo  Legion,  part  of  the  time  as  an  aid 
on  Gen.  Brigham  Young's  staff.  He 
was  ordained  a  High  Priest  and  Bishop 
under  the  hands  of  Pres.  Brigham 
Young  in  October,  1870,  and  presided 
over  the  Providence  Ward,  in  Cache 
Stake,  until  May  27,  1877,  when  he  was 
set  apart  under  the  hands  of  Pres.  Brig- 
ham Younsr  as  second  counselor  to  Mo- 
ses Thatcher  president  of  the  Cache 
Stake,  and  labored  in  that  capacity  un- 
til the  reorganization  of  the  presidency 
in  1879.  He  served  as  a  trustee  of  the 
Brigham  Young  College  from  its  organ- 
ization until  1890;  was  probate  and 
county  judge  of  Cache  county  from 
March,  1874,  to  August,  1883.  He  also 
acted  as  Church  agent  during  the  con- 
struction of  the  Denver  and  Rio  Grande 
railroad.  In  1898  he  was  appointed 
Church  agent  and  superintended  the 
construction  of  the  Alberta  canal,  in 
southern  Alberta,  Canada,  which  was 
co'^.pieled  in  November,  1900.  He  is 
now  a  worker  in  the  Logan  Temple, 
where  he  has  contributed  eight  years 
of  his  life  in  the  interest  of  the 
Church.  He  has  been  a  resident  of 
Providence,    Cache    county,    since    1864. 


DUNN,  Charles  Oscar,  Bishop  of 
College  Ward,  Cache  county,  Utah,  is 
the  son  of  Simeon  A.  Dunn  and  Harriet 
A.  Silver,  and  was  born  Oct.  13,  1855, 
in  the  old  fort  in  Brigham  City,  Box 
Elder  county,  Utah.  His  mother  died 
Jan.  1.  1857,  which  left  the  whole  care 
of  the  family  upon  his  father.  Charles 
was  baptized  in  1863  by  Elder  Lars  A. 
Larsen;  and  he  was  ordained  an  Elder 
by  Wm.  L.  Watkins.  He  labored  for 
several  years  as  a  Sabbath  school 
teacher  and  was  chosen  first  assistant 
superintendent  to  Charles  Kelley  in  the 
Fourth  Ward  (Brigham  City)  Sunday 
school,  Nov.  2,  1880.  Later,  he  pre- 
sided over  the  Ward  Y.  M.  M.  I.  A., 
and  also  acted  as  a  Ward  teacher.  Oct. 
18.    1876,      he     married      Letitia    Smith, 


daughter  of  Samuel  and  Janette  Smith, 
by  whom  he  has  had  five  children.  In 
1882  he  was  called  on  a  mission  to  St. 
George,  to  receive  instructions  in  Tem- 
ple ordinance  work,  together  with  his 
wife.  Early  in  1883  he  removed  to  Mill- 
ville.  Cliche  county,  where  he  labored 
as  Ward  teacher,  Sabbath  school  teach- 
er, president  of  an  Elders'  quorum, 
president  of  the  Y.  M.  M.  I.  A.,  etc. 
Oct.  24,  1883,  he  married  Martha  J. 
Wplch,  daughter  of  John  and  Eliza 
Welch,  by  whom  he  has  had  six  chil- 
dren. Together  with  his  wife,  he  was 
called  to  labor  in  the  Logan  Temple, 
May  18,  1884.  They  commenced  their 
work  there  Aug.  21,  1884,  and  con- 
tinued till  the  following  March  (1885). 
when  thev  were  released.      Oct.  7.  1887, 


430 


LATTER-DAY    SAINT 


Elder  Dunn  was  arrested  on  the  charge 
of  unlawful  cohabitation,  and  on  Dec. 
10th,  following,  he  was  sentenced  to 
six  months'  imprisonment  in  the  Utah 
penitentiary,  and  to  pay  a  fine  of  $150 
and  costs  of  court.  He  regained  his 
liberty  June  10,  1888.  When  the  Col- 
lege Ward  was  organized  June  28,  1891, 
he  was  called  to  act  as  Bishop  of  the 
new  ward,  being  ordained  Bishop  by 
Apostle  Moses  Thatcher.  Previous  to 
this  (July  13,  1884)  he  was  ordained  a 
High  Priest  by  Bishop  Robert  David- 
.«on. 

THOKESEX,       Ingwald        Conrad, 

counselor  to  Wm.  C.  Parkinson  (presi- 
dent of  the  Hyrum  Stake  of  Zion),  was 
born  in  Christiania,  Norway,  May  2, 
1852.  second  son  and  fourth  child  of 
Hans  Thoresen  (Johnson)  and  Karen 
Andersen.  His  father  was  a  first-class 
cabinet-maker  and  followed  that  trade. 
Both  his  parents  were  religiously  in- 
clined and  were  mennbers  of  the  Luth- 
eran church,  and  Ingwald  was  also  in- 
itiated into  said  church  by  being  sprin- 
kled when  a  few  days  old.  In  the 
spi'ing  of  1855  his  parents  first  heard, 
and  immediately  received,  the  gospel, 
and  they  became  enthusiastic  workers 
for  the  cause,  against  strong  opposition 
and  persecution  in  Christiania.  Hans 
Thoresen  became  the  "baptist"  of  this 
branch  of  the  Church  and  baptized 
into  the  Church  of  Christ  between  two 
and  three  hundred  souls,  in  the  night- 
time (as  this  and  other  ordinances  of 
the  gospel  were  prohibited  in  Norway 
by  law  and  had  to  be  performed  in 
secret):  still  he  was  caught,  arrested 
and  imprisoned  several  times  for  offi- 
ciating in  this  ordinance,  getting  from 
six  to  ten  days'  confinement  on  "bread 
and  water."  Under  these  periods  his 
family  suffered  want,  and  Ingwald  and 
the  other  children  would  anxiously  wait 
for  his  release  and  the  bread  he  had 
saved  while  "behind  the  bars."  Before 
he  was  eight  years  old,  Ingwald  under- 
stood and  had  faith  in  the  gospel  and 
asked  for  baptism;  but  his  parents  ob- 
jected until  he  thoroughly  understood 
the  gospel.  He  was  finally  permitted 
to  join  the  Church,  being  baptized  Aug. 
14,  1861.  He  attended  the  common 
schools  of  his  native  city  and  had 
nearly  completed  the  common  school 
course,  when,  in  April,  1863,  he  emigrat- 
ed with  his  parents  to  Zion.  They 
crossed  the  plains  in  Capt.  Peter  Neb- 


eker's  Church  train,  Ingwald  walking 
the  entire  distance  from  Florence,  Neb., 
to  Salt  Lake  City,  where  they  arrived 
Sept.  25,  1863.  Shortly  afterward  they 
moved  to  Hyrum,  Cache  county,  where 
he  and  his  parents  have  resided  ever 
since.  Ingwald  soon  graduated  from 
the  district  schools  of  that  city,  and  in 
1868,  when  sixteen  years  old,  he  started 
out  "on  his  own  hook,"  to  earn  means 
to  get  an  education.  He  worked  at  rail- 
roading, farming  and  mining  during  the 
summers  and  attended  the  High  School 
at  Logan,  Cache  county,  during  the 
winters,  until  the  spring  of  1873,  when 
he  began  teaching  school,  which  avoca- 
tion he  followed  with  success  for  about 
twelve  years,  in  Cache  and  adjoining 
counties.       April  14,   1873,     he     married 


t 


Margaret  Christina  Nielsen,  daughter 
of  Niels  B.  and  Margaret  D.  Nielsen, 
with  whom  he  has  had  fourteen  chil- 
dren, six  of  which  have  died  in  their 
youth,  and  two  are  married  and  reside 
in  Hyrum.  In  the  fall  of  1876  he  was 
called  on  a  mission  to  Scandinavia, 
where  he  labored  for  two  years  in  Den- 
mark and  Sweden, doing  excellent  work, 
Ingwald  was  ordained  an  Elder  into 
the  Church  about  1870,  a  Seventy  by 
Pres.  George  Q.  Cannon  Sept.  2,  1876, 
and  a  High  Priest,  Aug.  26,  1901,  un- 
der the  hands  of  Apostle  Marriner  W. 
Merrill,  when  he  was  also  set  apart  as 
a  counselor  to  Pres.  Wm.  C.  Parkin- 
son, of  the  Hyrum  Stake  of  Zion.  He 
has  served  the  Church  as  secretary, 
president  and  counselor  in  the  Stake 
presidency  of  Y.  M.  M.  I.  A.;   principal 


BIOGRAPHICAL.   BNCTCLOPBDIA. 


431 


of  the  theological  department  of  the 
Hyrum  Sunday  schools,  home  mission- 
ary. Ward  teacher,  Priest,  etc.  Polit- 
ically, Elder  Thoresen  has  reached  the 
front  ranks  in  his  city,  county,  and 
State.  Under  the  People's  Party  vrule 
he  served  his  city  as  mayor,  justice, 
surveyor,  attorney  and  school  trustee; 
and  Cache  county  as  prosecuting  attor- 
ney, county  surveyor  and  deputy  as- 
sessor and  collector;  and  the  territory 
of  Utah  as  a  member  of  the  constitu- 
tional conventions  of  1882  and  1887.  He 
has  always  been  a  staunch  Democrat 
and  taken  an  active  and  leading-  part 
in  defending  the  principles  and  policies 
of  his  party  throughout  the  State  of 
Utah,  and  also  aiding  his  colleagues  in 
Idaho.  Democracy  has  honored  him 
by  electing  him  one  of  its  first  county 
commissioners  in  Cache  county;  a 
member  of  the  constitutional  conven- 
tion of  1895,  and  of  the  second  State 
legislature  in  1898;  also  nominating 
him  as  one  of  its  presidential  electors, 
in  1900.  He  has  been  a  member  of 
the  State  executive  committee  of  his 
party  for  many  years,  and  as  a  party 
worker,  has  been  very  energetic,  fear- 
less, and  almost  radical;  but  always 
open,  above-board  and  fair  with  col- 
leagues and  opponents.  Since  he  re- 
tired from  school  teaching,  he  has  been 
engaged,  principally,  in  the  practice 
of  law,  but  has  also  supervised  his 
farm  work.  He  owns  one  of  the  best 
farms  near  Hyrum,  and  has  built  a 
good  home  in  Hyrum  city.  Elder  Thore- 
sen is  a  characteristic  Norwegian,  with 
determination  of  purpose  and  force  thai 
cannot  be  swayed  by  trifles,  and  what- 
ever he  undertakes  to  do,  he  does  with 
all  his  might;  and  consequently,  hag 
been  very  successful  in  his  undertak- 
ings generally.  He  has  a  strong  tes- 
timony of  the  divinity  of  the  gospel 
as  restored  to  the  earth  in  our  day,  and 
Rreat  faith  in  the  promises  of  the  Lord 
to  His  Saints. 

WRIGHT,  John  Fish,  Bishop  of 
Hyrum  Ward,  Cache  county,  Utah, 
from  1891  to  1901,  was  born  in  Goole, 
Yorkshire,  England,  Oct.  3,  1841,  son  of 
John  P.  Wright  and  Mary  Fish.  He 
emigrated  from  England,  together  with 
his  parents,  in  December,  1848,  and 
landed  in  New  Orleans  the  same  win- 
ter; came  up  the  great  rivers  to  Council 
Point,  Iowa,  in  May.  1849,  on  the  steam- 
er   "Eliza    Stewart;  "    remained    on    the 


frontiers  till  the  spring  of  1852,  when 
he  left  for  Utah,  in  Captain  Tldwell's 
company,  and  arrived  in  Salt  Lake  City 
in  September,  1852.  He  located  at 
Draper,  Salt  Lake  county,  where  he, 
together  with  his  father,  took  up  land, 
and  fenced,  broke  and  farmed  the  same. 
He  passed  through  the  grasshopper 
famine,  without  a  murmur;  participat- 
ed in  Indian  troubles,  although  but  a 
boy;  took  his  gun  and  blankets  and 
went  to  meet  the  Johnston  army  in 
1857,  and  was  one  of  the  guard  detailed 
to  remain  while  the  people  moved  south 
in  1858.  Together  with  his  parents, 
he  went  to  Cache  valley  in  the  spring 
of  1859,  where  they  found  only  seven 
log  cabins  standing  at  Maughan's  Fort 


'^.     ^-' 


(now  called  Wellsville).  They  arrived 
at  this  place  on  the  last  day  of  April. 
The  following  night  the  muddy  river 
had  risen  and  overflowed  its  banks,  so 
that  the  travelers  the  next  day  had 
to  bridge  the  stream  before  they  could 
cross.  Bishop  Peter  Maughan,  with 
some  of  his  brethren,  came  down  to  the 
camp,  consisting  of  about  twenty-five 
families,  called  a  meeting  and  organ- 
ized them,  setting  apart  John  P.  Wright 
as  president  of  the  company,  with 
John  Nelson  and  Israel  J.  Clark  as 
his  counselors.  After  building  the 
bridge,  they  proceeded  on  their  jour- 
ney, and  after  much  toil  and  hardships, 
on  account  of  bad  roads  and  an  abun- 
dance of  mud  and  water,  the  company 
arrived  at  Summit  creek  (now  called 
Smithfield).  Here  land  was  laid  off 
in    five   and    ten   acre   lots   and   divided 


432 


LATTER-DAY    SAINT 


among   the   people,    who   at   once   com- 
menced to  plow  and  put  in  crops.    They 
took  the   first     water     out     to   irrigate 
their  last  sown  grain,  June  15,  1859.    On 
the  18th  of  June  a  mesenger  came  from 
Maughan's   Fort,   with   instructions   for 
the  settlers  on  Summit  creek  to  start  as 
soon   as   it   was   dusk  that  evening  for 
the   fort  and   to   get   there,   if   possible, 
before  the   following  morning.   The  in- 
structions were  obeyed;  but,  at  the  last 
moment,  when  they  were  ready  to  start, 
two  yoke  of  oxen  were  missing.       The 
next  day  the  subject  of  this  sketch    and 
another  brother  were  sent  back  to  find 
the  missing  cattle.  This  was  considered 
a  very  dangerous  and  responsible  task, 
as   Peter  Maughan   had   received   word 
that  the  Indians  were  on  the  war  path 
and   were   likaly   to   make   a  raid  upon 
the   colony   at   any   moment;    but   with 
much  caution  the  two  brethren  succeed- 
ed  in   finding  the   cattle,   and   returned 
with  them  to  the  fort  the  same  evening. 
The  new  colony  remained  at  Maughan's 
Fort  about  two  weeks,  when  a  council 
was  held,   in  which  it  was  decided,   as 
the  wisest    plan,     to    abandon  Summit 
creek  for  the  time  being  and  locate  at 
what  is  now  called  Logan.      According- 
ly,  they     pitched     their     camp   oh   the 
banks  of  the  Logan  river  at  and    near 
where  the  Thatcher  grist  mills  and  the 
old   B.   Y.   College   building  now   stand. 
Here,   again   land  was  surveyed  and  a 
townsite  staked  off.      Pioneer  work  now 
began  in  earnest,  and  at  the  same  time 
the  grain  on  Summit  creek  was  taken 
care  of.  The  settlers  often  carried  their 
guns  in  one  hand  and  their  shovels  in 
the  other.       They  succeeded  in  raising 
good   crops,   wheat  yielding  as  high  as 
forty   bushels    to     the  acre.       Brother 
Wright  left  his     tracks      in     the  snow 
while  cutting  the  last  of  the  grain.  Af- 
ter taking  an  active  part  in  establish- 
ing the  city  of  I.iOgan,   he  moved  to  a 
place  called  Paradise  (old  Paradise),  in 
the  spring  of    1861,      and,     while  living 
there,  he  took  an  active  part  in  defend- 
ing the     lives    and     property    of  those 
isolated  people,  until  it  was  considered 
unsafe  to  remain  any  longer  in  so  dan- 
gerous a  position.      The  site  was  con- 
sequently  abandoned,   and   the   settlers 
mo\  ed  four  miles  north  to  a  more  open 
and  safe  location,   where     the  town  of 
Paradise    now    stands.       Feb.     23,    1864, 
Bro.  Wright  married  Martha  D.  Gibbs, 
daughter  of  George  D.  Gibbs  and  Ellen 


Phillips,   with   whom   he   has  had     ten 
children   who  are  all   alive  and   strongr 
in  the  faith.      In  1891  he  was  called  to 
take  a  mission  to  England  and  was  pre- 
paring  to   fill    the   same,    when    he   re- 
ceived a  letter  from  Pres.  Woodruff  re- 
leasing him  from  the  mission  and  call- 
ing him  to  be  Bishop  of  Hyrum.       He 
was  ordained  and  set  apart  to  that  po- 
sition, Feb.  15,  1891,  under  the  hands  of 
Apostle  Marriner  W.  Merrill,  and  offici- 
ated in  that  calling  until  August,  1901, 
when  he  was  honorably  released,  and, 
on  the  same  day,  set  apart  as  a  mem- 
ber of  the  High  Council  in  the  Hyrum 
Stake  of  Zion.  The  Cache  Valley  Stake 
had  been  divided  into  three  Stakes,  and 
Hyrum  divided  into  three  Wards.  Elder 
Wright  has  filled  a  number  of  secular 
positions  in  the  community.      Thus  he 
held  the  office  of  constable  in  his  pre- 
cinct for  several  terms,  and  has  acted 
as  school   trustee  and   county  commis- 
sioner.     In  1892  he  served  as  a  member 
of  the  Territorial  legislature.  As  a  busi- 
ness  man   Elder     Wright     has   figured 
prominently   in   the     community.       He 
commenced  work  for  Coe  and  Carter  of 
Omaha,  Neb.   (railway  tie  contractors), 
in  the  spring  of  1876,  and  continued  in 
their  employ  for  several  years,  having 
full  charge  of  their  work  the  latter  part 
of  the  time.      He  was  engaged  by  them 
to  inspect,   pay  for,  and  turn  the     ties 
over  to  the  railroad  company,  until  the 
summer    of    1888,    when    he    resigned. 
While  in  the  employ  of  that  company, 
he  was  intrusted  with  the  handling  of 
tens   of   thousands   of   dollars,   and   al- 
ways   gave    entire    satisfaction.     After 
this     he     was  engaged  by     Studebaker 
Brothers  to  manage  their  branch  house 
at  Logan  and  attended  to  this  business 
until  1891,  when  he  resigned,  in  order  to 
discharge  his  duties  as  Bishop  of  Hy- 
rum.    Elder   Wright,    who   has   been    a 
resident  of  Hyrum  since  he  was  called 
to   act   as   Bishop   there,    says   that   the 
greatest  joy  of  his  life  is  derived  from 
the    thought    that    in    all    that    he    has 
passed  through  for  the  benefit  of  future 
generations,  as  well  as  the  present  one, 
he  can  truthfully  say  that  he  has  never 
direcetly  nor  indirectly  lifted  his  hand 
nor  his  voice  against  the  Prieshood  of 
God.     He  has  always  exhibited  a  mer- 
ciful and  charitable  spirit,  and  no  one 
was   ever   turned   away   from   his   door 
who  sought  shelter  or  food. 


BIOGRAPHICAL.   ENCYCLOPEDIA. 


433 


ALiIiEN,  Andrew  Augustus,  junior, 
Bishop  of  Hyrum  Second  Ward,  Cache 
county,  Utah,  was  born  in  Cedar  City, 
Iron  county,  Utah,  Aug.  25,  1858,  son  of 
Andrew  A.  Allen  and  Sarah  Ann  Cart- 
wright.       When    two   years   of   age   he 


moved  with  his  parents  to  Hyrum, 
Cache  county,  where  he  has  resided 
ever  since.  He  was  baptized  Sept.  29, 
1867,  by  John  G.  Wilson  and  confirmed 
by  Jens  Lauritzen  the  same  day.     Jan. 

29,  1876,  he  was  ordained  to  the  office 
of  a  Teacher  by  David  Osborn.       Jan. 

30,  1882,  he  was  ordained  an  Elder  by 
Ola  N.  Liljenquist  and  was  soon  after- 
wards sustained  as  first  counselor  in 
the  presidency  of  the  14th  quorum  of 
Elders,  holding  that  office  until  Dec.  3, 
1889,  when  he  was  ordained  a  Seventy 
by  Brigham  H.  Roberts,  and  became  a 
member  of  the  62nd  quorum.  April  4, 
1889,  he  married  Louisa  Hammond,  of 
Providence,  Cache  county,  daughter  of 
Milton  D.  Hammond,  by  whom  he  has 
had  four  children;  all  of  these  are  liv- 
ing. He  labored  as  a  home  missionary 
in  Cache  Stake  during  the  winter  of 
1892  and  1893,  held  the  position  of  coun- 
selor in  the  Ward  Y.  M.  M.  I.  A.,  and 
afterwards  as  president  of  the  same.  He 
also  acted  as  a  Ward  teacher  from  1890 
to  1899.  Feb.  6,  1899,  he  was  ordained 
a  president  in  the  62nd  quorum  of  Sev- 
enty by  Joseph  W.  McMurrin.  April  10, 
1899,  he  was  set  apart  for  a  mission  to 
the  Northern  States,  by  Christian  D. 
Fjeldsted.  He  labored  in  the  State  of 
Illinois,  principally  in  Chicago,  and  re- 

Vol.  1,  No.  28. 


turned  home  July  9,  1901.  Aug.  26,  1901, 
he  was  called  and  sustained  as  Bishop 
of  the  Hyrum  Second  Ward,  in  the 
Hyrum  Stake  of  Zion.  He  was  ordained 
a  High  Priest  and  Bishop  on  the  above 
date,  by  Pres.  Joseph  Morrell.  Bishop 
Allen  is  a  farmer  by  occupation,  and  he 
has  held  a  number  of  political  offices 
in  Hyrum,  such  as  school  trustee,  city 
councilman,    and   mayor. 

PITKIX,  George  Orrin,  acting  presi- 
dent of  the  Cache  Stake  of  Zion  from 
1886  to  1890,  was  born  In  Far  West.Cald- 
well  county.  Mo.,  Aug.  19,  1837,  son  of 
Geo.  W.  Pitkin  and  Amanda  Eggleton. 
As  a  child  he  was  expelled  from  Mis- 
souri together  with  his  parents  and  the 
rest  of  the  Saints,  and,  later,  partici- 
pated in  the  persecutions  in  Illinois.  He 
also  became  an  exile  from  Nauvoo  in 
1846  and  spent  the  following  winter  on 
Fox  river,  in  Iowa.  The  next  winter 
was.  spent  on  Mosquito  creek,  near 
Kanesville,  Iowa,  whence  he  emigrated 
to  Great  Salt  Lake  valley  in  1848  in 
Heber  C.  Kimball's  company,  driving  a 
team  across  the  plains.  He  located  in 
Cottonwood  and  afterwards  in  Ogden. 
and  later  went  to  California  and  Ore- 
gon, returning  to  Utah  in  1857,  together 
with  his  father's  family.  As  a  minute 
man  he  participated  in  the  Echo  canyon 
war  and  was  detailed  to  burn  property 


in  Ogden,  in  case  the  army  commenced 
hostilities  on  its  arrival  in  the  Valley. 
During  the  "move"  he  made  a  visit  to 
Payson,  Utah  county.  In  the  spring 
of  1859  he  moved   to  Cache  valley  and 

July  13.   1901. 


434 


LATTER-DAT    SAINT 


located  at  Providence,  where  he  raised 
a  ciop.  In  the  spring  of  1860  he 
located  on  the  present  site  of  Millville, 
beinf  one  of  the  first  settlers  of 
that  place.  Here  he  took  an 
active  part  in  all  pioneer  and 
public  labors  and  presided  as  Bishop 
from  I860  to  1896.  In  1862  he  made  a 
trip  to  the  Missouri  river  and  back  as 
a  t'hurch  teamster,  and  in  1880-81  he 
filled  a  mission  to  the  Southern  States, 
laboring  together  with  Elder  Henry  G. 
Boyle.  From  1886  to  1890,  during  the 
absence  of  President  Charles  O.  Card, 
he  acted  as  president  pro  tem.  of  the 
Cache  Stake  of  Zion. 

KOUCHK,  John  E„  Bishop  of  Mill- 
ville (Cache  county,  Utah)  since  1896, 
was  born  July  11,  1861,  son  of  Thos. 
F.  Rouche  and  Margaret  Cornish.  His 
ocupation  as  a  boy  was  farming,  and 
selling  and  delivering  coal.  He  attend- 
ed the  district  school  and  took  an  inter- 
est in  the  different  young  people's  asso- 


ciations of  the  Ward.  In  1881  and  1882 
he  attended  the  B.  Y.  Academy  in  Pro- 
vo;  took  special  interest  in  the  busi- 
ness course  and  graduated  in  book- 
keeping. In  December,  1882,  he  com- 
menced working  for  Barton  &  Co.,  in 
the  general  mercantile  business,  and 
continued  in  that  labor  until  Novem- 
ber, 1883.  In  October,  1883,  he  was 
ordained  a  Seventy  by  Apostle  Albert 
Carrington.  About  this  time  he  was 
called  on  a  mission  to  the  Southern 
States.  Before  starting  on  this  mis- 
sion he  received  a  patriarchal  blessing 


from  Patriarch  John  Smith.  The  most 
prominent  item  in  that  blessing  was  a 
statement  to  the  effect,  that  he  should 
be  a  leader  among  his  brethren,  and 
that  many  should  seek  him  for  counsel. 
In  company  with  about  twenty  other 
Elders  he  met  to  organize  for  the  jour- 
ney. Although  he  was  the  youngest 
in  the  party,  he  was  chosen  to  take 
charge  of  the  company.  On  arriving 
at  Chattanooga,  Tennessee,  he  was 
assigned  to  labor  in  the  North  Caro- 
lina conference.  In  the  summer  of  1884 
he  was  appointed  president  of  said  con- 
ference, which  position  he  held  till  he 
was  released  in  February,  1886,  to  re- 
turn home.  At  this  time  the  hostile 
feelings  against  the  "Mormon"  Elders 
in  the  Southern  States  mission  seemed 
to  be  worse  than  at  any  time  in  the 
history  of  the  mission.  Elders  Gibbs 
and  Berry  were  killed  in  Tennessee.and 
Elder  Rouche  was  exposed  to  much 
persecution,  being  stoned,  shot  at  and 
mobbed  in  various  ways;  but,  through 
the  blessings  of  the  Lord,  he  received 
no  harm.  He  returned  to  Salt  Lake 
City  Feb.  22,  1886,  and  married  Annie 
M.  Chrlstensen  in  the  Logan  Temple, 
April  1,  1886.  The  young  couple  locat- 
ed at  Layton,  Davis  county,  and  Elder 
Rouche  resumed  his  former  occupation, 
working  for  Barton  and  Co.  at  Layton. 
In  thp  sDring  of  1888  he  sold  out  his  in- 
terest in  Layton  and  moved  to  Rich- 
mond. Cache  county,  where  he  engaged 
in  the  mercantile  business  in  partner- 
ship with  A.  U.  Hobson.  In  the  fall 
of  1899  he  sold  out  again  and  moved  to 
Logan,  Cache  county,  where  he  once 
more  engaged  in  business.  In  the 
spring  of  1891  he  was  called  to  labor 
as  a  missionary  in  the  Logan  Temple, 
where  he  continued  for  two  years.  May 
3,  1896j  he  was  ordained  and  set  apart 
by  Pres.  Joseph  F.  Smith,  as  Bishop 
of  Millville,  to  which  place  he  moved 
the  following  month.  His  marriage  so 
far  has  been  blessed  with  four  children. 

OLDHAM,  Samuel,  Bishop  of  Para- 
dise, Cache  county,  Utah,  since  1884, was 
born  March  3,  1852,  in  Bury,  Lanca- 
shire, England,  son  of  John  Oldham 
and  Maria  Heap.  He  was  baptized  in 
March,  1863,  and  In  1864  he  emigrated 
to  America,  crossing  the  Atlantic  in  the 
ship  "General  McClellan,'  and  the 
plains  in  Capt.  Wm.  S.  Warren's  train, 
which  arrived  in  Salt  Lake  City  Oct.  4, 
1864,    Together  with  his  parents  he  soon 


BIOGRAPHICAL.    ENCYCLOPEDIA. 


435 


afterwards  moved  to  the  town  of  Para- 
dise, in  Cache  county.  Utah,  which  has 
been  his  home  ever  since.  Feb.  26, 
1872,  he  married  Mary  Jane  Price, 
daughter  of  Edward  Price  and  Mary 
Bishop,  at  the  Endowment  House  in 
Salt  Lake  City,  by  whom  he  had  ten 
children:  and  on  Sept.  15,  1884,  he  mar- 
ried Mary  E.  Brown,  daughter  of 
Ehenezer  Brown  and  Mary  Wright, 
by  whom  he  has  had  seven  children. 
Hf  has  successively  filled  the  offices  of 
Teacher  Priest,  Elder,  Seventy  and 
High  Priest;  was  at  one  time  a  member 
of  the  T^residency  of  an  Elders'  quorum, 
and  later  one  of  the  presidents  of  the 
62nd  ouorum  of  Seventy.  June  8,  1884, 
he  was  ordained  Bishop  and  set  apart 
to  take  charge  of  the  Paradise  "Ward, 
which  position  he  still  holds.  In  1880- 
81  he  filled  a  mission  to  the  Southern 
States,  laboring  principally  in  Virginia. 
He  returned  home,  suffering  from  a  se- 
vere attack  of  typhoid-pneumonia.  In 
April.  1889,  he  was  sentenced  by  Judge 
Henderson  at  Ogden  to  six  months'  im- 
prisonment and  to  pay  a  $100  fine,  for 
the  offense  of  unlawful  cohabitation, 
so-called.  He  served  his  term  of  im- 
prisonment and  returned  home,  receiv- 
ing on  his  return  the  congratulation  of 
his  friends  and  neighbors,  the  whole 
town  having  assembled  en  masse  to 
welcome  him  back  to  liberty.  In  1876 
he  attended  the  B.  Y.  College,  at  Lo- 
gan, and  in  1877  he  graduated  from  the 
normal  department  of  the  Deseret  Uni- 
versity, now  known  as  the  University 
of  Utah.  For  twenty-four  years  he 
followed  the  teaching  profession,  being 
teacher,  principal,  and  finally  county 
superintendent  of  schools  for  Cache 
county,  Utah,  for  nearly  five  years. 
Four  of  his  children  have  entered  the 
teaching  profession,  and  his  two  older 
sons   have   performed  missions  abroad. 

LEMON,     Alexander    Abraham,    a 

prominent  Elder  of  Paradise,  Cache 
county,  Utah,  was  born  March  1,  1831, 
in  Tippecanoe  county,  Indiana,  son  of 
Wm.  McClure  Lemon  and  Catharine 
Mayer.  When  about  seven  years  old 
he  removed  with  his  parents  to  Cass 
county.Indiana. where  his  father  opened 
up  a  nice  farm  near  Logansport,  in  a 
thickly  timbered  country;  afterwards 
his  father,  who  was  a  surveyor  and 
school  teacher,  laid  out  a  town  on  the 
Tippecanoe  river  called  Winnamuck, 
which  is  now  the  county  seat  of  Pulaski 


county,  Indiana,  near  which  he  opened 
up  another  farm  and  where  the  family 
lived  in  the  year  1846,  when  George 
Mayer,  a  relative,  came  to  that  part 
of  the  country  preaching  "Mormonism." 
In  order  to  learn  more  of  the  gospel, the 
father  went  to  Nauvoo  on  horseback,  a 
distance  of  250  miles,  and  while  there 
he  was  baptized.  He  then  returned  to 
Indiana,  sold  out  his  possessions, bought 
five  yoke  of  oxen  and  two  wagons  and 
started  for  the  West  by  way  of  Nau- 
voo, where  they  arrived  in  July,  1846. 
After  crossing  the  Mississippi  river,  the 
journey  was  continued  across  Iowa  to 
Winter  Quarters,  where  they  spent  the 
following  winter,  and  in  1847  they  came 
to  the  Valley,  crossing  the  plains  in 
Perregrine  Session's  company  of  fifty. 
Young-  Alexander  drove  one  team,  while 


his  father  drove  the  other,  and  his  sis- 
ter Elizabeth  drove  sixteeen  head  of 
loose  cattle.  Alexander  was  baptized 
in  City  creek,  July,  1848,  by  John  Young, 
and  confirmed  by  Jedediah  M.  Grant. 
He  was  ordained  a  Seventy  Jan.  18, 
1851,  by  Albert  P.  Rockwood.  In  Au- 
gust following  he  received  his  endow- 
ments together  with  his  mother.  His 
father  died  March  10,  1851.  Alexander 
passed  through  all  the  hard  experiences 
of  pioneer  life  in  Utah's  earlier  days, 
and  remembers  all  about  the  crickets 
and  grasshoppers  and  Indian  raids.  In 
the  winter  of  1849-50  he  participated  in 
an  exploring  expedition  sent  to  south- 
ern Utah  in  charge  of  Apostle  Parley 
P.  Pratt.  In  1856-57,  he  was  called, 
together  with  many  others,  on  a  special 


436 


LATTER-DAY    SAINT 


mission  to  Los  Vegas  springs  (now  in 
Nevada):  he  returned  the  following 
year,  when  the  temporary  settlement 
made  by  the  missionaries  at  Los  Vegas 
was  broken  up.  In  1862  he  married 
Ann  Eabry  and  removed  to  Paradise, 
Cache  county, where  he  has  resided  ever 
since.  His  wife  has  borne  him  three 
sons  and  six  daughters.  After  being 
a  member  of  the  62nd  quorum  of  Sev- 
enty for  many  years,  he  was  ordained 
a  Hie-h  Priest  in  September,  1890,  by 
Joseph  Morrell.  Locally  he  has  filled 
a  number  of  positions  in  the  Church. 
He  has  acted  as  a  Ward  teacher  for 
many  years,  and  labored  among  the 
Saints  in  the  capacity  of  a  Priest.  In 
an  early  day  he  also  served  his  people 
in  a  military  capacity,  and  as  a  minute 
man  he  assisted  to  guard  the  mountain 
passes  during  the  Johnston  army  trou- 
bles in  1857  and  1858. 

DAVIS,  George  William,  Bishop 
of  Avon  Ward  (Cache  county,  Utah), 
was  born  in  Brigham  City,  Box  Elder 
county,  July  15.  1861,  son  of  William 
Davis  and  Christine  Erikke  Forsgren. 
His  father  was  the  first  settler  and  also 
the  first  Bishop  of  Brigham  City.  George 
took  an  active  part,  while  young,  in 
the  different  Ward  organizations,  and 
was  called,  March  11,  1885,  to  be  super- 
intendent of  the  Fourth  Ward  (Brigham 
City)  Sabbath  school.  He  married  Eliza 
Watkins,  daughter  of  William  L.  and 
Mary  A.  Watkins,  Nov.  11,  1885.  In  1887 
he  was  called  on  a  mission  to  New 
Zealand  and  was  set  apart  for  the  same 
by  Apostle  Franklin  D.  Richards,  May 
31.  1887.  He  left  Salt  Lake  City  the 
same  day.  in  company  with  Elders 
Alma  Hayes.  Alonzo  L.  and  Boyd  Stew- 
art, and  arrived  in  San  Francisco,  Cal., 
June  2nd.  Here  they  were  joined  by 
Elders  Ezra  Stevenson  and  John  A. 
Sutton,  jun.,  and  all  were  passen^rers 
together  on  the  steamer  "Zealandia," 
which  arrived  at  Auckland,  New  Zea- 
land. June  23,  1887.  Elder  Davis  tvas 
appointed  to  labor  in  the  Waiapu  dis- 
trict,where  he  spent  about  nine  months, 
devoting  most  of  his  time  to  acquiring 
the  Maori  language.  In  February,  1888, 
he  was  called  to  the  Bay  of  Islands 
district,  to  labor  with  Elder  George 
Romney,  jun.  He  arrived  at  Manga- 
pai  Feb.  25,  1888,  where  he  met  Elders 
Romney  and  Elias  Johnson,  the  last 
named  being  released  to  return  home. 
He  labored     with       Elder     Romney  till 


April  19,  1889,  when  the  latter  was  re- 
leased to  return  home.  The  Bay  of  Is- 
lands district  being  divided  into  three. 
Elder  Davis  was  called  to  preside  over 
the  Whangarei  district.  He  filled  that 
position  until  he  was  released  April  8, 
1890,  to  return  home.  On  his  mission 
he  took  part  in  baptizing  138  souls  and 
blessing  56  children.  After  his  return 
to  Brigham  City  he  continued  active  in 
the  service  of  the  Church,  laboring  in 
the  Sabbath  schools  and  the  mutual 
improvement  associations.  Some  time 
after  the  return  from  his  mission,  he 
removed  to  Cache  valley.  Feb.  24.  1895, 
he  was  ordained  to  the  ofllice  of  a 
Bishop  and  appointed  to  preside  over 
the  Avon  Ward,  in  place  of  Henry  C. 
Jackson,  who  had  removed  to  Idaho. 

JACKSON,  Alma  Oades,  first  coun- 
selor to  Bishop  Geo.  W.  Davis,  of  the 
Avon  Ward  (Cache  county,  Utah),  was 
born  March  25,  1856,  son  of  Henry  C. 
Jackson  and  Ann  Oades.  He  was  bap- 
tized by  his  father- July  10,  1866,  and 
ordained  a  Deacon  when  quite  young; 
acted  as  secretary  and  teacher  of  the 


Paradise  Ward  Sunday  school,  presided 
over  the  Deacon's  quorum  and  was  or- 
dained a  Seventy  by  James  D.  Hirst 
Feb.  6,  1877.  He  also  labored  as  a 
Ward  teacher  for  many  years.  He  mar- 
ried Emma  Jane  Obray  May  10,  1877, 
and  is  the  father  of  ten  children,  of 
whom  nine  are  still  living.  June  8, 
1884,  he  was  ordained  a  High  Priest  and 
set  apart  to  act  as  second  counselor  to 


BIOGRAPHICAL.    ENCYCLOPEDIA. 


437 


Bishop  Samuel  Oldham,  of  Paradise. 
He  filled  this  position  until  July  5,  1891, 
when  the  south  part  of  Paradise  was 
organized  into  a  separate  Ward  called 
Avon.  Elder  Jackson  being  a  resident 
of  the  new  Ward,  was  accordingly  set 
apart  as  first  counselor  to  Bishop  Hen- 
ry W.  Jackson,  of  the  Avon  Ward,  and 
since  December,  1894,  he  has  acted  in  a 
similar  capacity  to  Bishop  Geo.  W.  Da- 
vis. He  is  also  principal  teacher  of 
the  theological  class  of  the  Avon  Ward 
Sunday  school. 

MAUGHAN,      William      Harrison, 

Bishop  of  Wellsville  Ward,  Cache  coun- 
ty, Utah,  from  1859  to  1900,  was  born  at 
Alston,    Cumberland,    England,    May   7, 
1834,   son  of  Peter  Maughan  and  Ruth 
Harrison.       His   mother  died  when   he 
was  in  his  sixth  year.      In  1841  he  emi- 
grated to  America  with  his  father,  who 
had  embraced  "Mormonism,"  and  after 
visiting  Kirtland,  Ohio,  they  arrived  in 
Nauvoo,  111.,  where  William  was    bap- 
tized,  in   the   Mississippi     river,     when 
about  eight  years  old.      Afterwards  he 
accompanied  his  father  to  Rock  river, 
where   coal    mines    were   being   opened. 
While  laboring  there  they  first  heard  of 
the   martyrdom  of  Joseph   and   Hyrum 
Smith.       They   then   returned    to   Nau- 
voo, where  they  remained  until  the  gen- 
eral exodus  in  1846,  when  they  went  to 
Wisconsin    to     obtain       the     necessary 
means  to  purchase  an  oufflt  for  travel- 
ing  west.       In   March,   1850,      they   left 
Nauvoo  for  the  wilderness.  Young  Wil- 
liam drove  a  four-yoke  ox  team     from 
New  Diggings,  Wisconsin,  to  Salt  Lake 
City,  where  they  arrived  Sept.  17,  1850. 
They    were      sent    by    Pres.     Brigham 
Young   to   locate   in   Tooele   Fort    (now 
Tooeel  City),  and  thus  they  were  num- 
bered among  the  pioneers  of  that  place. 
There    they    remained    till    1854,      when 
they   moved    to   E.    T.    City.       In   July, 
1856.  Pres.  Brigham  Young  called  them 
to  go  to  Cache  valley  and  explore  that 
valley   with    a   view   of   making   settle- 
ments there;  and  in  the  fall  of  1856  they 
located   the   settlement   now   known   as 
Wellsville.       This  was   the   first   settle- 
ment made  in  Cache  valley.  Here  Wil- 
liam has  residei  ever  since.       He  was 
ordained    a     Deacon     by     Bishop  John 
Rowberry  in  1851,  and  an  Elder  by  Doc- 
tor Sprague  in  June,  1854.      He  was  or- 
dained   to   the   oflSce   of   a   High   Priest 
and   Bishop   and    set    apart    to   preside 
over  the   "Wellsville   Ward   by  Apostles 


Orson  Hyde  ana  h^zra  T.  Benson  Nov. 
12,  1859.  In  1875,  he  responded  to  a  call 
to  perform  a  mission  to  Great  Britain, 
where  he  labored  successfully  in  the 
Sheffield  and  Birmingham  conferences, 
being  called  by  Pres.  Jos.  F.  Smith  to 
preside  over  the  latter  conference.which 
position  he  filled  till  July,  1876,  when  he 
was  honorably  released  to  return  home. 
After  his  return  to  Utah  he  resumed  his 
labors  as  Bishop  of  Wellsville.  Since 
the  opening  of  the  Logan  Temple,  in 
1884,  he  has  served  as  a  member  of  the 
board  of  directors  of  said  Temple.  In 
civil  affairs  Bishop  Maughan  has  taken 
an  active  part.  Thus  he  served  as  coun- 
ty selectman  for  many  years,  was  the 
first  mayor  of  Wellsville  city  (serving 
from  1866  to  1875,  being  re-elected 
every  two  years).    He  served  again  as 


mayor  from  1878  to  1882,  and  was  re- 
elected in  1896  and  1901.  He  has  also 
served  as  a  member  of  three  constitu- 
tional conventions.  In  military  life  he 
has  made  the  following  excellent  rec- 
oid:  In  1852  he  served  as  volunteer  in 
subduing  the  Goshute  Indians,  under 
Gen.  Jas.  Ferguson;  in  1877  he  was 
elected  captain  of  company  F,  of  Col. 
Frank  Cummings'  command,  Nauvoo 
Leerion.  In  1861,  or  1862,  he  was  elected 
major  under  Gen.  West's  command,  and 
when  the  Cache  county  military  dis- 
trict was  organized,  he  was  elected 
colonel  of  the  2nd  infantry,  under  Gen. 
Ezra  T.  Benson,  holding  a  colonel's 
commission  from  Gov.  Doty  for  that 
position.  Bishop  Maughan  has  always 
been    a    successful    and    thrifty   citizen. 


438 


LATTER-DAY   SAINT 


having  done  much  to  develop  the  re- 
sources of  the  country.  At  present  he 
is  extensively  engaged  in  farming  and 
stock-raising.  He  organized  the  first 
co-operative  store  in  Cache  valley  (the 
Wellsville  Co-op),  and  was  elected  its 
first  president,  a  position  which  he  still 
holds.  The  institution  has  steadily  in- 
creased its  business  and  now  represents 
a  paid-up  capital  of  $30,000.  Bishop 
Maughan  married  his  first  wife  in  1853, 
and  later  he  yielded  obedience  to  the 
principle  of  plural  marriage  by  taking 
to  wives  Mary  Lloyd,  Rachel  "Wood- 
ward and  Euphania  Nibley.  He  is  the 
father  of  53  children,  40  of  whom  are 
now  living,  namely  21  sons  and  IS 
daughters,  all  Church  members  in  good 
standing.  He  can  already  count  one 
hundred  grandchildren. 

HILfi,-  AVilliain  J.,  Bishop  of  Mount 
Sterling,  Cache  county,  Utah,  was  born 
March  12,  1851,  in  Warsaw,  Hancock 
(DUnty.  111.,  son  of  Daniel  Hill  and  Eliz- 
abeth Brice.  He  emigrated  with  his 
parents  to  Utah  in  1853  and  located  in 
Mill   Creek,    Salt   Lake   county.    In   1859 


he  removed  to  Wellsville,  Cache  county, 
where  he  was  baptized  by  Bishop  Wm. 
II.  Maughan  in  1863.  He  was  ordained 
an  Elder  in  1871;  married  Georgiana 
Ensign  Dec.  18,  1871;  was  ordained  a 
Seventy  Jan.  8,  1884,  by  John  H.  Stod- 
dard, and  chosen  Bishop  of  Mt.  Sterling 
Ward  Jan.  30,  1895.  He  was  ordained 
a  High  Priest  and  Bishop  May  5,  1895, 
by    Apostle    Moses   Thatcher.       Bishop 


Hill  is  the  father  of  eight  children, 
namely  three  sons  and  five  daughters, 
seven  of  whom  are  now  living.  By  oc- 
cupation he  is  a  farmer  and  stock- 
raiser. 

PARKINSON,  Georgo  Chandler, 
president  of  the  Oneida  Stake  of  Zion, 
is  the  son  of  Samuel  Rose  Parkinson 
and  Arabella  Ann  Chandler,  and  was 
born  July  18,  1857,  in  Kaysville,  Davis 
county,  Utah.  Removing  with  his  pa- 
lents  to  Franklin,  Idaho,  in  1860,  he  be- 
came one  of  the  first  settlers  of  that 
town  and  of  Idaho.  He  was  educated 
at  the  Brigham  Young  College,  Logan, 
Utah,  graduating  with  honor  in  the 
class  of  1880.  He  began  teaching  school 
in  Logan  in  1877,  continuing  in  that 
calling  till  1881.  when  he  was  called  on 
a  misison  to  the  Southern  States,  where 
he  remained  for  a  year,  doing  success- 
ful work.  He  then  went  to  England, 
where  he  labored  about  fifteen  months 
as  a  missionary.  He  returned  home  in 
1883, and  again  resumed  teaching.  About 
this  time  he  was  called  to  be  second 
counselor  in  the  Oneida  Stake  presi- 
dency, being  ordained  a  High  Priest 
and  set  apart  to  this  office  by  Pres. 
Geo.  Q.  Cannon.  He  moved  to  Oxford 
in  July,  1883,  where  he  resumed  teach- 
ing and  was  elected  superintendent  of 
schools  in  Oneida  county.  While  at 
Oxford,  he  also  acted  as  superintendent 
nf  the  co-operative  store.  During  that 
time  a  very  unpleasant  and  unjust  oc- 
currence came  into  his  life.  An  al- 
leged polygamist  hid  in  the  cellar  of 
his  store,  without  his  knowledge,  but 
the  officer  arrested  Elder  Parkinson  for 
concealing  a  criminal.  He  was  tried, 
James  H.  Hawley  defending  him,  but 
the  jury  disagreed  on  the  verdict.  A 
new  trial  was  then  set  for  six  months 
later,  and  Mr.  Hawley,  who  had  then 
become  prosecuting  attorney,  succeeded 
in  getting  Elder  Parkinson  convicted 
and  sentenced  to  one  year's  imprison- 
ment in  the  State  prison  and  to  pay  a 
fine  of  three  hundred  dollars.  Elder 
Parkinson  paid  his  fine  and  served 
eleven  months  in  the  penitentiary,  be- 
ing given  one  month  of  his  time  for 
good  behavior.  He  had  no  knowledge 
of  the  man  who  had  concealed  himself 
in  the  cellar,  but  the  jury  were  all  anti- 
Mormon,  and  the  officer  who  subpoe- 
naed the  jury  was  heard  to  remark:  "I 
have  secured  a  jury  that  would  con- 
vict Jesus  Christ."  Such  was  the  jus- 
tice he  received  in  the  name  of  the  law! 


BIOGKAPHICAL    ENCYCLOPEDIA. 


439 


On  his  release  from  prison  Bro.  Parkin- 
son removed  to  Franklin  and  engaged 
in  the  produce  business.  He  also  be- 
came interested  in  the  sheep  and  cat- 
tle Industry.  Aug.  28,  1887,  he  was 
chosen  president  of  the  Oneida  Stake  of 
Zlon,  being  set  apart  to  this  position 
under  the  hands  of  Apostle  Moses  That- 
cher. His  counselors  were  Solomon 
H.  Hale  and  Matthias  F.  Cowley.  Presi- 
dent Parkinson  has  served  in  that  po- 
sition with  great  diligence  and  efficien- 
cy and  is  at  the  present  time  beloved 
by  all  the  Saints.  He  is  also  a  thrifty 
and  energetic  business  man.  While  in 
Franklin,  President  Parkinson,  in  con- 
nection with  others,  purchased  all  the 
stores  in  Franklin  and  consolidated  the 
business    under     the       name     of    "The 


OneH-"  Mercantile  Union,"  with  a  cap- 
ital stock  of  $50,000.  Bro.  Parkinson 
became  a  stockholder  and  director  in 
that  concern,  and  also  In  the  Idaho 
Milllns'.  Grain  &  Power  company.  He 
was  also  a  stockholder  in  and  the  man- 
ager of  the  W.  C  I^rkinson  Mercantile 
company,  of  Preston.  He  is  the  man- 
ager of  the  Studebaker  Brothers  Man- 
ufacturing company  of  Preston,  and  is 
also  much  interested  in  the  sheep  and 
cattle  business.  He  is  a  man  of  ex- 
cellent executive  force,  of  sound  judg- 
ment, and  indefatigable  energy,  and 
carries  forward  to  successful  comple- 
tion whatever  he  undertakes.  In  1894 
he  was  elected  to  the  State  senate  of 
Idaho,  representing  with  credit  a  dis- 
trict of  five  counties  which  contain  one- 


fourth  of  the  population  of  the  State. 
In  1895  he  was  appointed,  by  Gov.  Mc- 
(.'onnnell,  a  member  of  the  board  of  re- 
gents of  the  State  University;  he  was 
reappointed  in  1896.  He  has  always 
been  a  warm  friend  of  education.  Un- 
der his  superintendency  the  magnificent 
Oneida  Stake  Academy,  at  Preston,  was 
erected  at  a  cost  of  $50,000.  He  is  now 
president  of  the  Oneida  Stake  board  of 
education.  In  1896  he  was  one  of  the 
presidential  electors  on  the  Republican 
ticket.  President  Parkinson  married 
Lucy  M.  Doney  of  Franklin,  Idaho,  in 
1881.  The  issue  of  this  union  is  eight 
children,  three  sons  and  five  daughters. 
He  owns  one  of  the  most  beautiful  resi- 
dences in  the  State  of  Idaho,  located  in 
Preston,  where  he  has  resided  since 
1894. 

GKDDES,  Joseph  Stewart,  sec- 
ond counselor  to  President  Geo.  C.  Par- 
,  kinson  of  the  Oneida  Stake  of  Zlon,  is 
the  son  of  William  Geddes  and  Eliza- 
beth Stewart,  and  was  born  Dec.  18, 
1857,  in  Glasgow,  Scotland.  His  pa- 
rents embraced  the  gospel  and  emigrat- 
ed to  Utah  in  an  early  day.  After 
living  in  Salt  Lake  City  for  some  time, 
they  moved  north,  together  with  a 
small  company  of  Saints,  and  located 
at  a  place  which  was  afterwards  called 
Plain  City,  which  is  situated  about  ten 
miles  northwest  of  Ogden,  Weber  coun- 
ty. The  little  company  of  pioneers, 
consisting  of  about  twenty  souls,  at 
once  began  the  constructing  and  build- 
ing of  a  canal,  nine  miles  in  length, 
which  was  a  very  great  undertaking  for 
such  a  small  company.  And  besides,  the 
settlers  had  not  sufficient  teams  and 
farming  implements.  Those  who  had 
no  tools  would  often  work  at  night, 
thus  keeping  the  spade  and  shovel  al- 
most in  constant  use.  Neither  was 
there  much  time  taken  in  the  prepara- 
tion of  food,  as  it  consisted  chiefly  of 
bread  and  water.  Thus  they  toiled  on 
until  they  succeeded  in  bringing  out  a 
small  stream  of  water,  which  has  since 
been  increased  from  year  to  year  until 
Plain  City  has  been  converted  into  a 
veritable  garden  of  Eden,  as  was  ob- 
served on  a  certain  occasion  when  it 
was  visited  by  the  First  Presidency  in 
the  days  of  Pres.  John  Taylor.  Elder 
Geddes  writes:  "Father's  attention  was 
turned  to  agricultural  pursuits,  stock 
and  sheep  raising.  And,  of  course,  the 
boys  learned   to  plow,   to  sow,   to   reap 


440 


LATTER-DAY    SAINT 


and  to  mow,  as  we  grew  to  manhood. 
A  number  of  the  hoys,  and  some  of  the 
firls,  followed  school  teaching  for  a 
livelihood.  While  engag'ed  at  teach- 
ing school  at  Franklin,  Idaho,  I  be- 
came acquainted  with  a  Miss  Dora,  eld- 
est daughter  of  Annimus  and  Susan 
Nelley,  who  afterwards  became  my 
wife.  We  were  married  Dec.  29,  1882, 
in  the  Endowment  House,  Salt  Lake 
City.  My  chief  occupation  of  more  re- 
cent years  has  been  that  of  contracting 
and  buildine.  I  did  some  quarry  and 
stone  cutting  work  for  the  Salt  Lake 
Temple  in  connection  with  my  brother, 
Wm.  S.,  who  spent  a  number  of  years 
thus  employed.  Father  also  spent  a 
year  or  two  quarrying  foundation  rock 
for  said  Temple.  I  was  baptized  when 
about  eight  years  old.   was  ordained  to 


the  lesser  Priesthood  at  an  early  age 
and  was  set  apart  to  preside  over  the 
Teachers'  <iuorum  under  the  hands  of 
Hishop  Lewis  W.  Shurtliff;  later  I 
was  ordained  an  Elder,  and  I  was  or- 
dained a  Seventy  Jan.  27,  1884,  by  John 
Ellis.  I  acted  as  clerk  for  the  87th 
quorum  of  Seventy  until  Jan.  10,  1892. 
when  I  was  set  apart  by  Brigham  H. 
Uobf'rts  to  fill  a  vacancy  in  the  council 
of  the  S7th  quoium,  caused  by  the  de- 
mise of  my  brother  Wm.  S.,  who  died 
Aug.  2.3,  1891,  in  the  State  of  Oregon 
while  in  exile.  Nov.  10,  1894,  I  bade  my 
wife  and  family  farewell  and  started 
for  Chattanooga,  Tenn.,  to  fill  a  mis- 
sion to  the  Southern  States.  I  was  as- 
signed to  labor  in  the  South  Alabama 
conference,      which       then       comprised 


northwestern  Florida  and  southern 
Alabama.  After  laboring  for  about 
two  months  in  the  city  of  Pensacola, 
Florida,  I  received  a  letter  from  Pres. 
Elias  S.  Kimball,  calling  me  to  the 
presidency  of  the  South  Alabama  con- 
ference. While  upon  this  mission  I 
enjoyed  myself  exceedingly  well.  I  had 
the  pleasure  of  baptizing  and  assisting 
in  baptizing  a  great  many  of  the  honest 
in  heart  of  the  sunny  South,  and  wit- 
nessed the  growth  of  the  work  and  the 
spread  of  truth  with  exceeding  great 
joy.  Obtaining  a  leave  of  absence,  I 
returned  home  in  June,  1895.  to  comfort 
mv  wife  and  mourn  the  loss  of  our 
daughter  Iva,  a  sweet  little  girl  of  five 
years,  whom  the  Lord  had  taken  from 
us.  We  have  since  buried  another 
little  daughter,  Hazel,  who  was  born 
while  I  was  absent  on  my  mission.  We 
have  laid  to  rest  four  children  altogeth- 
er. I  remained  at  home  a  short  time 
with  my  family,  after  which  I  returned 
with  a  company  of  Elders  to  resume 
my  work  in  the  vineyard  of  the  Lord, 
where  I  continued  to  labor  with  the  El- 
ders and  Saints  until  Jan.  20,  1897,  when 
I  was  released  to  return  home.  As  a 
token  of  respect  and  esteem  the  Elders 
presented  me  with  a  17-jeweled  gold- 
filled  watch  and  my  railroad  fare  home. 
After  my  return  I  labored  as  a  home 
missionary  in  the  Weber  Stake  of  Zion. 
Before  going  on  my  mission  my  experi- 
ence was  varied  in  the  Ward  in  which 
I  resided.  I  served  two  terms  as  con- 
stable and  one  as  justice  of  the  peace. 
A  portion  of  my  time,  while  young, was 
given  to  the  study  of  music,  and  I  was 
a  lover  of  the  drama,  having  belonged 
to  and  managed  a  musical  and  dram- 
atical association  for  a  number  of 
yeais.  I  have  also  conducted  Sunday 
schools  and  Ward  choirs.  My  father 
obeyed  the  grospeL  at  fourteen  years  of 
age  and  was  turned  from  his  father's 
door  for  so  doing.  He  found  employ- 
ment in  the  coal  mines,  came  back 
home  and  was  taken  down  with  chol- 
era. When  given  up  to  die  by  doctors 
he  was  instantly  healed  through  the 
administration  of  "Mormon"  Elders. 
He  went  out  to  preach  at  sixteen  years 
of  age,  and  since  his  first  arrival  in 
Utah  he  has  made  a  complete  circle  of 
the  earth's  surface,  preaching  the  gos- 
pel. He  served  one  term  in  the  Utah 
penitentiary  for  unlawful  cohabitation, 
was  a  president  of  the  18th  quorum  and 
later  senior  president  of  the  87th  quo- 


BIOGRAPHICAL,    ENCYCLOPEDIA. 


441 


rum  of  Seventy.  My  mother,  not  being 
able  to  endure  the  hardships  of  early 
jjioneer  life,  died  at  the  age  of  thirty- 
six,  leaving  five  small  children,  who  re- 
ceived every  attention  from  Aunt  Mar- 
tha, mother's  sister,  who  had  also  be- 
come father's  wife.  Though  but  ten 
years  of  age,  when  mother  died,  many 
of  her  teachings  have  never  been  for- 
gotten. I  am  forty-three  years  of  age, 
and  the  indelible  impress  of  mother's 
good  counsel  has  thus  far  caused  me  to 
lefrain  from  taking  the  name  of  Deity 
in  vain,  and  from  partaking  in  any  de- 
gree of  alcohol  stimulants,  including  to- 
bacco in  all  its  forms.  My  home  is 
now  at  Preston,  Idaho.  Shortly  after 
my  arrival  here,  I  was  set  apart  as  one 
of  the  presidents  of  the  18th  quorum  of 
Seventy.  I  labored  as  a  teacher  in  the 
theological  department  of  the  Ward 
Sabbath  school  and  also  in  the  mission- 
ary department  of  I'eligion  class  work. 
As  a  member  of  the  Stake  choir  I  as- 
sisted in  singing.  I  was  ordained  a 
High  Priest  and  set  apart  as  second 
counselor  to  Pres.  George  C.  Parkinson, 
of  the  Oneida  Stake  of  Zion.  July  25, 
1898.  by  Apostle  Matthias  F.  Cowley. 

LiAKSEX,  John,  Bishop  of  Preston 
Ward.  Oneida  county,  Idaho,  was  born 
May  1,  184,5,  in  Guddomlund,  Aalborg 
amt.  Denmark,  and  is  the  son  of  An- 
di-ew  Larsen  and  Mary  Nissen.  To- 
gether with  his  parents  he  accepted  the 
gospel,  and  was  baptized  April  14,  1861, 
by  John  P.  Johnson.  He  emigrated  to 
Utah  with  his  parents  in  1861,  crossing 
the  plains  with  ox-teams.  John  was 
but  a  lad  of  sixteen  years  and  had 
never  had  any  experience  in  driving 
oxen:  yet  he  drove  foyr  yoke  of  oxen 
across  the  plains,  walking  himself  all 
the  way.  The  family  arrived  in  Salt 
Lake  City  in  September,  1861.  Soon  af- 
ter his  arrival  he  moved  to  Cache  val- 
ley with  his  father's  family  and  located 
in  Logan  Nov.  25.  1866.  He  married 
Annie  Jensen,  who  had  arrived  from 
Sweden  in  1862.  In  August.  1874,  he 
left  home  to  perform  a  three  months' 
mission  In  southern  Utah,  to  work  on 
the  St.  George  Temple.  In  April,  1877. 
he  was  called  to  go  on  a  mission  to  the 
Xorthej-n  States.  He  was  appointed  to 
labor  in  Minnesota,  where  he  was  suc- 
cessful in  making  many  friends  for  the 
cause  of  truth.  He  returned  home  in 
January  of  the  following  year.  Jan. 
13.  18S4,  he  was  ordained  to  the  ofTice  of 


a  High  Priest  by  Samuel  Roskelley.  He 
was  called  to  Preston,  Idaho,  July  27, 
1884,  where  he  acted  as  first  counselor 
to  Bishop  Wm.  C.  Parkinson  for  four- 
teen years.  When  Bro.  Parkinson  was 
appointed  to  preside  over  the  Pocatello 
Stake  of  Zion,  John  Larson  was  called 
to  be  Bishop  of  the  Preston  Ward,  and 
was  ordained  and  set  apart  to  that 
office  by  Apostel  Matthias  F.  Cowley, 
Oct.  2,  1898,  which  position  he  holds  at 
the  present  time.       His  family  consists 


of  ten  children,  six  of  whom  are  living. 
They  are  John  Andrew  (who  has  per- 
formed a  mision  in  Sweden),  Nephi 
(who  is  in  England  on  a  mission),  Wil- 
lard  (who  has  returned  from  a  mission 
to  the  Northwestern  States),  Alma,  Ma- 
rinda  and  Blanche.  Bishop  Larsen 
is  a  successful  business  man,  and  gives 
(lOd  the  credit  for  the  blessings  he  en- 
joys. 

JOHNSON',  Jaiiie.s,  second  counselor 
to  Bishop  John  Larson,  of  Preston, 
Oneida  county.  Idaho,  from  1898  to  1900. 
is  the  son  of  James  Johnson  and  Mary 
Nielsen,  and  was  born  Nov.  20,  1859. 
at  Brigham  City,  Utah.  He  was  bap- 
tized at  the  age  of  nine  years,  and  re- 
moved to  Hyde  Park, Cache  county. with 
his  parents  in  1871.  James  labored  in 
the  diffei-ent  grades  of  the  Aaronic 
Priesthood  and  was  ordained  an  Elder 
in  1880.  when  he  also  married  Miss  Har- 
riet E.  Lamb.  He  removed  to  Preston. 
Idaho,  in  June,  1884,  and  was  an  im- 
portant factor  in  the  growth  and  de- 
velopment of  that  thrifty  town,  both  as 
to  its  temporal  affairs  as  well  as  in  its 


442 


LATTER-DAY    SAINT 


fctlesiastical  goveinment.  Brother 
Johnson  is  the  father  of  ten  rhildren, 
eight  of  whom  are  living.  In  civil  life  he 
is  a  successful  business  man.  For  a 
number  of  years,  he.  together  with  his 
brothers  and  brothers-in-law,  conduot- 
f<l   a   farming  and   lumbering  business. 


Later,  he  went  into  merchandising.  Oct. 
2,  1898,  he  was  ordained  a  High  Priest 
and  set  apart  as  second  counselor  to 
Bishop  John  Larsen,  of  the  Preston 
Ward,  which  position  he  honorably 
filled  to  the  satisfaction  of  all  con- 
cerned. He  left  Salt  Lake  City,  Oct. 
9.  1900,  for  a  mission  to  Scandinavia.  On 
his  arrival  in  Copenhagen,  he  was  ap- 
I'Ointed  to  labor  in  Denmark,  where  he 
is  still  engaged  in  missionary  work.  In 
all  his  ecclesiastical  labors.  Elder  John- 
son has  enjoyed  the  full  confidence  of 
his  brethren  and  has  worked  whole- 
heartedly for  the  good  of  the  cause  of 
of  Christ  upon  the  earth. 

GKDDKS,  Hugh  Stewart,  second 
counselor  to  Bishop  John  Larson,  of 
Preston.  Oneida  county,  Idaho,  is  the 
son  of  William  Geddes  and  Martha 
Stewart,  and  was  born  July  25.  1859,  in 
Plain  City.  Weber  county,  Utah.  He 
was  baptized  when  about  eight  years 
old.  At  14  he  was  ordained  a  Teacher, 
and  labored  in  that  capacity  till  he  was 
about  twenty  years  of  age,  when  he 
was  ordained  to  the  office  of  a  Seventy. 
Julv  12,  1883,  he  married  Martine  Peter- 
son, a  daughter  of  Hans  Peterson  and 
Annie  M.  Hansen.  In  1884  he  moved 
from  Plain  City,  Utah,  to  Preston, 
Oneida  county,  Idaho.  At  this  time 
there   were   but   a   few   families  at  that 


place,  and  Elder  Geddes  writes  as  fol- 
lows: "I  worked  on  the  canal  the  first 
two  seasons,  with  no  crop  at  all,  and 
ip  the  fall  I  would  go  off  to  earn  a  lit- 
tle wheat  and  means,  upon  which  to 
live  during  the  winter.  In  the  midst 
of  the  hardships  and  trials  incident  to 
making  a  home  in  a  new  country,  a  call 
came  from  the  Prophet  of  God,  for  me 
to  go  on  a  mission  to  far-off  New  Zea- 
land. I  answered  that  I  was  ready  to 
go,  although  I  did  not  know  where  the 
means  were  to  come  from.  I  sold  my 
team,  harness  and  wagon  and  left  my 
wife  with  two  little  children,  with  but 
little  to  subsist  upon.  I  left  for  New 
Zealand  Oct.  15,  1888  and  arrived  there 
safely.  I  labored  with  good  success 
among  the  Maoris  until  the  spring  of 
1891,  when  I  was  released  to  return 
home.  About  two  months  after  my  re- 
turn home,  I  was  called  to  labor  as 
superintendent  of  the  Preston  Sunday 
school;  and  when  the  116th  quorum  of 
Seventy  was  organized,  I  was  chosen 
one  of  its  presidents.  I  labored  in 
these  two  callings  till  the  spring  of  1901, 
when  I  was  called  to  act  as  second 
counselor  to  Bishop  John  Larson  of 
Preston  Ward.  I  was  ordained  a 
High  Priest  and  set  apart  for  that  po- 


sition, which  I  still  hold.  I  have  al- 
ways been  interested  in  the  public  af- 
fairs of  Preston.  We  have  two  canals, 
and  for  a  number  of  years  I  served  as 
a  director  and  secretary  of  both  com- 
panies. When  Preston  was  incorporated 
as  a  town  I  was  elected  one  of  its 
trustees." 


BIOGRAPHICAL    ENCYCLOPEDIA. 


443 


RASMUSSEX,  Rasmus,  jun.,  second 
Bishop  of  Mink  Creek,  Oneida  county, 
Idaho,  is  the  son  of  Bishop  Rasmus 
Rasmusen.and  was  born  Sept.  29,  1872, in 
Brigham  City,  Box  Elder  county,  Utah. 
At  the  age  of  three  years,  he  removed 
with  his  parents  to  Mink  Creek,  where 
he  was  baptized  and  confirmed  by  his 
father  Sept.  29  1880,  and  later  ordained 
successively  a  Deacon,  Teacher  and 
Priest.  Jan.  26,  1892,  he  was  ordained 
an  Elder  by  Thos.  H.  Wilde,  and  three 
days  later  (Jan.  29th)  he  married  Lizzie 
Andreasen  in  the  Logan  Temple.  Hav- 
ing received  a  call  from  the  authorities 
of  the  Church  to  fill  a  mission  to  the 
Northern  States,  he  left  his  home,  wife 
and  four  children,  Dec.  6,  1898,  and 
went   to   Salt  Lake   City,   where   he  re- 


^,af& 


ceived  his  blessings  as  a  missionary 
and  was  ordained  a  Seventy  by  Chris- 
tian D.  Fjeldsted.  On  his  arrival  at 
the  mission  headquarters  in  Chicago, he 
was  appointed  to  labor  in  southern  In- 
diana, where  good  success  attended  his 
efforts  until  March  19,  1900,  when  he 
was  summoned  home  by  telegraph,  his 
wife  being  at  the  point  of  death.  He 
arrived  home  four  days  later  (March 
23rd)  and  found  his  wife  a  corpse.  May 
15,  1900,  he  was  ordained  a  High  Priest 
and  Bishop,  and  set  apart  to  preside 
over  the  Mink  Creek  Ward,  by  Apostle 
George  Teasdale.  In  September  fol- 
lowing he  married  Marie  M.  Hansen  in 
the  Logan  Temple. 

KELLER,    James    Morgan,     one  of 

the  first  settlers  of  Mink  Creek,  Oneida 


county,  Idaho,  was  born  April  6,  1827, 
on  the  island  of  Bornholm,  Denmark. 
He  accepted  the  gospel  and  was  bap- 
tized in  1852,  and  emigrated  to  Utah  in 
1853,  locating  in  Brigham  City,  Box  El- 
der county.  Later,  he  was  called  to 
settle    in    Mantua,    Box    Elder    county. 


where  he  resided  for  a  number  of  years, 
passing  through  many  hardships  and 
flerhting  Indians.  His  crops  were  also 
destroyed  by  grasshoppers  and  other 
insects  several  times.  Later,  about 
1863,  he  went  to  Mink*  Creek,  Idaho,  on 
an  exploring  trip,  and,  finding  it  a  de- 
sirable place  to  live  in,  he  settled  there 
with  one  of  his  families,  and  he  has  re- 
sidede  there  ever  since.  When  Elder 
Keller  first  settled  in  Mink  Creek,  the 
snov/  would  some  times  fall  to  the  depth 
of  six  feet.  The  nearest  settlement  was 
Franklin,  which  was  about  twenty 
miles  distant.  Bro.  Keller  has  been  a 
pioneer  in  the  fullest  sense  of  the  word 
and  has  assisted  in  transforming  the 
wilderness  into  a  garden  spot.  He  has 
raised  a  large  family,  having  had  five 
wives,  and  is  the  father  of  forty-two 
children.  At  the  present  time  he  has 
102  grandchildren.  Elder  Keller,  who  is 
now  in  his  74th  year,  is  still  hale  and 
hearty. 

HANSEN,        Hans       Christian,         a 

prominent  Elder  and  president  of  the 
Scandinavian  meetings  in  Mink  Creek, 
Idaho,  was  born  in  Lunde,  Odense  amt, 
Fyen,  Denmark,  and  is  the  son  of  Hans 
Hansen  and  Abelone  Christensen. 
When  he  first  heard  a  "Mormon"  Elder 


444 


LATTER-DAY    SAINT 


preach,  he  was  deeply  Impressed  with 
the  truths  presented.  He  was  baptized 
June  10.  1879,  by  Elder  Geo.  Frandsen, 
and  emigrated  to  Utah  the  same  year. 
He  located  In  Bear  River  City,  Box 
Elder  county,  where  he  resided  till  1882, 
when  he  moved  to  Cache  county,  and 
lived  there  till  1885,  when  he  changed 
his  residence  to  Mink  Creeek,  Idaho,  his 
present  home.  In  1891  he  was  called 
to  go  on  a  mission  to  Scandinavia.  He 
was  ordained  a  Seventy  and  set  apart 
for  the  mission  by  Christian  D.  FJeld- 
sted,  Aug.  28,  1891,  and  left  the  same 
dav  for  Denmark.  He  performed  suc- 
cessful work  in  the  Odense  and  Esbjerg 
branche.^,  in  the  Aarhus  conference,and 
was  also  sent  into  northern  Germany, 
t'^  labor  in  Haderslev,  Schleswig,  but 
he  was  banished  from  that  province  by 
the  government,  and  consequently  re- 
turned   to    Denmark.       While   on      this 


mission  Bro.  Hansen  labored  much 
among  his  own  relatives  and  those  of 
his  wife.  He  also  gathered  consider- 
able genealogy.  After  his  return  home 
he  was  called  to  labor  as  a  home  mis- 
sionary in  the  Oneida  Stake  of  Zion, 
which  duty  he  diligently  performed  for 
several  years.  He  presided  over  the 
Y.  M.  M.  I.  A.  in  Mink  Creek,  and  act- 
ed faithfully  as  a  Ward  teacher  for 
many  years.  As  president  of  the  Scan- 
dinavian meetings  in  Mink  Creeek  he 
has  been  very  zealous  in  his  labors,  and 
he  is  throughout  an  energetic  and  re- 
spected citizen  of  the  community,which 
he  has  served  as  supervisor  of  roads 
for  several  years,  and  as  a  school  trus- 


tee foi-  three  successive  terms.  He  Is 
yet  serving  in  the  latter  capacity,  and 
is  also  in  the  employe  of  the  govern- 
ment, having  charge  of  the  transporta- 
tion of  the  U.  S.  mail  from  Mink  Creek 
to  Preston.  Brother  Hansen  is  a  pros- 
perous farmer,  horticulturist  and  stock- 
raiser.  In  1879  he  married  Gjertrud 
Marie  Hansen,  the  only  daughter  of 
Hans  Knudsen,  a  wealthy  farmer  of 
the  island  of  Fyen,  Denmark.  She  left 
her  comfortable  home  for  the  gospel's 
sake,  sacrificing  the  prospects  of  a 
bright  future  from  a  wordly  standplnt, 
and  cast  her  lot  with  her  husband 
among  the  "Mormons"  in  the  new 
world.  The  issue  of  their  union  is  nine 
children,  seven  of  whom  are  now  liv- 
ing. 

CLARK,  John  H.,  Bishop  of  Wes- 
ton, Oneida  county,  Idaho,  was  born 
in  Lambeth,  Surrey,  London,  England, 
April  9,  1831.  He  was  baptized  in  the 
fall  of  1850  by  Elder  James  H.  Hart, 
and  emigrated  to  America  in  1854, cross- 
ing the  ocean  in  the  sailing  vessel 
"Germanicus."  He  landed  in  St.  Louis. 
Mo.,  where  he  remained  till  the  spring 
of  1855,  when  he  started  across  the 
plains,  as  a  teamster  in  Richard  Bal- 
lantyne's  company,  arriving  in  Salt 
Lake  City  in  October  of  that  year.  Bro. 
Clark  located  in  North  Ogden.  While 
there,  he  was  ordained  a  Seventy  in  the 
53rd  quorum.  He  took  an  active  part 
in  the  Echo  canyon  campaign,  serving 
with  the  Weber  county  militia.  During 
the  "move,"  in  1858,  he  went  south,  re- 
maining there  till  the  spring  following, 
when  he  moved  to  Cache  valley,  and 
located  in  Providence.  Later  he  went 
to  Bear  Lake  valley,  Idaho,  where  he 
settled  in  Ovid;  but  not  being  success- 
ful in  following  farming  there  he  went 
to  what  is  now  known  as  Laketown. 
After  spending  One  summer  there,  ne 
was  compelled  to  leave  on  account  of 
unfriendly  Indians,  thus  losing  his 
whole  summer's  work.  In  1867  he  moved 
to  Weston.  Idaho,  where  he  has  resided 
ever  sine*.  Elder  Clark  acted  as  a 
Teacher  till  Oct.  25,  1885,  when  the  88th 
quorum  of  Seventy  was  organized,  and 
he  was  set  apart  as  senior  president  of 
that  quorum  by  Seymour  B.  Young.  He 
held  that  position  till  Sept.  21,  1886, 
when  he  was  ordained  a  High  Priest 
and  set  apart  as  Bishop  of  the  Weston 
Ward  by  Apostle  Francis  M.  Lyman. 
This   position    he   is     at   present   filling. 


BIOGRAPHICAL.    ENCYCLOPEDIA. 


445 


From  August,  1889,  till  the  fall  of  1891, 
he  perfomed  missionary  work  in  Eng- 
land, laboring  in  the  London  confer- 
ence. 

GEORGESON  (Jorgensen).  Niels,  a 

Patriarch  in  the  Oneida  Stake  of  Zion, 
was  born  Jan.  17,  1834,  at  Hosterkjob, 
Birkerod  parish,  Frederiksborg  amt, 
Denmark.  He  was  the  youngest  of  all 
his  father's  children,  21  in  number,  and 
the  only  one  who  has  accepted  the  gos- 
pel. He  was  baptized  in  April,  1853, 
and  late  in  th&t  year  he  started  for 
Zion,  arriving  in  Salt  Lake  City  in  Oc- 
tober, 1854.  He  settled  in  Pleasant 
Grove,  Utah  county.  In  1856  he  was 
ordained  a  Teacher,  and  later  an  Elder. 
He  was  ordained  a  Seventy  May  25, 
1857.  and  became  a  member  of  the  52nd 
quorum.       He     removed     to   Salt  Lake 


City  and  worked  at  Pres.  Brigham 
Young's  saw  mill  in  City  creek  canyon. 
July  24.  1863,  he  married  Johanna  M. 
Kofoed,  and  in  the  summer  of  1864  he 
moved  to  Oxford,  Idaho,  where  he  re- 
mained till  1866,  when  he  located  at 
Weston,  Idaho,  where  he  at  present  re- 
sides. In  the  spring  of  1867  he  was 
chosen  by  Bishop  Peter  Maughan  to 
act  as  counselor  to  John  Maughan,  act- 
ing Bishop  of  Weston.  When  the 
Wards  and  Stakes  were  reorganized  he 
was  chosen  as  first  counselor  to  Bishop 
A.  A.  Allen  of  Weston  Ward  and  was 
on  that  occasion  ordained  a  High 
Priest.        At    the    organization    of     the 


Oneida  Stake  in  June,  1884,  he  was 
called  to  be  a  member  of  the  High 
Council  in  that  Stake,  a  position  which 
he  still  occupies.  April  5,  1895,  he  left 
Salt  Lake  City  for  a  mission  to  Scandi- 
navia, where  he  labored  till  June,  1887, 
when  he  was  honorably  released  and 
returned  home.  In  the  fall  of  that 
year,  he  was  arrested  and  tried  for  un- 
lawful cohabitation;  but  for  want  of 
evidence  he  was  acquitted.  Bro.  George- 
son  was  ordained  to  the  office  of  a 
Patriarch  by  Moses  Thatcher  April  25, 
1892,  and  is  at  present  performing  the 
duties  of  that  high  and  responsible 
calling. 

MAUGHAN,  John,  acting  Bishop  of 
Weston,  Oneida  county,  Idaho,  from 
1867  to  1875, is  the  son  of  Peter  Maughan 
and  Ruth  Harrison,  and  was  born  Oct. 
8,  1830,  in  Alston,  Cumberland,  Eng- 
land. In  March,  1841,  his  mother  died, 
leaving  six  small  children,  John  being 
the  eldest.  He  left  England  in  the 
spring  of  1841  for  America  on  board 
the  ship  "Rochester."  Brigham  Young 
Heber  C.  Kimball  and  others  of  the 
Twelve  returned  to  America  on  the 
same  vessel.  From  New  York  John 
went  to  Kirtland,  Ohio,  where  he  re- 
mained during  the  summer,  and  then 
continued  the  journey  to  Nauvoo,  III., 
via  Chicago.  He  was  baptized  in  the 
Mississippi  river  by  John  Sanders  in 
1842,  and  remained  in*  Nauvoo  till  1846, 
being  a  resident  of  that  city  when  the 
martyrdpip  of  Joseph  and  Hyrum 
Smith  took  place.  Bro.  Maughan  was 
personally  acquainted  with  them  both. 
After  spending  one  year  digging  coal 
on  Rock  river  for  the  Church,  he  went 
to  Wisconsin  in  1846,  and  worked  in 
the  lead  mines  there  for  four  years. 
In  1850  he  started  for  Salt  Lake  City 
and  arrived  there  Sent.  15,  1850.  To- 
gether with  his  father,  he  located  in 
Tooele  county.  In  1853  he  married 
Sarah  Marie  Davennort,  who  has 
borne  him  seven  sons  and  six  daugh- 
ters. Of  these  five  sons  and  six  daugh- 
ters are  living.  He  was  an  early  set- 
tler in  E.  T.  City.  Tooele  county.  Utah, 
and  in  1856  he  was  sent  with  others  to 
ooen  up  Cache  valley  for  settlement, 
locating  at  what  is  now  called  Wells- 
ville.  In  September,  1863,  he  was 
sent  to  Bear  Lake  county,  Idaho.  Af- 
ter wintering  at  Paris,  he  went  to  the 
east  side  of  Bear  river  in  1S64 
and  succeeded  in  raising  a  good  crop  at 


446 


LATTER-DAY    SAINT 


Montpelier.  In  the  fall  of  that  year 
he  was  called  back  to  Cache  valley, 
where  he  wintered  at  Richmond.  To- 
gether with  eight  others,  he  went  to 
make  a  settlement  at  Weston,  Idaho, 
in  1865.  Christopher  Funk  was  Bishop 
of  the  company,  which  was  successful 
in  raising  one  crop.  The  Indians  then 
came  and  drove  them  away,  but  in 
May.  1867,  Bro.  Maughan,  together 
with  others,  returned  to  Weston.  Bro. 
Maughan  was  then  called  to  be  Bishop, 
as  Bro.  Funk  did  not  return.  After 
several  years  of  hard  pioneer  work,  in- 
cluding the  building  of  bridges,  digging 
ditches,  fighting  grasshoppers  and 
crickets,  etc.,  the  settlers  succeeded  in 
founding  a  flourishing  village.  In  1872 
Bro.    Maughan    was    ordained    a    High 


Priest  by  Jefferson  Hunt  and  John 
Boise,  and  in  December,  1875,  he  and 
others  were  advised  to  go  south  for  a 
short  time.  Pres.  Brigham  Young  called 
Elder  Maughan  to  accompany  Bro. 
Lorenzo  H.  Hatch  and  labor  among 
the  Zuni  Indians.  He  labored  among 
them  one  year  and  then  returned  to 
Weston,  where  he  still  resides  and  is 
the  present  postmaster  of  the  town. 
Elder  Maughan,  though  over  seventy- 
one  years  old,  is  still  vigorous  both  in 
mind  and  body. 


called  into  the  local  ministry;  ordained 
a  Priest  in  February,  1874,  and  an  El- 
der May  31,  1874;  labored  as  a  mission- 
ary in  the  Skone  conference  about 
three  years,  and  emigrated  to  Utah, 
in  1877.       After     residing  in  that  State 


five  years,  he  changed  his  residence  to 
Weston,  Idaho,  iii  October,  1882,  where 
he  still  resides.  He  was  ordained  a 
Seventy,  Oct.  5,  1885.  In  March,  1886. 
he  was  arrested  by  three  U.  S.  deputy 
marshals  on  the  charge  of  having  re- 
sisted the  officers  in  November,  1885, 
when  they  raided  Weston  in  search  of 
polygamists;  after  a  hearing  in  court 
he  was  released  on  paying  a  fine  of 
$75.00.  Elder  Sandberg  filled  a  mission 
to  Sweden  in  1897-99,  laboring  first  as 
a  traveling  Elder  in  the  Skone  confer- 
ence and  later  as  president  of  the 
Stockholm  conference.  Returning  home 
he  had  charge  of  a  company  of  emi- 
grating Saints.  He  was  set  apart  as 
a  president  in  the  88th  quorum  of 
Seventy,  March  22,  1900.  Since  re- 
turning from  his  mission  to  Scan- 
dinavia, he  has  been  actively  engaged 
in  Sunday  school  work,  and  in  a  civil 
capacity  he  has  acted  as  justice  of  the 
peace  in  Weston  precinct.  He  is  also 
one  of  the  first  "Mormons"  who  was 
appointed  a  notary  public  in  Idaho. 


8ANDBKRG,  Peter  J.,    a  prominent  AUSTIN,     Philo    Wells,      Bishop  of 

Elder  in  Weston,  Oneida  county,  Idaho,  Dayton    Ward,    Oneida    county,    Idaho, 

was  born  June  1,  1852,  in  Christianstad  was   born   July  21,   1866,    in   Centerville, 

Ian,    Sweden;    baptized    Aug.    27,    1873;  Davis  county,  Utah,      He  was  baptized 

ordained   a  Teacher   Nov.   10,   1873,  and  June  20,  1875,  and  ordained  successive- 


BIOGRAPHICAL.   ENCYCLOPEDIA. 


447 


ly  to  the  offices  of  Deacon,  Teacher  and 
Elder.  The  latter  ordination  he  re- 
ceived from  Bishop  Wm.  H.  Lewis,  at 
Lewiston,  Cache  county.  Later  he 
was  ordained  a  Seventy  by  H.  M. 
Rawlins,  and  he  was  ordained  g^  High 
Priest  and  Bishop  Oct.  23,  1893,  by  Jo- 
seph F.  Smith,  and  set  apart  to  act  as 
Bishop  of  Dayton  Ward,  in  the  Oneida 
Stake  of  Zion.  This  position  he  is 
occupying  at  the  present  time. 

FARMER,  Erastus  G.,  Bishop  of 
the  Clifton  Ward,  Oneida  county,  Ida- 
ho, is  the  son  of  Edward  John  Farmer 
and  Elizabeth  E.  Wright,  and  was 
born  at  Florence,  Nebraska,  June  29, 
1861,  his  parents  being  then  on  their 
journey  to  Utah.      He  was  baptized  in 


Herriman  by  Bishop  James  Crane 
when  about  nine  years  old,  ordained  to 
the  various  grades  of  the  Priesthood 
and  called  on  a  mission  to  the  Southern 
States  at  the  April  conference,  1883.  He 
left  home  May  15th  of  that  year,  and 
was  appointed  to  labor  in  North  Caro- 
lina, where  he  baptized  nine  persons 
and  also  assisted  in  organizing  a  new 
branch  of  the  Church  in  Mitchell  coun- 
ty. He  was  mobbed  several  times;  re- 
turned home  Oct.  26,  1885.  Immediately 
on  his  return  home  he  was  called  to  la- 
bor as  a  home  missionary  in  the  Salt 
Lake  Stake,  which  office  he  filled  near- 
ly four  years.  Dec.  2,  1886,  he  was  or- 
dained a  Seventy  by  Wm.  H.  Freeman 
and  became  identified  with  the  95th 
quorum.  He  married  Mary  Ellen  Holt 
in  the  Logan  Temple,  Jan.  12,  1887,  and 


lived  at  Herriman  and  South  Jordan 
until  the  fall  of  1892,  when  he  moved 
to  Clifton,  Idaho.  July  26,  1893,  he 
was  ordained  a  High  Priest  by  Mathias 
F.  Cowley  and  set  apart  as  second 
counselor  to  Bishop  Wm.  F.  Garner 
of  Clifton,  in  which  calling  he  labored 
until  chosen  Bishop  of  the  Clifton 
Ward  Jan.  12,  1896.  He  was  ordained 
a  Bishop  Jan.  26,  1896,  by  Apostle  Mar- 
riner  W.  Merrill.  Bro.  Farmer  is  still 
laboring  successfully  in  that  calling, 
and  he  has  also  filled  a  number  of  civil 
offices,  such  as  judge  of  election,  school 
trustee,  justice  of  the  peace,  etc.  At 
present  he  is  engaged  in  farming  and 
sheep  raising. 

FISHER,         William        Fredrick, 

Bishop  of  Oxford,  Oneida  county,  Ida- 
ho, from  1877  to  1882,  was  born  Nov.  16, 
1839,  at  'Woolwich,  Kent,  England,  and 
is  the  son  of  Thomas  Fredrick  and 
Jane  Fisher.  He  was  baptized  in  1848, 
and  in  April,  1854,  he  emigrated  with 
his  parents  to  Utah,  crossing  the  At- 
lantic in  a  sailing  vessel,  and  went  by 
steamboat  up  the  Mississippi  and  Mis- 
souri rivers  to  Kansas  City,  Mo.  El- 
der Fisher  writes:  "My  father  bought 
cattle,  oxen  and  cows,  fitted  up  our 
wagons  and  pulled  out  to  Weston,  Mo. 
Our  company  was  the  last  that  crossed 
the  plains  that  year.  Our  captain  was 
Robert  Lang  Campbell,  under  whose 
guidance  we  arrived  In  Salt  Lake  City, 
Nov.  28,  1854.  We  located  at  Bounti- 
ful, Davis  county,  where  I  lived  with 
my  parents  until  the  spring  of  1859, 
when  I  was  employed  by  the  Chorpen- 
ing  Mail  company.  I  packed  mail  on 
mules  and  pack  saddles,  for  about  a 
year,  the  U.  S.  mail  being,  at  that 
time,  only  semi-monthly.  In  1860  I 
kept  a  mail  station  at  Gravelly  Ford, 
on  the  Humboldt  river,  for  about  six 
months,  and  while  there,  I  cooked  a 
supper  for  the  great  journalist,  Horace 
Greeley.  From  April  to  July,  1861,  I 
rode  the  pony  express  from  Ruby  val- 
ley to  Butte  station,  Nevada,  The  In- 
dian outbreak  took  place  all  along  the 
route  that  summer,  commencing  with 
the  killing  of  Ralph  Loyier  and  John 
Apnlegate  at  Dry  creek,  Nevada,  and 
John  Ouldcott  of  Simpson's  Park.  Dur- 
ing that  summer  a  good  many  of  our 
brave  boys  were  killed  by  the  Indians; 
some  were  scalped  and  others  were 
mutilated;  and  their  bodies  were  in 
some  instances   burned   on   wood   piles. 


448 


LATTER-DAT  SAINT 


I  took  the  news  of  the  outbreak  from 
Roberts  Creek  to  Schell  creeek,  and 
very  soon  afterward  the  U.  S.  go%'ern- 
ment  sent  two  companies  of  cavalry 
out  to  help  quell  the  uprising.  These 
troops  fought  a  great  many  battles 
with  the  Indians  and  finally  subdued 
them.  In  July,  I860,  I  brought  in  the 
pony  exp-ess  from  Ruby  valley,  Neva- 
da, to  Salt  Lake  City,  a  distance  of 
300  miles,  in  about  thirty-five  hours, 
with  only  sixteen  changes  of  horses. 
The  Indians  had  stolen  the  animals, 
killed  the  station  keepers,  and  burned 
the  stations  down,  where  there  should 
have  been  other  changes.  Later,  I 
rode  pony  express  for  one  year  be- 
tween Salt  Lake  City  and  Rush  val- 
ley. In  November,  1860,  I  carried  the 
presidential  election  returns  from   Salt 


Lake  City  to  Faust's  station,  in  Rush 
valley,  a  distance  of  75  miles,  in  4 
hours  and  20  minutes.  The  winter  of 
1860-61  was  noted  for  some  very  severe 
storms,  it  being  a  hard,  cold  winter. 
One  night  in  January,  1861,  I  was  eigh- 
teen hours  making  the  ride  from  Camp 
Floyd  to  Salt  I..ake  City,  being  lost 
all  night  in  one  of  the  worst  storms 
I  ever  experienced.  Jan.  1,  1861,  I  mar- 
ried Miss  Millennium  Andrus,  a 
daughter  of  Milo  and  Abigail  J.  An- 
drus.  In  the  spring  of  1862  I  moved 
to  West  Bountiful  and  lived  there  un- 
til I  moved  to  Richmond,  Cache  county, 
Utah,  in  the  fall  of  1864.  During  the 
time  I  was  employed  by  the  Western 
Mail  company  and  the  pony  express 
ccmpany,    I    had    a   number   of   narrow 


escapes  from  capture  and  death  by  the 
Indians,  but  a  kind  Providence  watched 
over  rne,  and  I  escaped  without  harm. 
1  have  done  a  great  deal  of  railroad 
building  in  my  day.  Thus  I  had 
charge  of  the  construction  of  the  "Big 
Fill,"  built  near  Blue  creek  at  "Pro- 
montory," at  a  cost  to  the  C.  P.  Ry.  Co. 
of  about  $150,000.  I  also  had  contracts 
on  the  Utah  Central.  Bingham  Canyon, 
Wasatch  &  Jordan  Valley,  Utah  North- 
ern and  several  other  railways.  In 
1871  I  went  on  a  mission  to  the  Middle 
States,  and  in  1874  I  commenced  mer- 
chandising at  Richmond,  Utah.  In 
1876  I  was  called  on  a  mission  to  move 
my  family  and  effects  to  Oxford, Oneida 
county,  Idaho.  In  August,  1877,  I 
was  ordained  a  Bishop  and  appointed 
to  preside  over  the  Oxford  Ward:  and  I 
officiated  in  that  capacity  until  De- 
cember, 1882.  In  July,  1878,  I  moved 
my  family  from  Richmond,  Utah,  to 
Oxford,  Idaho,  and  established  a  gen- 
eral store,  of  which  I  am  still  proprie- 
tor. I  was  elected  on  the  Democratic 
ticket  to  the  office  of  assessor  of  Oneida 
county  in  1878,  and  was  re-elected  in 
1880  and  sp-ain  in  1882.  My  wife  and  I 
have  raised  four  sons  and  three  daugh- 
ters, and  have  buried  four  sons.  Our 
home  at  present  is  at  Oxford,  Oneida 
county.  My  business  is  ranching, 
stock-raising,  and  merchandising.  I  am 
now  62  years  of  age  and  enjoy  good 
health." 

CLEMENTS,      Albert        Nephi,        a 

member  of  the  High  Council  of  the 
Oneida  Stake  of  Zion,  is  the  son  of  Al- 
bert Clements  and  Ada  Winchell,  and 
was  born  Nov.  1.5,  1842,  in  Nauvoo,  111. 
He  was  baptized  when  eight  years  old 
bv  Wiley  P.  Allred  in  Iowa.  With  his 
mother  he  left  Nauvoo  in  1844,  going 
to  Winter  Quarters.  He  drove  an  ox- 
team  across  the  plains  in  Warren 
Snow's  company  w'hen  but  a  lad  of  ten 
years,  arriving  in  Great  Salt  Lake  val- 
lev  Oct.  9,  1852.  In  1863  he  went  to 
the  Missouri  river  as  a  Church  teams- 
ter to  bring  Saints  to  the  valley.  He 
was  ordained  an  Elder  in  1865  by 
Bishop  Elijah  F.  Sheets.  In  July,  1864, 
he  settled  in  what  is  now  known  as  Ox- 
ford, Oneida  county,  Idaho,  being  one 
of  the  very  first  pioneers  and  settlers 
in  that  region,  where  he  still  resides. 
He  went  east  after  immigrants  again 
in  1868.  Elder  Clements  has  been  an 
active    teacher   in     the     Oxford   Ward 


BIOGRAPHICAL    ENCYCLOPEDIA. 


449 


since  its  first  organization.  When  the 
Oneida  Stake  was  organized  in  June, 
1884,  he  was  chosen  a  member  of  the 
High  Council  and  was  ordained  a 
High  Priest  and  set  apart  by  Geo.  C. 
Parkinson.  He  is  still  faithfully  serv- 
ing in  that  capacity.  In  1865  he  married 
Elizabeth  Ann  Boyce.the  issue  of  which 
union  is  13  children,  10  of  whom  are 
living.  He  yielded  obedience  to  the 
principle  of  plural  marriage  in  1885  by 
taking  to   wife   Laura   Georgeson,   who 


has  borne  him  six  children,  four  of 
whom  are  living.  Elder  Clements  is 
engaged  in  farming  and  stock  raising. 
He  has  passed  through  many  trying 
scenes,  but  he  has  always  been  ener- 
getic and  faithful  in  performing  his 
duties  as  a  Church  member  in  face  of 
all  opposition.  Civilly,  he  has  served 
several   terms  as   school   trustee. 

LiARSKN,  Hans  C,  Bishop  of  Glen- 
dale  Ward,  Oneida  county,  Idaho,  was 
born  June  27,  1867,  in  Logan,  Cache 
county,  Utah,  and  blessed  Aug.  21, 
1867,  by  Bishop  Henry  Ballard.  He 
was  baptized  Aug.  3,  1876,  by  Christian 
Olsen  in  Logan,  Cache  county,  and  con- 
firmed the  same  day  by  Christian  J. 
Larsen.  He  was  ordained  a  Deacon 
July  5,  1879,  by  Thomas  McNeil,  and 
labored  in  that  capacity  for  about  eight 
years.  He  served  as  first  counselor 
to  the  president  of  the  Deacons'  quo- 
rum for  about  one  year,  after  which 
he  was  chosen  president  of  the  quorum, 

Vol.  1,  No.  29. 


which  position  he  held  for  about  two 
years.  He  was  ordained  a  Priest  by 
Joseph  Morrell  Dec.  18,  1887,  which  of- 
fice he  held  a  little  over  five  years, 
during  which  time  he  labored  as  a  visit- 
ing Priest,  and  as  assistant  secretary 
in  the  Sunday  school  in  the  Logan 
Third  Ward.  During  this  time  he  was 
also  elected  director,  secretary  and 
treasurer  of  the  third  ecclesiastical 
Ward  of  Logan.  Later,  he  was  chosen 
as  Ward  clerk.  He  served  in  these 
various  positions  until  January,  1893, 
when  he  moved  to  Preston,  Idaho.  In 
February,  1893,  he  was  chosen  as  first 
counselor  to  Ezekiel  E.  Hopkin,  presi- 
dent of  the  Worm  creek  branch  of  the 
Preston  Ward.  He  was  at  that  titne 
ordained  an  Elder  by  Solomon  H.  Hale, 
which  office  he  held  five  months.  Early 
in  August,  1893,  the  Worm  creek  branch 
was  given  a  Ward  organization,  and 
called  Glendale,  with  Austin  T.  Merrill 
as  Bishop.  Lars  C.  Larsen  was  chosen 
first  counselor  and  was  ordained  a  High 


Priest  and  set  apart  to  that  position 
Oct.  22,  1893,  by  Pres.  Jos.  F.  Smith. 
He  held  this  office  till  the  death  of 
Bishop  Merrill,  in  March,  189b,  when  he 
was  appointed  to  preside  over  the  Ward 
until  a  re-organization  could  be  effect- 
ed. In  June,  1895,  he  was  chosen  and 
ordained  Bishop  of  Glendale  Ward, 
which  position  he  still  holds.  At  the 
election  in  the  fall  of  1890  he  was 
.selected  justice  of  the  peace  in  River- 
dale  precinct. 

July  20,  1901. 


450 


LATTER-DAY    SAINT 


CANNON.  Carl  John,  Bishop  of 
Pocatello.  Hannock  county,  Idaho,  is 
the  son  of  Anders  Johan  Cannon  and 
Charlotte  Carlson,  and  was  born  Aug. 
25  1841,  in  Ostra  Harg.  Linkoping  Ian, 
Sweden.  He  attended  the  public 
school  of  his  native  place,  until  he  was 
fourteen  years  of  age,  at  the  same  time 
devoting  himself  to  the  learning  of  his 
fathers  trade— that  of  a  tailor.  In 
1857.  two  Mormon  Elders,  viz.  Ola  N. 
Stohl  and  Carl  P.  Carlson,  visited  his 
fathers  house,  when  for  the  first  time 
he  heard  the  gospel.  Together  with 
his  parents,  he  was  converted,  and  was 
baptized  Dec.  6,  1858,  by  Elder  Andrew 
Goranson;  he  was  confirmed  by  Elder 
Ola  N.  Stohl,  Dec.  12th,  following,  in 
Norrkoi)ing.      In  the  fall  of  1860   he  was 


ordained  an  Elder  by  Ola  N.  Stohl  and 
immediate'y  sent  out  as  a  local  mis- 
sionary in  the  Norrkoping  district.  He 
labored  in  that  capacity  for  a  number 
of  years,  during  which  time  he  presided 
over  various  branches  and  districts, 
and  traveled  considerably.  In  1868  he 
married  Hulda  Wilhelmina  Stopen- 
dahl,  and  by  that  union  he  became  the 
father  of  nine  children — four  sons  and 
five  daughters.  With  his  family  he 
left  Sweden  in  1870  and  came  to  Ameri- 
ca, remaining  in  New  York  city  four 
years,  where  he  worked  at  his  trade. 
He  then  moved  to  Salt  Lake  City,  Utah, 
and  lived  there  until  1880,  when  he 
moved  to  Lr)gan,  Cache  county,  where 
he  remained  for  eight  years.      His  next 


move  was  to  Pocatello,  Idaho,  in  1888. 
Soon  after  arriving  there,  he  was 
chosen  counselor  to  Wm.  Willison,  pre- 
siding Elder  of  the  branch.  July  13. 
1890,  when  the  Pocatello  Ward  was  or- 
ganized, he  was  appointed  its  Bishop, 
and  has  been  acting  in  that  capacity 
until  the  present  time.  He  has  pre- 
sided with  signal  ability.and  has  gained 
the  love  and  esteem  of  all  the  mem- 
bers of  his  ward.  His  first  ordination 
to  the  Priesthood  was  to  the  office  of 
a  Teacher.  Later  he  became  an  El- 
der, while  yet  in  Sweden.  After  lo- 
cating in  Logan,  Utah,  he  was  ordained 
a  Seventy  in  1886,  and  was  ordained  a 
High  Priest  and  Bishop  July  13,  1890, 
by  Apostle  Moses  Thatcher.  His  la- 
bors as  a  missionary  in  his  native 
land  were  always  attended  with  suc- 
cess, many  being  added  to  the  Church 
under    his    administration. 

PRIEST,  John,  a  High  Councilor  in 
the  Pocatello  Stake  of  Zion,  was  born 
Feb.  9,  1850,  in  Tipton,  Staffordshire, 
England.  He  emigrated  to  America, 
together  with  his  parents,  in  1859,  and 
crossed  the  plains  in  Capt.  Ansel  P. 
Harmon's  train,  which  arrived  in  Salt 
Lake  City  Aug.  5,  1862.  Previous  to 
starting  for  the  Valley,  he  was  bap- 
tized by  John  D.  T.  McAllister,  July 
12,  1862,  at  Florence,  Neb.  With  his 
parents  he  located  at  Kaysville,  Davis 
county,  Utah.  In  1868  he  moved,  to- 
gether with  his  parents,  to  Uintah,  We- 
ber county.  He  married  Rhoda  Eliz- 
abeth Bybee,  Sept.  5,  1870.  While  in 
Uintah,  he  labored  in  the  Sunday  school 
and  acted  as  president  of  the  first  or- 
ganization of  Y.  M.  M.  I.  A.  there;  he 
also  presided  over  the  Elders  in  that 
Ward.  While  working  on  the  railroad 
in  1880,  at  a  place  called  Black  Rock, 
he  organized  a  Sunday  school  under 
the  direction  of  Bishop  Joseph  S.  Black, 
of  Deseret.  A  branch  of  the  Church 
was  also  organized  with  Bro.  Nailor 
as  president  and  John  Priest  as  his 
first  counselor.  In  May,  1885,  he  left 
Uintah,  Utah,  for  Snake  River  valley, 
Idaho,  where  he  located  at  a  place 
called  Taylor;  a  branch  was  organized 
there  May  23,  1866,  by  John  W.  Taylor, 
and  John  Priest  was  called  to  preside 
over  it.  He  buried  his  wife  Dec.  18, 
1887,  at  Eagle  Rock.  In  1888  he  re- 
moved to  Pocatello,  Idaho,  where  he 
has  resided  ever  since.  April  14,  1889, 
he   became  superintendent  of  the  Sun- 


BIOGRAPHICAL.   ENCYCLOPEDIA. 


451 


day  school.  And  he  has  been  a  Sabbath 
school  worker  for  twenty-flve  years. 
He  presided  over  the  Elders  in  the 
Pocatello  Ward  from  1891  to  1898.  June 
17,  1894,  he  was  set  apart  as  first  coun- 
selor to  Jos.  H.  Tolman,  president  of 
the  third  quorum  of  Elders  in  the 
Oneida  Stake.  When  the  sixth  quo- 
rum of  Elders  was  organized,  he  was 
set  apart  as  first  counselor  in  the  presi- 
dency thereof  by  Apostle  Matthias  F. 
Cowley.  He  also  served  as  a  home 
missionary  for  about  two  years.  Aug. 
7,  1898,  he  was  ordained  a  High  Priest 
and  set  apart  as  a  High  Councilor  in 
the  Pocatello  Stake  by  Pres.  Wm.  C. 
Parkinson.  Since  that  time  he  has 
taken  great  pleasure  in  traveling  and 
laboring  in  tue  Stake  and  its  several 
Wards. 

BUDGE,  William,  president  of  the 
Bear  Lake  Stake  of  Zion,  was  born 
May  1,  1828,  at  Lanark,  Lanarkshire, 
Scotland,  son  of  Wm.  Budge  and  Mary 
Scott.  He  was  baptized  Dec.  31,  1848, 
and,  being  ordained  to  the  Priesthood, 


he  was  sent  out  as  a  local  missionary 
in  February,  1851,  in  which  capacity 
he  labored  for  nearly  ten  years,  filling 
many  important  positions  in  the 
Church.  He  emigrated  to  Utah  in 
1860,  and  later  became  an  early  settler 
in  Bear  Lake  valley,  Idaho,  where  he 
acted  for  several  years  as  Bishop.  In 
August,  1877,  when  the  settlements  of 
the  Saints  in  that  valley  were  organized 
as  a  Stake  of  Zion,  he  was  chosen  anri 
set  apart  as  president   of  the  same — a 


position  which  he  has  filled  ever  since 
with  honor  and  credit  to  himself  and 
the  people  over  whom  he  has  presided. 
In  1878  he  was  called  on  a  special  mis- 
sion to  Europe  to  take  charge  of  the 
European  mission.  He  labored  in  that 
capacity  for  two  years  and  four 
months,  and  made  a  most  excellent 
record.  During  his  presidency  he  visit- 
ed the  missions  on  continental  Europe 
a  number  of  times.  On  his  return  home 
in  1880  he  resumed  his  duties  as  presi- 
dent of  the  Bear  Lake  Stake  of  Zion. 
He  has  also  served  in  the  Idaho  legis- 
lature and  is  one  of  the  most  influen- 
tial men  of  the  State  of  Idaho. 

KEETCH,  Elijah  C,  Bishop  of 
St.  Charles  Ward,  Bear  Lake  county, 
Idaho,-  is  the  son  of  Charles  G.  and 
Mercy  T.  B.  Keetch,  and  was  born 
May  31,  1865,  at  St.  Charles,  Bear  Lake 
county,  Idaho.  He  was  blessed  Sept. 
22.  1865,  by  Bishop  Wm.  G.  Young,  bap- 
tized Aug.  3,  1873,  by  Elder  Mosiah 
Booth,  and  confirmed  Aug.  8,  1873,  by 
Bishop  John  A.  Hunt.  He  soon  became 
an  active  member  and  worker  in  the 
Sunday  school  and  Y.  M.  M.  I.  A.  He 
was  sustained  as  secretary  and  recorder 
of  the  Y.  M.  M.  I.  A.  for  a  period  of 
a  little  more  than  five  years.  In  the 
early  part  of  July,  1884,  he  was  sus- 
tained as  a  Sunday  school  teacher  in 
the  St.  Charles  Sunday  school,  and  la- 
bored in  that  position  till  January, 
1889.  In  April,  1886,  he  was  sustained 
as  treasurer  of  the  St.  Charles  Sunday 
school  and  held  that  position  until  Jan. 
1,  1891.  March  27,  1892,  he  was  sus- 
tained as  second  assistant  superinten- 
dent of  the  St.  Charles  Sunday  school 
and  held  this  position  until  Nov.  23, 
1892,  when  he  was  sustained  as  first  as- 
sistant superintendent  and  held  that 
position  until  July  22,  1894.  He  was 
ordained  a  Deacon  Jan.  28,  1885,  by 
John  Windly  and  served  as  first  coun- 
selor to  the  president  of  the  quorum. 
Dec.  6,  1886,  he  was  ordained  a  Priest 
by  Andrew  Jenson.  He  was  ordained 
an  Elder  Aug.  28,  1889,  and  on  Jan.  12, 
1891,  he  was  set  apart  as  first  coun- 
selor to  the  president  of  the  quorum. 
He  married  Annie  S.  Pugmire,  daugh- 
ter of  Bishop  Jonathan  Pugmire  and 
Mary  Stanforth,  Nov.  19,  1890.  April 
10  1892,  he  was  set  apart  as  president 
of  the  6th  quorum  of  Elders  by  Pres. 
Wm.  Budge.  He  also  labored  for  a 
number  of  years  as.  a  visiting  teacher 


452 


LATTER-DAT    SAINT 


in  the  St.  Charles  Ward.  Dec.  19,  1S92, 
he  was  ordained  a  Seventy  by  Brigham 
H.  Roberts.  At  the  Stake  Sunday 
school  conference  held  in  Paris  in  June, 
1889,  he  was  sustained  as  Stake  Sunday 
school  secretary  and  missionary,  and 
labored  in  this  position  until  July  28, 
1895.  In  the  fall  of  1893  he  received 
a  call  from  the  First  Presidency  of  the 
Church  to  go  to  Provo  as  a  Sunday 
school  normal  student  and  take  a  twen- 
ty-weeks' course.  He  was  successful 
in  his  studies,  completed  the  course, 
received  his  certificate  and  returned 
home  in  June,  1894.  He  reported  him- 
self to  the  Stake  authorities,  who  ap- 
pointed him  to  labor  in  six  of  the 
Wards  of  the  Stake.  He  did  some 
traveling  during  the  summer  months 
and  on  Sept.  9,  1894.  he  began  his  real 
class  work.  He  organized  his  classes 
with  a  total  enrollment  of  107  pupils, 
consisting  of  officers  and  teachers  of 
the  Sunday  schools  in  the  Wards  where 
he  had  been  appointed  to  labor.  He 
continued  his  labors  in  this  regard  un- 
til he  was  called  and  sustained  as 
Bishop  of  the  St.  Charles  "Ward,  July 
28,  1895.  Aug.  11,  1895,  at  the  Stake 
quarterly  conference,  he  was  ordained 
a  High  Priest  and  Bishop. and  set  apart 
to  preside  as  Bishop  of  the  St.  Charles 
Ward,  by  Apostle  Heber  J.  Grant;  in 
this  position  he  is  still  laboring.  He 
has  been  a  faithful  servant  of  God  in 
every  office  he  has  filled  and  is  full  of 
integrity  to  God  and  His  work. 

AUSTIN,  Edwin  Nelson,  Bishop 
of  the  Liberty  Ward.  Bear  Lake  coun- 
ty, Idaho,  since  1877,  is  the  son  of  Ju- 
lius Augustus  Creazer  Austin  and  Oc- 
tavia  Ann  Lane,  and  was  born  in  Suf- 
field,  Hartford  county.  Conn..  Sept.  5. 
1840.  The  home  of  his  parents  was  for 
a  long  time  open  to  the  traveling  El- 
ders of  the  Church,  among  whom  were 
Ezra  T.  Beruson  and  John  M.  Woolley, 
through  whose  administrations  they 
embraced  the  gospel  about  the  year 
1842.  Feb.  4.  1846,  they,  with  other 
Saints  under  the  leadership  of  Samuel 
Brannan,  left  New  York  harbor  on 
board  the  old  ship  "Brooklyn"  for 
California.  Sailing  around  Cape  Horn 
she  touched  at  the  island  of  Juan  Fer- 
nandes  for  fuel  and  water,  and  also  at 
Honolulu,  landing  at  Yerba  Buena  (now 
San  Francisco),  in  July,  1846,  after  a 
cruise  of  nearly  six  months.  Edwin 
was  a  little  over  seven  years  old  when 


gold  was  discovered  in  Sutter's  mill- 
race,  on  the  American  river,  and  with 
his  parents  immediately  removed  to 
"Mormon  Island,'  'to  engage  in  wash- 
ing out  the  precious  metal.  Edwin 
had  the  distinction  of  being  the  young- 
est gold  hunter  in  the  "Diggings." 
Upon  word  reaching  California  that  the 
gathering  place  of  the  Saints  was  Great 
Salt  Lake  valley,  he,  together  with  his 
parents,  took  up  the  line  of  march  over 
the  Sierra  Nevada  mountains,  arriving 
at  the  "Old  Fort,"  Salt  Lake  City,  in 
the  fall  of  1848.  In  the  spring  of  1849 
he  was  baptized  into  the  Church  and 
soon  afterwards  moved  to  Farmington, 
Davis  county.  At  the  age  of  seventeen 
he  went  with  a  rescuing  party  to 
Salmon  river,  Idaho,  where  the  Ban- 
nock Indians  were  robbing  and  killing 


the  settlers.  April  17,  1863,  his  mar- 
riage with  Alvira  Naomi  Lane  was 
celebrated  at  Centerville,  Utah.  With 
wife  and  one  child  he  moved  to  Bear 
Lake  county,  Idaho,  in  1SJ4,  and  thus 
became  one  of  the  first  stettlers  at 
Paris.  Among  his  callings  of  respon- 
sibility in  the  Church  it  may  be  men- 
tioned that  he  acted  as  clerk  of  Bear 
Lake  Stake  and  as  a  member  of  the  first 
High  Council  in  the  same  Stake.  He 
also  served  as  captain  in  the  Nauvoo 
Legion.  Dec.  7,  1886,  he  \vas  called  to  act 
as  Bishop  of  Liberty  Ward,  and  was 
ordained  to  that  position  under  the 
hands  of  Apostle  Brigham  Young,  jr., 
Aug.  25,  1877:  this  position  he  still  holds. 
Oct.  28,  1872,  he  married  Emma  Wood 
in   the   Endowment    House,    Salt   Lake 


BIOGRAPHICAL.    ENCYCLOPEDIA. 


453 


City.       He  has  also  filled  a  number  of 
positions   of    trust   and    honor     in     the 
county,    state     and     nation:       He   was 
elected   the   first    sheriff   of   Bear    Lake 
county,  was  appointed  one  of  the  com- 
missioners to  organize  Bear  Lake  coun- 
ty;  served  as  county  surveyor  for  sev- 
eral terms,  and  has  been  deputy  United 
States  land  and  mineral  surveyor,  and 
mineral  surveyor  for  the  State  of  Ida- 
ho.     July  4,  1864,  together  with  Charles 
Oakey.he  raised  the  "Stars  and  Stripes" 
on  the     first    liberty    pole    erected     in 
Bear  Lake  county.       In  response   to  a 
call  from  Pres.  Wilford  Woodruff,  Jan. 
19    1898,    he   went    to   California,    where 
he  performed  a  short  mission;  laboring 
most   of   the   time    in   the   city   of   San 
Diego.      Bishop  Austin  is  the  father  of 
21  children,  namely  11  by  his  wife  El- 
nora    N.,    and    10    by    his.  second    wife, 
Emma.      A  strong,  resolute  will  is  per- 
haps his   chief  personal   characteristic 
which,  taken  with  his  firm  conviction  of 
the   truth   of   the   gospel,    accounts   for 
his  close  touch  with  the  authorities  of 
the    Church    on    all    leading   questions. 
This  element  is     made  to  appear  in  a 
striking  degree  in  his  uncompromising 
attitude     toward       evils       which       he 
discerns  in  his    own    household,  as  well 
as  among  the  people,  over  whom  he  has 
for   so    many   years   presided.       In   the 
discharge  of  his  local  official  duties  he 
has  ever  sought  and  followed   the  ad- 
vice of  his  superiors.      He  has  the  cour- 
age of  his  convictions,  and  his  fidelity 
to  principle  has  never  been  questioned 
by  friend  or  foe.       He  is  outspoken  in 
what  he  conceives  to  be  right — correct- 
ing a  friend  as  readily     as  an  enemy. 
The  same  attribute  has  dominated  his 
financial  calculations  to  the  extent  that 
for  many  years  it  has  been  proverbial 
in  his  family  that  no  debt  must  exist 
and  that  there  is  safety  only  in  living 
within  the  means  they  are  able  to  ac- 
quire. 

STEELiE,  James  Ephraini,  presi- 
dent of  the  Bingham  Stake  of  Zion,  is 
the  son  of  James  Steele  and  Elizabeth 
Wylie,  and  was  born  in  Manchester, 
England,  June  22,  1852.  He  emigrated 
with  his  parents  to  Utah  in  1856.  His 
parents  croF'-ed  the  plains  with  hand- 
carts, and  James,  who  was  but  four 
years  old,  had  to  walk  nearly  all  the 
way.  At  a  place  called  Bitter  Creek, 
Wyo.,  his  father  died.  His  mother  and 
her  two  little  boys  arrived  In  Salt  Lake 


City  Dec.  25,  1856,  and  were  sent  to 
American  Fork,  Utah  county,  where 
the  subject  of  this  sketch  was  raised 
and  lived  until  1885,  when  he  moved  to 
Idaho.  He  was  baptized  June  22,  1860. 
by  John  Curry.  In  1880  he  was  ordained 
an  Elder  by  Bishop  Leonard  E.  Har- 
rington; in  1882  he  was  ordained  a  Sev- 
enty, and  in  1886  he  was  ordained  to  the 
office  of  a  High  Priest  and  set  apart 
by  Apostle  John  W.   Taylor  as  Bishop 


of  lona  Ward,  which  was  organized 
at  that  time.  In  1890  Thos.  E.  Ricks 
chose  him  as  his  firs't  counselor  in  the 
presidency  of  the  Bannock  Stake,  in 
which  capacity  he  served  about  five 
years.  At  a  Stake  conference  held  at 
lona,  in  June,  1895,  Apostle  John  Menry 
Smith  being  present,  the  Bannock 
Stake  was  divided,  and  all  the  settle- 
ments lying  south  of  the  south  fork  of 
Snake  river  were  organized  into  a  new 
Stake  called  Bingham.  Elder  Steele 
was  set  apart  as  president  of  the  same 
June  9,  1895. 

WALKER,  Don  Carlos,  a  member 
of  the  High  Council  in  the  Bingham 
Stake  of  Zion,  is  the  second  son  of  Wil- 
liam H.  Walker  and  Mary  Jane  Shad- 
don,  and  was  born  May  21,  1858,  at  Pro- 
vo,  Utah.  He  writes:  "I  was  bap- 
tized May  10,  1868,  by  John  Cottam  in 
Salt  Lake  City,  and  confirmed  the  same 
day  by  Bishop  Fredrick  Kesler.  I  was 
ordained  a  Seventy  Feb.  27,  1876,  by  W. 
E.  Wilcox  and  became  a  member  of 
the  64th  quorum  of  Seventy,  but  in  1881 
I   was  transferred   to   the  84th  quorum 


454 


LATTER-DAT    SAINT 


in  the  Bannock  Slake.  June  9.  1895,  I  on  bran  bread,  and  after  the  bran  was 
was  chosen  as  a  High  Councilor  in  the  all  consumed  we  were  three  weeks 
Bingham  Stake  of  Zion.  which  office  without  bread,  meat  or  milk,  and  had 
I  now  hold.  I  was  ordained  a  High  to  sustain  life  from  what  could  be  gath- 
Priest  by  Apostle  John  Henry  Smith  ered  from  the  fields,  such  as  cat-tail 
che  same  day.  I  was  made  superin-  roots,  thistles  and  pigweed.  In  the 
tendent  of  the  Lewisville  Sunday  school  spring  of  1858,  which  is  known  as  the 
in  1884,  which  position  I  held  until  I  time  of  the  "move,"  my  father  and  his 
was  called  into  the  High  Council.  I  family  went  to  Provo  and  remained 
have  assisted  in  home  missionary  work  there  till  the  following  July,  when  we 
at  different  times  in  both  the  Bannock     returned  to  Salt  Lake  City.  At  the  age 

of  fourteen   I  joined   the  Utah   militia. 
Company   C.       In   the   spring  of  1867   I 
•was  called  to  Sanpete  county,  to  assist 
In  quelling  the  Blackhawk  war.      While 
camped  at  Gunnison  in  the  latter  part 
of  June,  1867,   I  was  detailed,   together 
with  Nathan  Tanner,  to  go  as  an  escort 
to  Manti  with  some  of  the  officers.  But 
on  attempting  to  catch  my  hofse  from 
the    herd,    he    proved      refractory    and 
Sergeant   Heber   Houtz   volunteered   to 
take  my  place.      I  owe  my  life  to  that 
incident,  for,  while  returning  from  the 
trip.  Major  John  W.  Vance,  Capt.  O.  P. 
Miles,    Sergeant      Houtz      and    Private 
Nathan  Tanner  were  ambushed  by  In- 
dians on  Twelve  Mile  creek,  and  Major 
Vance  and  Sergeant  Houtz  were  killed. 
Early  in  August,  a  treaty  of  peace  hav- 
ing been  effected    we  were  released  to 
return  home.       Nov.  27,  1872,  I  married 
Anna  B.  Starr.       In  the  spring  of  1874, 
I  was  called  to  go  and  help     build     a 
settlement  on   the  Muddy,   in   Nevada; 
but   I   was   subsequently   released,   and 
in  April.  1873,  I  was  given  employment 
as  a  guard  at  the  penitentiary,   under 
nny  father  who  was  warden  at  the  time. 
In  1880  I  was  called  to  labor  as  a  teach- 
er in  the  Ward,  and  also  labored  as  a 
teacher   in    the   North    District   Sunday 
school  of  Centerville.       Subsequently  I 
was   set   apart   as   second   counselor   in 
the   superintendency   of   that   school.     I 
also  acted  as  president  of  the  theologi- 
cal   class   and   was   a    counselor   in    the 
Y.  M.  M.  I.  A.  of  Centerville.     I  served 
two  years  as  a  home  missionary  in  the 
Davis  Stake.      In  the  fall  of  1889  I  was 
called  to  take  a  mission  to  the  North- 
ern  States.       I  left   home  Jan.  14,   1890, 
and   was     assigned     to   labor   in    Green 
county,  Indiana.       In  May,  1890.   I  was 
set   apart   to   preside   over   the   Indiana 
conference,  which  position  I  held  till  I 
was  released  in  October.  1891,  to  return 
While  I  lived  with  mother,  we  passed     home.      While  laboring  in  Indiana  I  as- 
through    the    famine    of    1856    and    1867,     sited   in   baptizing   fifteen    persons   and 
when    we    were    reduced    to    subsisting     organized    the    first    Sunday    school    in 


and  Bingham  Stakes.  I  moved  to  Ida- 
ho in  1884,  and  was  present  at  the  or- 
ganization of  the  Bannock  Stake.  I 
was  one  of  the  first  settlers  of  Lewis- 
ville, helped  to  take  out  the  first  canals 
in  that  part  of  the  valley,  and  built 
one  of  the  first  houses  on  the  Lewis- 
ville town  site,  where  I  still  reside.  At 
present  I  am  on  a  mission  in  the  North- 
ern States,  laboring  in  the  city  of  Chi- 
cago." 

ROCKWOOD,     Charles     Welcome, 

Bishop  of  the  lona  Ward,  Bingham 
county,  Idaho,  is  the  son  of  Albert  P. 
Rockwood  and  Elvira  T.  Wheeler,  and 
was  born  in  the  "Old  Fort,"  Salt  Lake 
City,  Utah,  March  2,  1850.  Elder  Rock- 
wood  writes:  "I  was  born  in  a  wagon 
box,  as  my  mother,  who  six  months 
previously  had  separated  from  father, 
had  no  house  to  live  in.  I  lived  with 
mother  till  the  spring  of  1858,  when, 
by  an  order  of  court,  my  sister  Mary 
Ann   and    I   were   given    to   my   father. 


BIOGRAPHICAL.   ENCYCLOPEDIA. 


455 


that  conference,  at  Robinson,  Green 
county,  Indiana.  After  returning^  home 
I  was  elected  and  set  apart  as  president 
of  the  Y.  M.  M.  I.  A.  of  Centerville, 
and  held  that  position  till  I  moved  to 
Zona.  In  the  fall  of  1897,  I  was  called 
to  labor  as  a  mutual  improvement  mis- 
sionary and  was  assigned  to  labor  in 
Sanpete  county.  In  this  capacity  I 
worked  for  three  months.  Having  a 
desire  to  go  to  the  Snake  River  valley 
to  make  a  new  home,  I  finally  located 
at  lona,  Bingham  county,  I  was 
chosen  and  set  apart  by  Pres.  Rulon 
S.  Wells  as  one  of  the  presidents  of  the 
106th  quorum  of  Seventy.  I  was  also 
chosen  as  president  of  the  religion  class 
of  lona,  and  became  one  of  the  Stake 
aids  in  the  same  labor.  Feb.  11,  1901, 
I  was  chosen  by  direct  i-evelation  to 
Pres.  James  E.  Steele  of  this  Stake,  in 
answer  to  prayer  as  to  who  should  fill 
the  vacancy  in  the  pi'esidency  of  the 
Stake.  After  asking  of  the  Lord  as 
to  the  filling  of  the  vacancy,  and  on 
retiring,  to  rest,  a  personage  appeared 
to  Pres.  Steele  and  told  him  that 
Bishop  A.  J.  Stranger  was  the  man  to 
fill  the  vacancy  in  the  Stake  presidency, 
and  that  Charles  W.  Rockwood  was  to 
be  the  Bishop  of  lona  Ward,  with 
George  P.  Ward  as  first  and  Isaac 
Goodmanson  as  second  counselor.  To 
accept  this  labor  was  one  of  the  great- 
est trials  of  my  life,  being  almost  a 
stranger  in  the  Ward,  and  not  knowing 
the  circumstances  under  which  I  was 
called;  but  after  being  made  acquaint- 
ed with  the  circumstances  connected 
with  the  call,  I  was  reconciled  and 
cheerfully  began  to  labor.  I  am  the 
father  of  eight  children,  four  sons  and 
four  daughters,  seven  of  whom  are  liv- 
ing, all  of  them  faithful  in  the  Church." 

INGL.ESTROM,  Anders  O.,  Bishop 
of  Basalt  Ward,  Bingham  county,  Ida- 
ho, was  born  Oct.  10,  1853,  in  Froslof, 
Skane,  Sweden;  son  of  Ola  Ingel- 
strom  and  his  wife  Ilgena  Ander- 
son; heard  the  gospel  in  Copenhagen, 
Denmark,  where  he  was  baptized  Oct. 
G,  1876.  On  the  28th  of  that  month, 
he  was  called  to  go  on  a  mission  to 
Sweden,  where  he  was  appointed  presi- 
dent of  the  Norrkoping  branch.  Dur- 
ing the  following  winter  new  members 
were  added  to  the  Church  there.  May 
19,  1878,  he  was  sent  to  the  Linkoping 
branch,  where  he  labored  until  the  17th 
of    October.       During     his     presidency 


there  eighty  persons  were  baptized. 
From  Linkoping  he  was  again  sent  to 
Norrkoping,  ^nd  he  organized  a  branch 
in  Vingaker.  He  labored  here  until 
June  2,  1879,  and  baptized  a  number  of 
persons.  Then  he  emigrated  to  Utah  and 


arrived  in  Salt  Lake  City,  July  16,  1879. 
On  the  1st  of  Jan.,  1880,  he  married 
Elizabeth  Jacobson;  moved  in  1885  to 
Blackfoot  and  in  1886  to  Basalt,  Idaho, 
where  he  now  holds  the  office  of  a 
Bishop. 

RICKS.  Thomas  Edwin,  president 
of  the  Fremont  Stake  of  Zion,  was  born 
July  21,  1828,  in  Trigg  (now  Christian) 
county,  Kentucky,  son  of  Joelj>  Ricks 
and  Elenor  Martin.  When  but  two 
years  old  his  parents  moved  to  Madison 
county,  Illinois,  at  which  place  he  was 
baptized  Feb.  14,  1845,  and  in  the  fol- 
lowing October  he  was  ordained  an  El- 
der. In  September  he  moved  with  his 
parents  to  Nauvoo,  Illinois.  He  worked 
on  the  Nauvoo  Temple  from  the  time 
he  arrived  there  until  work  was 
stopped,  and  preparations  commenced 
to  move  west.  He  crossed  the  Missis- 
sippi river  for  the  west  Feb.  8.  1846, 
with  part  of  Charles  C.  Rich's  family, 
acting  as  teamster  for  them  as  far  as 
Council  Bluffs,  where  he  remained  with 
his  parents  until  April,  1848,  when  he 
continued  westward  in  Heber  C.  Kim- 
ball's company.  When  the  company 
arrived  near  Elkhorn  river  the  Indians 
stole  four  of  their  oxen,  and  Bro.  Ricks 
with  three  others  were  sent  in  pursuit 
of  them.    They  came  upon  the  Indians 


456 


LATTER-DAY    SAINT 


about  six  miles  from  camp.  The  In- 
dians at  once  commenced  firing  at  them 
and  Bro.  Ricks  was  shot  three  times. 
It  was  not  until  the  following  July  that 
he  was  able  to  leave  his  bed,  but  from 
that  time  on  he  continued  to  gain 
strength.  He  arrived  in  Salt  Lake  val- 
ley Sept.  24,  1848,  locating  at  North 
Mill  Creek,  about  twelve  miles  north  of 
Salt  Lake  City.  The  following  spring 
he  moved  into  Centerville.  In  the  fall 
of  1849  he  was  called  to  go  with  an 
eight-ox  team  to  meet  a  company  of 
emigrants  In  charge  of  Ezra  T.  Benson 
and  Geo.  A.  Smith,  whom  he  met  near 
Independence  Rock  on  the  Sweetwater, 
and  returning  with  the  company  he  ar- 
rived in  Salt  Lake  City  Oct.  23,  1849. 
On  the  20th  of  November  of  the  same 
year  he  was  called  to  go  on  an  explor- 


ing expedition— under  the  charge  of 
Parley  P.  Pratt— to  southern  Utah.  He 
accompanied  this  expedition  as  far 
south  as  where  St.  George  is  now  lo- 
cated, and  returned  March  27,  1850. 
He  was  married  to  Tobitha  Hendricks 
Aug.  28,  1852.  At  the  April  conference, 
18.56.  he  was  called  to  go  south  on  an 
Indian  mission  with  William  Bring- 
hurst  and  others.  They  went  to  Los 
Vegas  (now  Nevada),  and  there,  with 
the  others  of  the  mission,  he  assisted 
in  building  a  fort,  and  opening  up 
farms.  At  the  October  conference, 
1856.  he  was  called  to  go  and  assist 
the  hand-cart  company  through,  and 
started  out  on  this  mission  the  same 
day  he  was  called.  He  met  Capt. 
Martin's  company  at  Independence 
Rock,    and   arrived   at   Salt   Lake   City 


with  them  Nov.  30th.  March  10,  1858, 
he,  with  others,  was  called  to  Salmon 
river,  Idaho,  to  rescue  Thomas  S. 
Smith's  company  from  the  Indians,  re- 
turning to  Salt  Lake  City  one  month 
later — with  the  rescued — when  they 
found  the  Saints  all  moving  south  on 
account  of  the  approach  of  Johnston's 
army,  in  which  move  he  participated 
and  went  as  far  south  as  Strawberry 
creek,  a  little  north  of  where  the  town 
of  Nephi  is  now  located.  In  the  fall 
of  1859  he  moved  to  Cache  valley  and 
located  at  Logan,  in  said  valley.  He  was 
for  many  years  a  member  of  the  High 
Council  of  Cache  Stake  of  Zion.  In  1863 
he  crossed  the  plains  as  captain  of  a 
company  of  teams  who  went  to  meet 
the  emigrants  at  Council  Bluffs,  and 
again  in  1866  he  was  called  to  fill  a 
similar  mission,  both  of  which  he  filled 
successfully.  In  1869  he  filled  a  mission 
to  the  States  of  Ohio,  Illinois  and  Ken- 
tucy.  Soon  after  his  return  from  this 
mission  he  was  found  busy  in  the  con- 
struction of  the  railroad  from  Ogden  to 
Franklin,  being  one  of  the  principal 
contractors  in  the  building  of  this 
grade.  In  1877,  he,  in  company  with 
Wm.  D.  Hendricks,  contracted  for  the 
laying  of  the  track  from  Franklin, 
Idaho,  to  Butte,  Montana,  which  work 
he  completed  by  Christmas,  1880.  In 
1881  he  w'as  busy  as  a  contractor  of 
grades  for  the  Northern  Pacific  rail- 
road. In  December,  1882,  he  was  called 
to  lead  a  colony  in  the  settlement  of 
the  upper  Snake  River  valley,  Idaho, 
where  he  arrived  the  following  Februa- 
ry and  at  once  went  to  work  and  laid 
out  the  city  of  Rexburg,  and  afterwards 
assisted  in  laying  out  nearly  every 
settlement  in  what  is  now  Fremont  and 
Bingham  counties.  He  built  the  first 
grist  mill  in  the  upper  Snake  river  val- 
ley; built  the  first  ferry  across  the 
north  fork  of  Snake  river;  built  the  first 
saw  mill;  opened  up  the  first  mer- 
cantile store,  and  was  ever  first  and 
foremost  in  every  enterprise  that  tend- 
ed to  build  a  commonwealth.  He  was 
appointed  the  first  Bishop  in  the  Snake 
River  country,  then  known  as  the  Ban- 
nock Ward.  When  the  Stake  was  or- 
ganized Feb.  4,  1884,  he  was  appointed 
its  president,  which  position  he  credit- 
ably filled  till  his  death.  In  1885  he 
was  called  on  a  mission  to  England, 
which  he  filled  for  a  period  of  over  two 
years.  Soon  after  his  return  from  this 
mission,  while  in  Logan,  he  was  placed 


BIOGRAPHICAL    ENCYCLOPEDIA. 


457 


under  arrest  on  the  charge  of  unlawful 
cohabitation,     but     at     his  preliminary 
hearing-  on   May   28,   1888,    he   was   dis- 
charged.     In  1890  he  was  again  arrest- 
ed for  his  religion's  sake,  and  this  time 
appealed   his  case   to   the   higher   court 
from    the    decision    of    the    trial    court, 
which  resulted  in  the  case  being  again 
dismissed.   From  1861  to  1863  he  served 
Cache  county  as  their  sheriff,  and  again 
in   the    '70s   he   was     serving   the   same 
county  as  their  assessor  and  collector. 
He  was  a  colonel   of  the   Utah   militia 
for  a  great  number  of  years.       Twice 
he   was   appointed   by   the   governor  of 
Idaho  a  delegate  to  represent  the  State 
in    the     National      Irrigation    congress, 
both    of     which    he    filled    with    honor. 
In  1898  he    was    appointed  by  the  gov- 
ernor of  Idaho     as     a  member  of   the 
board   of  directors  of  the  Insane  Asy- 
lum of  Idaho.       He  was  chosen  chair- 
man of  the  board  and  held  that  posi- 
tion at  the  time  of  his  death.    During 
the    time   he    was   railroad-building   he 
accumulated  considerable  means,  all  of 
which  he  spent  in  building  up  and  de- 
veloping the  Snake  river  country,  and 
in    assisting    the    poor   and    needy    who 
had  come  to  settle  there.     The  savings 
and    accumulations     of   a    great    many 
years  of  industrious  toil  were  all  spent 
through    his    kindness      and    liberality. 
President    Ricks    died    at    his    home    in 
Rexburg,  Bingham  county,  Idaho.Sept. 
28,    1901,    surrounded    by    his    numerous 
and      sorrowing     family.        Those    who 
knew    him    best     assert      that    a    more 
courageous  man  never  lived  than  Thos. 
E.    Ricks;    for    fear    to    him    was     un- 
known.      While   at   times   he   appeared 
a   little    rough   and    stern    in    his   man- 
ner and  conversation,  yet  beneath  that 
roughness  and   sternness   there  always 
beat  a  kindly  and  forgiving  heart.     To 
the   kingdom    of    God,    and    the   Priest- 
hood,  he   was   loyal   to   the  core,     ever 
ready  and  willing  to  go  where  he  was 
called    and    when    he    was    called,      un- 
flinchingly   braving    every    danger   and 
hardship  without  a  murmur.      His  was 
a   cheerful    disposition,    and    he   always 
had   words   of   encouragement   to   those 
who  were  laboring  to  build  up  the  new 
country  in  which  he  took  so  much  in- 
terest. He  had  five  wives,  four  of  whom 
survived   him.       He   was  the   father  of 
42  children,  36  of  whom  he  left  to  mourn 
his  loss.       At  the  time  of  his  death  he 
had   154     grandchildren     and     2   great- 
grandchildren living. 


HOGSTKD,  Hans  Christian  Soren- 
sen,  a  prominent  Elder  in  the  Salem 
Ward,  Fremont  county,  Idaho,  is  the 
son  of  Soren  Christian  Hansen  and  Jo- 
hanna Christiansen,  and  was  born  Aug. 
17,  1830,  at  Hogsted,  Vrejlev  parish, 
Hjorring  amt,  Denmark.  His  father 
died  in  1842,  and  his  youth  was  spent 
in  learning  the  brickmaker's  trade.  In 
the  fall  of  1857  there  was  considerable 
religious  agitation  among  the  people, 
and  Mr.  Hogsted  also  became  possessed 
of  the  spirit  of  inquiry.  In  answer  to 
his  humble  prayers  he  became  con- 
vinced that  there  was  a  true  and  living 
God,  and  he  immediately  began  to  find 
out  what  was  necessary  for  him  to 
do  in  order  to  save  his  soul.  About 
this  time  his  younger  sister  came  to 
visit    him.       She    brought    with    her     a 


tract  that  she  had  received  from  a 
"Mormon  "  Elder,  and  left  it  with  her 
brother,  who  read  it,  and  became  im- 
pressed to  ask  the  Lord  if  Joseph  Smith 
was  a  true  Prophet.  He  then  read  all 
the  literature  on  "Mormonism"  that  he 
could  get  possession  of.  At  the  first 
meeting  of  the  Latter-day  Saints  that 
he  attended  he  became  convinced  that 
the  doctrine  taught  by  the  Elders  was 
from  God, and  he  accepted  the  gospel  and 
was  baptized  by  Elder  Peter  A.  Field- 
sted  Feb.  8,  1858.  He  was  ordained  a 
Deacon  by  Peter  A.  Fjeldsted  Feb.  28, 
1858,  and  at  the  same  time  appointed  to 
preside  over  the  Serritslev  branch.  He 
was  ordained  a  Priest  June  20,  1858,  by 
Peter  A.  Fjeldsted,  and  an  Elder  Dec. 
26,  1858,  by  Peter  A.  Fjeldsted,  and  ap- 


458 


LATTER-DAY  SAINT 


pointed  president  of  the  Jerslev  branch. 
Later,  he  was  appointed  to  labor  as  a 
traveling  Elder  in  different  districts 
of  the  Vendsyssel  conference,  and  still 
later  his  field  of  labor  was  made  to  in- 
clude the  Aalborg  conference.  He  mar- 
ried Maren  Borglum  Dec.  10.  1861,  in  the 
city  of  Hjorring.  Together  with  Chris- 
tian A.  Madsen  and  two  other  Elders, 
he  was  imprisoned  in  Mariager  Jan. 
30.  1861,  for  preaching  the  gospel.  They 
were,  however,  released  the  next  day. 
March  4,  1862,  Elder  Hogsted  was  ap- 
pointed to  preside  over  the  Vendsyssel 
conference.  In  April,  1862,  he  went  to 
Hamburg,  Germany,  to  assist  in  ship- 
ping large  companies  of  Scandinavian 
emigrants,  bound  for  Zion.  During 
the  year  1862,  162  souls  were  baptized 
into  the  Church  in  the  Vendsyssel  con- 
ference. March  13,  1864,  he  was  re- 
leased from  his  position  as  president 
of  said  conference  and  appointed  to 
preside  over  the  Copenhagen  confer- 
ence, which  at  that  time  was  the  larg- 
est conference  in  the  Scandinavian  mis- 
sion and  contained  about  eleven  hun- 
dred Saints.  Elder  Hogsted's  whole 
missionary  career  was  imminently  suc- 
cessful, and  he  stands  in  the  first  ranks 
of  all  the  local  Elders  who  ever 
preached  the  gospel  in  Scandinavia.  He 
presided  in  Copenhagen  till  1865,  when 
he  was  released  and  allowed  to  emi- 
grate to  Zion.  He  left  Denmark  May 
4,  1865,  crossed  the  Atlantic  on  the  ship 
"B.  S.  Kimball,"  and  landed  in  New 
York  June  15,  1865.  He  arrived  in  Salt 
Lake  City  Nov.  8,  1865.  "WTiile  cross- 
ing the  ocean,  all  his  children  died  ex- 
cept two.  During  the  winter  of  1856- 
57  he  resided  in  the  Sixteenth  Ward, 
Salt  Lake  City.  In  1866  he  moved  to 
Huntsville,  Weber  county,  where  he 
lived  till  1876,  when  he  removed  to  Har- 
risville,    in    the    same    county.        March 

27,  1870,  he  was  ordained  a  Seventy  by 
Amos  Milton  Musser  and  became  a 
member   of  the   75th   quorum.       Jan.   9, 

1871.  he  was  set  apart  as  one  of  the 
presidents  of  said  quorum.  Later  he 
became  the  senior  president  of  the  60th 
quorum  of  Seventy.  June  3,  1893,  he  was 
ordained  a  High  Priest  by  William  F. 
Rigby.       From   May  28,  1887,     to     Nov. 

28,  1887,  he  served  a  term  in  the  Utah 
penitentiary  for  "unlawful  cohabita- 
tion." His  present  home  is  at  Salem, 
Fremont  county,  Idaho,  and  he  is  now 
71  years  of  age  and  rejoices  in  the  gos- 
pel more  than  ever  before.      He  has  27 


children— 12  sons  and  15  daughters— 
who  are  all  members  of  the  Church. 
Besides  all  the  missionary  work  he  has 
done  for  the  living.  Elder  Hogsted  has 
been  a  faithful  Temple  worker,  and  has 
attended  to  ordinance  work  for  a  great 
number  of  his  relatives. 

LARSEN,      Lauritz      Kdward,        a 

prominent  Elder  in  the  Salem  Ward, 
Fremont  county,  Idaho,  is  the  son  of 
Lars  Emanuelsen  and  was  born  Dec. 
29,  1832,  in  Frederikshald,  Smaalenenes 
amt,  Norway.  He  first  heard  the  gos- 
pel in  1856,  and  was  at  once  convinced 
of  its  truth.  He  was  baptized  Oct. 
19.  1856.  by  John  F.  F.  Dorius  and  con- 
firmed a  member  of  the  Church  by  Carl 
C.  A.  Christensen.  Soon  afterwards 
he  was  ordained  a  Teacher  and  sent  out 
to  preach  the  gospel  as  a  local  mission- 
ary. Because  he  would  not  renounce 
"Mormonism"  he  was  discharged  from 
a  good  position  which  he  held  at  the 
time  in  a  woolen  factory  in  Tistedalen. 
He  then  went  to  Christiania,  where  he 
remained  for  some  time.  Here  he  was 
ordained  an  Elder  and  sent  out  to  do 
missionary  work  in  Hadeland,  where  he 
labored  successfully  for  about  three 
months.  In  the  summer  of  1858  he  w-as 
sent  to  Drammen  to  labor.  He  also 
visited  his  relatives  that  year  and  had 
the  pleasure  of  baptizing  his  father, 
mother,  brother  and  sister.  In  ISSO' 
he  was  appointed  to  labor  in  Christian- 
ia. While  on  a  visit  to  his  first  mis- 
sionary field,  Hadeland,  he  baptized  a 
number  of  people  and  organized  a 
branch  of  the  Church.  For  this  he  was 
arrested  and  imprisoned  on  bread  and 
water  diet.  Immediately  on  being 
released,  he  baptized  seven  persons.  In 
1863  he  was  called  to  labor  in  Trond- 
hjem  and  while  operating  in  that  field 
he  walked  the  entire  distance,  400  miles, 
from  Trondhjem  to  Christiania,  and 
back  again,  to  attend  a  conference 
meeting.  In  1864  he  was  released  from 
his  mission,  with  permission  to  emi- 
grate to  Zion.  He  crossed  the  ocean 
in  a  sailing  vessel,  and  the  plains  with 
an  ox-team,  being  six  months  on  the 
journey.  He  married  and  lived  for 
twenty  years  in  Hyrum,  Cache  county. 
Utah.  April  2,  1897,  he  left  Salt  Lake 
City,  in  response  to  a  call  to  go  on  a 
mission  to  Scandinavia.  While  on  this 
mission  he  labored  in  Christiania  near- 
ly the  whole  time.  Bro.  Larsen  writes: 
"There   is   no   comparison   between    the 


BIOGRAPHICAL   ENCYCLOPEDIA. 


459 


missionary  experiences  today  and  that 
of  twenty-five  years  ago.  Now  all  is 
peaceful  and  quiet,  then  there  were  dis- 
turbance and  persecution  on  every 
side."  Elder  Larsen  is  the  head  of 
a  large  family;  all  his  children  are 
members  of  the  Church.  He  is  now  70 
years  of  age  and  in  possession  of  ex- 
cellent health. 

WARD,  Moroni,  Bishop  of  the 
Washakie  Ward,  Malad  county,  Idaho, 
is  the  son  of  Geo.  W.  Ward  and  Ann 
Trulock,  and  was  born  June  8,  1851,  at 
Harris'  Grove,  Iowa,  while  his  parents 
were  moving  westward.  Elder  Ward 
writes:  "After  arriving  in  Utah  in 
1852,  we  wintered  in  North  Ogden,  We- 
ber county.  In  the  spring  of  1853  we 
moved    to   Willard,    Box    Elder   county, 


where  I  lived  till  I  was  21  years  of  age, 
working  on  the  farm,  herding  cattle 
and  sheep,  and  attending  school  during 
the  winter.  I  married  Eliza  Voss  Nov. 
18,  1872,  and  moved  to  Muddy  Creek 
(now  Woodruff),  Oneida  county,  Idaho, 
where  I  was  busy  making  a  new  home 
till  Feb.  26,  1878,  when  I  was  called  by 
Pres.  John  Taylor  to  aid  in  the  work 
of  teaching  and  directing  the  labors  of 
the  Lamanites  on  the  Malad  farm.  I 
was  set  apart  for  this  mission  by  Pres. 
Lorenzo  Snow,  and  left  for  my  field  of 
labor  March  17,  1878.  I  was  ordained 
a  High  Priest  by  Oliver  G.  Snow,  Aug. 
29,  1881,  and  set  apart  to  serve  as  sec- 
ond counselor  to  Bishop  Isaac  E.  D. 
Zundell,  of  the  Washakie  Ward,  which 
position  I  held  till  November,  1888,when 


I  was  released  to  return  home,  after  an 
absence  of  eleven  years.  I  built  a 
house,  and  moved  my  family  to  Wood- 
ruff April  6,  1889.  In  June,  1889,  I  was 
set  apart  as  first  counselor  to  Bishop 
T.  A.  Davis.  I  labored  in  that  capacity 
till  April,  1890,  when  I  was  called  to 
take  my  family  and  live  and  labor 
among  the  Indians  again,  at  Washakie. 
This  was  a  very  hard  trial  for  my 
family,  as  they  would  be  the  only  white 
people  in  the  place,  and  my  family  con- 
sisted lar^-ely  of  girls,  making  it  doubly 
hard.  However,  we  left  our  home 
April  7,  1890,  and  took  up  our  abode 
once  more  among  the  Indians  at 
Washakie.  At  the  June  (1890)  confer- 
ence of  Malad  Stake  I  was  ordained  a 
Bishop  and  set  apart  to  preside  over 
the  Washakie  Ward,  by  Pres.  Lorenzo 
Snow,  and  I  have  continued  to  hold 
this  position  ever  since.  I  have  spent 
22  of  the  best  years  of  my  life  in  trying 
to  educate  the  Lamanites  to  be  indus- 
trious, to  be  honest,  truthful  and  vir- 
tuous, and  have  also  taught  them  the 
glorious  principles  of  the  gospel  of  Je- 
sus Christ.  I  have  had  great  joy  and 
satisfaction  in  my  labors,  having  been 
assisted  by  the  Lord  at  all  times.  I 
have  seen  many  grand  manifestations 
of  His  power  and  might." 

SHURTLIFF,  Lewis  Warren,  res- 
ident of  the  Weber  Stake  of  Zion,  is 
the  son  of  Luman  Andrus  Shurtliff  and 
Eunice  Baggs  Gaylord,  and  was  born 
July  24,  1835,  at  Sullivan,  Lorain  (now 
Ashland)  county,  Ohio.  His  ancestors 
were  of  old  Puritan  stock,  the  fijjst  of 
the  name  in  America  being  William 
Shurtliff,  who  came  from  England  to 
the  Plymouth  colony  in  1634.  Some  late 
branches  of  the  family  moved  westward 
in  1811,  and  Brother  Shurtliff's  progen- 
itors settled  about  that  time  in  Ohio 
on  the  Western  Reserve.  While  an  in- 
fant, his  parents  became  members  of 
the  Church  of  Jesus  Christ  of  Latter- 
day  Saints.  The  family  went  to  Kirt- 
land,  Ohio,  in  1838;  from  there  they 
moved  to  Far  West,  Mo.,  and  thence 
to  Nauvoo,  III.,  and  thence  to  Council 
Bluffs,  Iowa,  following  with  patience 
the  buffetings  and  viscissitudes  of  the 
people  of  their  chosen  faith.  Lewis' 
father,  Luman  A.  Shurtliff,  took  an 
active  part  in  the  early  day  of  the 
Church;  and,  being  a  mason  by  trade, 
was  privileged  to  work  on  many  of  the 
historic   buildings  erected   in   the   days 


460 


LATTER-DAY    SAINT 


of  the  Prophet.  In  the  spring  of  1851 
the  family  began  their  long  Journey  to 
Utah  with  ox  teams,  arriving  in  Salt 
Lake  City,  Sept.  23rd,  of  the  same 
year.  Shortly  afterwards  they  set- 
tled in  Weber  county,  in  what  is  now 
called  Harrisville;  but  when  the  Indian 
trouble  came  on,  they  went  to  live  in 
Bingham's  Fort,  near  Ogden.  During 
this  trouble  Lewis  W.  Shurtliff  was  a 
lieutenant  in  the  militia  organized  for 
self-defense.  When  a  young  boy  he 
was  ordained  a  Deacon  at  Council 
Bluffs  and  was  subsequently  ordained 
to  the  various  grades  of  the  Priesthood, 
in  their  order,  after  coming  to  Utah. 
In  the  fall  of  1855,  he  was  called  on  a 
mission  to  Salmon  river,  Idaho  (then 
eastern    Oregon),    where   several   small 


companies  had  been  sent  as  colonists 
and  missionaries  to  the  Indians.  They 
were  the  first  white  men  who  plowed 
a  furrow  and  brolte  the  soil  of  that 
territory.  He  was  only  twenty-one 
years  of  age  when  called  on  this  most 
dangerous  colonization  expedition. 
While  there  he  married  Louisa  C. 
Smith  Jan.  4,  1858.  He  remained  there 
until  1858;  during  this  time  the  In- 
dians caused  them  much  annoyance 
and  .some  trouble.  Finally,  they  had  a 
severe  encounter,  in  which  two  Elders 
were  killed  and  several  wounded,  and 
all  their  cattle  and  horses  were  stolen 
by  the  Indians.  After  being  imprisoned 
for  thirty  days,  they  were  rescued  by 
a  company  of  about  two  hundred  men 
from  Utah.  When  Elder  Shurtliff  re- 
turned to  Ogden  in  1858,  he  found  that 


the  community  had  gone  south  because 
of  the  Johnston  army  trouble,  and  on 
the  return  of  the  Saints  to  their  homes, 
he  settled  in  Ogden, where  he  purchased 
property.  In  1863,  he  went  to  Florence, 
on  the  Missouri  river,  in  a  company 
under  Captain  Thomas  E.  Ricks,  for 
the  purpose  of  meeting  and  bringing 
the  emigrating  Saints  and  their  freight 
to  Utah.  His  wife  died  in  the  fall  of 
1866,  and  in  the  spring  of  1867  he  was 
called  on  a  mission  to  Great  Britain. 
Responding  to  the  call,  he,  together 
with  other  missionaries,  went  by  mule- 
teams  to  Julesburg,  Neb.,  which  was 
then  the  western  terminus  of  the 
Union  Pacific  railroad.  While  in  Eng- 
land he  presided  successively  over  the 
Nottingham  and  the  London  confer- 
ences and  traveled  extensively  through 
England,  Scotland  and  Wales.  He  also 
visited  Denmark,  Norway,  Sweden.Ger- 
many,  France  and  Italy,  and  attended 
meetings  with  the  Saints  in  most  of 
those  countries.  On  returning  home, 
he  was  appointed  Bishop  of  Plain  City, 
which  office  he  held  until  1883,  when  he 
was  called  back  to  Ogden  and  appoint- 
ed president  of  the  Weber  Stake  of 
Zion.  This  was  done  at  a  conference 
held  in  Ogden,  J'an.  21,  1883.  From  1866 
to  1872  his  time  was  mostly  spent  in  the 
missionary  field.  April  10,  1872.  he 
married  Emily  M.  Wainwright.  In  1883 
he  was  elected  county  commissioner  of 
Weber  county  and  remained  in  that 
office  until  1886.  During  that  time  he 
was  a  member  of  the  constitutional 
convention  and  was  elected  to  the  coun- 
cil of  the  Territorial  legislature  in  1886. 
The  same  year  he  was  elected  probate 
judge  of  Weber  county,  and  re-elected 
to  both  these  offices  in  1888.  In  1889, 
he  was  elected  county  commissioner 
and  served  in  that  capacity  until  1894. 
In  1896  and  1898  he  served  in  the  upper 
house  of  the  State  legislature.  For 
a  number  of  years  he  has  been  closely 
connected  with  the  Trans-Mississippi 
Commercial  Congress  and  also  the  Na- 
tional Irrigation  Congress,  which  or- 
ganizations are  working  for  the  de- 
velopment and  advancement  of  the 
western   arid   and   semi-arid  lands. 

MIDDLETON,  Charles  F.,  first 
counselor  to  Pres.  Lewis  W.  Shurtliff 
of  the  Weber  Stake  of  Zion,  was  born 
Feb.  24,  1834.  in  Washington  county,  Il- 
linois. He  is  a  direct  descendant  of  the 
fathers  of  American  independence.  His 


BIOGRAPHICAL.    ENCYCLOPEDIA. 


461 


father's  name  was  William,  who  was 
Ibe  son  of  Reuben,  who  was  the  son  of 
Nuke,  who  was  a  descendant  of  Arthur 
Middleton,  who  sig-ned  the  declaration 
of  Independence.  His  mother's  name 
was  Mary  H.  Butler.  His  parents 
joined  the  Church  in  1834  and  passed 
through  the  persecutions  of  Missouri 
and  Illinois.  Charles  F.  was  baptized 
by  Joseph  Smith  at  Nauvoo  in  1842.  The 
family  arrived  in  Salt  Lake  City  Sept. 
22,  1850,  and  settled  in  Ogden  the  same 
fall,  where  the  father,  William  Middle- 
ton,  who  was  ordained  a  Patriarch  in 
the  Church,  died  in  1889.  Charles  F. 
Middleton  participated  in  the  famous 
Salmon  river  expedition  or  mission  in 
the  fifties,  and  remained  with  it  till  it 
was  broken  up  by  Indians.  In  1869  he 
was  elected  constable  of  Ogden;  in  the 
spring  of  1869  he  was  appointed  to  the 
offlce  of  a  selectman  of  Weber  county, 
and  in  1871  he  was  elected  justice  of 
the  peace  of  Ogden  precinct.  Aug.  7, 
1871,  he  was  chosen  second  counselor 
to  David  H.  Peery,  in  the  presidency 
of  the  Weber  Stake  of  Zion,  which  po- 
sition he  held  till  Jan.  21,  1883,  when 
he  was  chosen  first  counselor  to  Pres. 
Lewis  W.  Shurtliff.  In  1876-77  he  filled 
a  short  mission  to  the  States,  laboring 
principally  in  Illinois,  Missouri  and 
Iowa.  He  has  acted  as  alderman  and 
police  judg-e  of  Ogden,  and  filled  nu- 
merous other  positions  of  honor  and 
tiust. 

FLYGARE  Nils  Christian  sec- 
ond counselor  to  Pi'es.  Lewis  W.  Shurt- 
liff of  the  Weber  Stake  of  Zion,  was 
born  Feb.  3,  1841,  at  Ruthsbo,  Bjerreso 
parish,  near  Tstad,  Malmohus  Ian, 
Sweden.  He  was  baptized  by  C.  Niel- 
sen, Sept.  5,  1858,  in  the  city  of  Lund, 
Sweden,  and  was  soon  afterwards  or- 
dained Deacon  and  called  to  labor  as  a 
local  missionary,  and  in  the  spring  of 
1859  he  was  ordained  an  Elder.  He  la- 
bored over  three  years  as  a  missi^jnary 
in  the  Scone  conference,  filling  the  fol- 
lowing positions  in  the  order  named: 
missionary  in  Ystad  branch,  president 
of  Svedala  branch,  missionary  in  the 
province  of  Blekinge,  missionary  in 
Neflinge  and  Wiggarum  branches,  pres- 
ident of  Wiggarum  branch,  president  of 
Horby  branch,  president  of  Landskrona 
branch  and  traveling  Elder  in  Lands- 
krona and  Svaluf  branches.  In  Sep- 
tember,  1861,   he   was   called   to   preside 


over  the  Stockholm  conference,  which 
position  he  occupied  until  the  spring  of 
1864,  when  he  was  honorably  released  to 
emigrate  to  Utah.  During  all  these 
years  of  missionary  labor,  while  a  very 
young  man,  he  showed  much  energy 
and  perseverance  and  did  much  travel- 
ing and  preaching.  The  membership 
of  the  Church  in  Sweden  was  consid- 
erably increased  through  his  faithful 
labors.  He  left  his  native  land  in  the 
spring  of  1864  and,  in  company  with  a 
large  company  of  emigrants,  landed  in 
America  in  June.  He  crossed  the  plains 
in  Capt.  Wm.  B.  Preston's  company 
and  arrived  in  Salt  Lake  City  Sept.  15, 
1864.  Shortly  after  arriving  in  Utah, 
he   located    in   Ogden,    where   his   home 


has  been  ever  since.  His  early  occupa- 
tion in  Utah  was  that  of  a  builder, 
which  later  led  him  to  become  one  of 
the  principal  contractors  and  builders 
in  Utah.  In  1874  he  was  called  by 
Pres.  Brigham  Young  to  perform  a 
mission  to  Scandinavia.  On  arriving  in 
Copenhagen,  Denmark,  he  was  appoint- 
ed to  preside  over  the  Stockholm  con- 
ference, which  position  he  occupied  till 
June,  1875,  when  he  was  called  by  Pi-es. 
Jos.  F.  Smith  to  preside  over  the  Scan- 
dinavian mission.  He  was  released  to 
return  home  in  June,  1876,  and  was  ap- 
pointed leader  of  a  large  company  of 
emigrants  from  Liverpool  to  Utah.  In 
the  fall  of  1877  he  was  called  to  take  an- 
other mission  to  Scandinavia,  and  pre- 
sided for  two  years  over  the   mission. 


462 


LATTER-DAY    SAINT 


While  iin  this  mission,  he.  in  connection 
with  Elder  August  W.  Carlson,  pub- 
lished the  first  edition  of  the  Book  of 
Mormon  In  the  Swedish  language.  Re- 
turning home  in  the  fall  of  1879,  he  was 
again  appointed  leader  of  a  company  of 
Saints  from  Liverpool  to  Utah.  He  was 
very  successful  in  handling  the  emi- 
gration matters  on  these  long  and  tire- 
some journeys  over  water  and  land.  In 
the  fall  of  1885,  Elder  Flygare  was,  for 
the  third  time,  called  to  take  a  mission 
to  Scandinavia;  this  time  he  presided 
over  the  mission  about  three  years,  and 
returned  to  his  home  in  Ogden  in  Oc- 
tober, 1888.  Up  to  this  time  he  had 
spent  over  twelve  years  as  a  missionary 
in  Scandinavia,  and  he  is,  no  doubt,  as 
to  length  of  time  spent  in  the  mission- 
ary field,  at  the  head  of  the  list  of  those 
who  have  labored  in  Scandinavia.  At 
home  Elder  Flygare  has  held  many  po- 
sitions of  trust  and  responsibility,  both 
in  Church  and  State.  After  serving  as 
Bishop  of  the  Fourth  Ward  of  Ogden 
from  1877  to  1883,  he  was  chosen  second 
counselor  in  the  Stake  presidency  of 
Weber  Stake  of  Zion,  which  position 
he  still  holds.  He  is  also  a  member 
of  the  Stake  Board  of  Education.  El- 
der Flygare  has  served  Ogden  city  as 
building  inspector,  city  councilor  and 
fire  and  police  commissioner.  He  has 
served  the  State  as  superintendent  of 
the  erection  of  the  Agricultural  College 
buildings  at  Logan,  and  is  at  present 
one  of  the  trustees  of  the  State  Indus- 
trial School  and  treasurer  of  that 
school.  He  has  been  very  active  in 
business  affairs  and  was  one  of  the 
originators  of  the  following  named  en- 
terprises: First  National  Bank  of  Og- 
den. of  which  he  was  a  director  for 
many  years;  Eccles  Lumber  Co.,  of 
which  he  is  vice-president;  Ogden 
Street  Railway  Co.,  of  which  he  was  a 
director;  Ogden  Electric  Railway  Co., 
of  ^vhich  he  was  secretary,  treasurer 
and  manager  for  a  long  time,  and  O5- 
den  Standard  Publishing  Co.,  of  which 
he  was  i)resident  for  several  years.  He 
is  at  iiresent  engaged  by  the  Ogden 
Sugar  company  as  manager  of  that  en- 
terprise. 

GKDDES,  William,  a  prominent  El' 
der  of  Plain  City,  Weber  county,  Utah, 
was  born  Dec.  8,  1832,  near  Glasgow, 
Scotland,  of  humble  parentage.  At  the 
age  of  fourteen  he  first  heard  the  gos- 
pel, was  convinced  at  once  of  its  truth, 


and  was  soorl  after  baptized.  He  lOld 
his  father  of  what  he  had  done  and  ex- 
plained the  principles  of  his  newly 
adopted  faith;  but  his  father  rejected 
the  gospel,  turned  the  boy  out  of  his 
house  and  told  him  never  to  enter  it 
again,  unless  he  renounced  "Mormon- 
ism."  William  walked  for  three  days 
hunting  work,  and  on  the  evening  of 
the  third  day  he  secured  employment 
in  a  coal  mine,  and  that  evening  worked 
enough  to  pay  for  his  supper,  which 
was  the  first  food  he  had  tasted  since 
leaving  home.  After  an  absence  of  two 
years  he  returned  to  his  home  and 
found  his  father  sufficiently  softened  in 
heart  to  receive  and  welcome  him,  but 
didn't  want  to  hear  anything  of  "Mor- 
monism."  He  had  been  home  but  a 
short  time  when  he  was  seized  with  the 


cholera.  He  asked  his  father  to  have 
ihe  Elders  come  and  administer  to  him, 
but  the  father  would  not  let  a  "Mor- 
mon" Elder  enter  his  house.  The  boy 
grew  worse  and  was  thought  beyond 
recovery,  and  as  a  dying  request  the 
father  yielded  to  the  boy's  desire.  The 
Elders  were  sent  for  and,  under  their 
administration,  the  boy  was  instantly 
healed,  arose  from  his  supposed  death 
bed  and  went  to  meeting  with  the  El- 
ders. After  this  miraculous  manifesta- 
tion of  the  power  of  God,  he  spent  much 
of  his  spare  time  preaching  on  the 
streets,  and  was  soon  styled  the  boy 
preacher.  In  1854  he  came  to  Utah,  but 
instead  of  using  the  money  he  had 
saved  by  hard  work  to  pay  his  passage, 
he  worked  his  way  and  paid  the  pass- 


BIOGRAPHICAL    ENCYCLOPEDIA. 


463 


age  of  a  poor  widow.  His  training  in 
the  quarries  and  mines  of  Scotland 
served  him  well  in  his  new  home,  where 
he  found  employment  in  quarrying 
granite  for  the  Salt  Lake  Temple.  He 
was  associated  with  John  Sharp  in  the 
work  for  several  years  after  his  arrival 
in  Utah.  Durin"  the  Johnston  army 
troubles  he  went  out  to  Echo  canyon 
and  passed  through  the  many  trials 
and  hardships  of  those  memorable 
days;  he  was  one  of  the  most  cheerful, 
willing  defenders  of  God's  cause.  In 
1859,  he,  together  with  fourteen  others, 
settled  the  town  of  Plain  City,  and  it 
was  due  to  his  determined  persevering 
nature  that  the  place  was  not  aband- 
oned, as  the  settlers  had  nine  miles  to 
bring  the  water  through  a  difficult 
country  before  a  crop  of  any  kind  could 
be  raised.  Before  moving  to  Plain 
City,  Elder  Geddes  married  (at  the  age 
of  21)  Elizabeth  Stewart,  and  about  a 
year  later  he  married  her  sister  Martha 
Stewart.  In  his  new  home  at  Plain 
City  he  passed  through  all  the  hard- 
ships incidental  to  pioneer  life.  In  1872 
he  was  called  to  fill  a  mission  to  Scot- 
land; but  soon  after  his  arrival  there 
he  w-as  called  to  Australia,  where  he 
filled  a  most  successful  mission.  While 
in  Australia  he  saw  the  power  of  the 
Lord  made  manifest  many  times.  On 
one  occasion  he  was  prepared  to  take 
a  iourney  on  a  certain  boat,  but  was 
warned  in  a  dream  not  to  do  so;  he 
heeded  the  dream  and  learned  later 
that  the  boat  he  had  intended  taking 
had  been  wrecked  and  all  on  board  lost. 
During  the  crusade  against  polygamy 
he  was  arrested  and  served  six  months 
in  the  penitentiary, which  was  very  try- 
ing to  his  constitution,  and  his  health 
was  much  impaired  through  the 
cha^^'-ed  conditions  he  was  forced  to  ac- 
cept while  there.  Elder  Geddes  was 
always  a  public  spirited  man,  and  was 
particularly  interested  in  the  education 
of  the  young.  Consequently,  he  did 
much  toward  the  betterment  of  the 
schools  of  his  to\\Ti  and  county.  Dur- 
ing the  early  military  days  in  Utah  he 
was  one  of  the  most  active,  serving 
with  distinction  as  captain  in  the  Utah 
militia.  He  died  suddenly  of  heart  fail- 
ure at  Plain  City,  Aug.  23,  1899,  at  the 
aee  of  sixty-six  years.  His  life's  am- 
bition was  to  raise  a  family  that  would 
be  a  credit  to  his  name  after  death. 
Whether  his  ambition  was  realized  or 
not  can  best  be  answered  in  the  words 


of  Pres.  Lewis  W.  Shurtliff  who,  while 
speaking  at  his  funeral  service,  said: 
"Bro.  William  Geddes  leaves  behind 
him  a  large  family  of  boys  and  girls, 
than  whom  I  know  no  better,  and  who 
among  us  has  done  more?" 

HESS,  John  W., president  of  the  Da- 
vis Stake,  is  the  son  of  Jacob  Hess  and 
Elizabeth  Foutz,  and  was  born  Aug.  24, 
1824,  in  Franklin  county,  Penn.  In  1832 
his  father's  family  moved  to  P.ichland 
county,  where  he,  together  with  his 
father,  mother  and  elder  sister,  was 
baptized  by  Bishop  David  Evans,  about 
1834.  His  father  then  moved  to  Ray 
county.  Mo.,  where  the  family  passed 
through  all  the  persecutions  of  those 
days,  and  was  finally  expelled  from  the 
State  with  the  rest  of  the  Saints.  John 
W.  Hess  was  ordained  a  Seventy  in  the 
city  of  Nauvoo  in  1841  and  became  a 
member  of  the  22nd  quorum.  He  as- 
sisted in  building  the  Nauvoo  Temple 
and  received  his  endowments  therein. 
He  was  an  orderly  sergeant  in  the  Nau- 
voo Legion  and  was  on  guard  just  prior 
to  the  Prophet's  martyrdom.  In  the 
spring  of  1846  he  left  for  the  Rocky 
Mountains  together  with  the  other  ex- 
iled Saints.  July  16.  1846,  he  enlisted  in 
the  famous  Mormon  battalion  in  com- 
pany E,  and  marched  toward  Mexico  in 
defense  of  his  country's  flag.  He  served 
till'  July  29.  1847,  when  he  was  mustered 
out  in  Salt  Lake  City.  In  March,  1855. 
he  was  called,  ordained  and  set  apart  to 
preside  as  Bishop  of  Farmington  Ward 
by  Pres.  Brigham  Young,  in  which  of- 
fice he  faithfully  served  till  1882,  when 
he  was  called  by  Pres.  John  Taylor  to 
act  as  first  counselor  to  Wm.  R.  Smith, 
president  of  the  Davis  Stake.  March 
4,  1894,  he  was  set  apart  as  president 
of  the  Davis  Stake  by  Apostle  Franklin 
D.  Richards, which  position  he  has  filled 
ever  since.  Feb.  8,  1900.  he  was  ordained 
a  Patriarch  by  Apostle  Francis  M.  Ly- 
man. Elder  Hess  commanded  the  Da- 
vis county  military  district  as  colonel 
from  its  organization  till  it  was  dis- 
banded. Pres.  Hess  is  the  husband  of 
seven  wives  and  the  father  of  63  chil- 
dren, fifty  of  whom  are  living.  Ho  has 
at  the  present  writing  250  grandchildren 
and  40  great-grandchildren. 

BARTON,  Peter,  Bishop  of  Kays- 
ville,  Davis  county,  Utah,  is  the  son  of 
John  Barton  and  Elizabeth  Bell,  and 
was  born  March  21,  1845,  at  St.  Helens, 


464 


LATTER-DAY   SAINT 


Lanchashire  England.  He  was  bap- 
tized by  Elder  James  Barton  in  1855; 
ordained  a  Deacon  and  later  a  Priest 
while  in  England.  He  emigrated  to 
Utah  in  1862,  crossing  the  Atlantic  in 
the  ship  "Manchester,"  and  traveled 
over  the  plains  in  Ansel  P.  Harmon's 
ox-train.  After  his  arrival  in  Utah,  he 
settled  in  Kaysville,  where  he  has  re- 
sided ever  since.  He  was  ordained  an 
Elder  and  subsequently  a  Seventy,  and 
in  1874-76  he  labored  as  a  missionary  in 


Great  Britain.  June  18,  1877,  he  was 
ordained  a  High  Priest  and  Bishop  and 
set  apart  to  preside  over  the  Kaysville 
Ward,  which  position  he  still  occupies 
with  honor,  both  to  himself  and  the 
Ward.  He  also  served  as  Ward  clerk 
in  Kaysville  for  a  number  of  years.  In 
February,  1889,  he  was  sentenced  to  fif- 
teen months'  imprisonment  for  "un- 
lawful cohabitation,"  but  before  having 
served  his  full  term,  he  was  pardoned, 
being  the  first  "Mormon"  ever  pardoned 
by  Pres.  Benjamin  Harrison.  Bishop 
Barton  has  held  a  number  of  civil  po- 
sitions, such  as  justice  of  the  peace, city 
recorder  of  Kaysville,  etc.  He  ha?  also 
served  two  terms  in  the  Utah  legisla- 
ture. 

BARNKS,  John  Kicliard,  fir.st  coun- 
selor to  Bishop  Peter  Barton  of  Kays- 
ville, was  born  at  Sandy,  Bedfordshire. 
England.  July  28,  1833.  He  was  bap- 
tized April  28,  1848,  and  ordained  a 
Priest  in  1850.  He  emigrated  to  Utah 
in    1853,    and    was    ordained    a    Seventy 


about  the  year  1856.  He  was  clerk  of 
the  Kaysville  Ward  for  several  yt-ars 
during  Bishop  Christopher  Laytons  ad- 
ministration. In  1874  he  visited  his  na- 
tive land,  being  absent  from  home  three 
months.  June  29,  1877,  he  was  ordained 
a  High  Priest  by  Franklin  D.  Richards 
and  set  apart  as  first  counselor  to 
Bishop  Peter  Barton,  of  Kaysville, 
which  position  he  now  holds.  Feb.  22. 
1887,  he  was  arrested  for  unlawful  co- 
habitation, and  on  April  30,  1888,  was 
sentenced  by  Judge  Zane  to  three 
months  in  the  penitentiary  and  to  pay 
a  fine  of  $.300,  which  fine  he  paid,  but 
was  released  from  the  penitentiary 
June  22,  having  been  pardoned  by  Pres- 
ident Orover  Cleveland.  He  was  a 
worker  in  the  Salt  Lake  Temple  a  por- 
tion of  the  time  during  1894  and  1895, 
was  a  member  of  the  Constitutional 
convention  in  1895,  and  a  senator  in  the 
first  legislature  of  the  State     of  Utah. 


Elder  Barnes  is  one  of  the  leading  busi- 
nes  men  in  Utah,  is  a  director  in  ten 
different  business  institutions,  including 
the  Z.  C.  M.  I.  of  Salt  Lake  City  and 
the  Deseret  National  and  Savings 
Bank.  He  has  been  superintendent  of 
the  Kaysville  co-operative  institution 
since  its  first  organization  in  1869. 

UOITCHK,  Thomas  Francis,  sec- 
ond counselor  to  Bishop  Peter  Barton, 
of  Kaysville,  Davis  county,  Utah,  is  the 
son  of  John  Baptiste  and  Catharine  Ce- 
celia Skelly,  and  was  born  Feb.  9,  1833. 
in  Lincoln  county.  North  Carolina.     He 


BIOGRAPHICAL.   ENCYCLOPEDIA. 


465 


was  baptized  in  St.  Louis,  Mo.,  Sept.  22, 
1854,  by  Elder  William  Cornish  and  or- 
ordained  a  Deacon  in  the  spring 
of  1854.  He  emierrated  to  Utah 
in  1855,  driving-  a  team  across 
the  plains  for  Living^ston  &  Kin- 
kade,  and  arrived  in  Salt  Lake  City, 
Aug:.  15,  1855,  He  located  in  Kaysville, 
Davis  county,  Utah,  where  he  has  re- 
sided ever  since,  with  the  exception  of 
a  few  months  in  1856,  when  he  made 
Farming-ton  his  temporary  home.  He 
was  ordained  a  Seventy  Aug.  16,  1857, 
and  became  identified  with  the  55th 
quorum  of  Seventy.  Subsequently 
(Sept.  29,  1861),  he  was  set  apart  as  a 
member  of  the  council  of  said  quorum, 
in  which  capacity  he  labored  faithfully 
until    June    29,    1877,    when    he    was    or- 


dained a  High  Priest  and  set  apart  to 
act  as  second  counselor  to  Bishop  Peter 
Barton — a  position  which  he  has  now 
filled  for  over  a  quarter  of  a  century. 
In  a  civil  capacity  Elder  Roueche  has 
filled  many  positions  of  honor,  trust 
and  responsibility  in  the  midst  of  the 
community,  where  he  has  resided.  Thus, 
he  was  the  first  mayor  of  Kaysville, 
being  elected  to  that  office  in  1868,  and 
held  it  successively  for  fourteen  years. 
He  served  as  a  member  of  the  Utah 
legislature  in  1888,  and  as  selectman  of 
Davis  county  from  1882  to  1890.  In  an 
early  day  he  acted  as  one  of  Kaysville's 
most  efficient  and  zealous  teachers.  He 
participated  in  the  so-called  Echo  can- 
yon war  in  1857-58,  and  took  a  very  ac- 
tive part  in  the  defense  of  his  people. 
In  1887  he  visited  the  place  of  his  birth 


in  tl  e  State  of  South  Carolina,  and  bore 
a  faithful  testimony  to  his  relatives 
and  others  of  the  restored  g-ospel.  In 
November,  1886,  Presidents  John  Tay- 
lor and  Geo.  Q.  Cannon  who  were  then 
in  exile,  made  their  home  at  the  house 
of  Elder  Roueche,  together  with  their 
cttendants.  They  intended  to  stay 
cnly  a  few  weeks,  but  as  the  anti-Poly- 
gamy raid  continued,  they  remained 
there  over  eight  months,  or  until  the 
death  of  Pres.  Taylor,  which  occurred 
ct  the  home  of  Bro.  Roueche  July  25, 
1887.  Pres.  Joseph  P.  Smith  arrived 
one  week  before  the  death  of  the  Presi- 
dent. With  that  sad  event  all  the 
brethren  left  the  hospitable  roof  of 
Bro.    Roueche. 

BLOOD,  William,  senior  president 
of  the  55th  quorum  of  Seventy,  is  the 
son  of  William  Blood  and  Mary  Stret- 
ton,  "nd  was  born  in  Barton,  Stafford- 
shire, Eng-land,  Aug.  27,  1839.  With  his 
parents  he  embarked  for  America,  in  a 
company  of  210  Saints,  under  the  direc- 
tion of  William  Kay,  in  the  g-ood  ship 
"Fanny,"  Jan.  23,  1844,  and  arrived  in 
Nauvoo, April  13,  1844.  Three  weeks  after 
his  arrival  there,  his  father  died.  Later 
his  mother,  who  had  three  small  chil- 
dren to  support,  married  Henry  Wool- 
ley.  The  family  was  driven  from  Nau- 
voo with  the  Saints  and  settled  in 
Council  Bluffs,  Iowa,  where  they  re- 
mained until  the  summer  of  1849,  when 
they  started  for  the  Rocky  Mountains. 
William  was  baptized  on  Aug.  10,  1849, 
in  the  Platte  river  by  Elder  William 
Hawk.  He  arrived  in  Salt  Lafre  City 
Oct.  13,  1849,  and  the  next  year  he 
moved  to  Kaysville,  his  present  home, 
and  has  since  that  time  been  engag^ed 
in  farming-.  On  account  of  the  priva- 
tions and  trials  of  pioneer  life,  his 
schooling-  was  very  limited,  but  through 
his  own  efforts,  he  has  succeeded  in 
gaining  a  g-ood  practical  education. 
June  15,  1857,  he  was  ordained  a  Sev- 
enty under  the  hands  of  Albert  P. 
Rockwood,  and  was  assig-ned  to  the  55th 
quorum.  He  was  a  member  of  Phile- 
mon C.  Merrill's  company  which  was 
organized  in  1857  to  meet  Johnston's  ar- 
my, and  after  the  company  disband- 
ed, he  remained  on  guard  at  Yellow 
creek  until  early  winter.  In  the  spring 
of  1858  he  was  chosen  one  of  the  de- 
tail guard  of  the  exodus  of  the  Saints 
In  the  "move."  Sept.  9,  1861,  he  mar- 
ried  Jane   Wilkie   Hooper,   and   in   No- 


Vol.  1,  No.  30. 


July  27,  1901. 


466 


LATTER-DAY    SAINT 


vember,  1872,  he  obeyed  the  law  of  plu- 
ral marriage,  by  taking  as  his  plural 
wife  Sarah  Jane  Colemere.  Like  many 
others  he  suffered  imprisonment  be- 
cause he  preferred  to  keep  the  com- 
mandments of  God,  rather  than  those 
of  man,  being  sentenced  Sept.  30,  1887, 
In  the  Third  District  Court  by  Judge 
Zane,  to  six  months  in  the  penitentia- 
ry and  to  pay  a  fine  of  two  hundred 
dollars.  He  was  released  Feb.  29,  1888. 
In  1876  he  was  chosen  and  set  apart  as 
one  of  the  presidents  of  the  55th  quo- 
rum of  Seventy,  and  has  been  its 
senior  president  since  Jan.  14,  1892. 
Although  never  called  on  a  foreign 
mission,  he  has  been  an  active  member 
of  the  Church  at  home,  performing  any 
labor  asigned  to  him  to  the  best  of  his 


ability.  Thus,  he  has  labored  as  a 
home  missionary,  as  a  Ward  teacher 
(since  1864),  as  presiding  teacher  (since 
Nov.  14,  1888),  as  a  teacher  in  the  local 
Sunday  school  (from  Nov.  18,  1877,  un- 
til the  present  time),  and  as  assistant 
superintendent  in  the  same  school 
(since  Oct.  3,  1880).  He  has  officiated 
in  most  of  the  baptisms  in  Kaysville 
Ward  since  1864  and  baptized  778  per- 
sons. He  has  been  very  zealous  in 
teaching  his  children  the  principles  of 
the  gospel,  both  by  precept  and  exam- 
ple being  the  father  of  21  children,  19 
of  whom  are  living.  Four  of  his  sons 
have  carried  the  gospel  to  the  world. 

HYDE,  Rosel,  counselor  in  the 
Kaysville  Ward  bishopric  from  1858  to 
1877,  is  a  son  of  Heman  Hyde  and  Polly 


W.  Tilton,  and  was  born  at  York,  Liv- 
ingston county,  N.  Y.,  May  20,  1816.  He 
was  baptized  May  8,  1836,  by  Joel  H. 
Johnson  at  Kirtland,  Ohio,  and  con- 
firmed the  same  day.  He  moved  from 
Kirtland  with  his  father's  family  to 
Missouri,  where,  within  two  days'  drive 
of  Far  West,  they  were  met  by  a  mob 
and  forced  to  leave  the  State.  They  fled 
to  Quincy,  111.,  where  they  wintered. 
Rosel  was  married  Dec.  12,  1839,  and  in 
1843  he  moved  to  Bear  creek  settlement, 
Hancock  county,  111.  He  was  driven 
from  the  State  in  1846,  along  with  the 
rest  of  the  Saints.  He  settled  near 
the  Missouri  river,  a  short  distance  be- 
low Winter  Quarters,  at  a  place  called 
Council  Point,  and  remained  there  till 
May  20,  1849, when  he  took  up  the  march 
for  the  Rocky  Mountains.  He  arrived 
in  Salt  Lake  City  in  September,  of  the 
same  year,  where  he  first  settled,  but 
moved  to  Kaysville  in  the  spring  of 
1853.  Here  he  built  a  house  on  the 
farm  on  which  he  now  resides.  He 
joined  with  the  Saints  in  their  exodus 
south  in  1858,  but  returned  the  same 
year.  In  the  fall  of  1858  he  was  set 
apart  as  first  counselor  to  Bishop  Allen 
Taylor  of  Kaysville  and  held  that  po- 
sition during  that  Bishop's  administra- 
tion. Christopher  Layton  succeeded 
Bishop  Taylor  as  Bishop, and  Bro.  Hyde 
served  as  his  first  counselor  until  1877, 
when  Christopher  Layton  was  chosen 
as  a  member  of  the  Stake  presidency. 
He  was  ordained  a  Patriarch  by  Frank- 
lin D.  Richards  Jan.  13,  1878.  As  cap- 
tain of  a  Church  train  he  went  to  Win- 
ter Quarters  in  1863,  and  returned  the 
same  season  with  a  company  of  emi- 
grants. He  filled  a  mission  to  New 
York  State  in  the  winter  of  1859-60; 
served  in  Territorial  legislature  in  the 
session  of  1858-59,  and  served  as  county 
selectman  in  Davis  county  five  succes- 
sive terms  of  three  years  each.  He  has 
been  mayor  of  Kaysville,  and  held  sev- 
eral other  important  civil  positions 
there.  Bro.  Hyde  has  been  a  very  en- 
ergetic and  thrifty  man,  has  labored 
hard  and  accomplished  much  good  in 
the  developments  of  the  resources  of 
the  country. 

BROAVX,  William,  the  first  Bishop 
of  South  Bountiful  Ward,  Davis  coun- 
ty, Utah,  was  the  son  of  William  Brown 
and  Jane  Stranghan  and  was  born  Jan. 
3,  1816,  in  Ontario  county.  New  York. 
He  was  baptized  Feb.  5,  1843,  by  Archi- 


BIOGRAPHICAL.   ENCYCLOPEDIA. 


467 


bald  Montgomery  in  the  State  of  New 
York,  and  came  to  Nauvoo  the  same 
year.  In  1846,  in  connection  with  the 
rest  of  the  Saints,  he  became  an  exile 
for  the  gospel's  sake,  and  after  spend- 
ing a  year  on  the  frontiers  he  came 
to  Great  Salt  Lake  valley  in  1847,  cross- 
ing the  plains  in  Ira  Eldredge's  com- 
pany of  fifty,  which  arrived  on  the 
present  site  of  Salt  Lake  City  Sept.  22, 

1847.  After  spending  the  winter  of  1847- 
48  in  the  "Old  Fort,"  Bro.  Brown  set- 
tled in  the  Fifteenth  Ward,  Salt  Lake 
City,  where  he  built  the  first  house 
ever  erected  in  that  part  of  the  city, 
into   which   he   moved     in     November, 

1848.  His  was  the  only  family  that 
spent  the  winter  of  1848-49  in  the  15th 


Ward.  In  the  spring  of  1851  he  settled 
in  Bountiful,  Davis  county,  where  he 
took  up  the  farm  on  which  he  resided 
the  remainder  of  his  days.  In  1877, 
when  Bountiful  was  divided  into  three 
Wards,  William  Brown  was  chosen  and 
ordained  Bishop  of  that  part  which  was 
organized  under  the  name  of  South 
Bountiful  Ward,  and  he  held  that  posi- 
tion until  his  death,  which  occurred  at 
his  home  in  South  Bountiful  Oct.  28, 
1892.  Bishop  Brown  was  a  pioneer  of 
the  true  type  and  a  God-fearing  man, 
who  left  a  fine  record  behind  him.  His 
name  will  always  be  honored  among 
the  faithful  Elders  of  Israel. 

MANN,  Charles  William,  a  prom- 
inent Elder  in  the  West  Bountiful 
Ward,  was  born  May  4,  1839,  at  Strat- 
ford-on-Avon,  Warwickshire,    England. 


He  was  baptized  in  1855  by  Elder  Wm. 
Cooper,  and  emigrated  to  Utah  in  1859, 
sailing  over  the  ocfean  in  the  ship  "Wil- 
liam Tapscott."  While  on  this  voyage 
he  married  Livia  Ann  Smith  and 
crossed  the  plains  in  Capt.  Geo.  Row- 
ley's hand-cart  company,  which  ar- 
rived in  Salt  Lake  City  Sept.  4,  1859. 
Bro.  Mann  pulled  a  hand-cart  all  the 
way  across  the  plains  and  mountains. 
He  located  in  Farmington,  Davis  coun- 
ty, where  he  lived  till  1862,  when  he 
moved  to  Bountiful,  where  he  has  re- 
sided ever  since.  He  was  ordained  an 
Elder  in  1861  and  was  later  ordained  to 
the  office  of  a  Seventy,  and  is  at  pres- 
ent a  president  of  the  74th  quorum.  El- 
der Mann  has  always  been  an  active 
and  faithful  churchman,  having  labored 
as  a  teacher  and  later  as  president  of 
the  Teacher's  quorum.  For  many  years 
he  acted  as  Ward  teacher,  and  a  Sab- 
bath school  worker.  In  1889-90  he 
served  a  term  of  fifteen  months  in  the 
Utah  penitentiary  for  obeying  the  high- 
er law  of  marriage.  In  the  fall  of  1890 
he  left  home  on  a  mision  to  Great  Brit- 
ain, returning,  on  account  of  illness,  in 
1891,  Brother  Mann  is  an  enterpris- 
inb  citizen  and  has  aided  much  in  de- 
veloping this  western  country.  He  par- 
ticipated in  the  Indian  wars  of  1866, 
being  stationed  at  Springtown,  Sanpete 
county.  He  was  also  active  in  the 
Morrisite  war.  In  civil  pursuits  he  has 
followed  market  gardening  successful- 
ly, and  is  at  present  managing  the 
Woods  Cross  Canning  and  Pickling 
company.  He  married  Maria  Busby 
and  Louise  Webb  as  plural  wives,  and 
is  the  father  of  23  children,  14  of  whom 
are  now  livii^g. 

WRIGHT,  Joseph,  Bishop  of  East 
Coalville  Ward,  Summit  county,  Utah, 
is  the  son  of  Joseph  Wright  and  Mar- 
tha Rippon,  and  was  born  Dec.  8,  1844, 
at  Handsworth  Woodhouse,  Yorkshire, 
England.  In  a  brief  biographical 
sketch  prepared  for  this  work. 
Bishop  Wright  says:  "I  was 
raised  in  my  native  village  until  I 
was  twenty-three  years  old,  and  was 
baptized  April  19,  1868,  by  William 
Walker.  I  emigrated  to  Utah  the  same 
year,  sailing  from  Liverpool,  England, 
on  the  steamship  "Colorado,"  July  14, 
1868.  We  arrived  in  New  York  July 
28,  1868,  and  at  Benton,  the  terminus  of 
the  Union  Pacific  railroad,  Aug.  7,  1868, 
Here  we  camped  on  the  North     Platte 


468 


LATTER-DAY  SAINT 


river  about  one  week.  We  left  Benton 
Aup.  14th  in  Daniel  D.  McArthur's  ox- 
train  of  61  wagons  and  411  persons,  and 
arrived  at  Echo  city,  Utah,  Sept.  8.  1868. 
Bi-'shop  Warren,  a  railroad  contractor, 
whose  camp  was  at  the  point  of  the 
mountain  by  the  rock  quarry, near  what 
is  known  as  the  Devil's  Slide,  wanted 
men  to  work  on  his  railway  contract. 
I  was  engaged  and  worked  on  the  road 
till  Christmas,  when  I  went  to  Coal- 
ville, to  stay  for  the  winter.  I  secured 
work  in  the  coal  mines  and  married 
Betsy  Jane  Bowers  July  18,  1870;  we 
made  our  home  in  Coalville  till  Novem- 
ber, 1873,  when  we  moved  to  Kamas,  to 
take  up  land  and  make  a  start  in  life. 
Bishop  Samuel  F.  Atwood  called  me  to 
go  on  a  mission  to  Arizona.Feb.  14,  1876, 
and  in  response  to  this  call  I  left 
Kamas  Feb.  14th,  and  after  many  difR- 
culties  I  reached  Salt  Lake  City.  We 
started  for  Arizona  Feb.  24,  1876,  and 
traveled  through  mud  and  snow  till  we 
reached  Pangultch,  whence  we  traveeld 
up  the  Sevier  river  to  Assay's  ranch. 
We  found  four  feet  of  snow  on  the  de- 
vide.  At  Orderville  we  stopped  two 
weeks  to  rest  our  cattle,  after  which 
we  traveled  via  Mount  Carmel  and 
Kanab  to  John  D.  Lee's  ferry,  on  the 
Colorado  river.  The  river  was  very 
high  and  dangerous  to  cross;  and  while 
camping  on  its  banks,  we  were  over- 
taken by  Brothers  Daniel  H.  Wells, 
Erastus  Snow,  Brigham  Young,  jun., 
Lorenzo  W.  Roundy,  Jacob  Hamblin, 
and  others,  who  were  on  their  way  to 
visit  the  Saints  on  the  littl*^  Colorado 
river.  We  helped  to  ferry  them 
across,  and  made  two  trips  in  safety. 
Returning  for  another  load,  we  put 
on  two  provision  wagons  and  Pres. 
Wells'  buggy,  after  which  we  towed 
the  boat  up  the  stream  one  mile,  in 
order  to  give  it  a  chance  to  land  at 
the  proper  place  on  the  opposite  side. 
While  takine-  the  boat  around  a  point 
of  rocks,  the  water  poured  over  the 
bow;  word  was  given  to  slacken  the 
tow-rope,  and  in  doing  so  the  rope 
caugth  in  the  seam  of  a  rock,  whereby 
the  bow  was  drawn  under  the  water, 
and  in  a  few  moments  the  rapid  cur- 
rent swept  the  boat  clear  of  its  con- 
tents; men,  wagons  and  luggage  went 
into  the  surging  water  together.  Pres. 
Wells  jumped  towards  the  shore  where 
I  stood  on  the  bank,  and  I  threw  the 
tow-rope  to  him,  in  order  to  help  him 
out.      A  rush  was  made  to  get  a  small 


skiff  to  pick  up  the  brethren  who  were 
floating  down  the  river.  We  soon  found 
that  Bishop  Lorenzo  W.  Roundy  was 
missing;  he  was  said  to  be  a  good 
swimmer,  but  most  likely  he  was  taken 
with  the  cramp  and  sank  at  once.  I 
understand  that  his  body  has  never 
been  found.  The  party  then  went  to 
the  house  of  John  D.  Lee,  and  his  wife 
Emma  did  all  she  could  for  the  com- 
fort of  the  brethren.  It  was  a  very 
gloomy  night  on  account  of  the  loss  of 
Bro.  Roundy.  This  unfortunate  af- 
fair occurred  May  28,  1876.  Pres.  Wells 
counseled  Brother  George  Dabling  and 
me  to  take  our  families  back  to  where 
we  could  get  feed  and  water  for  our 
cattle.  Consequently,  we  returned  to 
Jacobs  Pools,  where  we  remained  until 
the  river  went  down,  so  that  we  could 
cross  without  danger.  Brother  Dab- 
ling  and  I  made  a  trip  back  to  Order- 
ville after  provisions.  In  the  latter 
part  of  July  we  again  started  for  the 
ferry,  where  we  met  John  D.  Lee  for 
the  first  time.  We  swam  our  cattle 
across  the  river  and  crossed  our  wag- 
ons on  the  ferry  boat,  while  our  fami- 
lies crossed  in  a  little  skiff.  The  next 
morning  we  started  for  Navajo  springs, 
thence  we  traveled  via  the  Limestone 
tanks  and  Willow  springs  to  Mow-ab- 
by.  From  that  place  we  made  a  visit 
to  Moancoppy,  to  see  the  brethren  who 
were  located  there  as  missionaries  to 
the  Indians.  We  returned  to  Mow- 
abby,  whence  we  traveled  to  the  Little 
Colorado  river,  and  up  that  stream  to 
Sunset,  where  we  arrived  Aug.  19,  1876. 
Hei-e  we  rested  a  few  days  with  the 
Saints  who  were  located  here,  and 
harvested  a  small  patch  of  wheat  and 
corn,  after  which  Brother  Lot  Smith 
called  all  the  brethren  to  go  and  build 
a  fort  as  a  protection  against  the  In- 
dians. I  was  apointed  to  dig  a  well. 
We  dug  one  -SS  feet  deep  and  found 
good,  cold  water,  but  it  was  a  little 
brackish.  After  I  had  finished  walling 
the  well  up  with  rock,  Bro.  Smith  put 
a  mason's  trowel  in  my  hand  and  said, 
"Brother  Wright,  I  want  you  to  go  and 
build  some  houses."  We  all  got  houses 
bv  the  first  of  January,  1877.  We  lived 
in  the  united  order,  as  we  had  turned 
all  our  property  in  as  one  family;  we 
all  ate  at  one  table,  and  the  sisters 
took  turns  in  doing  the  cooking;  the 
brethren  all  labored  under  the  direc- 
tion of  Bro.  Lot  Smith  (who  was  presi- 
dent of  the  company)  and  other  breth- 


BIOGRAPHICAL.   ENCYCLOPEDIA. 


469 


ren  who  were  appointed  to  take  charge 
of  certain  portions  of  the  labor.  "We 
all  got  along  very  agreeably,  without 
much  faultfinding,  and  we  prospered 
with  everything  we  undertook  to  do. 
In  the  fall  of  1880  I  went  to  visit  my 
folks  in  Utah,  and  while  there  I  was 
released  from  my  Arizona  mission  by 
the  First  Presidency.  I  then  settled 
at  Coalville,  Summit  county,  where  I 
have  resided  ever  since.  In  1889  I  was 
chosen  by  the  presidency  of  the  Stake 
to  preside  over  the  East  Coalville 
Ward,  and  at  a  meeting  held  May  17, 
1889,  I  was  unanimously  sustained  in 
that  position.  At  the  close  of  the 
meeting  I  was  ordained  a  High  Priest 
and  Bishop  by  Apostle  Franklin  D. 
Richards." 

FRAZIER,  Marion,  Bishop  of  the 
Oakley  Ward,  Summit  county,  Utah, 
is  the  second  son  of  Thomas  Leonard 
Frazier  and  Rachel  Maxfield  Young, 
and  was  born  at  Fort  Supply,  Utah 
(now  in  Wyoming),  June  20,  1856,  In  a 
covered  wagon.  He  was  baptized, 
when  eleven  years  old,  by  Henry  Rey- 


nolds at  Wanship,  Summit  county, 
Utah,  and  ordained  an  Elder  June  27, 
1879,  by  Apostle  Geo.  Teasdale.  On 
the  same  day  he  married  Nancy  Eliza 
Richards,  a  daughter  of  Apostle  Frank- 
lin D.  Richards.  He  was  ordained  a 
Seventy  May  12,  1884,  by  James  Wool- 
stenhulme,  and  was  set  apart  to  preside 
over  the  Oakley  branch  Sunday  school 


by  Bishop  Stephen  Walker  of  Peoa. 
Nov.  1,  1885.  Feb.  22,  1891,  he  was  ap- 
pointed president  of  the  Y.  M.  M.  I.  A. 
He  was  ordained  a  High  Priest  August 
5,  1894,  under  the  hands  of  Apostle 
Brigham  Young  and  set  apart  as 
Bishop  of  the  Oakley  Ward,  which  po- 
sition he  is  filling  to-day. 

WOOLSTENHULME,  James,  senior 
president  of  the  22nd  quorum  of  Sev- 
enty, is  the  son  of  John  W.  Woolsten- 
hulme  and  Alice  Mellor,  and  was  born 
March  24,  1837,  in  Oldham,  Lancashire, 


England.  His  father  died  when  James 
was  six  years  old,  leaving  a  widow  and 
four  children,  all  younger  than  James. 
He  began  to  work  in  a  cotton  factory 
at  the  age  of  seven.  On  the  last  day 
of  October,  1844,  the  mill  at  Oldham,  in 
which  he  was  employed,  collapsed  and 
many  lives  were  lost,  but  a  kind  Provi- 
dence saved  him.  At  the  age  of  11 
years  he  was  elected  as  a  student  in 
the  Oldham  Blue  Coat  school  where  he 
received  a  good  education.  March  4, 
1851,  he  set  sail  for  America  on  board 
the  ship  "Olympus."  While  on  board 
this  ship  he  first  heard  the  gospel 
preached  by  Thomas  Smith  and  other 
Elders.  He  was  baptized  April  13, 
1851,  together  with  about  50  other  pas- 
sengers, which  had  been  converted  on 
the  ship.  He  landed  in  St.  Louis,  Mo., 
May  10,  1857,  where  he  met  his  mother, 
who  had  married  Thomas  Hill.  He 
left  St.  Louis  for  Salt  Lake  City  May 
1,   1852,   traveling  with  an  ox-team,  via 


470 


LATTER-DAY    SAINT 


Independence,  Jackson  county,  to 
Ft.  Leavenworth,  Kansas.  Here  he 
found  the  company  that  was  bringing 
machinery  to  Utah  to  manufacture  beet 
sugar.  He  arrived  in  Salt  Lake  City 
Nov.  11,  1852,  having  endured  many 
hardships  on  the  journey.  He  now 
found  himself  alone  in  a  strange  land, 
but  he  soon  obtained  employment  at 
Bountiful,  Davis  county.  He  passed 
through  the  grasshopper  war  with 
scanty  fare  and  participated  in  the 
Johnston  army  troubles,  doing  excel- 
lent service  as  one  of  the  Davis  county 
mountain  rangers.  He  was  on  guard 
in  Pioneer  Hollow,  when  Southworth 
and  Groo  (two  returning  missionaries) 
brought  Gov.  Alfred  Cumming's  mess- 
age; was  with  Lot  Smith  on  the 
Muddy,  and  did  picket  duty  at  Needle 
Rocks,  near  Yellow  creek,  where  he  and 
several  others  took  five  men  prisoners. 
He  returned  to  Bountiful  about  Christ- 
mas. In  the  spring  of  1858  he  married 
Mary  L.  Page,  and,  together  with  his 
young  wife,  he  went  south  during  the 
"move"  and  lived  in  Provo,  but  re- 
turned to  Bountiful  when  the  Saints 
moved  back.  in  1861  he  worked  v<. 
Kamas,  doing  the  first  logging  in  th.'-t 
part  of  Utah.  Feb.  15,  1863,  he  married 
Julia  Duhamel.  In  April,  1863,  he  went 
East  to  the  Missouri  river  after  emi- 
grants. He  took  part  in  three  Indian 
raids,  and  had  some  interesting  ex- 
periences. On  one  occasion  he  lived 
for  three  weeks  on  flour  and  water,  the 
meal  being  prepared  by  roasting  the 
Hour  and  water  over  the  fire  on  sticks. 
He  was  elected  justice  of  the  peace  in 
Kamas  for  three  successive  terms, 
1874,  1877,  and  1880.  In  August,  1874, 
he  was  elected  county  commissioner  in 
Summit  county.  In  1876  he  was  or- 
dained a  Seventy  by  Apostle  Orson 
Pratt  and  set  apart  for  a  mission  to 
Great  Britain.  While  on  this  mission 
he  gathered  much  valuable  genealogy. 
In  1888  he  was  fined  $65  and  sentenced 
to  65  days'  imprisonment  in  the  Utah 
penitentiary  for  unlawful  cohabitation 
with  his  wives.  During  1888  and  1891 
he  filled  another  mission  to  Great  Brit- 
ain. Brother  "Woolstenhulme  is  the 
father  of  17  children,  13  of  whom  are 
now  alive,  and  he  has  22  grandchildren. 
He  has  done  a  great  work  for  his  de- 
parted relatives  in  the  Temple.  At 
present  he  is  the  senior  president  of 
the  22nd  quorum  of  Seventy. 


McKINNON,       Peter,  Bishop     of 

Woodruff  Ward,  Rich  county,  Utah,  is 
the  son  of  Archibald  and  Mary  Mc- 
Kinnon,  and  was  born  Feb.  7,  1868,  in 
Salt  Lake  City,  Utah.  When  three 
years  old  he  moved  with  his  parents 
to  Randolph,  Rich  county  His  child- 
hood days  were  spent  on  the  farm,  and 
in  attendance  at  the  public  schools. 
When  twenty  years  old  he  attended  the 
Latter-day  Saint  Seminary  at  Ran 
dolph,  and  was  appointed  musical  di- 
rector in  that  institution.  He  was  a 
student  of  the  Latter-day  Saint  Col- 
lege at  Salt  Lake  City  in  1889-90  and 
was  also  a  member  of  the  Tabernacle 
choir  during  that  time.  On  returningr 
home  from  school  he  was  appointed 
conductor  of  the  Randolph  Ward  choir 


and  was  also  made  leader  of  the  brass 
band  and  orchestra,  as  well  as  othei* 
musical  organizations,  much  of  his 
time  and  energy  being  devoted  to  the 
advancement  of  the  divine  art,  both  in 
the  Ward  and  county.  During  the  fall 
of  1891  he  was  called  as  a  special  mis- 
sionary to  labor  among  the  mutual  im- 
provement associations.  He  took  a 
special  missionary  course  in  the  B. 
Y.  Academy  at  Provo,  after  which  he 
traveled  among  the  mutual  improve- 
ment associations  in  the  Bannock, 
Oneida  and  Cassia  Stakes,  in  company 
with  Peter  Beck,  of  Paris,  Idaho.  In 
the  spring  of  1892  he  engaged  in  the 
mercantile  business  and  has  been  suc- 
cessful   in    establishing      an    extensive 


BIOGRAPHICAL.    ENCYCLOPEDIA. 


471 


trade  throughout  Rich  county.  Oct. 
10,  1894,  he  married  Charlotte  L.  Call, 
in  the  Salt  Lake  Temple.  At  the  or- 
ganization of  the  "Woodruff  Stake  of 
Zion  in  1898,  he  was  called  from  Ran- 
dolph to  preside  as  Bishop  of  the  Wood- 
ruff Ward,  and  was  ordained  and  set 
apart  to  that  position  June  9,  1898,  un- 
der the  hands  of  Apostle  Heber  J. 
Grant.  He  was  appointed  by  Gov.  He- 
ber M.  Wells  in  1899  and  1901  to  super- 
vise the  expenditure  of  appropriations 
made  by  the  Utah  legislature  for  Rich 
county.  In  November,  1900,  he  was 
elected  county  commissioner  for  Rich 
county,  and  was  appointed  chairman  of 
that  board. 

TWlTCHELLi,  Willis,  Bishop  of 
the  Manila  Ward, in  the  Woodruff  Stake 
of  Zion,  was  born  at  Beaver  city,  Utah, 
July  11,  1860.  He  lived  with  his  father 
on  his  farm  till  he  was  25  years  of  age, 
when  he  married  Rachel  A.  Potter.  He 
was  called  to  act  as  superintendent  of 


the  Sunday  school  on  Indian  Creek, 
Beaver  county,  in  1889,  which  position 
he  held  till  1898,  when  he  moved  to 
Lucern  valley,  where  he  was  chosen 
superintendent  of  the  Sabbath  school. 
He  held  that  office  about  one  year,  or 
until  he  was  ordained  a  High  Priest 
and  Bishop  and  set  to  preside  over  the 
Manila  Ward  in  the  Woodruff  Stake  of 
Zion.  Before  the  organization  of  the 
Manila  Ward,  there  was  a  branch  or- 
ganization in  that  locality  over  which 
Elder  Twitchell  presided. 


PUTNAM,  Savannah  C,  a  High 
Councilor  in  the  Woodruff  Stake  of 
Zion,  is  the  son  of  Artemus  W.  Put- 
nam and  Louisa  D.  Bunker,  and  was 
born  Nov.  11,  1851,  at  Mexico,  Oxford 
county,  Maine.  He  was  baptized  Aug. 
29,  1868,  and  came  to  Utah  in  1869.  Af- 
ter a  short  residence  in  Bountiful,  Da- 
vis county,  he  settled  in  Bear  River 
valley  in  1871,  and  thus  became  one  of 
the  founders  of  Woodruff.  He  was  or- 
dained an  Elder  May  1"^,  1874,  by  Abi- 
nadi  Pratt,  a  Seventy  July  25,  186,  by 
Christian  D.  Fjeldsted,  and  a  High 
Priest  Aug.  19,  1888,  by  James  H.  Hart, 
and  on  the  latter  date  also  set  apart 
as  first  counselor  to  Bishop  Wm.  H. 
Lee.  In  October,  1890,  he  was  set  apart 
as  first  counselor  to  Bishop  John  M. 
Baxter  by  Wm.  Budge.  He  was  set 
apart  as  a  Stake  High  Councilor  and 
also  to  be  second  counselor  in  the  High 
Priests'  quorum  June  9,  1898,  by  Heber 
J.  Grant.  Bro.  Putnam  acted  for  many 
years  as  a  Ward  teacher,and  was  made 
superintendent  of  the  Woodruff  Sun- 
day school  when  it  was  first  organized 
April  25,  1875.  He  held  that  position 
until  Feb.  24,  1889.  In  February,  18V8, 
he  was  appointed  choir  leader  of  the 
first  choir  organized  in  Woodruff;  he 
neld  that  position  for  eighteen  years. 
He  was  secretary  of  the  first  Y.  M.  M. 
I.  A.  organized  at  Woodruff  Jan.  3, 
1879;  was  apointed  Ward  clerk  in  1876 
and  held  that  position  until  1893.  He 
taught  four  terms  in  the  district  school. 
During  1891  he  served  30  days'  imprison- 
ment in  the  Utah  penitentiary  for  un- 
lawful cohabitation.  He  is  the  father 
of  19  children. 

FLETCHER.  Samuel,  a  president 
of  the  27th  quorum  of  Seventy,  is  the 
son  of  Adam  and  Ann  Fletcher,  and 
was  born  May  5,  1839,  in  Arker  Lodge 
Bride  Church  parish,  Cumberland  coun- 
ty, England.  Elder  Fletcher  writes: 
"My  father's  family  emigrated  to 
America  in  1854.  In  1859,  I  first  heard 
the  gospel,  and  was  baptized  Jan.  15, 
1859,  in  Mason  City,  West  Virginia,  in 
the  Ohio  river.  In  April,  1859,  I  bid 
adieu  to  friends,  home  and  kindred,  for 
like  Ruth  of  old  I  had  found  a  Nao- 
mi, not  as  a  woman,  but  as  the  king- 
dom of  God.  I  left  for  Utah,  my  future 
home,  and  arrived  in  Salt  Lake  City 
Sept.  1,  1859,  after  driving  an  ox-team 
with  a  load  of  merchandise  from  the 
Missouri  river.  I  was  then  in  my 
twentieth  year.      Feb.  2,  1861,  I  was  or- 


472 


LATTER-DAT  SAINT 


dained  a  Seventy  and  became  a  member 
of  the  36th  quorum.  Later  I  was  trans- 
ferred to  the  27th  quorum.  I  moved  to 
Coalville,  Summit  county,  Utah,  Oct. 
8,  1883.  I  became  a  president  of  the 
27th  quorum  of  Seventy  Dec.  23,  1883, 
and  am  still  occupying  that  position.  I 
have  been  married  twice  and  have  bur- 
ied a  wife  and  seven  children.  1  have 
nine  sons  living  at  the  present  time." 

QUIBELL,     Joseph    Aminadab,      ^ 

Patriarch   in   the  Woodruff   Stake,   was 
born   of  humble   parents     at  Waverly, 
Lincolnshire,    England.       Brother   Qui- 
bell    writes:      "My    father  had  a  large 
family,  consisting  of  ten  children,  four 
boys  and  six  girls;  my  father  was  never 
identified  with  any  church,  but  mother 
at  one  time  belonged  to  the  Wesleyan 
persuasion.       My  childhood  days  were 
spent  in  the  village  school,  and  I  com- 
menced to  labor  at  farm  work  when  I 
was  nine  years  of  age.       By  the  time 
I  was  fourteen  I  hired  out  by  the  year 
for   very   low   wages.       At   the   age   of 
twenty  I  thought  to  improve  my  con- 
dition, by  leaving  the  farm  and  going 
to  work  on  a  new  railroad  which  was 
being  built.       I   followed   that   kind  of 
employment  for  about  eighteen  months, 
after  which  I  went  to  Sheffield,  York- 
shire,  where  I  married  Rebecca  Bing- 
ham Newton.  When  twenty-three  years 
of  age  I  heard  the  gospel  preached  and 
eagerly  received  it.      I  was  baptized  by 
Samuel  Hartle,  June  22,  1869,  and  con- 
firmed on     the      following    Sunday  by 
Charles   Parkin.       I   was     ordained     a 
Priest  Aug.  14,  187Q,  by  Charles  Parkin, 
and    ordained   an    Elder   Dec.    31,    1871, 
by  Charles   Parkin.       With  my   wife   I 
emigrated    to    America    in    the    fall    of 
1873,  and  landed  in  New  York  Oct.  27, 
1873,    where   my   parents   had   preceded 
me  by  two  years.      I  preached  the  gos- 
pel  to    them  and  baptized   my  mother, 
one  sister  and  my  youngest  brother  as 
well   as   other   relatives.       We   arrived 
in   Ogden   in   the  fall  of  1875.       I  have 
labored    as    a    Sabbath    school    teacher 
for  several  years,  and  as  a  Ward  teach- 
er and   Priest  for   a  number  of  years. 
I   served   as   first  counselor  in   the   3rd 
quorum  of  Elders  under  two  presidents. 
I  was  ordained  a  High  Priest  Feb.   16, 
1899,  by  Apostle  John  Henry  Smith  and 
set    apart    as   a    member   of    the    High 
Council  of  the  Woodruff  Stake  of  Zion. 
Nov.   19,   1900,   I   was  set  apart  to  take 
a  special  mission  through  the  Woodruff 


Stake  under  the  hands  of  Pres.  John 
M.  Baxter,  and  I  was  ordained  a  Pa- 
triarch May  5,  1901,  by  Apostle  Abra- 
ham O.  Woodruff." 

SMITH,      William     John,      a    High 
Councilor    in    the    Woodruff    Stake    of 
Zion,    is   the   son   of  Hugh   Smith     and 
Agnes   McDonald,   and   was  born   Sept. 
28,    1842.    in    the    county   of    Down,    Ire- 
land.      He  moved   with  his  parents   to 
Liverpool,    England,    when    two    years 
old.  The  following  is  a  short  life  sketch 
from  his  own  pen:    "My  parents    joined 
the     Church     on     the      3rd      of    April, 
1850,  and     I    was  baptized  the  follow- 
ing October,  being  then  eight  years  of 
age.       My  father   left   the   Church,   but 
my  mother  kept  all  the  children  in  the 
faith.      She  urged  upon  me  the  necessi- 
ty  of  my  taking  father's     place,     and 
emigrating  her  and  the  children.  From 
that    time    I    commenced    to   save    my 
money  for  that  purpose,  and  the  Lord 
blessed    me,    so    that    I    soon    obtained 
money  enough  to  pay  for  our  emigra- 
tion to  the  frontiers.       May  1,  1866,  we 
set    sail    on      board      the      ship    "John 
Bright."  We  were  five  weeks  and  three 
days  on  the  water.      Before  we    sailed, 
however,  my  father,  who  was  opposed 
to   our  leaving,   discovered  our     hiding 
place,   and  had  me  arrested,    placed  in 
jail   and   taken   before   the   magistrate. 
But   I   was   soon   set  free,   and     father 
repented    of    what    he    had    done    and 
promised    to    follow    in  the  next  ship. 
This,    however,    he     never       did.       We 
crossed  the  plains  in  Thomas  E.  Ricks' 
mule-train  which  arrived  in  Salt  Lake 
City,    Sept.    4,    1866.       I    worked   at   my 
trade  as  a  carpenter  in  Salt  Lake  City 
till  July,   1873,   when  I  moved  to   Ran- 
dolph,   Rich    county,      Utah.       In     the 
winter    of    1892-93,    I    worked      at      the 
finishing  of  the  Salt  Lake  Temple.      I 
was   ordained   a   Teacher   by   Septimus 
W.    Sears    in    Liverpool    in   April,    1864, 
an  Elder  by  Pres.  Joseph  F.   Smith  in 
1867,  a  Seventy  by  Abraham  H.  Cannon 
May   11,    1884,    and    a   High   Priest     by 
Rudger  Clawson  May  6,  1900.     On  that 
occasion,    also,    I    was    set   apart   as   a 
member   of    the    High    Council,    of   the 
Woodruff  Stake  of  Zion.     I  have  mar- 
ried   three   wives,    namely,    Jane    Lori- 
mer,  March  18,  1866,   in  Liverpool;   An- 
nie   Maria    Batty,      Nov.      7,    1881,    and 
Mary  Ann  Batty,  April  7,  1884.      I  have 
had  twenty  children  born  to  me,  14  of 
whom  are  alive.      I  have  been  a  Sun- 


BIOGRAPHICAL.    ENCYCLOPEDIA. 


473 


day  school  worker  nearly  all  my  life 
•or  until  within  the  last  three  years.  I 
have  labored  as  a  Teacher  and  Priest 
in  nearly  all  the  Wards  where  I  have 
resided." 

SMITH,      William      Gilbert,       first 
president  of  the  Morgan  Stake  of  Zion, 
is    the   oldest    child    of  Warren     Smith 
and  Amanda  Barnes,  and  was  born  at 
Amherst,   Lorain  county,   Ohio,   May  9, 
1827.      His  parents  were  among-  the  first 
to   hear  and   accept   the  gospel   as   re- 
vealed to  Joseph  Smith  and  were  bap- 
tized early  in  the  year  1831.      The  next 
year    the    family    moved    to    Kirtland, 
Ohio,   where   the  father  worked  at   his 
trade,      blacksmithing.       Willard     was 
baptized    on    his    eighth      birthday      at 
Kirtland  by  Simeon  Carter.     While  the 
Kirtland  Temple  was  being  construct- 
ed,  he  acted   as   water  carrier  for   the 
workmen.      Although  young  at  the  time 
of  the   dedication   of   that   building,   he 
still    remembers    many    incidents     con- 
nected with  the  memorable  event.    To- 
gether wtth  his  parents  he  left  Kirtland 
in  1838  in  the  "Kirtland  Camp,"     com- 
posed  of   families   of   Saints   who   were 
driven  from  their  homes  by  the  threats 
of  an  organized  mob.       His  father  lost 
one  of  his  horses  and  was  delayed  for 
some  time;   the  main  camp  moving  on. 
Then,  together  with  ten  or  twelve  oth- 
er  belated   families,    the    Smiths     jour- 
neyed on  behind   the   camp.       The  day 
before   reaching  Haun's   mill,    in   Cald- 
well county,   Mo.,   the  little  band  were 
relieved  of  all  their  firearms  bv  a  mob. 
They     traveled     all       night,     reaching 
Haun's  mill  the  following  day.       Here 
they  spent  the  night.       The  next  day, 
while    the    entire    company,    men,     wo- 
men  and   children,   were   assembled   in 
front    of    an    old      blacksmith    shop    to 
listen  to   the   reading  of  a   letter     just 
received   from   the   Prophet  Joseph,   an 
infuriated     mob       of     men,   numbering 
about  two  hundred  and  fifty,  suddenly 
appeared    and    put    the    little    band    to 
flight.        Willard's       father      and      two 
brothers,  and  about  sixteen  others  ran 
into  the  shop,   but  when  he  attempted 
to  go  through  the  door,   his  arms  flew 
outward  and  it  was  impossible  for  him 
to  pass  the  threshold.       Several    times 
he  made  the  attempt,  but  some  unseen 
power   held   him    back,    and    he    sought 
safety  in  another  direction,  hiding  first 
In  a  pile  of  lumber  near  the  shop.      He 
was   finally   driven   from   this   place  of 


refuge   by   the  bullets  of  the  mob  and 
fied    to    a   small    frame    house    a   short 
distance  from  the  shop.  When  the  mob 
finally   retired,    and    all    was   quiet,    the 
frightened    women    and    children    crept 
from    their   hiding   places,    but   Willard 
Smith   was   the   first   one  to   enter     the 
fatal   shop,   where     so     much   innocent 
blood    was    spilled      and    from   whence 
those  noble  spirits  took  their  kind  and 
merciful   flight     back     to     the  Father. 
What   a   sight   for   a   child   only   eleven 
years    old,      to      behold!      His    beloved 
father  and  one  dear  little  brother  were 
lying  dead,  murdered;  another  brother. 
Alma,    with    his    hip    shot    away,      was 
lying  near  the  bellows  in  a  dying  condi- 
tion.      Tenderly,       Willard     lifted     his 
wounded  brother  and  carried  him  from 
the  shop,  meeting  his  mother  just  out- 
side.     Little  Alma  was  taken  to  their 
tent    and,    in   answer   to    their   earnest 
prayer,   God   gave  simple  directions  to 
Sister   Smith     for       the     dressing  and 
treatment  of  the  terrible  wound.      Al- 
though the  entire  hip  joint  was  blown 
away,  the  boy  recovered,  and  he  never 
suffered  any  pain  or  inconvenience  as 
the   result   of   the   injury  in   after   life. 
The   next     day     Willard     assisted   his 
mother  and  Bro.  Joseph  Young  to  place 
bodies   of     the     martyred     Saints   into 
a  dry  well,     ihe     only  available  grave 
under  the  circumstances.       As  soon  as 
possible  the  survivors  left  the  vicinity 
of  the  tragedy,  and  Sister  Smith  jour- 
neyed to  Quincy,  111.       While  here,  she 
married   again.       By   a   strange     coin- 
cidence,   her    second    husband's     name 
was  Warren  Smith,   and  he,   also,   was 
a  blacksmith.      After  staying  at  Quin- 
cy  for   a   year,    the    family   moved     to 
Nauvoo,    where    Willard    learned      the 
trade  of  a  stonecutter  and  assisted  in 
the  construction  of  the  Nauvoo  Temple. 
He   was  present   at   Its  dedication   and 
received  his  endowments  in  that  Tem- 
ple.   He  left  his  mother  in  Nauvoo  and 
started  west  with  the  pioneers  in  1846. 
When,   at  Council   Bluffs,   the  call   was 
made  for  five  hundred  volunteers  from 
the  "Mormons,"  he  was  one  of  the  first 
to  offer  his  services,  and  was  taken  as 
a  drummer  under  Captain  Allen.       He 
endured  all  the  hardships  of  that  per- 
ilous journey  over  an  uninhabited  coun- 
try, suffering— with  the  rest  of  the  bat- 
la  lion— untold  misery  from  hunger,  fa- 
tigue and  thirst.      They    at    length  ar- 
rived  at    Los   Angeles,    Cal.,    and   here, 
after  a  time,  they  were  honorably  dis- 


474 


LATTER-DAT    SAINT 


charged  from  service.  Willard  re-en- 
listed for  six  months  and  was  retained 
as  one  of  the  "Pacific  Guard."  In  the 
spring  of  1848  he  joined  Orrin  P.  Rock- 
well's company  and  returned  to  Salt 
Lake  City.  In  October  of  the  same 
year,  in  company  with  John  W.  Hess, 
Jacob  Earle  and  others,  he  started 
back  to  the  States  to  meet  some 
Saints  en  route  for  Utah.  In  1849  he 
joined  a  company  and  proceeded  to  the 
new  gold  fields  of  California.  He  spent 
several  years  at  the  gold  fields  and 
then  went  to  Oregon,  where  he  rented 
a  farm.  At  this  time  his  brother  Alma 
returned  from  a  mission  to  the  Sand- 
wich Islands  and,  calling  on  Willard 
at  his  farm,  he  induced  him  to  settle 
his  busines  in  Oregon  and  return  to 
Utah  He  did  so,  and  after  reaching 
Salt  Lake  City,  he  lived  quietly  with 
his  mother  until  I860,  when  he  was 
called  on  a  mission  to  England.  Here 
he  labored  until  1863,  when  he  was  re- 
leased and  returned  home  with  a  large 
company  of  emigrating  Saints,  which 
arrived  in  Salt  Lake  City  early  in  Oc- 
tober, 1863.  In  1865  he  was  ordained 
a  Bishop  and  sent  to  preside  over  the 
Saints  in  Morgan  county,  where  he  still 
resides.  He  presided  as  Bishop  until 
the  Morgan  Stake  of  Zion  was  organ- 
ized in  1877,  when  he  was  chosen  as 
president  of  the  same.  This  position 
he  held  until  1893,  when  he  was  honor- 
ably released.  For  many  years  he  held 
the  position  of  probate  judge  in  Mor- 
gan county,  and  served  four  terms  in 
the  Utah  legislature  as  a  representative 
from  Morgan  county.  He  has  held 
many  other  offices  of  public  trust  and 
in  many  ways  has  endeared  himself  to 
the  entire  people  with  whom  he  has 
lived  and  labored.  In  1865  he  married 
Miss  Huldah  Cordelia  Thurston,  daugh- 
ter of  Thomas  Jefferson  Thurston,  the 
pioneer  settler  of  Morgan  county.  He 
is  the  father  of  twelve  children,  nine  of 
whom  are  living  and  are  faithful  -work- 
ers in  the  Church.  Although  in  the 
75th  year  of  his  age,  he  is  still  erect 
and  active.  His  eyesight  and  hearing 
are  good,  and  he  is  very  fond  of  the 
society  of  the  young,  and  enjoys  music 
and  singing,  but  above  all,  he  loves  to 
relate  instances  of  Church  history.  His 
memory  is  remarkable,  for  one  of  his 
years,  and  he  will  often  relate  the 
most  minute  details  of  his  association 
with  the  Prophet  Joseph,  the  Haun's 
Mill    massacre,    the      battalion    march, 


and  other  striking  incidents  of  the  ear- 
ly days  of  his  life.  His  has  indeed 
been  an  eventful  life,  and  he  will  sure- 
ly be  greatly  rewarded  for  his  faith- 
ful work.  He  now  lives  on  his  farni 
at  Littleton,  Morgan  county,  Utah,  and 
never  lo.ses  an  opportunity  of  bearing  a 
strong  testimony  to  the  truthfulness  of 
the  gospel  as  revealed  through  the 
Prophet  Joseph  Smith. 

FRY,  Richard,  president  of  the 
Morgan  Stake  of  Zion  from  1893  to  1900, 
is  the  son  of  William  and  Mary  Fry 
and  was  bom  at  East  Down,  Devon- 
shire, England,  April  15,  1831.  He  ob- 
tained a  common  school  education  in 
England  and  made  good  use  of  it.  In 
1852  he  made  a  trip  to  America,  as  a 
companion  to  his  employer's  son,  visit- 
ing the  most  important  cities  and  places 
of  note  in  the  East.  On  his  return 
from  America  he  heard  the  gospel  as 
preached  by  Latter-day  Saint  Elders, 
and  accepted  it.  He  was  baptized  and 
confirmed  a  member  of  the  Church 
Jan.  27,  1857,  by  Elder  W.  H.  Barnett. 
March  25,  1860,  he  married  Ann  Black- 
more  Rowle,  and  two  days  later  he 
sailed  from  Liverpool  on  board  the  ship 
"Underwriter,"  arriving  in  New  York 
May  1,  1860.  He  crossed  the  plains  in 
James  D.  Ross'  ox-train,  as  captain 
over  ten  wagons,  and  arrived  in  Salt 
Lake  City  Sept.  3,  1860.  After  stop- 
ping two  weeks  in  that  city,  he  went  to 
Weber  valley,  where  he  located,  and 
thus  became  one  of  the  first  five  pio- 
neer families  who  settled  South  Mor- 
gan. When  Thomas  J.  Thurston  was 
called  to  be  presiding  Bishop  in  Morgan 
county.  Richard  Fry  was  chosen  as  his 
first  counselor,  which  position  he  held 
till  he  succeeded  Bishop  Thurston  as 
Bishop.  At  the  organization  of  the 
Morgan  Stake  he  was  chosen  as  first 
counselor  to  Willard  G.  Smith,  presi- 
dent of  the  Morgan  Stake.  He  held 
this  position  till  April  15,  1893,  when  he 
was  appointed  president  of  said  Stake. 
He  performed  the  duties  of  this  high 
and  responsible  calling  the  remaining 
years  of  his  life.  Pres.  Fry  was  or- 
dained an  Elder  by  James  D.  Ross  July 
15.  1860,  and  a  High  Priest  Sept.  5,  1873. 
In  civil  life  he  held  such  offices  as 
mayor  of  Morgan  city  and  treasurer  of 
Morgan  countv.  He  was  a  successful 
and  thrifty  business  man  and  served 
for  years  as  superintendent  and  man- 
ager of  Z.  C.  M.  I.  at  Morgan.     Later, 


BIOGRAPHICAL,   ENCYCLOPEDIA. 


475 


he  engaged  in  the  merchantile  business 
for  himself.  He  entered  the  order  of 
plural  marriage  April  11,  1876,  by  tak- 
ing to  wife  Susan  Lerville.  For  obey- 
ing this  commandment  of  God  he  was 
arrested,  tried  and  sentenced  to  five 
months'  imprisonment  in  the  Utah  pen- 
itentiary, and  fined  $300.  He  was  in- 
carcerated from  Nov.  19,  1887,  to  April 
19,  1888.  Pres.  Fry  was  the  father  of 
fourteen  children,  twelve  of  whom  are 
now  living.  The  last  public  duty  he 
performed  was  to  attend  the  general 
conference  of  the  Church  held  in  Salt 
Lake  City  in  April,  1900.  On  his  return 
home  from  that  conference,  he  took 
sick  with  a  severe  cold  and  passed 
peacefully  away  April  15,  1900 — the  six- 
ty-ninth anniversary  of  his  birth.  Bro. 
Fry  was  one  who  ever  played  the  part 
of  a  man;  one  who,  though  content  to 
follow,  possessed  the  ability  to  lead; 
one,  whose  wise  management  reared 
two  families  in  love  and  harmony, 
and  won  for  him  a  host  of  friends.  He 
passed  away  in  the  hope  of  a  glorious 
resurrection,  and  his  name  will  ever  be 
mentioned  among  those  of  the  good  and 
righteous. 

HEINEK,  Daniel,  third  president 
of  the  Morgan  Stake  of  Zion,  is  the  son 
of  Martin  and  Adel  Heiner,  and  was 
born  Nov.  27,  1850,  in  Franklin  county. 
Penn.  He  was  baptized  April  11,  1850, 
and  emigrated  to  Utah  the  same  year, 
crossing  the  plains  with  ox-teams. 
During  the  first  two  winters  in  Utah 
he  subsisted  partly  on  bran  bread.  He 
moved  to  Morgan  county  in  1863,  but 
spent  most  of  his  time  on  the  ranch 
and  at  other  occupations,  and  he  never 
had  much  opportunity  for  attending 
school.  In  1873  he  married  two  wives, 
with  whom  he  has  lived  happily  and 
raised  nineteen  children,  namely  thir- 
teeen  boys  and  six  girls,  all  of  whom 
are  living,  and  are  faithful  members  of 
the  Church.  Pres.  Heiner  was  a  mem- 
ber of  the  first  State  legislature  and 
has  always  taken  great  interest  in  the 
affairs  and  progress  of  the  State  of 
Utah.  For  a  long  time  he  was  an  ac- 
tive Sunday  school  worker.  He  was 
set  apart  as  president  of  the  Morgan 
Stake  Sept.  13.  1900,  by  Apostle  Geo. 
Teasdale,  as  successor  to  the  late 
Richard  Fry,  and  he  is  to-day  filling 
that  responsible  position.  Pres.  Heiner 
is  noted  for  his  wise  and  good  counsel 
and  is  loved  and  respected  by  all  who 


know  him.  He  ascribes  a  great  deal 
of  his  success  in  life  to  a  good  paren- 
tage; his  father  and  mother  were  both 
good  people,  who  raised  their  children 
in  the  fear  of  the  Lord. 

CLUFF,  Benjamin,  first  Bishop  of 
Center  Ward,  Wasatch  county.  Utah, 
is  the  third  son  of  David  Cluff  and 
Betsy  Hall,  and  was  born  March  20, 
1830,  in  the  town  of  Durham,  Strafford 
county.  New  Hampshire.  He  was  but 
an  infant  when  his  parents  moved 
from  his  birthplace  to  Kirtland,  Ohio, 
where  the  family  became  converts  to 
"Mormonism."  Benjamin  distinctly 
remembers  the  dedication  of  the  Kirt- 
land Temple  and  the  subsequent  perse- 
cutions in  Ohio.  While  the  family 
stopped  temporarily  at  Springfield,  111., 
in    the    spring   of   1839,    Benjamin     was 


baptized  in  the  Illinois  river,  and  the 
following  year  the  family  moved  tcv 
Nauvoo,  instead  of  going  to  Missouri, 
for  which  State  they  had  started  from 
Ohio.  As  a  young  man  Benjamin  took 
an  active  part  in  the  upbuilding  of 
Nauvoo, and  remained  there  until  the 
general  exodus  of  the  Saints  in  1846. 
In  journeying  to  the  great  west  the 
family  made  halts  at  Bonaparte  and 
Mt.  Pisgah,  Iowa,  the  winter  of  1846- 
47  being  spent  at  the  latter  place.  After 
that  two  years  were  spent  at  Council 
Bluffs  and   vicinity,   and   in   June,   1850, 


476 


LATTER-DAY    SAINT 


the  family  started  on  the  long  and  tedi- 
ous journey  to  Great  Salt  Lake  valley, 
where  they  arrived  in  the  fall  of  that 
year.  They  settled  in  Provo,  Utah 
county.  In  the  spring  of  1853  Benjamin 
was  ordained  a  Seventy  by  Joseph 
Young,  and  in  the  fall  of  that  year  he 
was  called,  together  with  many  others, 
to  go  south  to  Little  Salt  Lake  valley, 
to  strengthen  the  settlement  there,and 
guard  them  against  the  Indians.  He 
lived  in  Parowan  two  years,  and  while 
there  he  married  Mary  Ellen  Foster; 
returned  to  Provo  in  1855.  In  the  spring 
of  that  year  he  was  sent  on  a  mission 
to  the  Los  Vegas  Indians,  in  Nevada, 
where  he  labored  two  years,  part  of  the 
time  in  the  lead  mines.  He  returned 
home  at  the  time  of  the  Johnston  army 
invasion,  and  performed  military  duty 
in  Echo  canyon.  Later,  he  located  at 
Logan.  Cache  valley  from  whence  he 
was  called  on  a  mission  to  the  Sand- 
wich Islands  in  1864.  He  remained 
there  six  years,  and  took  temporary 
charge  of  the  mission  for  six  months 
during  the  absence  of  Geo.  Nebeker, 
to  whom  he  acted  as  first  counselor  in 
the  presidency  of  the  mission.  His 
wife  was  with  him  part  of  the  time. 
He  returned  to  Logan,  Utah,  in  1870; 
soon  afterwards  he  removed  to  Coal- 
ville, Summit  county,  where  he  resided 
three  years,  after  which  he  settled  on 
Centre  creek,  Wasatch  county,  where 
he  took  up  a  farm.  July  15,  1877,  at 
the  organization  of  the  Wasatch  Stake 
of  Zion,  he  was  ordained  a  High  Priest 
and  Bishop  and  set  apart  to  preside 
over  Center  Ward,  which  was  organized 
at  the  time.  This  position  he  held 
for  sixteen  years,  after  which  he  was 
honorably  released.  He  then  moved 
to  Arizona,  where  he  presided  over  the 
High  Priests'  quorum  of  the  St.  Joseph 
Stake;  later  he  became  the  senior  mem- 
ber of  the  High  Council  of  the  Stake, 
which  duty  he  performed  till  he  moved 
back  to  Utah.  He  is  at  the  present 
time  residing  in  Provo,  and  though 
nearly  72  years  old,  he  enjoys  good 
health,  being  strong  in  body  and  mind. 
Benjamin  Cluff  is  the  father  of  fifteeen 
children,  namely  seven  by  his  first 
wife,  and  eight  by  his  second  wife, 
Eliza  A.  Foster,  whom  he  married  in 
1856;  he  died  Sept.  5,  1990.  Bro.  Cluflf's 
children  are  all  members  of  the 
Church;  some  of  them  are  highly  edu- 
cated and  occupy  pronninent  positions 
in   both  Church  and  State.       (For  fur- 


ther  details     see     "The     Cluff   Family 
Journal,"  Vol.  1,  p.  75,  etc.) 

BLiAKE,  William,  second  Bishop 
of  Center  Ward,  Wasatch  county,  Utah, 
was  born  in  August,  1848,  at  North 
Molton,  Devonshire,  England.  His  pa- 
rents were  "Mormons"  before  he  was 
born.  He  left  England,  together  with 
his  father  and  two  sisters,  in  May,  1864, 
for  America,  crossing  the  Atlantic  on 
board  the  ship  "Hudson."  His  father 
died  in  crossing  the  plains,  but  Wil- 
liam and  his  two  sisters  arrived  in  Utah 
in  October,  1864.  He  was  baptized  May 
4,  1865,  and  in  1866  he  went  as  a  Church 
teamster  in  John  D.  Holladay's  ox- 
train  to  the  Missouri  river,  to  bring 
poor  emigrants  to  the  Valley,  among 
whom  were  his  mother  and  sister.  He 
moved  to  Wanship,  Summit  county,  in 
the  fall  of  1866.  In  1868  he  made  an- 
other trip  east  after  emigrants,  in 
John  Gillespie's  company.  Oct.  2,  1871, 
he  married  Mary  Lake.  He  was  or- 
dained an  Elder  by  Pres.  Joseph  F. 
Smith  in  April,  1866,  and  he  was  or- 
dained a  High  Priest  and  set  apart  as 
first  counselor  to  Bishop  Benjamin 
Cluff,  of  Center  Ward,  by  Apostle  Fran- 
cis M.  Lyman,  Nov.  4,  1883.  Bishop 
Cluff  went  to  Arizona  in  the  fall  of 
1893,  and  on  April  28,  1894,  Bro.  Blake 
was  ordained  a  Bishop  of  the  Center 
Ward  by  Apostle  Francis  M.  Lyman, 
which  position  he  held  till  the  fall  of 
1898,  when  he  moved  to  Utah  county. 
March  18,  1900,  he  was  set  apart  as 
second  counselor  to  Bishop  John  John- 
son of  Lake  View  Ward,  by  Pres.  Da- 
vid John.  In  this  office  he  is  laboring 
at  the  present  time. 

CLiEGG,  Thomas,  fourth  Bishop  of 
Center  Ward,  Wasatch  county,  Utah,  is 
the  son  of  Henry  Clegg  and  Margaret 
Ann  Griffith,  and  was  born  Nov.  13, 
1858,  at  Springvllle,  Utah  county,  Utah. 
He  was  baptized  in  September,  1866,  by 
Thos.  Chiles,  moved  to  Heber  City, 
Wasatch  county,  in  1872.  He  was  or- 
dained an  Elder  in  November,  1880,  and 
a  Seventy  Feb.  15,  1885.  He  was  or- 
dained a  High  Priest  and  set  apart  as 
second  counselor  to  Bishop  Alonzo  A. 
Brim  by  Apostle  Francis  M.  Lyman. 
Nov.  12,  1898,  and  he  was  ordained  a 
Bishop  Feb.  13,  1900,  by  Apostle  Fran- 
cis M.  Lyman  and  set  apart  to  preside 
over  the  Center  Ward,  succeeding 
Bishop  Brim.       Prior     to      this,     Elder 


BIOGRAPHICAL   ENCYCLOPEDIA. 


477 


Clegg  labored  as  a  block  teacher  for 
twelve  years,  and  as  a  first  counselor 
in  the  Y.  M.  M.  I.  A.  nine  years.  He 
has  also  labored  as  a  Sunday  school, 
a  mutual  improvement  and  a  Stake 
missionary.  He  has  served  as  choir 
leader,  superintendent  of  Sunday 
schools  and  president  of  Y.  M.  M.  I.  A. 
Since  Dec.  2,  1880,  when  he  married 
Rachel  Ann  Sessions, he  has  endeavored 
to  raise  a  family  in  the  fear  of  the 
Lord. 

LAMBERT,  Ephraim,  Bishop  of 
Woodland,  Wasatch  county,  Utah,  is 
the  son  of  John  and  Eline  Hansine 
Lambert,  and  was  born  Nov.  4,  1858,  in 
Salt  Lake  City,  Utah.  Bishop  Lam- 
bert writes:  "My  father  was  born  in 
Eng-land.  He  came  to  Nauvoo  with 
the  first  company  of  Saints  that  sailed 
from  Liverpool,  England.  My  mother 
was  born  in  Copenhagen,  Denmark. 
She  was  the  first  girl  that  was  bap- 
tized in  that  country.  When  I  was  two 
years  old  my  parents  moved  from  Salt 
Lake  City  to  Kamas,  Summit  county, 
and  were  among  the  first  settlers  in 
Rhoads'  valley.  I  received  but  very 
little  schooling,  most  of  my  time  being 
spent  in  farming  and  in  herding  sheep 
and  cattle.  We  passed  through  many 
hard  times  incident  to  settling  a  new 
country.  When  my  brother  and  I 
were  about  eight  years  of  age,  and  were 
herding  sheep,  we  lo&t  a  lamb  on  a  cer- 
tain occasion.  We  searched  and  hunt- 
ed, but  failed  to  find  it,  and  we  were 
afraid  to  go  home  without  it,  as  our 
father  was  quite  strict  with  his  chil- 
dren. Having  been  taught  the  princi- 
ple of  prayer,  we  made  up  our  mind  to 
pray  to  the  Lord,  and  ask  Him  to  di- 
rect us,  so  that  we  could  find  the  lost 
animal.  Consequently,  we  knelt  down 
and  prayed,  each  in  turn,  and  when 
we  arose  to  our  feet,  we  saw  the  lost 
lamb  standing  close  by  and  in  plain 
view.  This  may  appear  like  a  trifling 
affair  to  some,  but  it  was  the  means 
of  creating  a  faith  in  me  through 
which  the  Lord  has  subsequently 
blesed  me  abundantly  and  preserved 
my  life.  Often,  when  I  have  be«n  alone 
on  the  tops  of  high  mountains,  have  I 
knelt  down  and  lifted  up  my  voice 
in  thanksgiving  to  the  Lord  for  the 
many  manifestations  of  His  goodness 
towards  me.  The  Lord  has  often 
blesed  me  with  dreams  and  visions. 
March  9,  1880,  I  married  Agnes  Michie, 


who  has  been  a  good,  dutiful  and  af- 
fectionate wife  to  me  ever  since.  Dec. 
8,  1883,  I  was  chosen  and  set  apart  as 
president  of  the  first  Y.  M.  M.  I.  A. 
organized  in  Woodland  Ward,  and  in 
August,  1885,  I  was  chosen  to  fill  a 
vacancy  in  the  council  in  the  20th 
quorum  of  Seventy;  but  before  I  was 
placed  in  that  position  I  was  chosen  to 
be  second  counselor  to  Bishop  Moon, 
which  position  I  held  until  he  moved 
to  Old  Mexico,  in  1890,  when  I  was  or- 
dained and  set  apart  by  Apostle  John 
W.  Taylor  to  act  as  Bishop  of  Wood- 
land, which  position  I  hold  at  the 
present  time.  I  have  been  extensively 
engaged  in  the  saw  mill  and  timber 
business.  I  am  also  a  farmer  on  a 
small  scale." 

CLUFF,  Henry,  Bishop  of  the  Elk- 
horn  Ward,  Wasatch  county,  Utah,  is 
the  son  of  David  Cluff  and  Betsy  Hall, 


^ 

K  M 

^ 

* 

and  was  born  in  Nauvoo,  Hancock 
county.  111.,  Feb.  15,  1843.  With  his 
parents  he  moved  to  Mt.  Pisgah,  Iowa, 
in  1845,  and  later  to  Council  Bluffs.  In 
1850,  together  with  his  father's  family 
he  migrated  to  Utah  and  settled  in 
Provo,  Utah  county.  In  1864  he  went 
back  to  the  Missouri  river  for  immi- 
grants. He  took  an  active  part  in  the 
Blackhawk  war  and  other  later  Indian 
troubles  which  occurred  in  the  early 
settlement  of  Utah.  In  1865  he  mar- 
ried Keziah  E.Russell.  In  1871  he  moved 
from  Provo  City  to  Provo  valley,  set- 
tling on  what  is  known  as  Cluff's  ranch, 
where  he  still  resides.      He  learned  the 


478 


LATTER-DAY    SAINT 


trade  of  a  cabinet-maker,  but  for  many 
years  he  has  given  his  attention  to 
farming  and  stockraising.  In  1878  he 
was  set  apart  as  presiding  Elder  over 
the  Elkhom  branch  of  the  East  Heber 
Ward,  and  in  1899  he  was  selected  and 
set  apart  as  Bishop  of  the  Elkhorn 
Ward  under  the  hands  of  Apostle 
Francis  M.  Lyman,  with  Orson  H.  Lee 
and  Harry  Morris  as  his  first  and  sec- 
ond counselors  respectively.  He  served 
two  terms  as  justice  of  the  peace,  and 
was  elected  a  county  commissioner  in 
Wasatch  county,  in  1900. 

RASBAND,  Joseph  A.,  High  Coun- 
cilor in  the  Wasatch  Stake  of  Zion,  is 
the  son  of  Thomas  and  Elizabeth  Ras- 
band,  and  was  born  March  17,  1867,  in 
Heber,  Wasatch  county,  Utah.  He  was 
blessed  April  28,  1867,  by  Joseph  M. 
Murdock,  and  was  baptized  June  29, 
1877,  by  John  McDonald,  and  confirmed 
the  same  day.  He  was  ordained  a 
Deacon  April  23,  1882,  by  Thomas  S. 
Watson,  and  a  Teacher  March  10,  1888; 
later  he  was  ordained  an  Elder,  and  he 
was  ordained  a  Seventy  by  Rasmus  An- 
derson Nov.  2,  1890.  He  was  ordained 
a  High  Priest  and  set  apart  as  a.  High 
Councilor  by  Apostle  Reed  Smoot  Feb. 
10,  1901.  In  1893-96  he  filled  a  mission 
to  the  Samoan  Islands.  He  labored 
as  a  mutual  improvement  missionary 
in  the  Weber  Stake  from  Dec.  9,  1897, 
to  March  12,  1898.  He  also  labored  as 
a  Sunday  school  missionary  and  later 
as  a  member  of  the  Wasatch  Stake 
Sunday  School  Board.  He  served  in 
this  position  till  Feb.  10,  1901,  when  he 
became  a  member  of  the  High  Council, 
which  position  he  at  present  fills.  El- 
der Rasband  has  always  been  an  active 
mutual  improvement  association  work- 
er, having  labored  as  secretary,  coun- 
selor, and  president.  He  married  Eli- 
za A.  Jeffs  Dec.  3,  1890. 

BENNION,  Samuel  Roberts,  pres- 
ident of  the  Uintah  Stake  of  Zion,  was 
born  in  Nauvoo,  Hancock  county,  111., 
Nov.  10,  1842,  the  son  of  John  Bennion 
and  Esther  Wainwright.  He  came  to 
the  Valley  with  his  parents  in  1847  and 
settled  in  North  Jordan,  Salt  Lake 
county,  in  1849,  where  he  was  baptized 
by  his  father  Jan.  9,  1851,  and  was  sub- 
sequently ordained  a  Deacon,  an  Elder 
and  a  Seventy  successively.  Finally, 
he  was  chosen  as  one  of  the  presidents 
of    the    7th    quorum    of    Seventy.        He 


filled  a  mission  to  the  States  in  1876-77, 
and  a  mission  to  Great  Britain  In  1883- 
85.  In  1886  he  was  called  to  Ashley 
valley,  to  preside  over  the  settlements 
of  the  Saints  there, and  when  these  were 
organized  as  a  Stake  of  Zion  May  9, 
1887,  Elder  Bennion  was  chosen  as  pres- 
ident of  the  same,  which  position  he 
still  holds. 

GLINES,  James  Harvey,  a  prom- 
inent Elder  in  the  Uintah  Stake  of  Zion, 
is  the  son  of  James  P.  Glines  and  Ruth 
Brown,  and  was  born  April  17,  1822,  at 
Franklin,  Merrimack  county,  New 
Hampshire.  Becoming  converted  to 
"Mormonism,"  he  was  baptized  by 
Erastus  Snow  March  10,  1843,  in  Peters- 
boro,  N.  H.,  and  was  soon  afterward 
ordained  a  Deacon  in  the  Church,  He 
was  ordained  an  Elder  by  Orson  Hyde, 
at  Boston,  Mass.,  June  2,  1844,  and  spent 
some    time    electioneering    for     Joseph 


Smith,  who  at  that  time  was  a  can- 
didate for  the  presidency  of  the  United 
States.  He  then  emigrated  to  Nau- 
voo, arriving  there  July  31,  1844,  about 
a  month  after  the  martyrdom  of  the 
Prophet  and  Patriarch,  Here  he  served 
as  a  police  officer  on  the  old  police  force 
and  took  an  active  part  in  public  af- 
fairs generally;  he  was  present  at  the 
memorable  meeting  held  at  Nauvoo, 
Aug.  8,  1844,  when  Sidney  Rigdon's 
claim  to  the  guardianship  of  the 
Church  was  rejected  and  the  Twelve 
Apostles  were  acknowledged  as  the 
highest  authority.  He  was  ordained 
a  Seventy   by  Joseph  Young  and     be- 


BIOGRAPHICALi   ENCYCLOPEDIA. 


479 


came  a  member  of  the  8th  quorum  of 
that  organization.  He  was  one  of  the 
number  who  brought  a  cannon  that  be- 
longed to  the  "Carthage  Greys"  to 
Nauvo,  to  celebrate  the  4th  of  July. 
There  it  was  stolen  and  taken  across 
the  river  and  subsequently  sent  to 
Council  Bluffs.  Elder  Glines,  as  a 
member  of  tha  Nauvoo  Legion  (in  which 
he  served  as  adjutant  in  a  regiment), 
was  often  on  duty  as  guard  during  the 
troubleous  times  of  mobocracy.  As 
an  exile  for  the  sake  of  his  religion  he 
left  Nauvoo  in  February,  1846,  crossing 
the  Mississippi  river  on  the  ice,  and 
made  his  way  to  Council  Bluffs.  He 
was  subsequently  sent  back  to  Nauvoo 
after  goods,  and  on  his  return  he 
brought  with  him  the  cannon  previous- 
ly mentioned.  Soon  after  his  return 
to  Council  Bluffs,  he  enlisted  in  the 
Mormon  Battalion,  being  one  of  the 
first  to  enter  his  name  as  a  volunteer; 
he  enlisted  as  sergeant-major  in  that 
battalion  at  its  organization.  He  also 
accompanied  Pres.  Brigham  Young  on 
a  visit  back  to  Garden  Grove,  in  Iowa, 
to  obtain  volunteers.  He  marched 
with  the  main  body  of  the  battalion 
as  far  as  Santa  Fe,  New  Mexico,  when 
he  became  a  member  of  the  detachment 
which  wintered  at  Pueblo,  from  which 
place  he  went  back  to  Winter  Quar- 
ters in  1847.  At  Winter  Quarters  he 
served  as  a  special  guard,  and  was  a 
member  of  Hosea  Stout's  expedition, 
which  went  out  to  meet  the  Pioneers, 
as  they  returned  from  the  Valley  in  the 
autumn  of  1847.  Early  in  1848  he  was 
sent  on  a  mission  to  Iowa,  Illinois  and 
Wisconsin,  to  hunt  up  Saints  who  had 
become  scattered  during  the  exodus 
from  Nauvoo.  In  1852  he  migrated  to 
the  Valley.crossing  the  plains  in  Robert 
Wimmer's  company.  He  settled  in 
Cedar  Valley,  Utah  county,  being  one 
of  the  first  settlers  of  Cedar  Fort. 
Here  he  followed  the  avocation  of  a 
school  teacher.  Upon  the  approach  of 
Johnston's  army  in  1858,  the  Saints 
vacated  Cedar  Fort,  and  Elder  Glines 
lived  for  three  years  in  American  Fork, 
where  he  taught  school  and  served  as 
alderman  and  as  a  military  officer.  He 
then  moved  back  to  Cedar  valley,  where 
he  resided  until  1883,  when  he  removed 
to  Ashley  valley,  Uintah  county,  where 
he  has  resided  ever  since.  Elder  Glines 
has  been  a  very  active  man,  both  in 
ecclesiastical  and  temporal  affairs.  In 
Cedar  valley  he  served  as  tithing  clerk, 


ward  clerk,  president  of  teachers,  jus- 
tice of  the  peace  and  president  of  a 
water  company.  He  originated  the 
first  water  company  in  Utah  county. 
In  Ashley  valley  he  has  organized  two 
water  companies  and  the  different  ec- 
clesiastical associations  of  the  Stake; 
he  also  served  as  probate  judge  from 
1884  to  1888,  and  as  justice  of  the  peace. 
For  three  years  he  was  the  acting 
Bishop  of  the  4th  Ward  (or  Glines 
Ward),  in  Ashley  valley,  and  superin- 
tended the  building  of  the  school  house 
in  Glines  Ward,  which  Ward  was 
named  in  his  honor.  He  was  ordained 
a  High  Priest  by  James  Hacking,  May 
9,  1887;  later  he  became  a  High  Coun- 
cilor in  the  Uintah  Stake  of  Zion.  In 
1899  he  performed  a  mision  to  Massa- 
chusetts and  New  Hampshire,  where 
he  labored  mostly  among  his  kindred. 
While  on  this  mission  he  preached  on 
the  Boston  Commons,  and  was  also  able 
to  allay  considerable  prejudice  by 
newspaper  interviews.  In  December, 
1845,  Elder  Glines  married  Elizabeth 
Ann  Myers  in  the  Nauvoo  Temple. 
While  he  served  in  the  Mormon  Bat- 
talion his  wife  lived  in  the  so-called 
Ponca  camp,  which  was  in  charge  of 
Bishop  Geo.  Miller.  His  first  wife  died 
Nov.  3,  1873;  his  second  wife,  who  is 
still  alive,   is  a  native  of  Sweden. 

LYBBERT,  Christian  Frederifc 
Bernhard,  senior  president  of  the 
97th  quorum  of  Seventy,  is  a  son  of 
Joachim  Frederik  and  Margrethe 
Elizabeth  Wilhelmine  Evart,  and  was 
born  Nov.  6,  1834.  at  Flade,  Horns  her- 
red,  Hjorring  amt,  Denmark,  He  re- 
ceived a  fair  education  in  the  common 
schools  of  Denmark.  Bible  reading 
was  one  of  the  studies  taught  in  the 
schools,  and  he,  being  of  a  naturally 
religious  mind,  soon  began  to  think 
about  what  he  should  do  to  save  his 
soul.  When  he  first  heard  of  the  "Mor- 
mons" he  became  interested  and  prayed 
to  his  Heavenly  Father  to  enlighten 
his  mind,  that  he  might  know  who  had 
the  truth.  His  prayer  was  answered; 
he  became  a  convert  to  "Mormonism," 
and  he  was  baptized  by  Jacob  Julander 
March  28.  1854.  He  followed  the  trade 
of  a  blacksmith,  till  June,  1854,  when 
he  was  ordained  a  Teacher  and  sent 
out  to  labor  as  a  missionary  in  the 
Aalborg  conference.  He  did  success- 
ful missionary  work  in  different  places 
for  over  two  years.       He  was  ordained 


480 


LATTER-DAY    SAINT 


a   Priest,    and   later    (Feb.    11.    1855)    he 
was  ordained  an  Elder  by  E.  G.  Enk- 
sen       He  had  the  pleasure  of  teaching 
his  mother  and   father  the  gospel,   the 
former  he  also  baptized.  In  the  sprmg 
of    1859    he    enlisted    as    a    soldier     and 
served   his   country   four  years,   durmg 
which  time  he  also  worked  actively  m 
Church  affairs.      He  married  Mary  An- 
dersen in  Copenhagen  June  15,  1862.    In 
1865  he  emigrated  to  Utah,  crossing  the 
plains    with    ox-teams.        He      married 
Antonette  M.  Olsen  March  10.  1866,  and 
located  in  Ogden  the  same  year.    Here 
he  followed  his  trade  and  also  took  an 
active  interest  in  Church  work,   labor- 
ing as  a  Ward  Teacher.      Subsequently 
he  moved  to  Spring  City.  Sanpete  coun- 
ty,   and    later    (in   1870)      he   located   at 
Levan,  Juab  county,  where  he  labored 
as    Ward    and    Sunday    school    teacher. 
Ward  clerk,   superintendent  of   Sunday 
school,  etc.      In  1882  he  moved  to  Ash- 
ley   valley,    locating    at    what    is    now 
Merrill   Ward.       Here   he   also    held     a 
number  of  ecclesiastical  positions.  May 
5,  1892,  he  was  set  apart  by  Pres.  Joseph 
F.  Smith  for  a  mission  to  Europe.  From 
May,    1892,    to   June,     1894.     he    labored 
diligently    as   a   missionary   in    Holland 


and  also  in  Denmark,  and  was  success- 
ful in  making  many  friends  and  con- 
verts, as  also  in  getting  much  valuable 
genealogy.  Since  his  return  home  he 
has  served  as  Ward  clerk  and  teacher 
and  discharged  the  duties  pertaining  to 
his  calling  as  senior  president  of  the 
97th  quorum  of  Seventy. 


HIGBEE,    Isaac,      first  president  of 
the   Utah    (or   Provo)     Stake     of    Zion, 
from  1851  to  1852,  was  born  Dec.  23,  1797. 
in  Galaway  township,  Gloucester  coun- 
ty.   New   Jersey.       The   following   short 
sketch    of    his    life    is    written    by    him- 
self:       "When      between    five    and    six. 
years  old,   I  removed  with  my  parents 
to   Clermont  county,   Ohio.       I  married 
Keziah   String,   Feb.   11,   1819.    Soon  af- 
ter I  moved   to   Cincinnati.     About   the 
first  of  May,  1832,  my  father  and  moth- 
er,  Isaac  and   Sophia   Higbee,   John   S. 
Higbee    and    wife,    John    T.    Kerr     and 
Margaret,  his  wife  (who  was  my  wife's 
sister),  myself  and  wife  Keziah,  and  a 
few    months    later    Elias      Higbee    and 
wife,  were  all  baptized  into  the  Church 
of   Jesus   Christ   of   Latter-day   Saints. 
I  was  ordained  an  Elder  June  23,  1832, 
by   Lyman   Wight   and   Calvin   Wilson. 
About   April    1st   we   all    emigrated     to 
Jackson  county,  Missouri.      When  I  ar- 
rived there  I  sent  Elias  Higbee  to  the 
land  office  to  enter  eighty  acres  of  land 
on  the  Big  Blue,   in  what  was  Lyman 
Wight's  settlement.      The  Bishop  divid- 
ed the  land,  twenty  acres  to  my  father, 
thirty  to  Elias,  and  thirty  to  me.  After 
we  were  driven  out  of  Jackson  county, 
Joseph    Smith      (the     Prophet)    was    in 
need  of  money  to  pay  his  lawyer's  fees, 
etc.       I   gave   the   Bishop   leave   to   sell 
my   land    to    help   Joseph    to    settle    his 
debts,   which  I  presume  he  did.     I  was 
driven  from  my  home  in  Jackson  coun- 
ty, and  crossed  the  Missouri  river  into 
Clay  county,  Nov.  9,  1833,  the  day  being 
very  rainy.      That  night  my  son  Alma 
was  born;  he  died  in  Clay  county  when 
he  was  two  and  a  half  years  old.  I  was 
ordained    to    the      High    Priesthood    in 
Clay   county,    by   the   High   Council   of 
Zion,  March  22,  1835.      I    started    on    a 
mission  to     preach     the     gospel  in  the 
States  March  20,  1835;  assisted  in  build- 
ing a  branch  of  the  Church  in  Illinois 
of   forty-five    members;    went    to    Kirt- 
land    and    worked    two    months    on    the 
Temple    and    returned      home    Oct.    24, 
1838.      I  was  in  the  Crooked  river  bat- 
tle Oct.  25,  1835,  and  a  few  days  later, 
I  left  Far  West   for  Illinois.       In   Feb- 
ruary, 1839,  my  family  came  to  Quincy, 
being    driven    out    of    Missouri    by    the 
mob.       Feb.   19,   1841,   I  was  ordained  a 
Bishop    under      the      hands    of    Joseph 
Smith    the   Prophet,   and   appointed     to 
take  charge  of  the  Second  Ward  in  the 
city  of  Nauvoo.      Nov.  3,  1841,  my  wife 
Keziah   died.       In   August,    1843,    I   was 


BIOGRAPHICAL    ENCYCLOPEDIA. 


481 


elected  justice  of  the  peace.  Dec.  15, 
1845,  I  received  an  endowment  in  the 
House  of  the  Lord  in  Nauvoo.  Sept. 
17,  1846,  I  was  expelled  from  Nauvoo 
by  our  enemies.  In  1847,  I  was  appoint- 
ed to  take  charge  of  the  ferry  across 
the  Missouri  river  at  Winter  Quarters. 
I  arrived  in  Great  Salt  Lake  valley 
Sept.  24,  1848.  May  28,  1849,  I  was  ap- 
pointed to  preside  over  the  Saints  in 
Utah  valley,  now  Provo  City.  Feb. 
9,  1850,  my  son  Joseph  was  killed  by  the 
Indians.  In  December,  1852,  I  was 
appointed  by  the  legislature  of  L^tali 
as  judge  of  probate  in  Utah  county. 
April  6,  1856,  I  was  called  on  a  mission 
to  Euiope.  After  my  return  I  was 
elected  justice  of  the  peace  in  Provo 
City.  Following  are  the  names  of  my 
children  who  were  with  me  in  Mis- 
souri: Mary  Higbee,  married  to  Louis 
Zabriski:  died  near  Florence;  Amanda, 
wife  of  John  McEwan;  Hannah,  wife 
of  Warner  Johnson;  Joseph,  who  was 
killed  by  the  Indians  near  Provo;  Em- 
ma, born  in  Caldwell  county,  Mo.,  wife 
of  Henry  Rogers;  and  Alma,  born  and 
died  in  Clay  county.  Mo."  Isaac  Hig- 
bee died  at  his  home  in  the  Third  Ward. 
Provo,  Feb.  16.  1874.  as  a  faithful  mem- 
ber of   the  Church. 

MILLiER,  AVilliam,  president  of 
the  Utah  Stake  of  Zion  from  July.  1S60. 
to  1868.  was  the  son  of  Seth  Miller  and 
Martha  Tilden  and  was  born  Feb.  ^. 
1814,  at  Avon,  Livingston  county,  N.  Y. 
His  parents  emigrated  to  the  State  of 
New  York  soon  after  their  marriage, 
and  were  among  the  early  settlers  in 
northwestern  New  York.  Pres.  Miller 
had  nine  brothers  and  sisters  who  lived 
to  raise  families.  The  Millers  \vere 
among  the  most  prominent  members  of 
society,  and  were  quite  wealthy  for 
those  times.  William's  father  belonged 
to  no  religious  denomination,  but  was 
strictly  moral  and  honest  in  his  deal- 
ings with  his  fellow-men.  His  mother 
was  a  Presbyterian;  her  husband  never 
Interfering  in  her  religious  practices. 
When  William  Miller  was  in  his  sev- 
enteenth year,  quite  a  religious  wave 
passed  over  their  part  of  the  country, 
and  all  were  anxious  to  experience  its 
influence— experience  of  change  of 
heart.  He  attended  the  revivals,  and 
after  repeated  solicitations  had  his 
name  put  down  on  six  months'  trial — 
it  being  the  rule  to  take  persons  on  a 
short  trial  to  prove  their  sincerity,  be- 

Vol.  1,  No.  31. 


foi-e  admitting  them  to  membership. 
Just  after  taking  this  step  he  heard  an 
Elder  preach  the  new  and  strange  doc- 
trines then  advocated  by  the  "Mor- 
mons," which  set  him  to  read  the  Scrip- 
tures, to  ascertain  for  himself  as  to  the 
truth.  He  also  obtained  a  Book  of 
Mormon  and  carefully  read  its  con- 
tents, scarcely  resting  to  eat  and  drink, 
and  found  it  consistent  with  the  Bible. 
He  attended  all  the  Latter-day  Saint 
meetings  in  the  vicinity  for  a  year, 
which  resulted  in  his  ultimately  join- 
ing the  Latter-day  Saints.  In  the  fall 
of  the  year,  on  his  18th  birthday,  his 
father  gave  him  $1,000  and  his  liberty 
to  commence  life  for  himself.  May  1, 
1834,  he  was  married  to  Phebe  Scott, 
of  the  town  of  Avon,  and  they  at  once 


commenced  housekeeping  on  their  own 
account.  Not  getting  his  money  as 
early  in  the  spring  as  desired,  he 
turned  his  attention  to  farming,  and 
during  this  season  he  again  became  in- 
terested in  the  doctrines  taught  by 
the  Latter-day  Saints.  He  started  for 
Kirtland,  Oct.  12,  1834,  where  he  re- 
mained for  some  three  weeeks,  convers- 
ing with  the  Prophet  Joseph  and  oth- 
er Elders,  with  whom  he  became  ac- 
quainted. Being  now  fully  convinced 
he  went  into  the  waters  of  baptism 
Oct.  28,  1834,  and  on  the  following  Sun- 
day was  confirmed  a  member  of  the 
Church  by  Sylvester  Smith.  He  started 
home  next  day  rejoicing  in  the  truth  of 
the  gospel.  The  next  Sabbath  he  at- 
tended a  meeting  of  the  Saints,  seven 
miles   from   where   he   resided,    in   com- 

Aug.  3.  1901. 


482 


LATTER-DAY    SAINT 


pany  with  his  wife.  She  also  being 
a  believer,  was  baptized  in  June,  1834. 
In  June,  1835,  he  took  his  wife  to  Kirt- 
land,  where  they  remained  one  month, 
and  made  arrangements  to  move  and 
make  his  home  at  Kirtland,  which  he 
did  in  the  following  autumn.  He  pur- 
chased seventy  acres  of  land  and  rent- 
ed a  house  in  town,  expecting  to  make 
a  permanent  home  there.  He  wa^  at 
the  dedication  of  the  Temple  at  Kirt- 
land,and  received  the  ordinances  of  the 
gospel  conferred  on  the  Elders  at  that 
time,  he  having  been  previously  or- 
dained an  Elder  by  Elder  Beman.  At 
Kirtland  he  was  ordained  a  Seventy  in 
the  2nd  quorum  of  Seventy,  and  was 
sent  on  a  mission  to  his  native  State, 
where  he  preached  and  organized  sev- 
eral branches  of  the  Church.  Return- 
ing to  Kirtland  in  the  spring  of  1838, 
Elder  Miller  moved  with  the  Saints  to 
Far  West,  Missouri,  where  he  arrived 
on  the  7th  of  May,  in  time  to  raise 
some  corn.  In  the  August  election 
of  that  year  the  anti-Mormons  tried  to 
prevent  the  Saints  from  voting,  which 
caused  a  hot  physical  conflict  between 
the  parties,  in  which  William  Miller 
took  a  prominent  part,  assisting  and 
protecting  all  legal  voters  in  deposit- 
ing their  ballots.  During  the  dark 
times  which  followed  in  Missouri,  Wil- 
liam Miller  was  on  constant  duty.trav- 
eling  from  Adam-ondi  Ahman,  carry- 
ing messages  to  and  from  his  brethren 
whose  lives  were  in  danger.  He  helped 
to  save  the  printing  press  and  valuable 
papers  by  digging  a  hole  in  the  ground, 
putting  the  valuables  in,  covering  them 
with  poles  and  stacking  hay  on  top. 
This  was  a  day  that  "tried  men's  souls." 
The  City  of  the  Saints  (Far  West)  fell 
before  the  mob-army  which  Governor 
Boggs  sent  to  exterminate  the  Saints, 
the  Prophet  and  many  of  the  leaders 
were  marched  to  prison,  while  the  de- 
fenders, among  whom  was  William 
Miller,  were  forced  to  lay  down  their 
arms  and  at  the  point  of  the  bayonet 
to  deed  away  their  land  to  defray  the 
expenses  of  the  war  which  their  ene- 
mies had  forced  upon  them.  During 
all  these  perilous  times  he  was  inde- 
fatigable in  saving  the  families  of  the 
exterminated  Saints.  Feb.  1,  1839,  he 
left  Far  West,,  and  arrived  at  Quincy, 
Illinois,  where  he  saw  Sidney  Rigdon, 
who  counseled  the  Saints  to  scatter  for 
the  time  being.  Thus  counseled  he  went 


to  Sangamon  county,  where  he  rented 
a  farm  of  thirty  acres;  but  after  har- 
vesting his  crops  he  removed  to  Boone- 
ville,  where  he  rented  a  farm  and  re- 
mained two  years.  Here  he  baptized 
over  twenty  persons  and  raised  up  a 
branch  of  the  Church.  In  1841  he  re- 
moved to  Nauvoo,  where  he  remained 
five  years,  assisting  in  all  the  public 
works,  and  was  present  when  the  cor- 
ner and  cap  stones  of  the  Temple  were 
laid.  Having  been  taught  by  the 
Prophet  that  it  was  both  his  privilege 
and  duty  to  take  a  plurality  of  wives, 
he  accordingly,  on  Dec.  2,  1844,  took,  as 
his  second  wife,  Marilla,  eldest  daugh- 
ter of  Squire  Aaron  Johnson,  in  the 
presence  and  with  the  free  and  full 
consent  of  his  first  wife.  The  follow- 
ing noble  and  quite  heroic  episode  of 
"Mormon"  history  is  told  in  the  "Life 
of  Brigham  Young:"  "By  the  time  we 
were  at  work  in  the  Temple,'  says 
Pres.  Young,  officiating  in  the  or- 
dinances, the  mob  learned  that  'Mor- 
monism'  was  not  dead,  as  they  sup- 
posed. We  had  completed  the  walls  of 
the  Temple,  and  the  attic  story  from 
about  half-way  up  of  the  first  windows, 
in  about  fifteen  months.  It  went  up 
like  magic,  and  we  then  commenced 
officiating  in  the  ordinances.  Then 
the  mob  commenced  to  hunt  for  other 
victims;  they  had  already  killed  the 
Prophet  Joseph  and  his  brother  Hyrum 
in  Carthage  jail,  while  under  the 
pledge  of  the  State  for  safety,  and  now 
they  wanted  Brigham,  the  president  of 
the  Twelve  Apostles,  who  were  then 
acting  as  the  presidency  of  the  Church. 
I  was  in  my  room  in  the  Temple;  it 
was  the  southeast  corner  of  the  upper 
story.  I  learned  that  a  posse  was 
lurking  around  the  Temple,  and  that 
the  United  States  marshal  was  waiting 
for  me  to  come  down, whereupon  I  knelt 
down  and  asked  my  Father  in  Heaven, 
in  the  name  of  Jesus,  to  guide  and 
protect  me,  that  I  might  live  to  prove 
advantageous  to  the  Saints;  I  arose 
from  my  knees,  and  sat  down  In  my 
chair.  There  came  a  rap  at  my  door. 
'Come  in,'  I  said;  and  Brother  George 
D.  Grant,  who  was  then  engaged  driv- 
ing my  carriage  and  doing  chores  for 
me,  entered  the  room.  Said  he, 
'Brother  Brigham,  do  you  know  that  a 
posse  and  the  United  States  marshal 
are  here?'  I  told  him  that  I  had  heard 
so.       On  entering     the     room.     Brother 


BIOGRAPHICAL.   ENCYCLOPEDIA. 


483 


Grant  left  the  door  open.  Nothing  came 
Into  my  mind  as  what  to  do  until, 
looking  across  the  hall,  I  saw  Brother 
William  Miller  leaning  against  the 
wall.  As  I  stepped  towards  the  door 
I  beckoned  to  him;  he  came.  'Brother 
William,'  I  said,  'the  marshal  is  here 
for  me;  wiU  you  go  and  do  just  as  I  tell 
you?  If  you  will,  I  will  serve  them  a 
trick.'  I  knew  that  Brother  Miller  was 
an  excellent  man,  perfectly  reliable, 
and  capable  of  carrying  out  my  pro- 
ject. 'Here,  take  my  cloak,'  said  I; 
but  it  happened  to  be  Brother  Heber 
C.  Kimball's;  our  cloaks  were  alike  in 
color,  fashion  and  size.  I  threw  it 
around  his  shoulders,  and  told  him  to 
wear  my  hat  and  accompany  Brother 
George  D.  Grant.  He  did  so.  'George, 
you  step  in  the  carriage,'  said  I  io 
Brother  Grant,  'and  look  towards 
Brother  Miller,  and  say  to  him  as 
though  you  were  addressing  me,  'are 
you  ready  to  ride?'  You  can  do  this, 
and  they  will  suppose  Brother  Miller 
to  be  me,  and  proceed  accordingly;' 
which  they  did.  Just  as  Brother  Mil- 
ler was  entering  the  carriage,  the  mar- 
shal stepped  up  to  him,  and,  placing 
his  hand  upon  his  shoulder,  said,  'You 
are  my  prisoner.'  Brother  William  en- 
tered the  carriage,  and  said  to  the  mar- 
shal, 'I  am  going  to  the  Mansion  House, 
won't  you  ride  with  me?'  They  both 
went  to  the  Mansion  House.  There 
were  my  sons  Joseph  A.,  Brigham 
jun.,  and  Brother  Heber  C.  Kimball's 
boys  and  others,  who  were  looking  on, 
and  all  seemed  at  once  to  understand 
and  participate  in  the  joke.  They  fol- 
lowed the  carriage  to  the  Mansion 
House,  and  gathered  around  Brother 
Miller  with  tears  in  their  eyes,  saying, 
'Father,'  or,  'President  Young,  where 
are  you  going?'  Brother  Miller  looked 
at  them  kindly,  but  made  no  reply; 
and  the  marshal  really  thought  that 
he  had  got  'Brother  Brigham.'  Lawyer 
Edmonds,  who  was  then  staying  at 
the  Mansion  House,  appreciating  the 
joke,  volunteered  to  Brother  Miller  to 
go  to  Carthage  with  him,  and  see  him 
safe  through.  When  they  arrived 
within  two  or  three  miles  of  Carth- 
age, the  marshal,  with,  his  posse, 
stopped.  They  arose  in  their  car- 
riages, buggies  and  wagons,  and,  like 
a  tribe  of  Indians  going  to  battle,  or 
as  if  they  were  a  pack  of  demons,  yell- 
ing and  shouting,  exclaimed:  'We've 
got    him,    we've      got     him,    we've    got 


him!'  W^hen  they  reached  Carthage, 
the  marshal  took  the  supposed  Brigham 
into  an  upper  room  of  the  hotel,  and 
placed  a  guard  over  him,  at  the  same 
time  telling  those  around  that  he  had 
got  him.  Brother  Miller  remained  in 
the  room  until  they  bid  him  come  to 
supper.  While  there,  parties  came  in, 
and  asked  for  Brigham.  Brother  Mil- 
ler was  pointed  out  to  them.  So  it 
continued,  until  an  apostate  'Mormon,' 
by  the  name  of  Thatcher,  who  had 
lived  in  Nauvoo,  came  in,  sat  down 
and  asked  the  landlord  where  Brigham 
was.  'That  is  Mr.  Young,'  said  the 
landlord,  pointing  across  the  table  to 
Brother  Miller.  'Where?  I  can't  see 
any  one  that  looks  like  Brigham,' 
Thatcher  replied.  The  landlord  told 
him  it  was  that  fleshy  man,  eating. 
'Oh, — ,'  exclaimed  Thatcher,  'that's  not 
Brigham;  that's  William  Miller,  one  of 
my  old  neighbors.'  Upon  hearing  this 
the  landlord  went,  and,  tapping  the 
sheriff  on  the  shoulder,  took  him  a  few 
steps  to  one  side,  and  said:  'You  have 
made  a  mistake.  That  is  not  Brigham 
Young.  It  is  William  Miller,  of  Nau- 
coo.'  The  marshal,  very  much  aston- 
ished, exclaimed:  'Good  heavens!  And 
he  passed  for  Brigham.'  He  then  took 
Brother  Miller  into  a  room,  and  turn- 
ing to  him,  said:  'What  in  h — 1  is  the 
reason  you  did  not  tell  me  your  name?' 
'You  have  not  asked  me  my  name,' 
Brother  Miller  replied.  'Well,  what  is 
your  name?'  said  the  sheriff,  with  an- 
other oath.  'My  name  is  William 
Miller.'  'I  thought  your  name  was 
Brigham  Young.  Do  you  say  this  for 
a  fact?'  'Certainly  I  do,'  returned 
Brother  Miller.  'Then,'  said  the  mar- 
shal, 'why  did  you  not  tell  me  that 
before?'  'I  was  under  no  obligations 
to  tell  you,'  replied  Miller.  The  mar- 
shal, in  a  rage,  walked  out  of  the  room, 
followed  by  Brother  Miller,  who  walked 
off  in  company  with  Lawyer  Edmonds, 
Sheriff  Backenstos  and  others,  who 
took  him  across  lots  to  a  place  of  safe- 
ty; and  this  is  the  real  birth  of  the 
story  of  'Bogus  Brigham'  as  far  as  I 
can  recollect."  There  is  Brigham 
Young's  touch  of  irrepressible  humor  in 
the  telling,  but  no  man  better  than  he 
understood  the  value  of  the  service 
which  William  Miller  had  rendered  him. 
By  this  noble  and  heroic  act,  of  giv- 
ing himself  into  custody  and  jeopardiz- 
ing his  own  life,  if  he  did  not  save  the 
life    of    Pres.    Young,    he    most      likely 


484 


LATTER-DAY    SAINT 


saved  him  from  a  long  imprisonment 
and  vexatious  lawsuits.  Truly  is  the 
man.  who  in  times  of  danger  offers 
himself  for  his  fellow  man.  one  of  the 
noblest  of  his  race.  Grave  threats 
were  uttered  against  Miller,  for  im- 
posing unon  the  officers  in  Brigham 
Young's  stead,  and  Sheriff  Backenstos, 
fearing  the  anti-Mormons  would  kill 
him.  hurried  him  off  and  took  him 
safely  back  to  Nauvoo  that  night  by 
a  circuitous  '  route,  arriving  at  five 
o'clock  the  next  morning.  Being  sick 
at  the  time  of  the  exodus.  Elder  Miller 
did  not  leave  Nauvoo  till  May,  1846.  He 
stopped  at  Garden  Grove,  where  his 
wife's  father,  Aaron  Johnson,  was  pre- 
siding, and  put  in  crops,  which,  how- 
ever, he  left  for  others  to  harvest,  and 
continued  to  Council  Bluffs  that  sea- 
son, in  time  to  cut  hay  and  make  win- 
ter quarters.  But  after  cutting  his 
house  logs  for  his  winter  cabin,  he 
was  taken  down  with  a  severe  sickness. 
On  his  recovery,  he  found  that  some 
one  had  appropriated  his  house  logs, 
and,  as  winter  was  on  him,  he  sold 
his  only  coat  for  a  dugout  in  the  side 
of  the  bluff,  where  he  and  his  family 
passed  the  winter  of  1846-47.  In  March, 
1849,  he  took  a  contract  from  Livings- 
ton &  Kinkade  to  haul  4,000  pounds  of 
merchandise,  at  $10  per  hundred,  from 
the  Missouri  river  to  Utah,  getting  part 
of  his  pay  in  advance;  and  on  the  25th 
day  of  April,  he  loaded  and  started 
across  the  river,  and  left  Winter  Quar- 
ters May  4,  1849,  for  Utah.  He  was 
placed  in  charge  of  sixty  wagons.  At 
Loup  Fork  the  company  remained  one 
week,  in  consequence  of  high  water. 
While  camoed  there,  several  cases  of 
cholera  deevloped,  and  a  number  of 
persons  died  with  this  same  disease. 
He  arrived  at  Salt  Lake  City,  Sept.  20, 

1849,  purchased  a  house  and  lot  in  the 
Sixteenth  Ward,  fenced  in  a  farm  of 
thirty  acres  the  next  spring  on  the 
west  side  of  Jordan,  and  built  an  adobe 
house  on  his  lot.       Early  in  February, 

1850,  he  came  up  to  Provo,  and  took 
hand  in  the  Indian.  diflRculties.  At  the 
legislative  session  of  1849,  he  was  ap- 
pointed one  of  the  judges  of  Utah 
county,  which  necessitated  his  removal 
to  that  county,  where  he  went,  in  com- 
pany with  Bishop  Aaron  Johnson, Sept. 
18,  1850,  having  previously  visited  the 
county  and  selected  the  site  of  Spring- 
ville.  In  the  spring  of  1851  he  or- 
ganized  a   cavalry   company   and   was 


appointed  captain,  for  the  protection  of 
the  citizens  against  the  predatory  red 
man.  At  the  Augrust  election,  he  was 
elected  a  member  of  the  legislature  for 
the  session  of  1851-2.  In  the  spring  of 
1851,  he  did  his  portion  of  fencing  six- 
ty acres  of  land,  raised  400  bushels  of 
wheat  and  built  the  first  adobe  house 
in  Springville.  In  the  fall  of  1852. 
he  went  to  Iron  county,  where  he  re- 
mained over  winter,  built  a  house  and 
located  a  farm,  expecting  to  remain 
there,  having  been  sent  there  to 
strengthen  the  new  settlements,  in  con- 
sequence of  the  Indian  difficulties:  but 
a  treaty  being  made  with  the  Indians, 
he  returned  to  Springville  in  the  spring 
of  1853.  In  1853  he  was  appointed  first 
counselor  to  Bishop  Aaron  Johnson. 
From  1853  to  1856,  his  time  was  occu- 
pied in  farming,  making  roads  into  the 
canyons,  and  the  duties  of  his  various 
offices.  In  1856  he  was  called  to  fill  a 
mission  to  England.  Before  going  on 
his  mission,  this  year  being  the  famous 
grasshopper  year.  Brother  Miller 
weighed  out  just  enough  flour  to  sup- 
ply his  family  until  an  early  harvest, 
and  disposed  of  his  surplus  to  his  needy 
neighbors.  The  family  divided  ihis 
scanty  allowance  among  the  needy, 
never  turning  an  applicant  away  hung- 
ry; and  yet  the  supply  held  out  until 
harvest,  like  the  widow's  loaf.  April 
17,  1856,  William  Miller  started  to  Eu- 
rope to  perform  a  mission,  in  company 
with  Orson  Pratt,  Phinehas  H.  Young 
and  others.  They  endured  great  hard- 
ships in  getting  through  the  mountains 
at  this  early  season  of  the  year,  en- 
countering the  fearful  mountain  storms, 
the  deep  snow,  the  cold,  chill  sleet  and 
sweeping  avalanche;  camping  by  night 
under  the  overhanging  rock,  warmed 
by  the  huge  bonfire  kindled  from  the 
mountain  pine;  and  so  on  wearily  from 
day  to  day,  part  of  the  time  having 
to  unload  their  wagons  and  pack  their 
scanty  supplies  upon  their  horses, 
trudging  along  on  foot  by  their  sides, 
frequently  encountering  the  savage 
Indian  warriors  who  at  this  time  were 
very  biter  in  their  feelings  toward 
the  white  emigrants,  and  who  never 
missed  an  opportunity  of  levying  a 
tribute  in  the  shape  of  "biscuit,"  from 
the  overland  traveler.  They  reached 
Atchison  June  9th,  and  on  the  same 
day  took  passage  on  the  steamboat 
"Peter  Starr,"  for  St.  Louis,  Mo.,  at 
which    place    they    arrived      June    12th. 


BIOGRAPHICAL    ENCYCLOPEDIA. 


485 


and  took  th?  railroad  the  same  evening 
for  the  East.  Elder  Miller  arrived  in 
New  York  July  3rd,  and  sailed  for 
Liverpool  July  5,  1856,  on  the  steamer 
"Atlantic."  After  a  prosperous  voyage 
they  arrived  at  Liverpool  July  16,  1856. 
Elder  Miller  was  assigned  to  the  Bir- 
mingham conference,  and  afterwards 
labored  in  Wales,  presiding  in  connec- 
tion with  Elders  Daniels  and  Evans 
over  the  Welsh  mission.  In  conse- 
iiuence  of  the  Utah  troubles  of  1857, 
most  of  the  Elders  were  called  home. 
Elder  Miller  among  the  rest,  leaving 
Liverpool  Oct.  14,  1857,  in  the  steamer 
"Baltic,"  in  company  with  Orson  Pratt, 
Ezra  T.  Benson,  Alexander  McRae  and 
others,  who  were  compelled  to  travel 
incognito,  not  desiring  to  be  known  as 
"Mormon"  Elders,  in  consequence  of 
the  bitter  feeling  then  manifest  against 
them.  They  arrived  in  New  York,  Oct. 
25th.  In  consequence  of  Johnston's 
army  being  then  on  the  plains  en  route 
for  Utah,  the  Elders  were  ordered 
home,  via  the  Isthmus  of  Panama. 
They  arrived  at  San  Francisco,  Sept. 
30,  1857,  and  thence  traveled  overland 
to  Utah,  arriving  about  New  Year's 
day,  1858.  Being  among  those  nota- 
bles of  L'tah  county  that  Judge  Cradle- 
baugh  desired  to  imprison,  Bishop 
^Miller  was  compelled  to  leave  home 
in  the  spring  of  1859,  and  was  with 
General  Aaron  Johnson  in  the  moun- 
tains all  the  season  until  late  in  the 
autumn,  and  was  one  of  the  famous 
"Kolob"  boys:  but  there  was  never 
any  indictment  of  any  kind  against 
him  during  Cradlebaugh's  administra- 
tion. He  was  called  to  preside  over 
Utah  Stake,  and  also  to  be  the  Bishop 
of  Provo,  July  17,  1860.  On  the  24th 
of  July  following,  a  company  of  caval- 
ry with  the  Provo  brass  band  came 
to  Springville,  under  the  direction  of 
L.  John  Nuttall,  marshal  of  the  day, 
and  escorted  Bishop  Miller  and  family 
to  Provo,  where  they  participated  in 
the  celebration  of  the  day.  He  im- 
mediately entered  into  the  performance 
of  the  duties  of  his  office.  During  the 
administration  of  Bishop  Miller,  the, 
meeting  house  in  Provo  was  complet- 
ed, furnished  and  dedicated  under 
great  disadvantages,  in  consequence 
of  Indian  depredations  and  the  gen- 
eral hard  times.  He  paid  into  the  meet- 
ing house  fund  over  $1,000,  and  donated 
liberally  to  build  and  establish  the 
Deseret  Telegraph  line, which  was  com- 


pleted during  his  administration.  He 
built  the  first  house  of  any  note  on  the 
bench  of  Provo,  and  afterwards  built 
what  is  now  known  as  the  Exelsior 
House  in  Provo.  Elder  Miller  died  at 
Provo  Aug.  7,  1875,  aged  sixty-one 
years  and  seven  months.  (See  also  Tul- 
lidge's  Quarterly  Magazine,  Vol.  3,  p. 
420.) 

SMOOT,  Abraham  Owen,  presi- 
dent of  the  Utah  Stake  of  Zion  from 
18G8  to  1895,  was  born  Feb.  17,  1815,  in 
Owen  county.  Kentucky.  His  father, 
George  W.  Smoot,  was  from  Prince 
Edward  county,  Virginia,  and  his 
mother,  Ann  Rowlett,  was  from  the 
same  State  and  county.  They  migrat- 
ed from  Virginia  to  Kentucky  in  1812. 
On  the  father's  side  he  was  of  Scotch 
origin.  Grandfather  Smoot  emigrat- 
ed from  Scotland  and  settled  on  the 
eastern  shores  of  Maryland.  His  wife, 
Nancy  Beal,  was  from  England.  They 
emigrated  attout  the  same  time  and 
were  married  in  America.  When  Abra- 
ham O.  Smoot  was  seven  years  old, 
his  parents  moved  from  his  native 
place  to  the  western  district  of  Ken- 
tucky, and  when  he  was  about  thir- 
teen years  old,  to  a  short  distance 
across  the  State  line  into  Tennessee, 
where  he  lived  till  he  embraced  the 
gospel  and  came  west.  His  fat.ier  be- 
longed to  no  church,  nor  did  his  mother 
until  she  joined  the  Church  of  Jesus 
Christ  of  Latter-day  Saints.  His 
father  died  in  182S,  before  the  Church 
was  founded;  his  mother  came  into  the 
Church  in  1835;  he  himself  was  bap- 
tized March  22,  1835,  by  Elder  Warren 
Parrish.  &oon  after  joining  the 
Church  Abraham  O.  Smoot  was  or- 
dained a  Deacon  and  given  charge  of 
a  small  branch  which  had  been  built 
up  by  Apostle  David  W.  Patten  and 
Elders  Wilford  Woodruff  and  Warren 
Parrish.  He  served  in  the  capacity  of 
a  Deacon  from  May,  1835,  to  Feb.  4, 
1836,  when  he  was  ordained  an  Elder 
by  Wilford  Woodruff,  with  whom  he 
traveled  in  the  ministry  for  about  a 
year,  mostly  in  the  States  of  Tennes- 
see and  Kentucky.  In  the  fall  of  1836 
he  went  to  Kirtland,  Ohio,  with  Elder 
Woodruff,  where  the  body  of  the 
Church  first  gathered.  Here  they  spent 
the  ensuing  winter  together,  attending 
the  Kirtland  high  school.  In  the 
spring  of  the  year  1837  the  Prophet  Jo- 
seph advised  Elder  Smoot  to  return  to 


486 


LATTER-DAT    SAINT 


Kentucky,  as  the  northern  climate  did 
not  agree  with  his  health.  He  returned 
to  his  native  State,  but  soon  after- 
wards he  and  Elder  Henry  G.  Sher- 
wood organized  a  company  of  Saints 
and  led  them  to  Far  West,  Caldwell 
county.  Missouri,  at  which  place  the 
Saints  had  located,  after  having  been 
driven  from  Jackson  county.  Having, 
with  Elder  Sherwood,  led  the  com- 
pany to  the  then  headquarters  of  the 
Church,  Elder  Smoot  continued  trav- 
eling in  the  ministry,  preaching  un- 
til the  latter  part  of  1838,  when  the 
Saints  were  driven  from  Missouri.  He 
was  at  Far  West  as  one  of  its  active 
defenders  when  that  "Mormon"  city 
fell  before  the  combined  forces  of  the 
militia  and  mob  of  the  State  under  the 


command  of  General  John  Clark, w'hose 
speech  to  the  prisoners  of  war,  after 
the  Prophet,  his  brother  Hyrum,  Par- 
ley P.  Pratt,  and  others  of  the  leaders 
had  given  themselves  up,  stands  as  one 
of  the  most  barbaric  speeches  that  ever 
fell  from  the  lips  of  any  officer  in 
modern  times,  civil  or  military.  Abra- 
ham O.  Smoot  was  one  of  those  prison- 
ers of  war.  While  a  prisoner  he  mar- 
ried his  first  wife,  Martha  T.  McMeans. 
They  were  married  Nov.  11,  1838.  In 
the  month  of  February,  1839,  they  left 
Missouri  in  the  general  expulsion  of  the 
Saints  from  that  State.  Their  outfit 
was  very  scant,  consisting  of  a  small 
wagon  and  a  span  of  horses;  yet  they 
took  with  them  the  family  of  John  L. 
Butler  (afterwards  Bishop  of  Spanish 
Fork)  with  his  wife  and  five  children. 


They  made  their  way  into  Illinois  as 
best  they  could,  through  the  storms  of 
winter,  and  arrived  at  Quincy  on  the 
8th  of  March.  Here  they  spent  the 
spring  months  and  recruited,  and  ear- 
ly in  the  summer  moved  to  Nauvoo. 
After  meeting  his  wife  in  Nauvoo,  El- 
der Smoot  again  took  missions  in  the 
ministry.  He  traveled  in  the  South- 
ern States  and  introduced  the  gospel 
in  Charleston,  South  Carolina.  His 
last  mission  after  the  martyrdom  of 
the  Prophet  was  to  gather  up  the 
Saints  of  the  Southern  States  for  the 
journey  to  the  mountains.  In  the  ex- 
odus he  led  a  company  to  Winter  Quar- 
ters and  was  the  captain  of  one  of  the 
pioneer  companies  in  the  journey  to  the 
valley  of  the  Great  Salt  Lake.  His 
company,  which  was  organized  at  the 
rendezvous  on  Elkhom  river,  consisted 
of  120  wagons.  It  was  the  largest  com- 
pany on  the  road  that  season,  and  was 
the  second  company  that  arrived  in 
the  valley  after  the  pioneeers — Daniel 
Spencer's  being  the  first.  Elder  Smoot 
was  elected  a  member  of  the  first  High 
Council  in  the  organization  of  the 
Great  Salt  Lake  Stake,  which  existed 
several  years  before  the  incorporation 
of  the  city.  He  was  the  first  justice 
of  the  peace  that  ever  acted  in  Utah. 
The  next  year  w'as  the  great  gold  emi- 
gration to  California,  when,  as  the 
only  justice  of  the  peace  found  between 
the  Missouri  river  and  Salt  Lake,  he 
was  called  upon  by  the  gold-seekers  to 
adjudicate  in  about  forty  cases,  some 
of  which  involved  thousands  of  dollars. 
In  the  fall  of  1849,  he  returned  east  to 
establish  ?.  carrying  company  with 
Jedediah  M.  Grant,  on  the  Missouri 
river,  twelve  miles  from  Winter  Quar- 
ters, which,  however,  was  not  accom- 
plished, but  they  established  a  ferry 
there  and  started  the  largest  portion  of 
the  emigration  of  that  year.  In  the 
spring  of  1850  he  engaged  to  brine:  out 
two  trains  of  merchandise,  one  for 
Colonel  John  Reese,  and  conducted  one 
for  Livingston  &  Kinkade— the  former 
by  his  partner,  Jedediah  M.  Grant,  the 
latter  conducted  by  himself.  These 
were  the  earliest  of  the  merchant  trains 
that  supplied  the  Salt  Lake  City  mar- 
ket after  the  one  brought  by  Livingston 
&  Kinkade  the  previous  year.  In  the 
fall  of  1851  Elder  Smoot  was  called  to 
go  on  a  mission  to  England.  In  com- 
pany with  Elders  Wlllard  Snow  and 
Samuel   W.    Richards,     he     arrived   In 


BIOGRAPHICAL   ENCYCLOPEDIA. 


487 


Liverpool  New  Year's  day  1852.  When 
they  left  Salt  Lake  City  there  had  been 
no  news  from  Liverpool  for  about 
seven  months,  and  Pres.  Brigham 
Young  was  anxious  for  information  of 
the  work  in  Europe;  so  they  traveled 
with  all  speed  and  made  the  quickest 
trip  from  the  Valley  to  England  up  to 
that  time.  At  the  next  season's  emi- 
gration, the  important  question  was 
considered  by  the  presidency  of  the 
British  mission  as  to  who  should  be 
chosen  to  take  charge  of  the  emigra- 
tion,and  more  than  the  usual  solicitude 
was  manifested  in  consequence  of  this 
being  the  first  sent  under  the  opera- 
tions of  the  Perpetual  Emigration 
Fund  Company.  Among  all  the  El- 
ders then  in  Europe,  Abraham  O. 
Smoot  was  chosen,and  it  is  well  known 
rn  the  history  of  the  "Mormon"  emi- 
grations from  Liverpool  to  Great  Salt 
Lake  valley  that  the  companies  of  that 
year  were  well  conducted  and  cared  for 
on  the  journey.  In  charge  of  the  emi- 
gration, he  arrived  in  Great  Salt  Lake 
City  aboirt  the  middle  of  September, 
but  was  immediately  sent  back  to  meet 
the  sugar  works  on  the  plains,  which 
he  met  between  Green  river  and  the 
South  Pass  on  the  Sandies  and  brought 
them  in.  In  the  spring  of  1856  he  went 
to  St.  Louis,  Mo.,  to  purchase  goods 
and  supplies  for  the  Church,  expecting 
remittances  of  the  money  from  the 
Liverpool  office,  which,  however,  had 
been  drained  by  the  large  emigration 
of  the  poor  that  season;  so  that  Abra- 
ham O.  Smoot  had  to  be  personally  re- 
sponsible for  the  purchases  until  the 
money  could  be  brought  round;  but  he 
succeeded  and  brought  home  40  wagons 
and  120  yoke  of  cattle.  After  the 
death  of  Jedediah  M.  Grant,  the  first 
mayor  of  Salt  Lake  City,  Abraham  O. 
Smoot,  in  November,  1856,  was  elected 
by  the  city  council  to  take  his  place, 
and  in  February,1857,  he  was  re-elected 
mayor  of  Salt  Lake  City,  by  the  unani- 
mous vote  of  the  people  at  their  regu- 
Jar  election.  He  went  to  the  States  in 
charge  of  the  mail  carried  by  the  Y.  X. 
Company,  and  brought  the  news  of  the 
coming  of  the  Utah  expedition.  He  re- 
mained in  charge  of  the  city  during  the 
Utah  war,  moved  with  the  people  south 
and  located  for  the  time  at  Salem, 
where  there  was  feed  for  his  stock.  Af- 
ter the  conclusion  of  peace  he  returned 
with  the  people  to  Salt  Lake  City  and 
resumed  his  duties  as  its  chief  magis- 


trate. He  was  re-elected  mayor  In 
February,  1859,  and  was  by  repeated 
elections  continued  in  office  till  Febru- 
ary, 1866.  He  was  also  alderman  of 
the  Fifth  Municipal  Ward,  four  years 
before  being  elected  mayor.  In  Feb- 
ruary, 1868,  he -was  called  to  Provo,  to 
take  charge  of  the  Utah  Stake,  and  was 
elected  mayor  of  Provo  on  the  second 
Monday  in  February.  He  served  Pro- 
vo as  mayor  for  twelve  years  without 
pay,  as  he  also  served  Salt  Lake  City 
for  ten  years  without  salary.  He  w^as 
a  member  of  all  the  constitutional  con- 
ventions except  those  of  1887  and  1895, 
and  an  officer  of  the  provisional  gov- 
ernment of  the  State  of  Deseret.  He 
also  served  twelve  years  in  the  council 
branch  of  the  legislature.  His  financial 
record  was  a  most  successful  one.  He 
was  one  of  the  conspicuous  promoters 
of  the  Provo  Woolen  Mills  and  for 
many  years  president  of  that  company; 
at  the  time  of  his  death  he  was  one  of 
its  principal  stockholders.  He  was  one 
of  the  organizers  of  the  First  National 
Bank  of  Provo,  and  at  the  time  of  his 
death  the  president,  which  position  he 
held  continuously  from  the  organiza- 
tion of  the  bank.  He  was  one  of  the 
organizers  and  principal  stockholders 
of  the  Utah  County  Savings  bank,  and 
president  of  it  from  the  day  of  its 
opening  until  he  died.  He  became 
largely  interested  in  the  Provo  Co- 
operative Institution  Soon  after  its  in- 
corporation, and  at  the  time  of  his 
death  owned  nearly  half  of  the  capital 
stock.  He  was  president  continuously 
from  1867  to  1895.  He  was  identified 
more  extensively  than  any  other  man 
with  Provo's  financial  and  industrial 
institutions.  In  educational  matters  he 
was  a  great  leader.  When  Pres.  Brig- 
ham  Young  established  the  academy 
that  bears  his  name,  Abraham  O. 
Smoot  was  chosen  as  the  president  of 
the  board  of  trustees,  and  that  »^osi- 
tion  he  held  until  his  death.  The  school 
monopolized  much  of  his  time  and 
financial  influence.  After  a  most  event- 
ful and  successful  career.  President 
Smoot  died  at  Provo,  March  6,  1895. 
About  three  weeks  before  his  demise 
he  had  a  family  gathering,  when  his 
children  assembled  to  celebrate  his 
eightieth  birthday.  His  words  to  them 
on  that  occasion  were  full  of  good 
counsel  and  wisdom.  (See  also  "Tul- 
lidge's  Quarterly  Magazine,"  Vol.  3.  p. 
297.) 


488 


LATTER-DAY  SAINT 


PARTRIDGE,  Edward,  president 
of  the  Utah  Stake  of  Zion  from  1895 
to  1900.  was  born  June  25,  1S33,  at  In- 
dependence, Jackson  county,  Missouri. 
His  parents  were  Edward  Partridge 
and  Lydia  Clisbee,  his  father  being 
the  first  Bishop  in  the  Church.  The 
eaiiiest  recollections  of  President 
Partridge  were  of  the  mobbings  of  the 
Saints  in  Missouri.  When  eight  years 
and  two  days  of  age  he  was  baptized 
in  the  Mississippi  river  at  Nauvoo,  111. 
He  came  to  Utah  with  his  mother  and 
other  members  of  the  family  in  1848, 
his  father  having  died  in  1840.  In 
1854  he  was  called  to  fill  a  mission  to 
the  Sandwich  Islands,  where  he  labored 
three  years.  Feb.  4,  1858,  he  married 
Miss  Sarah  Lucretia  Clayton,  a  daugh- 
ter of  the  late  Wm.  Clayton,  and  moved 
south  at  the  time  of  the  "move"  in 
1858.  Shortly  after  returning  he  was 
set    apart    as    a    member    of    the    Hijrh 


Council  of  Salt  Lake  Stake,  and  lived 
for  several  years  in  Farmington,  Da- 
vis county,  where  he  had  charge  of 
Apostle  Amasa  M.  Lyman's  farm.  Feb. 
15,  1862,  he  married  Miss  Elizabeth 
Buxton.  In  1864  he  moved  to  Fill- 
more, Millard  county.  May  9,  1864,  he 
was  set  apart  as  Bishop  of  Fillmore, 
which  position  he  filled  for  a  number 
of  years.  In  1877  he  was  called  to 
the  office  of  counselor  to  President 
Hinckley,  of  the  Millard  Stake.  May  1, 
1882,  he  left  on  a  second  mission  to 
the  Sandwich  Islands,  taking  a  part 
of  his  family  with  him.  He  was  pres- 
ident   of    the    mission    for    nearly    three 


years,  returning  to  Utah  in  March, 
1885.  Some  years  after  his  return  he 
located  in  Provo,  in  order  to  take  ad- 
vantage of  the  educational  facilities 
offered  by  the  Brigham  Young  Acade- 
my, for  the  benefit  of  his  children. 
He  was  soon  after  called  to  labor  as  a 
home  missionary  in  the  Utah  Stake  of 
Zion,  and  to  the  offices  of  alternate 
to  the  High  Council,  High  Councilor, 
and  in  1892  became  second  counselor 
to  Pres.  Abraham  O.  Smoot  in  the 
Stake  presidency;  at  the  death  of  the 
latter,  in  1895,  Edward  Partridge  was 
called  to  preside  over  the  Stake,  which 
position  he  occupied  for  upwards  of  five 
years,  or  until  the  time  of  his  death, 
which  occurred  in  Provo,  No\ .  17,  1900. 
In  an  obituary  published  in  the  "Des- 
eret  News"  on  the  day  of  his  demise 
rhe  following  eulogy  is  given:  "Pres- 
ident Partridge  was  a  quiet,  unob- 
trusive, sensitive  man,  whose  whole  life 
has  been  devoted  to  the  furtherance 
of  the  work  of  God.  He  was  earnest 
and  sincere  in  all  his  undertakings, 
and  merited  and  enjoyed  the  respect 
of  the  community.  He  had  many 
friends  in  various  parts  of  the  State 
where  he  has  lived.  His  life  has 
been  busy  and  well  spent,  and  he  leaves 
a  record  without  blemish  to  be  cher- 
ished and  honored  by  his  posterity 
through  coming  generations.  He  was  an 
example  of  unselfish  devotion  to  the 
PTOspel,  his  course  in  life  being  worthy 
of  emulation  by  all  Latter-day  Saints. 
Elder  Partridge  has  filled  many  other 
offices  of  honor  and  trust  in  the 
Church  and  State.  He  served  in  the 
Territorial  legislature  and  was  a  mem- 
ber of  the  State  constitutional  con- 
vention of  1895.  He  has  filled  every  po- 
.sition  with  honor  and  integrity.  He 
was  the  father  of  seventeen  children, 
twelve  of  whom  are  living,  and  are 
men  and  women  of  high  standing  in  the 
community  in  which  they  reside.  He 
has  twenty-four  grandchildren  and  one 
great-grandchild  living.  He  has  been 
very  diligent  during  his  life  in  keeping 
his  journal  and  genealogy,  and  much 
valuable  historical  data  and  reminis- 
cences of  prominent  men  and  events 
connected  with  the  Church  are  record- 
ed in  the  former." 

JOHN,  David,  president  of  the 
Utah  stake  of  Zion,  was  born  Jan.  29, 
1883,  in  Pembrokeshire,  Wales.  His 
parents   were   members  of   the   Baptist 


BIOGRAPHICAL   ENCTCLOPEDIA. 


489 


church;  many  of  his  family  were  min- 
isters, and  most  of  them  of  that  de- 
nomination. It  was  designed  by  the 
family  that  he  also  should  be  educated 
for  the  ministry,  and  for  this  purpose 
he  spent  his  time  at  school  till  he  was 
23  years  of  age.  Four  years  of  this 
time  were  spent  in  the  Baptist  college, 
Haverford  West,  South  Wales.  David 
became  acquainted  with  the  Saints 
during  the  first  term  of  Orson  Pratt's 
presidency  over  the  British  mission,  in 
the  years  1848-50,  when  so  many  thou- 
sands were  brought  into  the  Church, 
and  all  Wales  rang  with  the  gospel  and 
wonders  of  "Mormonism."  David,  who 
at  that  time  was  a  youth,  beli«ved  and 
was  baptized  in  February,  1847,  but  so 
outraged  did  his  family  feel  over  his 
joining  the  "Mormons"  that  he  was 
subject    to   constant   and    bitter    perse- 


cution from  them,  and  finally  he  waa 
forced  to  give  bonds  to  his  father  to 
keep  from  the  "Mormons'"  till  he  was 
of  age,  which  he  did  by  the  "counsel" 
of  Apostle  Orson  Pratt  himself.  Thus 
was  David  John's  association  with  the 
"Mormon"  Church  broken  off  for  a  few 
years,  until  he  had  reached  the  age  of 
23,  and  during  that  time  he  was  being 
educated  in  a  Baptist  college,  with  his 
father's  firm,  set  resolve  that  his  son 
should  engage  in  the  Baptist  ministry. 
But  by  a  remarkable  manifestation 
from  the  heavsn,  the  severed  link  of 
his  destiny  with  the  "Mormon"  people 
was  restored.  Near  the  end  of  Janu- 
ary,   1856,    he   had   a  very       impressive 


dream,  which  was  afterwards  fully 
written  and  published  in  the  Udgorn 
Scion  (Zion's  Trumpet),  in  the  year 
1856.  "I  dreamt,"  wrote  David,  "that 
I  saw  an  angel  of  the  Lord.  After  he 
had  talked  a  little  with  me,  he  placed 
his  right  hand  on  my  left  shoulder.  His 
eyes  were  of  a  dark  brown  color,  but 
full  of  glory.  His  voice  was  clear,  but 
full  of  power  and  authority.  While  in 
his  presence  I  beheld  very  high  moun- 
tains. He  told  me  that  they  were  the 
everlasting  hills,  over  or  by  which  the 
Latter-day  Saints  were  going  to  their 
gathering  place.  'Why,'  said  he,  'are 
you  spending  your  time  in  vain  here? 
How  is  it  you  will  not  join  the  Church 
of  Christ  and  spend  your  time  there?' 
I  replied,  'I  hope  I  am  in  the  Church 
now,  am  I  not?'  'You  know  better,' 
he  said.  Do  not  ask  questions  that 
you  know  perfectly  well,  but  go  on  un- 
to perfection.  Look  towards  the  fir- 
mament.' I  looked  and  beheld  the  air 
full  with  people  of  every  sect  and  par- 
ty. There  I  saw  Christ  sitting  upon 
His  throne  in  great  glory,  and  the  peo- 
ple gathered  themselves  before  Him  to 
be  judged.  Those  that  had  pleased 
Him,  He  commanded  to  stand  on  His 
right  hand,  and  those  that  did  not,  on 
His  left.  He  judged  them  one  by  one, 
till  they  composed  two  straight  lines, 
.running  parallel  one  against  the  other 
for  the  distance  of  about  one  mile. 
Those  on  the  left  were  those  of  the  dif- 
ferent sects  and  parties  of  the  day; 
and  those  on  the  right  were  Latter-day 
Saints.  The  Saints  seemed  lovely,  and 
all  smiled,  looking  in  the  face  of  Jesus 
as  one  man  looks  on  another  But  the 
other  line  seemed  miserable,  and  full  of 
discontent,  sorrow  and  grief,  turning 
thfeir  faces  from  Jesus,  and  could  not 
abide  His  presence.  'According  to  this 
vision,'  I  said,  'the  Saints  are  right,  but 
the  others  are  not.'  'You  see,'  he  an- 
swered, 'who  is  right  and  who  is 
wrong.  Look,'  said  he,  'on  thy  right 
hand.'  I  looked,  and  there  beheld  a 
large  and  very  extensive  valley — the 
most  beautiful  land  I  ever  saw.  We 
were  standing  on  one  side  of  it,  which 
was  flat.  On  the  side  we  stood  were 
high  and  beautiful  trees.  Under  the 
shadow  of  one  of  them  we  stood  from 
the  heat  of  the  sun,  which  was  very 
powerful.  On  the  other  side  were 
mountains  or  hills,  but  not  very  high. 
Those  extended  to  the  extremity  of  the 
valley.       The  beauty  and   glory  of  the 


490 


LATTER-DAY    SAINT 


valley,  which  was  from  three  to  four 
miles  wide,  was  beyond  description. 
'Oh,  my  God,"  I  exclaimed,  'I  never 
knew  that  such  a  beautiful  scene  as 
this  belonged  to  our  earth.'  'This,' 
said  the  angel,  'shall  be  thy  inheritance 
and  thy  seed  after  thee  forever,  if  thou 
wilt  obey  the  commandments  of  God 
and  do  right  in  the  flesh.  Look,  be- 
hold thee,'  said  he.  'I  then  found  my- 
self in  a  large  and  beautiful  building. 
There  I  saw  on  the  stand  one  that  I 
knew,  preaching  the  principles  of  life.' 
'This,'  said  my  guide,  'is  the  house  of 
the  Lord.'  At  this  I  awoke,  believ- 
ing that  the  spirit  of  the  Lord  and  an- 
gels filled  the  room.  I  arose  and 
bowed  myself  before  God  In  prayer,  and 
desired  Him,  If  that  messenger  was 
from  Him,  to  make  it  known  to  me 
once  more  by  the  same  messenger;  if 
not,  to  hide  the  vision  from  me.  I 
again  retired  to  rest,  and  soon  fell  into 
a  deep  sleep,  when  suddenly  the  same 
personage  appeared,  and  made  known 
unto  me  some  of  the  same  things;  but  he 
rebuked  me  this  time  for  spending  my 
time  where  I  was.  He  also  said:  'Thou 
wert  foreordained  before  the  founda- 
tion of  the  world  to  come  forth  in  this 
age  to  assist  to  build  the  Kingdom  of 
God  upon  the  earth,  and  now  the  time 
is  up.  If  thou  wilt  obey  the  command- 
ments of  God,  thy  davs  shall  be  long 
on  the  earth;  if  not,  thy  days  shall  be 
short,  says  the  Lord!'  These  words 
pierced  my  soul,  and  I  again  awoke, 
and  spent  the  remainder  of  the  night 
in  deep  reflection,  and  somewhat 
grieved  in  spirit;  at  other  moments  I 
would  rejoice  exceedingly."  His  mind 
overwhelmed  by  these  repeated  visions 
of  the  night,  David  in  the  morning 
could  not  give  his  attention  to  his  les- 
sons. This  was  observed  by  the  tu- 
tor, who  supposed  him  to  be  unwell 
and  excused  him.  In  the  afternoon  he 
went  to  the  house  of  Elder  John  Grif- 
fiths and  obtained  some  books  of  -the 
Church,  among  which  was  P.  P.  Pratt's 
"Voice  of  Warning,"  which  made  a 
great  impression  upon  his  mind.  Thus 
restored  to  his  destiny  with  the  Latter- 
day  Saints  by  a  remarkable  dream,  he 
told  his  father  and  family  of  his  re- 
newed resolve  to  join  the  Saints.  At 
this  the  distress  of  his  family  was 
great,  but  the  bond  which  he  had  years 
before  given  to  his  father  was  no  long- 
er In  force,  he   being  now  23  years  of 


age.  He  also  told  his  tutor  and  fellow- 
students  of  his  intentions.  They 
remonstrated  with  him,  but  the  remon- 
strances of  family,  tutor  and  class- 
mates were  powerless  now.  David  left 
the  Baptist  College  and  was  rebaplized 
into  the  Church  Feb.  6,  1856.  On  the  1st 
of  March  he  was  ordained  a  Priest,  on 
the  29th  an  Elder,  and  on  the  1st  of 
June,  1856.  he  was  sent  out  as  a  trav- 
eling Elder  in  the  Pembrokeshire  con 
ference.  Dec.  30,  1856,  he  was  appointed 
president  of  the  Flintshire  conference, 
which  position  he  filled  for  one  year. 
Dec.  19,  1856,  he  was  appointed  second 
counselor  to  the  president  of  the  Welsh 
mission.  Having  filled  his  position  for 
a  year  in  the  W^elsh  presidency,  Davia 
John  was  moved  into  England  and  ap- 
pointed president  of  the  Nottingham 
conference,  which  position  he  held  from 
January,  1859,  till  March,  1860,  when  he 
was  appointed  to  the  pastorate,  con- 
sisting of  three  conferences — Notting- 
hamshire, Leicestershire  and  Derby- 
shire. In  the  important  position  of 
pastor  of  one  of  the  great  British  pas- 
torates, which  at  that  time  consisted 
each  of  about  a  hundred  churches  or 
branches,  he  labored  till  January,  1861, 
when  he  was  released  to  emigrate  to 
Utah.  April  6,  1861,  he  sailed  in  the 
ship  "Manchester,"  arrived  in  Salt 
Lake  City  on  Sept.  13th  of  the  same 
year,  and  came  direct  to  Provo.  David 
John  is  naturally  of  a  ministerial  type 
of  man,  he  having  come  from  a  fam- 
ily of  ministers.  Hence,  soon  after  his 
arrival  in  Utah  county  he  quickly  fell 
into  his  proper  sphere,  which  at  length 
brought  him  into  the  presidency  of  the 
Utah  Stake  of  Zion.  He  was  ordained 
a  Seventy  in  December,  1861.  and  a 
High  Priest  and  counselor  to  Bishop 
Wm.  G.  Nuttall,  of  the  Third  Ward, 
Sept,  10,  1862.  He' continued  in  the  same 
position  to  Bishop  Myron  Tanner,  and 
served  as  a  Bishop's  counselor  alto 
gether  fifteen  years.  In  October,  1865, 
he  was  appointed  by  George  A.  Smith 
superintendent  of  Utah  Stake  Sunday 
schools,  which  position  he  held  for 
twenty-eight  years.  In  1872,  he  was 
made  president  of  the  High  Priests' 
quorum  of  the  Stake;  he  held  that  posi- 
tion until  June  4,  1877,  when  he  was 
set  apart  as  first  counselor  to  Abraham 
O.  Smoot,  in  the  Stake  presidency.  In 
March,  1883,  he  was  appointed  agent  in 
Utah  Stake  of  the  Presiding  Bishopric 


BIOGRAPHICAL.    ENCYCLOPEDIA. 


491 


of  the  Church,  and  was  ordained  fo. 
that  position  to  the  office  of  a  Bishop, 
by  Presiding  Bishop  Edward  Hunter, 
and  Presidents  John  Taylor  and  Joseph 
F.  Smith.  But  during  this  time  David 
John  was  sent  on  a  mission  to  Great 
Britain,  having  been  called  at  the 
April  conference  of  1871.  He  left  Provu 
on  the  1st  of  May,  and  on  his  arrival 
in  Liverpool  he  was  appointed  to  pre- 
side over  the  Welsh  mission,  in  which 
he  labored  till  June,  1872,  reviving  the 
work  in  his  native  land.  He  faithful- 
ly labored  among  his  own  kindred,  but 
ineffectually.  He  sailed  from  Liverpool 
June  13,  1872,  and  arrived  in  Salt  Lake 
City  July  4,  1872.  David  John  served  as 
counselor  to  Abraham  O.  Smoot  in  the 
presidency  of  the  Utah  Stake  of  Zion, 
until  the  death  of  President  Smoot, 
March  6,  1895.  On  the  reorganization 
of  the  Stake  presidency,  April  21,  1895, 
he  was  chosen  as  first  counselor  to 
President  Edw-ard  Partridge  and  served 
in  that  capacity  till  President  Part- 
ridge's death,  Nov.  17,  1900.  When  the 
Utah  Stake  was  divided  into  three 
Stakes,  in  January,  1901,  David  John 
was  chosen  and  set  apart  as  president 
of  that  part  of  Utah  county  which  re- 
tained the  old  name  fUtah  Stake)  and 
which  embraces  Provo  and  Springville, 
and  a  few  adjacent  settlements.  This 
high  and  holy  position  he  now  occupieb. 
In  the  educational,  business  and  com- 
mercial part  of  the  History  of  Provo, 
we  have  found  David  John  a  school- 
teacher, and  a  business  man  in  tht 
Provo  Co-operative  Institution,  on  the 
Provo  Woolen  Factory,  and  in  the  lum- 
ber company,  which  originated  with  tht: 
firm  of  Smoot  and  John.  He  left  the 
factory  to  fulfil  the'  duties  of  the  Pre- 
siding Bishop's  agent  for  the  Utah 
County  Stake.  (See  also  Tullidge's 
Quarterly  Magazine,  Vol.  3,  p.  297.) 

BLACKBURN,  Elias  Hicks,  first 
Bishop  of  Provo  and  a  Patriarch  in  the 
Church,  is  the  son  of  Thomas  and  Eliz- 
abeth Blackburn  and  was  born  Sept.  17, 
1827,  in  Bradford  county,  Penn.  The 
following  life  sketch  is  from  Elder 
Blackburn's  own  pen:  "My  father  died 
when  I  was  one  year  old.  In  1833  my 
mother  moved  with  her  family  to  Ohio 
and  later  to  Illinois.  In  April,  1845,  I 
was  baptized.  At  Nauvoo,  111.,  I  as- 
sisted in  finishing  the  Temple,  and  in 
1846  I  took  part  in  the  exodus  from 
Nauvoo.     I   witnessed    the    starting   of 


the  Mormon  Battalion  and  spent  the 
winter  of  1846-47,  in  aiding  the  families 
of  those  who  were  in  the  Battalion.  In 
March,  1847,  I  married  Sarah  Jane  Goff. 
In  December,  1847,  I  was  ordained  a 
Seventy  by  Joseph  Young.  In  1849,  I 
crossed  the  plains  in  Wm.  Hyde's  com- 
pany, and  located  in  Provo,  in  the  fall. 
Here  I  spent  the  winter  among  hostile 
Indians.  In  the  winter  of  1849-50  we 
had  a  battle  with  the  Indians,  in  which 
Joseph  Higbee  was  killed,  and  a  num- 
ber wounded.  In  the  spring  peace  was 
made,  but  there  was  much  suffering 
among  the  people  for  want  of  food, 
wheat  being  worth  $5  a  bushel.  In  the 
spring  of  1850  the  present  townsite  of 
Provo  was  surveyed  and  the  people  left 
the  fort  to  build  on  their  city  lots.  Wfe 
suffered  much   inconvenience   from   the 


fact  that  the  Indians  opposed  our 
building  upon  their  lands  or  catching 
their  fish.  Our  little  settlement  was 
presided  over  by  Elder  Isaac  Higbee. 
In  March,  1851,  President  Brigham 
Young,  Heber  C.  Kimball  and  others 
came  to  Provo  to  organize  us  into  a 
Ward,  and  on  the  19th  of  that  month 
they  called  the  Saints  together  and 
preached  to  them.  On  that  occasion  I 
was  called  and  sustained  as  Bishop,  be- 
ing ordained  a  High  Priest  and  Bishop 
by  President  Brigham  Young.  My  coun- 
selors were  Wm.  Young  and  Harlow 
Redfield.  I  immediately  commenced 
building  up  the  town,  exploring  the 
country,  raising  crops,  etc.  The  winter 
of  1851-52  was  a  hard  one  in  Provo,  and 
our    people    suffered    considerable,    but 


492 


LATTER-DAY    SAINT 


the  Lord  was  merciful  unto  us,  and  pre- 
served our  lives.  In  July,  1852,  Presi- 
dent Brigham  Young  and  three  of  the 
Apostles  came  to  Provo  and  organized 
the  town  into  four  Wards.  During  the 
spring  and  summer  of  1853  a  war  was 
waged  with  the  Indian  chief  Walker,  of 
the  Utes.  Some  of  our  people,  who  had 
acted  very  unwisely,  had  killed  an  In- 
dian, which  exasperated  Walker  and  all 
the  Utes,  and  they  declared  war  upon 
us.  There  was  much  excitement  among 
the  people,  many  of  our  men  being 
called  out  to  fight  the  Indians.  Hostil- 
ities continued  till  the  spring  of  1854, 
when  Brigham  Young,  as  governor  o^ 
Utah,  made  peace  with  Walker.  In 
September,  1854,  I  was  called  by  Presi- 
dent Brigham  Young  to  take  a  relief 
train  (ox-teams  and  provisions)  to  the 
immigrating  Saints  on  the  plains.  I 
found  much  suffering,  especially  in  the 
Scandinavian  company,  on  account  of 
the  loss  of  their  oxen.  I  gave  them  one 
hundred  sacks  of  flour,  which  had  been 
donated  in  the  Valley.  I  went  as  far 
east  as  the  Sweet  Water  river;  but  we 
all  returned  in  safety  to  Salt  Lake  City. 
The  spring  of  1855  opened  under  more 
favorable  circumstances;  still  many  of 
the  Saints  went  without  the  comforts  of 
life.  Provisions  were  very  high.  Sugar, 
for  instance,  was  worth  a  dollar  a 
pound  in  Provo.  In  August,  1855,  a 
memorable  blessing  was  given  to  the 
people  of  Provo,  in  the  shape  of  a  hard 
white  substance  found  upon  the  leaves 
of  the  young  cottonwood  trees.  We 
shook  off  this  substance,  which  was 
very  sweet,  into  tubs  of  water,  and 
boiled  it  down,  without  process,  when 
it  congealed  into  sugar,  about  the  color 
of  our  common  brown  sugar.  The 
Saints  in  Provo  made  between  three 
and  four  thousand  pounds  of  this  kind 
of  sugar.  I  told  the  Saints  that  it  was 
a  direct  gift  from  the  Lord,  and  they 
freely  paid  their  tithing  on  it.  Among 
other  products  I  took  333  lbs.  of  this 
sugar  to  Salt  Lake  City  to  the  general 
tithing  office.  On  explaining  the  mat- 
ter to  President  Brigham  Young,  whom 
I  met  at  the  door,  he  declared  it  was 
sugar  from  the  Lord.  In  November, 
1856,  I  sent  out  twenty  wagons  and  pro- 
visions to  relieve  the  hand-cart  com- 
pany, which  was  in  distress.  In  due 
time  this  company  arrived  in  Salt  Lake 
City,  and  141  of  the  sick  and  frozen 
emigrants  were  sent  to  Provo.  That 
winter  we  enjoyed  a  glorious  reforma- 
tion, all  being  rebaptized  in  the  spring 


of  1857.  In  April,  1857,  I  was  called  to 
accompany  President  Brigham  Young 
and  about  one  hundred  others  on  a  visit 
to  the  Salmon  river  mission,  called  Fort 
Limhi.  In  1857  the  government  of  the 
United  States  stopped  all  mails  coming 
into  the  Territory.  President  Young 
called  upon  me  to  run  the  mail  from 
Salt  Lake  City  to  Salt  Creek  (or  Nephi), 
Juab  count^'  which  I  did  for  one  year 
without  remuneration.  In  185^  I  assist- 
ed in  the  great  "move"  south.  The 
tithing  grain  of  the  general  tithing 
office  was  assigned  to  my  care  at  Provo. 
I  furnished  President  Young  a  guard  of 
thirty  men  to  accompany  him  home  to 
Salt  Lake  City.  In  September,  1859,  I 
was  called,  together  with  six  other 
brethren,  to  take  a  mission  to  Great 
Britain  and  Scandinavia;  we  were  the 
first  Elders  sent  out  after  the  troubles 
with  the  government.  I  spent  three 
years  in  the  missionary  field.  John 
Brown  and  myself  were  called  to  act  as 
emigration  agents,  March  1,  1862,  and 
we  labored  in  that  capacity  for  six 
months.  I  returned  to  Salt  Lake  City 
in  September,  1862.  In  1863,  I  was 
called  by  President  Brigham  Young  to 
go  to  Beaver  county,  where  I  superin- 
tended the  Sunday  school  for  eleven 
years  and  also  acted  as  a  home  mission- 
ary in  that  Stake.  I  moved  to  Rabbit 
or  Fremont  valley,  (now  in  Wayne 
county)  in  1879.  Apostle  Erastus  Snow 
set  me  apart  to  act  as  Bishop  of  all  the 
settlements  in  Fremont  valley,  in  May, 
1880.  From  1880  to  1883  I  acted  as  select- 
man in  Piute  county.  I  also  served  a 
term  in  the  Utah  legislature,  represent- 
ing Piute  and  Beaver  counties  in  the 
session  of  1882.  Apostle  Francis  M. 
Lyman  ordained  me  a  Patriarch  and  set 
me  apart  to  travel  and  bless  the  people. 
May  29,  1889,  since  which  time  I  have 
traveled  thousands  of  miles  and  blessed 
1,580  people.  I  have  seen  many  sick 
people  healed,  having  been  the  means, 
in  the  hands  of  the  Lord,  of  curing 
many  tumors  and  cancers.  I  have  had 
five  wives  and  thirty-nine  children.  I 
am  now  in  my  74th  year,  and  enjoy 
good  health,  being  able  to  still  continue 
my  labors  among  the  people.  I  feel 
veiy  grateful  to  the  Lord  for  his  mer- 
cies unto  me.  The  desire  of  my  soul  is 
to  sustain  the  Church  of  Jesus  Christ 
of  Latter-day  Saints,  and  all  the  prin- 
ciples of  the  gospel." 

KNUDSEN,    Andrew,      Bishop  of  the 
First  Ward,  Provo,  Utah  county,  Utah, 


BIOGRAPHICAL   ENCYCLOPEDIA. 


493 


was  born  July  13,  1854,  in  Lojten,  Hede- 
marken,  Norway,  of  well-to-do  parents 
(Andrew  Knudsen  and  Bergitha  Lar- 
sen),  who  embraced  the  gospel  about 
1863,  and  emigrated  to  Utah  in  1865; 
the  family  located  in  Provo,  Utah  coun- 
ty, where  Elder  Knudsen  still  resides; 
at  the  age  of  eighteen  he  commenced 
to  study  music  and  was  a  practical 
musician  for  twenty-five  years.  He 
worked  on  the  St.  George  Temple  in 
1875-76,  and  married  Miss  Chesty  Sward 
June  9,  1877,  with  whom  he  has  had 
seven  children.  In  1887-89  he  filled  a 
mission  to  Norway,  laboring  in  the 
Bergen,  Hedemarken  and  Arendal 
branches.  He  presided  over  the  two 
latter  branches  and  organized  a  choir 
in  the  Arendal  branch.  He  was  or- 
dained Bishop  and  set  apart  to 
preside  o\er  the  Provo  First  "Ward  Dec. 
24,  1893,  which  position  he  still  holds. 
For  many  years  he  had  charge  of  the 
ward  choir;  labored  as  assistant  Sun- 
day School  superintendent;  city  coun- 
cilman, etc. 

WILLIAM,  David  J.,  First  counse- 
lor to  Bishop  Andrew  Knudsen  of  the 
First  "Ward,  Provo.  is  the  son  of  David 
and  Sarah  Williams,  and  was  born  at 
Canton,  Fulton  county,  111.,  May  5,  1862. 
He  was  baptized  by  Elder  Benjamin  F. 
Cummings  Jan.  8,  1876.  With  his  fath- 
er's family  he  left  Illinois  for  Utah, 
Aug.  1,  1877,  and  arrived  in  Ogden  Aug. 
5th.  He  was  ordained  an  Elder  by 
David  "Williams,  and  a  Seventy  b5' 
John  P.  "Wimmer.  Oct.  10,  1895,  he  was 
ordained  a  High  Priest,  and  set  apart 
as  a  counselor  to  Bishop  Andrew  Knud- 
sen by  Pres.  Edward  Partridge,  which 
position  he  still  holds.  He  married 
Martha  A.  John,  daughter  of  Pres.  Da- 
vid   John,    Aug.    30,    1883. 

EGGERTSEN,  Simon  Peter,  jun- 
ior, Bishop  of  the  Second  "Ward,  Provo, 
Utah  county,  Utah,  is  the  eldest  son 
of  Simon  P.  Eggertsen  and  Johanne 
Thomsen,  and  was  born  in  a  small  log 
house  in  Provo,  Utah  county,  Utah, 
Sept.  15,  1860.  "When  very  young  he 
learned  to  accompany  his  father  to  the 
field.  He  did  what  he  could  in  herding 
cows,  driving  oxen  and  many  other 
things.  It  mattered  not  what  work  he 
was  given  to  do  that  work  was  faith- 
fully done.  In  a  religious  way,  Sunday 
Schools  and  meetings  of  various  kinds 


were  attended.  He  labored  as  a  Deacon, 
Teacher,  Priest,  Seventy,  Sunday 
School  teacher,  secretary  of  different 
organizations,  president  of  the  Y.  M. 
M.  I.  A.,  and  superintendent  of  the 
Sunday  School.  His  winters  were  spent 
in  attending  school.  These  schools  were 
not  very  good  in  childhood:  but  later 
the  Timpanogas  University,  under  the 
Dusenberrys,  and  the  B.  Y.  Academy, 
under  Karl  G.  Maeser,  were  attended. 
He  graduated  from  the  Brigham  Young 
Academy  in  1880  as  a  teacher.  Since 
then  he  has  labored  sixteen  years  in 
Lehi,  four  years  in  Springville,  and 
eight  years  in  Provo  city  schools.  A 
year  after  his  marriage  with  Etta  Niel- 


.%fcte. 


■4 


sen,  he  was  called  on  a  mission  to  the 
Northwestern  States,  (1886),  where  he 
first  labored  as  a  regular  traveling  El- 
der, and  later  as  president  of  the  Min- 
nesota conference,  which  included  Min  - 
nesota,  "Wisconsin,  Iowa  and  Dakota. 
He  was  honorably  released  in  the 
spring  of  1887.  June  1,  1889,  he  was  or- 
dained a  High  Priest  by  Abraham  O. 
Smoot,  and  set  apart  as  first  counselor 
to  Bishop  "Wride,  of  the  Second  "Ward, 
which  position  he  held  for  nine  years, 
or  until  1898.  when  he  was  ordained  a 
Bishop  by  Apostle  John  Henry  Smith 
and  set  apart  to  preside  over  that 
"Ward.     This  position  he  still  holds. 

N. 

TA"5rLOR,  ThomasH.,    Bishop  of  the 
Third     "VN^ard,      Provo,      Utah     countv. 


494 


LATTER-DAY    SAINT 


Utah.  Is  the  son  of  George  Taylor  and 
Eliza  Nichols,  and  was  born  July  28, 
1868,  at  Provo,  Utah.  He  was  baptized 
in  1876  by  Eider  Holdoway,  ordained 
f»  Deacon  in  1878,  ordained  a  Teacher 
April  23,  1884,  ordained  a  Priest  Feb. 
8,  1885,  ordained  an  Elder  Jan.  24,  1889, 
ordained  a  Seventy  March  28,  1890,  and 
ordained  a  High  Priest  June  3,  1891,  and 
at  the  same  time  set  apart  as  second 
counselor  to  Bishop  Richard  S.  Gibby 
of  the  Third  Ward.  In  1895  he  was  set 
apart  as  first  counselor  to  Bishop  Wm. 
J.  Lewis.  He  was  ordained  a  Bishop 
Aug.  26,  1900,  and  set  apart  to  preside 
over  the  Third  Ward,  Provo,  which  po- 
sition he  still  occupies.  Bro.  Taylor 
served  as  president  of  the  Y.  M.  M.  I. 


A.  in  Provo  for  a  period  of  seven  years. 
During  the  time  he  has  presided  as 
Bishop  he  has  worked  energetically  for 
the  upbuilding  and  advancement  of  the 
affairs  cf  his  Ward,  both  in  spiritual 
and  temporal  affairs.  Among  other 
things  undertaken  is  the  erection  of  a 
fine  meeting  house,  to  cost  about  $10,000, 
which  is  progressing  splendidly  at  the 
present  time.  The  materials  and  labor 
is  being  donated  by  the  Ward  mem- 
bers. Civilly.  Bro.  Taylor  is  looked  up- 
on as  a  thrifty  and  straightforward 
business  man.  In  1S99  he  was  elected 
mayor  of  Provo,  and  served  the  people 
so  well  in  that  capacity  that  they  elect- 
ed him  again  to  that  office  in  1901. 

BOOTH,  John  Edge,  Bishop  of  the 
Fourth  Ward  of  Provo  from  1877  to 
1895,  is  a  son  of  Richard  L.  Booth  and 


Elsie  Edge,  and  was  born  June  29,  1847, 
at  Bedfordleigh,  Lancashire,  England. 
He  came  to  Utah  Sept.  12,  1857.  During 
ihe  "move"  in  1858  he  lived  in  Alpine, 
Utah  county.  In  1860  he  herded  sheep 
in  Draper,  Salt  Lake  county.  He  was 
r-  volunteer  in  the  Blackhawk  war  in 
1866,  doing  service  on  the  Sevier  river. 


In  1868  he  attended  the  school  at  Draper 
which  was  taught  by  Dr.  John  R.  Park. 
During  the  winter  of  1869-70  he  attend- 
ed the  Deseret  University.  In  1870-71 
he  taught  in  the  High  School  at  Boun- 
tiful, Davis  county.  From  May,  1871, 
till  it  closed  he  taught  the  branch 
school  of  the  University  at  Provo.  He 
was  called  to  be  a  counselor  to  Bishop 
Harvey  H.  Cluff  of  the  Fourth  Ward, 
Provo,  in  August,  1875.  In  June,  1877, 
he  was  called  to  be  Bishop  of  that  Ward 
and  served  in  that  office  till  January, 
1S95.  From  October,  1883,  to  November, 
1884,  he  assisted  President  Wm.  M.  Pal- 
mer in  the  Northern  States  Mission  and 
during  1S89  and  1890  he  presided  over 
said  mission.  In  civil  life  Bishop  Booth 
has  served  as  city  councilman,  alder- 
man, justice  of  the  peace,  mayor,  mem- 
ber and  president  of  the  school  board, 
county  attorney,  member  of  the  house 
of  representatives  and  of  the  council 
of  the  Territorial  legislature,  member  of 
the  Territorial  and  State  board  of 
eciualization  from  1890  to  1899,  United 
States  as.'?istant  district  attorney  under 
J\  F.  Vanile,  and  at  the  present  time 
judge  of  the  Fourth  district  court  by 
appointment  of  the  governor,  (May, 
1899),  and  election  (November,  1900). 


BIOGRAPHICAL    ENCYCLOPEDIA. 


495 


JOHNSON,  John.  Bishop  of  Lake 
View,  Utah  county,  Utah,  is  the  son  of 
Johan  Johansen  and  Bergitha  Larsen, 
and  was  born  at  Ostre,  Sween,  Lopten, 
Hedemarken,  Norway,  June  7,  1849.  To- 
gether with  his  parents  he  emigrated  to 
Utah  in  1S64,  crossing  the  ocean  in  the 
large  sailing  vessel,  "Monarch  of  the 
Sea,"  and  the  plains  in  Patriarch  John 
Smith's  ox-train.  They  arrived  in  Salt 
Lake  City  October,  1865,  and  later  set- 
tled in  Provo,  Utah  county.  John  was 
baptized  April  7,  1865,  by  Peter  Madsen. 
Tn  1868  he  was  sent  back  to  the  ter- 
minus of  the  Union  Pacific  railroad  to 
bring  emigrants  to  the  Valley.  June  13, 
1870,  he  married  Ingrid  Sward.  When 
the  Lake  View  Ward  was  organized  in 


1877  he  was  called  to  serve  as  presid- 
ing Teacher.  He  left  for  a  mission  to 
Norway  in  October,  1889,  where  he  la- 
bored in  the  Frederikshald,  Ejdsvold 
and  Christiania  branches.  Later,  he 
presided  over  the  Christiania  confer- 
ence. Receiving  an  honorable  release 
he  returned  home  in  November,  1891.  In 
February,  1892,  he  was  ordained  a 
High  Priest  and  Bishop  and  set  apart  to 
preside  over  the  Lake  View  Ward, 
M'hich  position  he  still  holds,  laboring 
with  that  zeal  and  integrity  which  is 
characteristic  of  a  faithful  servant  of 
God. 

TEW,  William,  Bishop  of  Ma- 
pleton  ward,  Utah  county,  Utah,  is  the 
son  of  Thomas  Tew  and  Rebecca  Bird 


and  was  born  Feb.  2,  1859,  at  Spring- 
ville,  Utah  county,  Utah.  His  parents 
having  emigrated  from  England  in  the 
fifties.  When  William  was  nine  yeara 
old  he  moved  with  his  parents  to  Paris, 
Bear  Lake  county,  Idaho,  where  they 
remained  till  1868,  when  they  moved  to 
Richmond,  Cache  county,  Utah.  Four 
years  later  they  moved  back  to  Spring- 
ville.  William  worked  with  his  father 
and  attended  the  district  schools  dur- 
ing his  youth,  until  he  started  out  in- 
dependently for  himself  as  a  farmer. 
Having  taken  a  lively  interest  in 
Church  work  from  his  early  youth,  he 
was  chosen  a  counselor  in  the  Y.  M.  M. 
I.  A.,  and  he  also  served  as  assistant 
superintendent  of  the  Sunday  school, 
as  a  Bishop's  counselor  for  seven  years, 
a  mutual  improvement  and  a  Sunday 
school  missionary,  etc.  May  19,  1896. 
he  was  ordained  a  Bishop  by  Apostle 
Abraham  H.  Cannon,  and  set  apart  to 
preside  over  the  Mapleton  ward,  in 
w'hich  capacity  he  is  at  present  dili- 
gently laboring.  He  married  Clara 
E.  Snow,  daughter  of  Warren  S.  Snow 
and  Sarah  E.  Whitney,  Jan.  31,  1884, 
with  whom  he  has  had  six  children. 

COOMBS,  Isaiah  Moses,  a  prom- 
inent Elder  in  the  Utah  Stake  of  Zion. 
was  born  March  21,  1834,  in  Columbia. 
Monroe  county,  Illinois,  son  of  Mark 
Anthony  Coombs  and  Maria  Morgan. 
His  parents  were  both  members  of  the 
Church  when  he  was  born,  his  father 
having  been  baptized  by  Isaac  Morley 
at  Independence,  Jackson  county.  Mo.. 
April  5,  1832.  Isaiah,  who  had  received 
a  good  common  school  education,  com- 
menced to  teach  school  at  the  age  of 
seventeen  years  in  his  native  town: 
this  avocation  he  followed  for  twenty 
years,  teaching  in  different  places.  Nov. 
30,  1854,  he  married  Sarah  A.  Turk,  by 
whom  he  had  one  child,  who  died. 
Bro.  Coombs'  emigration  to  Utah,  in 
1855,  caused  a  separation  between  him- 
self and  wife,  who  refused  to  leave  her 
parents.  While  stopping  temporarily 
at  St.  Louis.  Mo.,  on  his  way  to  Utah, 
he  was  ordained  an  Elder  April  24, 
1855,  and  appointed  clerk  of  that  sea- 
son's emigration  under  the  direction  of 
Apostle  Erastus  Snow.  He  crossed  the 
plains  in  Capt.  Isaac  Allred's  com- 
pany, which  arrived  in  Salt  Lake  City, 
Nov.  2,  1855,  bringing  with  him  the  body 
of  Albert  Gregory,  a  returned  mission- 


496 


LATTER-DAY    SAINT 


ary,  who  had  died  at  Atchison,  Kan- 
sas. On  his  arrival  in  Salt  Lake  City, 
he  received  a  certificate  from  the  late 
Judge  Wm.  W.  Phelps,  regent  of  the 
Deseret  University,  entitling  him  to 
teach  school  in  Utah.  He  commenced 
teaching  in  the  14th  Ward  Dec.  3, 
1855.  When  the  14th  W'ard  Sunday 
school  was  reopened  May  18,  1856,  Bro. 
Coombs  was  appointed  teacher  of  a 
Book  of  Mormon  class  and  he  became 
the  superintendent  of  the  school  June 
7.  1856.  He  was  ordained  a  Seventy 
by  Joseph  Young  July  7,  1856.  and  be- 
came identified  with  the  19th  quorum. 
In  company  with  Apostle  Parley  P. 
Pratt,  he  left  Salt  Lake  City  on  a  mis- 


sion to  the  States.  Sept.  12,  18.56,  they 
crossed  the  plains  with  a  mule-team, 
of  which  Elder  Coombs  was  part  own- 
er. On  this  mission  he  labored  princi- 
pally in  Illinois  and  Arkansas,  and  re- 
turned home  in  1857,  when  the  Elders 
were  recalled  because  of  the  Johnston 
army  trouble.  At  the  time  of  the  move 
in  1858,  he  located  temporarily  at  Pro- 
vo,  and  married  Fanny  McLean,  of 
Spanish  Fork,  July  28,  1858.  She  sub- 
sequently bore  him  fourteen  children — 
seven  boys  and  seven  girls — eleven  of 
whom  are  now  living;  they  are  faithful 
members  of  the  Church  and  some  of 
them  prominent  in  the  community. 
During  the  winters  of  1858-59.  1859-€0 
and  1860-61,  Elder  Coombs  taught  school 
in  Parowan,  Iron  county,  where  he  also 
made  a  temporary  home.  In  1861  he 
settled  at  Payson,  Utah  county,  where 


he  then  resided  the  remainder  of  his 
days.  He  taught  school  until  1S69, 
when  he  was  called  by  President  Brig- 
ham  Young  to  take  charge  of  the  tith- 
ing office  at  Payson.  This  position  he 
held  for  seventeen  years.  As  an  expert 
bookkeeper,  he  traveled  extensively 
through  southern  Utah,  by  appointment 
instructing  the  tithing  clerks  in  the 
different  settlements  how  to  keep  cor- 
rect tithing  accounts.  In  1867  he  or- 
ganized a  Sunday  school  in  Payson,  un- 
der the  direction  of  Bishop  John  B. 
Fairbanks,  and  was  made  its  superin- 
tendent. In  1868  he  was  appointed  as- 
sistant superintendent  of  the  Utah 
Stake  Sunday  schools.  In  1875  he 
yielded  obedience  to  the  principle  of 
plural  marriage  by  taking  to  wife  Char- 
lotte Augusta  Hardy,  with  whom  he 
had  six  children.  In  1875-76  he  filled 
a  mission  to  Great  Britain,  laboring  in 
the  London  conference.  Returning 
home  early  in  1876  he  had  charge  of  a 
small  company  of  emigrating  Saints. 
In  1881  he  was  chosen  as  one  of  the 
presidents  of  the  temporary  organiza- 
tion of  Seventies  in  Utah  county,  and 
he  was  set  apart  as  a  president  of  the 
46th  quorum  of  Seventy,  located  in  Pay- 
son,  Sept.  16,  1883.  He  also  assisted  in 
reorganizing  the  several  quorums  of 
Seventies  in  Utah  Stake.  In  1884  he 
was  appointed  a  home  missionary.  Up 
to  the  time  of  his  death,  which  occurred 
at  Payson  May  20,  1886.  Elder  Coombs 
was  busily  engaged  in  public  labors.  As 
the  clerk  of  the  Ward,  he  compiled  the 
history  of  Paj'son. 

McCULLOUGH.  AVilliam  A.,  presid- 
ing Elder  of  the  Knightsville  branch, 
is  the  second  son  of  James  D.  McCul- 
lough  and  Elizabeth  M.  Loftin,,  and 
was  born  in  Texas  Aug.  6,  1854.  His 
parents  emigrated  to  Utah  in  1856,  and 
were  among  those  called  to  go  south 
and  raise  cotton  in  "Dixie."  William 
assited  his  parents  all  he  could.  He 
also  worked  on  the  St.  George  Temple. 
Jan.  25,  1877,  he  married  Martha  A. 
Pearce  in  the  St.  George  Temple,  being 
one  of  the  first  who  were  married  in 
that  sacred  edifice.  He  was  also  or- 
dained an  Elder  the  same  day.  From 
1880  to  1882  he  worked  on  the  Atlantic 
and  Pacific  railroad  in  Arizona,  and 
later  he  went  to  Mexico  to  work  on  the 
Central  railroad.  He  returned  to  Utah 
and    located   in    Provo.       Sept.    7,    1884, 


BIOGRAPHICAL    ENCYCLOPEDIA. 


497 


he  was  set  apart  as  second  counselor  issue  of  which  union  is  two  children, 
to  Bishop  J.  P.  R.  Johnson  of  the  Pro-  At  the  organization  of  the  Thistle 
vo  First  Ward.  This  responsible  po-  branch  in  1898,  Bro.  Smith  was  set 
sition  he  held  till  1894.  He  was  set  apart  as  presiding  Elder  by  Pres.  Da- 
apart  as  a  home  missionary  in  the  vid  John,  and  was  also  appointed  su- 
Utah  Stake  in  1889,  and  set  apart  as  perintendent  of  the  Sunday  school, 
first  counselor  to  Bishop  Andrew 
Knudsen  of  the  Provo  First  Ward, 
Jan.  7,  1894,  which  position  he  held 
till  1897.  At  the  organization  of  the 
Knightsville  branch,  Oct.  3,  1897,  Bro. 
McCullough    was    chosen    as    presiding 


i 


Both  of  these  positions  he  occupies  at 
the  present  time.  He  is  engaged  in  the 
mercantile  business  and  is  also  post- 
master at  Thistle. 


Elder,  with  Oscar  Wilkins  as  his  first 
and  A.  L.  Towle  as  his  second  coun- 
selor; he  is  still  laboring  in  that  ca- 
pacity. While  in  Provo  he  acted  as 
president  of  the  Y.  M.  M.  I.  A.  in  the 
First  Ward  for  three  years,  and  also  as 
a  Ward  teacher  for  a  period  of  years. 
He  is  the  father  of  eight  children,  four 
of  whom  are  now  living. 

SMITH,  Benjamin  Franklin,  pre- 
siding Elder  of  the  Thistle  branch  (in 
the  Utah  Stake  of  Zion),  is  a  son  of 
Hyrum  Harrison  Smith  and  Euphemia 
Mossman,  and  was  bom  in  Vanwert, 
Vanwert  county,  Ohio,  Aug.  21,  1866. 
He  was  baptized  May  2,  1889,  by  El- 
der Edwin  Udall.  In  the  fall  of  1889 
he  emigrated  to  Salt  Lake  City,where 
he  resided  in  the  Sixteenth  Ward.  He 
was  ordained  a  Priest  by  Bishop  Fred- 
erick Kesler,  and  later  an  Elder.  In 
1890  he  moved  to  Thistle.  He  married 
Anna  Baker  in  September,  1891;  she 
died  in  Lehi  April  20,  1896.  Feb.  11, 
1897,    he   married   Grace  E.   Driggs,   the 

Vol.  1.  No.  32. 


GALLOP,  William,  presiding  El- 
der of  the  Oakland-  branch,  in  the 
Utah  Stake  of  Zion,  was  born  Dec.  14, 
1852,  at  Springville,  Utah  county,  Utah. 
He  was  baptized  Oct.  27,  1861,  by  Geo. 
Kendall  and  confirmed  the  same  day. 
His  early  youth  was  spent  at  home, 
laboring  with  his  father.  At  the  age 
of  twenty  years  he  was  ordained  a 
Priest.  Dec.  24,  1876,  he  married  Lydia 
Ann  Strong.  In  1878  he  was  ordained 
an  Elder  by  Bishop  William  Bring- 
hurst.  Oct.  8,  1883,  he  yielded  obedi- 
ence to  the  law  of  plural  marriage, 
and  he  was  ordained  a  Seventy  Dec. 
30,  1884,  by  Geo.  Stores.  During  the 
anti-polygamy  crusade  he  was  arrest- 
ed, tried,  convicted  and  sentenced  to 
90  days'  imprisonment  in  the  Utah 
penitentiary.  At  the  organization  of 
the  Oakland  branch,  of.  the  Springville 
Ward,  in  1893,  he  was  chosen  as  pre- 
siding Elder,  and  he  is  still  serving  in 
that  calling.  Bro.  Gallop  has  been  able 
to  trace  his  genealogy  back  to  1649.  He 
is  the  father  of  fifteen  children,  ten 
of  whom  are  now   living. 

Aug.  10,  1901. 


498 


LATTER-DAT    SAINT 


DANIELS,  James  Ephraim,  a  High 
Councilor  in  the  Utah  Stake,  is  the  son 
of  James   Daniels   and    Elizabeth   Salt- 
house  and  was  born     Feb.     9,    1825,   in 
Manchester,    Lancashire,    England.    He 
was    baptized    in    November,    1841,      by 
Chas.  D.  Miller.       He  emigrated  to  the 
United    States   in    the   fall   of  1842   with 
his  mother's  family,  in  the  ship  "Med- 
ford,"  and  landed  at  New  Orleans.     In 
passing    up    the    river    they    were    ice- 
bound   at    St.    Louis,    Mo.,    during    the 
winter.      In  the  spring  of  1843,  he  went 
to  Quincy,   111.,   where  he   had   a  sister 
living.       From   here   in   1845  he     moved 
to  Nauvoo,  where  he  worked  at  cabinet 
making.      After  the  exodus  from  Nau- 
voo he  moved  back  to  Quincy,  111.,  and 
fitted    out    for    the    trip    to    Great    SaJt 
Lake   valley.       Crossing   the   plains   in 
1850,    in    Captain    Milo    Andrus'      com- 
pany, he  arrived  in  Salt  Lake  City  the 
last  of  August,  of  that  year.       He  had 
maried  the  year  previously,  and  stayed 
in  Salt  Lake  City  until  December, when 
he  moved  to  Utah  county  and  assisted 
in   founding   the   town   of   Payson,     his 
being  the  fourth  family  that  settled  at 
that  place.       He  next  moved  to  Prove 
in  the  fall  of  1854,  where  he  has  resided 
until  the  present  time.       He  worked  at 
the  carpenter  business  until  1870,  when, 
on  the  resignation  of  Elijah  F.  Sheets, 
he  was  appointed  assessor  and  collec- 
tor for  Utah   county.       In  1874  he  was 
elected  county  recorder,  and  also  coun- 
ty treasurer,  which  offices  he  filled  un- 
til 18S2.      He  was  elected  to  those  offi- 
ces  years   later.       He   also   served   two 
teims  in  the  Provo  city  council  as  al- 
derman, and  figured  to  some  extent  in 
the  military  affairs  of  the  county.     He 
was   with   General   Pace   in   the   Black- 
hawk  war  in  Sanpete,  acting  as  adju- 
tant  on    his   staff.       He    served    in    the 
famous   Echo   canyon   expedition,     and 
was  afterward  elected  lieutenant-colo- 
nel of  the  first  regiment  of  Utah  coun- 
ty   militia,     under       L.     John    Nuttall, 
colonel.       He     was     commissioned     by 
Governor   Durkee,   and   held    that   rank 
when   the  Utah   militia  was  disbanded. 
Elder  Daniels  has  always   taken  great 
interest   in   musical   matters.       He   was 
for   thirty-five   years     chorister   of   the 
Church   choir   in    Provo,    which    gained 
quite  a  reputation  under  his  leadership. 
During    the     time     he   conducted     the 
choir    he    was   under    the    necessity     of 
l)roviding     some       simple       means     by 
which  the  organ  accomj)animent  could 


be  had,  as  organists  were  very,  very 
scarce  in  those  days.  He  therefore 
invented  a  transposing  keyboard,  an 
instrument  which  by  being  properly 
adjusted  could  be  made  to  play  in  any 
key  desired.  This  invention  was  after- 
ward sent  away  together  with  the  or- 
gan upon  which  it  was  used,  and  a 
number  of  years  afterward  was  patent- 
ed by  a  man  in  Montana,  and  Bro. 
Daniels  was  deprived  of  the  honor  of 
its  invention.  Elder  Daniels  has  al- 
ways been  an  active  Church  member. 
In  1887  he  was  called  on  a  mission  to 
Great  Britain,  and  he  has  acted  as  a 
High  Councilor  since  1889. 

ROBERTS,  William  D.,  senior  pres- 
ident of  the  Thirty-fourth  quorum 
of  Seventy  and  a  prominent  citi- 
zen of  Provo,  Utah  county,  Utah, 
was  born  in  Winchester,  Scott  county, 
111.,  Sept.  4,  1835.  When  he  was  three 
years  old,  his  father  removed  with  his 
family  to  Milton,  Pike  county,  111.,  and 
from  there  to  Galena.  From  Galena 
the  family  moved  to  Ursa,  111.,  where 
Robert's  sister, Daphne,  and  his  brother 
Daniel,  died.  Early  in  the  spring  of 
1846,  the  family  left  Illinois,  crossing 
the  Mississippi  river  on  the  ice.  Locat- 
ing at  Garden  Grove,  Decater  county, 
they  lived  there  until  1849,  when  they 
moved  to  Lancaster,  Missouri.  In  the 
spring  of  1851,  they  left  Lancaster  for 
Utah,  leaving  the  oldest  brother,  Don, 
at  Lancaster,  his  brother  Boliver  hav- 
ing gone  to  Utah  in  1850.  The  trip  across 
the  plains  was  fraught  with  all  the 
trials  and  hardships  incident  to  those 
days.  The  company  had  some  trouble 
with  the  Indians,  and  a  stampede  of  the 
cattle,  which  resulted  in  the  death  of 
one  woman.  Arriving  in  Utah,  the 
Roberts  family  moved  direct  to  Provo 
city,  where  they  located  in  September, 
1851.  In  the  sirring  of  1852, William  D., to- 
gether with  his  father  and  brother  Boli- 
var, went  to  California;  they  crossed 
the  Sierra  Nevada  mountains,  and  ar- 
rived at  Placerville,  (better  known  at 
that  time  as  "Hang  Town")  on  the  9th 
of  July,  where  they  remained  during  the 
balance  of  the  summer.  Bolivar  and 
William  engaged  in  mining,  and  the 
father, being  a  physician, practiced  medi- 
cine.In  the  winter  of  1852-3  they  removed 
to  San  Jose,  where  they  remained  dur- 
ing the  winter,  and  thence  removed  to 
San  Bernardino,  where  a  colony  of 
Latter-day  Saints  had  located.    At  San 


BIOGRAPHICAL    ENCYCLOPEDIA. 


499 


Bernardino  William  D.  engaged  in 
farming  during  that  summer,  and  in 
the  fall  his  father  left  with  the  intention 
of  returning  east  by  water.  From  San 
Francisco  he  went  by  water  (crossing 
the  Isthmus  of  Panama)  to  New  York, 
and  thence  to  Lancaster,  Mo.,  where  he 
resided  until  the  time  of  his  death. 
Soon  after  being  left  by  his  father,  Wm. 
D.  went  to  Eel  river,  a  settlement 
about  twenty  miles  from  Bucksport, 
Cal.,  and  engaged  in  farming.  About 
harvest  time  he  was  greatly  surprised 
by  the  arrival  of  his  brother, 
Boliver,  who  had  been  in  Utah 
and  from  whom  he  had  not 
heard    for    many    months.    He    assist- 


ed Wm.  D.  in  harvesting  his  crop  and 
in  taking  it  to  market.  The  brothers 
had  115,000  pounds  of  grain  and  pota- 
toes, which  they  shipped  for  Trinidad, 
about  25  miles  up  the  coast.  There  be- 
ing no  place  to  store  freight  below  deck 
on  this  steamer,  they  were  forced  to 
put  their  stuff  on  deck,  exposed  to  a 
heavy  storm,  which  lasted  all  the  way 
to  Trinidad  and  all  the  time  they  were 
unloading;  it  damaged  their  product  to 
that  extent  that  instead  of  getting  four 
or  five  thousand  dollars,  as  they  had  ex- 
pected, after  paying  all  expenses,  they 
had  $360,  and  instead  of  returning  to 
Urah,  as  they  had  expected,  they  pur- 
chased a  mule  and  a  miner's  outfit, 
and    started    for    the   northern    part    of 


California,  arriving  at  Cox's  bar,  on  the 
Trinity  river  in  the  month  of  May, 
where  they  engaged  in  placer-mining 
by  the  process  known  as  sluicing,  un- 
til the  water  failed,  after  which  they 
joined  a  company  and  flumed  the  Trin- 
ity river,  sawing  the  lumber  by  hand, 
the  lumber  being  worth  about  $150  per 
thousand  feet.  It  was  very  expensive 
work.  While  engaged  in  that 
lumber  business,  William  D.  de- 
cided to  return  to  Utah.  He 
started  on  foot,  for  Humboldt  bay, 
thence  took  steamer  for  San  Francisco 
and  San  Pedro,  and  from  there  went 
to  San  Bernardino,  where  he  fitted  out 
with  others  to  pack  through  to  Utah. 
He  arrived  in  Provo  in  December,  lg55, 
with  a  horse,  saddle,  bridle,  leggings, 
spurs,  six-shooter  and  two  twenty  dol- 
lar gold  pieces,  the  savings  from  nearly 
four  years  labor  in  California,  In  these 
early  days  California  was  inhabited  by 
a  rough  and  wicked  class  of  people. 
Sunday  was  the  principal  day  for  all 
manner  of  sports,  such  as  gambling, 
drinking,  horseracing,  fighting,  etc.  A 
six-shooter  and  dirk  knife  were  the  con- 
stant companions  of  nearly  every  man. 
Wm.  D.  came  near  losing  his  life  on 
three  different  occasions  at  the  hands 
of  Spaniards,  who  hated  the  Americans 
with  a  deadly  hatred.  Soon  after  his 
return  to  Provo,  Wm.  D.  enlisted  in  the 
service  of  the  United  States,  under 
Thomas  Johnson,  United  States  mar- 
shal, who  summoned  a  posse  for  the 
purpose  of  arresting  the  notorious  In- 
dian chief  Tintic  and  his  band,  who 
had  been  engaged  in  stealing  and  run- 
ning off  stock  belonging  to  the  settlers. 
At  that  time  Tintic  was  encamped 
near  what  is  known  as  Camp  Floyd. 
Wm.  D.  was  one  of  the  party  which 
numbered  twenty-five  men.  The  first 
night  the  men  camped  at  Lehi,  the  next 
morning  Wm.  D.  was  detailed  with  an- 
other man  to  go  around  on  the  west 
side  of  the  lake  to  notify  the  ranchers 
to  come  into  the  settlements,  as  there 
was  trouble  with  the  Indians.  The  com- 
mand went  on  to  Camp  Floyd,  where  he 
joined  it  after  dark.  Before  he  reached 
them,  they  had  met  and  had  a  battle 
with  Tintic  and  his  band,  in  which  one 
of  the  Carson  boys  and  an  Indian 
squaw  were  killed,  and  several  Indians 
wounded.  The  Indians  made  their  es- 
cape into  Rush  valley,  where  Marshal 
Thomas  Johnson  with  his  command 
followed    them,    overtaking    them    at   a 


500 


LATTER-DAY  SAINT 


point  where  they  were  entrenched 
behind  the  rocks  and  in  the  cedars  on 
the  mountain.  The  posse  drew  up  in 
line  about  two  hundred  yards  from  the 
Indians,  when  Johnson,  through  his  in- 
terpreter, tried  to  induce  Tintic  to  sur- 
render: this  he  refused  to  do.  saying  he 
was  hungry  for  a  fight,  and  at  the  same 
time  he  fired  upon  the  posse.  One  of 
the  balls  passed  between  Wm.  D.  and 
George  Parrish,  who  were  side  by  side. 
Johnson,  under  pretext  of  it  being  too 
late,  ordered  a  retreat.  The  posse  re- 
turned to  the  settlement,  where  it  re- 
mained over  night,  and  the  next  day 
went  back,  but  the  Indians  had  made 
their  escape,  taking  with  them  a  large 
number  of  cattle  and  horses  belonging 
to  the  settlers.  During  this  war  about 
twelve  white  people  In  all  were  killed 
by  the  Indians.  In  1856  Wm.  D.  moved 
to  Pleasant  Grove,  where  he  remainea 
during  the  summer,  but  returned  to 
Provo  in  the  fall.  Here  he  engaged  in 
farming  and  other  work.  This  was 
the  year  of  the  hand-cart  emigration. 
Wm.  D.  was  one  of  the  party  who 
brought  away  from  Fort  Bridger  the 
last  of  the  hand-cart  emigrants.  The 
hardcfhips  and  sufferings  endured  from 
the  cold  were  indeed  very  great.  The 
unfortunate  hand-cart  expedition  re- 
sulted in  the  death  of  over  one  hun 
dred  and  fifty  persons,  besides  many 
who  were  made  cripples  for  life,  by  los- 
ing their  hands,  or  feet,  through  being 
frozen.  In  1857  Wm.  D.  went  out  on 
the  Sweetwater,  now  in  Wyoming,  trad- 
ing with  the  immigrants,  together  with 
Daniel  W.  Jones.  While  there  he  was 
taken  prisoner  by  the  Crow  Indians  and 
held  over  night,  they  being  camped  ou 
the  road  for  the  v^urpose  of  plunder. 
The  next  morning  he  was  rescued  by 
a  company  of  the  emigrants  who  were 
on  their  way  to  California.  Wm.  D. 
returned  to  Utah  in  the  fall,  and  made 
a  trip  that  winter  to  southern  Califor- 
nia, bringing  back  with  him  wild 
horses,  also  several  hundred  head  of 
sheep.  Soon  after  this,  the  trouble 
came  on  between  Utah  and  the  gov- 
ernment. Wm.  D.  was  a  member  of 
the  State  militia,  which  was  ordereu 
out  to  Echo  canyon,  and  he  remained 
there  until  wintej*  closed  in.  and  all 
danger  of  the  army  attempting  to  come 
in  was  passed,  when  he  returned  to 
Provo.  In  the  spring  of  1858  satisfac- 
tory arrangements  having  been  made 
with    the    government,    General    Johns- 


ton's army  was  permitted  to  come  in, 
and  locate  in  Cedar  valley,  Utah  coun- 
ty. During  this  time  Wm.  D.'s  broth- 
er. Clark,  returned  to  Utah,  having 
been  in  the  East,  and  he  took  his  moth- 
er and  brothers,  Homer  and  Byron, 
back  to  Missouri.  After  they  had  left 
here  Wm.  D.  fitted  up  a  team  and  took 
some  passengers  to  Los  Angeles,  Cal., 
bringing  freight  back  on  his  return. 
April  18.  1859,  he  left  Salt  Lake  City 
for  the  East,  by  way  of  California,  the 
Indians  being  so  hostile  between  Utah 
and  the  Missouri  river  that  it  was  too 
dangerous  to  go  that  way.  They  were 
also  on  the  war  path  between  Utah  and 
California,  but  it  was  safer  to  go  that 
wa-y  than  the  other.  Wm.  D.  took  pas- 
sage on  the  overland  to  San  Francisco, 
the  fare  being  $125.  They  traveled  in 
a  coach  to  Camp  Floyd,  and  in  a  spring 
wagon  (jerkey)  to  Simpson  Springs. 
From  there  to  thie  point  where  the  trail 
intersected  the  emigrant  road  on  Hum- 
boldt river,  there  was  nothing  but  a 
trail,  and  consequently  they  were 
forced  to  proceed  on  horseback.  They 
traveled  day  and  night,  making  ove. 
100  miles  each  twenty-four  hours,  un- 
til they  reached  the  Sinks  of  the  Hum- 
boldt river.  From  there  they  went  by 
coach  to  where  the  road  struck  the 
mountain  above  Genoa,  and  thence  went 
on  foot  over  the  snow  for  forty  mile» 
over  the  Sierra  Nevada  mountains, 
making  the  forty  miles  in  two  days. 
Wm.  D.  made  the  whole  trip  from  Salt 
Lake  City  to  Scramento  in  ten  days, 
and  eleven  hours,  being  the  first  and 
only  man  who  ever  kept  up  with  the 
mail,  without  laying  over  on  the  roaa. 
This  feat  was  published  in  Cali- 
fornia as  the  greatest  ride  on  recor''. 
At  San  Francisco  Wm.  D.  took  steam- 
er for  New  York  by  way  of  the  Isth- 
mus of  Panama.  He  was  twenty  days 
making  the  trip,  and  arrived  in  New 
York  in  May.  Thence  he  went  by  way 
of  Philadelphia  to  Lancaster,  Mo., 
where  he  found  his  father,  mother  and 
brothers.  He  remained  in  Missouri 
that  summer  and  winter.  The  next 
spring  he  purchased  a  drove  of  cattle 
and  crossed  the  plains  to  Utah,  arriv- 
ing there  in  the  fall  of  1860.  During 
the  winter  of  1860  he  made  a  trip  to 
Los  Angeles,  bringing  with  him  from 
that  trip  18  colonies  of  bees.  Previous 
to  this  he  was  the  first  person  to  make 
the  importation  of  bees  into  Utah  a 
success.      He    imported    in   all    over   six 


BIOGRAPHICAL    ENCYCLOPEDIA. 


501 


hundred  colonies  of  bees.  After  re- 
turning from  tJiis  trip  to  southern  Cali- 
fornia, Wm.  D.  loaded  his  teams  for 
Austin,  Nevada.  Starting  his  teams 
on  ahead,  he  went  to  Salt  Lake  City 
to  attend  to  some  business.  While 
there  he  learned  that  three  men  had 
been  killed  at  Shell  Creek,  Nevada,  bj. 
two  traveling  companions.  The  next 
morning  he  took  coach  for  the  west  to 
overtake  his  teams,  and  while  travel- 
ing from  Simpson  Springs  to  Indian 
Springs,  he  found  a  horse  that  one  of 
the  murderers  had  '---'^  his  escape  on. 
The  horse  had  given  out.  He  took  the 
animal  to  his  camp,  and  after  water- 
ing and  feeding  it,  and  giving  his  men 
instructions  to  continue  the  journey 
westward,  he  took  the  trail  of  the  mur- 
derer, and  followed  it  all  night.  Reach- 
ing Faust's  station,  in  Rush  valley,  just 
before  daylight,  he  learned  that  the 
man  he  was  following  had  stopped 
there  the  night  before.  He  then  en 
listed  the  services  of  Peter  Neice,  who 
accompanied  him  further  on  the  trail 
of  the  murderer.  They  overtook  him 
about  five  miles  west  of  Camp  Floyd, 
arrested  him,  and  took  him  down 
to  the  settlement.  After  break- 
fast they  took  him  to  a  blacksmith 
shop,  where  they  had  him  heavily  iron- 
ed under  the  directions  of  Robert  T. 
Burton,  sheriff  of  Salt  Lake  county, 
and  by  the  request  of  the  superinten- 
dent of  the  Overland.  Wm.  D.  put  the 
man  on  board  the  coach  and  started 
west  with  him,  intending  to  take  him 
to  Austin,  Nevada,  for  trial.  When 
they  reached  Shell  Creek,  where  the 
murder  had  been  committed,  they 
found  a  posse  of  between  fifty  and  one 
hundred  men  who  held  the  other  mur- 
derer as  a  prisoner.  They  had  every- 
thing ready  for  lynching  the  two, 
which  they  did  in  less  than  one  hour 
after  Wm.  D's.  arrival,  June  15,  1865. 
The  men  who  had  been  killed  were  two 
brothers  by  the  name  of  Wollman,  and 
one  man  named  McCoy.  The  murder- 
er arrested  by  Wm.  D.  was  John  Wabb, 
and  the  other  was  Ransom  G.  Young. 
The  two  men  were  hung  close  to  the 
graves  of  the  men  they  had  killed,  and 
all  five  of  them  were  buried  close  to- 
gether. The  murder  had  been  commit- 
ed  by  Wabb  and  Young  with  a  hatchet 
while  their  victims  were  asleep.  Both 
these  men  were  less  than  twenty  years 
old.  After  this  tragedy,  Wm.  D.  went  on 
to    Austin,    Nevada,      and     from    there 


sent  his  teams  to  Carson  Valley.  Here 
he  left  his  teams  for  the  winter^  and 
took  stage  for  Provo.  Soon  afterwards 
he  left  for  the  east,  traveling  on  the 
Overland  stage.  He  left  Salt  Lake 
City  in  company  with  another  passen- 
ger, the  conductor  and  the  driver.  In 
going  down  a  dugway  near  Bear  river, 
the  stage  was  tipped  over,  and  there 
being  some  bullion  in  the  coach,  one 
of  the  bars  fell  on  the  leg  of  Mr.  Gil- 
dersleeve,  the  other  passenger,  break- 
ing it.  He  was  taken  to  Fort  Bridger 
and  left.  When  they  reached  Pacific 
Springs,  they  were  forced  to  leave  the 
coach  and  take  a  lighter  conveyance 
with  boards  oh  to  carry  the  mail.  In 
passing  from  the  upper  crossing  of  the 
Sweetwater  to  Strawberry  creek,  the> 
got  stalled  in  a  snowdrift,  the  conduc- 
tor and  Wm.  D.  being  compelled  to  get 
off  and  tramp  snow  in  order  to  get  the 
team  out.  At  Strawberry  creek  they 
obtained  a  coach  with  a  bed  on  it  and 
went  on.  That  night  the  driver  ran 
the  vehicle  off  a  bridge  and  tipped  El- 
der Roberts  into  a  slough,  the  weight 
of  the  coach  breaking  through  the  ice. 
They  mounted  the  horses  and  rode  to 
the  station,  leaving  the  coach  in  the 
slough.  After  securing  the  coach  the 
next  morning,  they  continued  the  jour- 
ney to  Atchison,  without  further  trou- 
ble. They  found  the  city  in  a  terrible 
uproar.  The  notorious  bushwhacker, 
Quantrell  had  just  made  a  raid  on  a 
town  nearby  a  short  time  before,  and 
the  people  were  expecting  him  and  his 
command  every  hour.  From  Ate-hison, 
Elder  Roberts  went  to  St.  Joeseph,  Mo., 
by  rail,  but  most  of  the  passengers, 
rather  than  take  the  chances  on  the 
cars,  walked  up  the  Missouri  river  on 
the  ice.  When  he  reached  St.  Joseph 
he  found  it  under  martial  law.  He 
succeeded  in  getting  a  ticket  and  a 
passport,  and  boarded  the  train  for 
Macon  City,  Mo.  On  this  journey  he 
passed  through  both  federal  and  rebel 
lines  at  different  points.  When  he 
reached  Macon  City,  he  learned  that 
Lancaster,  the  place  where  he  wanted 
to  go,  was  60  miles  north,  and  there 
was  no  regular  conveyance.  He  final- 
ly succeeded  in  hiring  a  man  to  take 
him  through  to  Kirksville  during  the 
night  time.  Macon  City  was  in  the 
hands  of  the  federals,  Kirksville  in  the 
hands  of  the  rebels.  They  reached 
Kirksville  just  before  daylight.  At 
first  he  could   get  no   one  to  take  him 


502 


LATTER-DAY    SAINT 


from    there    to    Lancaster,    but    finding 
an   old   acquaintance,    he   was   enabled 
through  his  assistance  to  secure  a  horse 
from  a  livery  stable,  on  which  he  rode 
to  Lancaster,  meeting  with  no  further 
trouble  on   the   way.       Here   he    found 
his    father,    mother    and    three    of    his 
brothers.        His    oldest    brother,      Don, 
was   with   General   Price   in    the   rebel- 
army.       Feb.   6,   1862,   William  D.   mar- 
ried Miss  Maria  Lusk,  and  that  spring. 
in  company  with  his  mother  and  broth- 
ers and   two  of  his  wife's  brothers,   he 
left  Lancaster  for  Utah,  where  they  all 
arrived    in   safety.       During   his   many 
years'  residence  in  Utah,  Elder  Roberts 
has  assisted  in  the  building  up  of  the 
State  and   especially  Provo  city,  where 
he  has  built  two  large  brick  houses,  be- 
sides  erecting     one   brick   house   on   a 
farm.  He  has  set  out  a  number  of  or- 
chards    and     vineyards,    and   in  addi- 
tion to  importing  bees  (above  referred 
to)  he  has  imported  blooded  horses  and 
cattle,  pigs  and  chickens.      He  was  one; 
of  the  company  who  imported  the  first 
steam    power   threshing     machine    and 
the    first    steam    power    brick    machine 
ever    brought    to    Utah.       He    was    the 
first   to   bring  a   reaping   machine   into 
Utah  county     and  assisted  by  his  two 
oldest    sons,    Benjamin      and      Wilford 
Bennett,  was     the  first  to  make  stone- 
ware   in   Utah.       He   was    also    one    of 
the  first  to  assist  in  the  discovery  and 
development    of    mines    in    the    Tintic 
mining   district;    he   has  spent   a  large 
amount   of   money   in    the   timber   and 
lumber  business.       He  was  a  member 
of   the   first   dramatic   association   ever 
organized   in  Provo;    was  a  member  of 
the  first  martial  band;   was  a  member 
of  and  principal  mover  in  the  organiza- 
tion of  the  first  brass  band  ever  organ- 
ized in  Utah  county:  was  a  member  of 
the  city  council  for  five  years,  serving 
three  years  as  councilor  and  two  years 
as   alderman,   and    was   the   first   post- 
master  of   Provo   after   Utah   was   ad- 
mitted into  the  Union  as  a  State.     He  is 
the    father   of  eleven   children,    five   of 
whom    are   now   living:      he     has   nine 
grandchildren.       He   was  baptized   and 
confirmed  a  member  of  the  Church  of 
Jesus    Christ    of   Latter-day    Saints    in 
the   winter  of  1851.       He   was  ordained 
a  Teacher  in  the  spring  of  1857,  and  a 
Seventy,    May   17.    1857.    beint?  assigned 
to  the  34th  quorum,  and  is  at  the  pres- 
ent time  senior  president  of  said  fiuor- 
um.       Elder    Roberts   is    now    filling    a 
mission   to  Great  Britain. 


JOKGENSEN,  Enoch,  a  prominent 
Elder  in  the  Church,  is  the  eldest  son  of 
Johan  G.Jorgensen  and  Sorina  Knudsen 
Staalesen,  and  was  born  Feb.  26,  1867,  at 
Ephraim,  Sanpete  county,  Utah.  His 
parents  were  poor,  but  they  strove  to 
gi\e  their  children  such  school  advan- 
tages as  the  locality  afforded. and  Enoch 
was  not  slow  in  making  the  best  use 
of  his  opportunities.  In  1886  he  began  a 
course  of  study  at  the  B.  Y.  Academy, 
at  Provo,  from  which  institution  he 
graduated  in  1889.  Immediately  he  was 
called  to  the  principalship  of  the  Wa- 
satch Stake  Academy  at  Heber  City, 
where  he  remained  two  years.  Aug.  2, 
1888,  he  married  Anna  M.  Berg,  in  the 
Manti  Temple.  She  is  the  daughter  of 
Ole  H.  Berg,  of  Provo.  Several  bright 
children  have  blessed  their  union,  four 


of  whom.  Berg,  Sterling,  Fern  and  Le- 
land,  are  numbered  among  the  youth 
of  Zion.  [Sterling  nine  years  old,  and 
Fern,  seven  years  old,  have  died  since 
this  sketch  was  prepared.].  June  17, 
3  896,  Enoch  was  ordained  a  Seventy  by 
Jonathan  G.  Kimball,  and  set  apart  as 
a  missionary  to  Chicago  and  Scandi- 
navia. He  labored  in  Chicago  that  sum- 
mer, and  was  sent  on  to  Copenhagen, 
Denmark,  in  the  fall.  The  last  year  of 
his  mission  he  presided  over  the  Copen- 
hrigen  conference,  and  on  being  re- 
leased he  was  delegated  to  conduct  a 
large  company  of  emigrants  to  Utah. 
For  a  number  of  years  Elder  Jorgensen 
has  been  one  of  the  Stake  ofl=icers  of  the 
Y.  M.  M.  I.  association  and  of  the  Sun- 
day schools,  of  Sanpete  Stake,  and  has 
devoted  himself  especially  to  work  with 


BIOGRAPHICAL    ENCYCLOPEDIA. 


503 


choirs.  He  is  recognized  as  one  of  the 
most  successful  teachers  in  central 
Utah,  and  is  at  present  acting  as  prin- 
cipal of  the  public  schools  at  Price, 
Carbon  county. 

HOLBROOK,    Jean    Clara,      one  of 

the  first  Latter-day  Saint  lady 
missionaries  who  labored  in  Great 
Britain,  is  a  daughter  of  Lafay- 
ette Holbrook  and  Emily  A.  Hinck- 
ley and  was  born  Nov.  14,  1878,  in 
Fillmore,  Millard  county,  Utah.  She 
was  baptized  in  1887,  and  in  speaking  of 
this  event,  she  says:  "Though  only  in 
my  ninth  year  I  was  old  enough  to  have 
some  serious  thoughts  on  baptism.  I 
felt  that  in  being  baptized  I  was  not 
only  obeying  one  of  God's  commands, 
but  was  also  promising  him  that  I 
would  try  to  be  a  good  girl."  In  the 
spring  of  1890  she  moved  to  Provo,  with 
her  parents,  where  she  stiil  resides. 
Here  she  took  an  active  part  in  the 
primary  association  work  and  later  in 
the  Y.  M.  M.  I.  A.  labors.  She  was  edu- 
cated in  the  public  schools  of  Fillmore 
and  Provo,  in  the  Millard  Stake  Acade- 
my, and  in  the  Brigham  Young  Acade- 
my, at  Provo.  There  came  a  time  when 
doubt  entered  her  mind,  and  caused 
her  to  feel  unhappy,  but  in  answer  to 
the  humble  and  sincere  prayer  of  her 
heart  she  was  told,  "Do  not  worry 
about  that  which  you  cannot  under- 
stand. Try  to  learn  the  simple  lessons 
of  daily  life,  and  by  degrees  your  mind 
will  expand  so  that  you  can  grasp  the 
higher  gospel  truths."  By  following 
that  advice  she  rapidly  grew  in  faith 
and  knowledge,  and  in  a  short  time 
bore  a  firm  testimony  to  the  truth  of 
the  gospel,  each  day  her  testimony  be- 
comes stronger.  In  January,  1898,  she 
was  called  to  act  as  an  assistant  in  the 
the  primary  association  of  the  First 
Ward,  in  Provo.  In  1897  she  was  called 
to  be  assistant  secretary,  and  later  to 
be  secretary  of  the  Sabbath  school,  fill- 
ing both  positions  with  credit  and 
ability.  She  was  set  apart  May  19,  1899, 
by  Apostle  John  W.  Taylor  for  a  mis- 
sion to  Great  Britain,  leaving  next  day 
for  her  field  of  labor.  On  arriving  in 
England,  she  was  assigned  to  the  Lon- 
don conference,  where  she  labored,  to- 
gether with  Sister  Inez  Knight  and 
later  with  Sister  Alice  Sargent,  assist- 
ing the  Elders  in  their  regular  mis- 
sionary work  by  distributing  tracts 
fron^  house  to  house,  holding  street  and 


indoor  meetings,  visiting  the  people  and 
explaining  the  gospel  to  them.  Sister 
Holbrook's  experience  as  a  missionary 
is  the  same  as  that  of  the  Elders  gen- 
erally. She  was  treated  kindly  by  the 
people  and  at  other  times  with  con- 
tempt. She  labored  principally  in  Ash- 
ford,  Kent  and  London,  but  she  also 
had  the  privilege  of  visiting  many  of 
the  principal  cities  in  Great  Britain  and 
on  the  continent.  While  on  this  mis- 
sion she  also  attended  some  of  the 
meetings  of  the  International  Council 
of  Women  in  London,  in  1899,  and  visit- 
ed, by  invitation,  the  Windsor  Palace 
at  a  tea  given  by  Queen  Victoria.  She 
arrived  home  June  21,  1901,  and  has 
this  to  say:  "I  feel  to  thank  my 
Heavenly  Father,  that  He  deemed  me 
worthy  to  be  a  gospel  messenger.  I 
have  learned  to  love  the  work,  and 
know  that  the  most  perfect  joy  in  life 
comes  from  working  for  the  great  Mas- 
ter." 

BOOTH,      Josephine      D.,       one     of 

the  first  Latter-day  Saint  lady 
missionaries  who  labored  in  Great 
Britain,  is  the  daughter  of  John 
E.  Booth  and  Maria  J.  Har- 
vey, and  was  born  in  Provo,  Utah, 
March  16,  1876.  She  was  baptized  when 
eight  years  old.  Her  mother  died  about 
this  time,  leaving  four  children  of 
which  she  was  the  eldest.  Josephine 
attended  the  Briglfam  Young  Academy 
part  of  each  year  from  the  time  she 
was  eight  until  sixteen;  the  remainder 
of  the  time  she  assisted  her  father  in 
his  office  as  typewriter.  When  she  was 
seventeen  years  old  she  went  away  to 
teach  school  at  Glendale,  a  pretty  little 
town  in  Kane  county.  This  was  prac- 
tically her  first  trip  away  from  home. 
On  her  return  .she  accepted  a  position 
as  reporter  for  one  of  the  Salt  Lake 
papers,  at  the  B.  Y.  A.  summer  school, 
when  Dr.  Hinsdale  was  the  lecturer. 
The  following  winter  she  was  engaged 
in  the  Provo  city  schools  and  taught 
for  two  years.  During  her  vacation  she 
visited  the  Yellowstone  National  Park. 
When  about  22  years  old,  she  visited 
Zina  Y.  Card  at  Cardston,  Canada.  Al- 
though she  had  been  an  active  worker 
in  the  Sunday  school  and  in  the  Y.  L. 
M.  I.  A.,  her  spiritual  nature  was  not 
developed  as  it  should  have  been.  It 
proved  that  her  visit  to  Cardston  was 
exactly  what  Avas  needed.  The  people 
there  were  devoted  to  the  gospel,   and 


504 


LATTER-DAY    SAINT 


lived  their  religion  as  nearly  as  they 
could.  At  one  meeting,  which  particu- 
larly impressed  her,  five  people  spoke  In 
tongues,  and  there  were  at  least  four 
in  the  congregation  who  had  the  inter- 
pretation each  time,  and  who  rose  up 
in  power  and  testified  that  it  came  from 
Almighty  God.  She  now  began  to  seek 
the  Lord  more  earnestly  than  ever  be- 
fore, in  order  to  be  guided  aright  in  all 
the  ways  of  life  .and  with  each  succeed- 
ing day  the  beauties  of  the  true  and 
everlasting  gospel  became  more  appar- 
ent. She  remained  in  Cardston  for 
seven  months,  after  which  she  taught 
school  at  Lake  View.  She  boarded  with 
a  faniily  who  were  not  in  the  Church, 
and  for  the  first  time  in  her  life  she 
felt  the  real  need  of  an  education  in  the 
gospel,  so  as  to  be  able  to  defend  it. 
She  was  convinced  of  its  truth  for  her- 
self, but  found  that  one  must  have 
more  than  a  testimony  of  a  truth,  to 
make  others  see  the  light.  In  the  sum- 
mer of  1898  she,  with  her  father,  visited 
the  Exposition  at  Omaha,  and  also 
went  to  Denver,  where  she  met  the  mis- 
sionaries and  Saints  and  had  the  privil- 
ege of  attending  a  number  of  meetings. 
May  19,  1899,  she  received  a  call  to  go  to 
Great  Britain,  as  a  missionary,  and  on 
May  26th  she  bade  farewell  to  home  and 
loved  ones.  Before  leaving,  she  went 
to  the  Temple  of  God,  and  in  that 
sacred  building  olTered  a  prayer  that 
she,  as  a  daughter  of  Zion,  and  a  repre- 
sentative of  her  people,  might  have 
courage  and  strength  to  do  her  duty. 
On  her  arrival  in  Liverpool,  she  was 
appointed  to  labor  in  Scotland.  She 
arrived  in  Glasgow,  Aug.  1,  1899,  and 
began  her  real  missionary  work.  She 
did  much  the  same  as  the  brethren,  at- 
tending street  meetings,  going  from 
house  to  house  with  tracts,  and  visit- 
ing both  among  strangers  and  Saints. 
"While  in  Glasgow  she  had  the  privi- 
lege of  speaking  three  times  in  one 
of  the  largest  established  churches  of 
that  city.  Whenever  she  accepted  these 
invitations  she  was  introduced  as  a 
"Mormon"  missionary  girl  from  Utah. 
During  the  summer  of  1900  she  and  her 
companion,  Sister  Eliza  Chipman,  la- 
bored in  Edinburgh,  and  also  visited 
most  of  the  branches  throughout  Scot- 
land. In  Febuary,  1901,  she  received  a 
rail  from  Pres.  Platte  D.  Lyman,  to 
travel  among  the  conferences  in  con- 
tinental Europe.  This  was  a  wonderful 
opportunity  and  a  great  blessing  to  her. 


She  met  Saints  in  many  lands,  attended 
conferences  in  Holland,  Germany, 
Switzerland,  Norway  and  Sweden,  and 
visited  Italy,  Belgium  and  Denmark. 
While  in  Stockholm,  Sweden,  she  re- 
ceived word  of  her  release,  and  that  she 
was  to  sail  for  home  June  5,  1901,  on 
the  "New  England."  She  traveled  night 
and  day,  in  order  to  get  to  "bonny" 
Scotland,  where  she  now  bid  her  friends 
good-bye.  She  had  made  many  true 
and  devoted  friends,  and  many  sweet 
memories  are  twined  about  the  two 
years  she  spent  among  the  kind,  hos- 
pitable and  honest  people  of  Europe. 

McNEIL,  John,  a  promient  Elder 
in  American  Fork,  Utah  county,  Utah, 
was  born  March  1,  1827,  near  Edin- 
burgh, Scotland.  He  was  baptized  June 
23,  1847,  in  Scotland;  ordained  a  Teach- 
er Dec.  26,  1847,  by  Elder  Wm.  A.  Mc- 
Tvlaster;  ordained  a  Priest  in  October. 
1848,  by  Wm.  A.  McMaster;  ordained  an 
Elder  July  8.  1849,  by  Wm.  A.  McMas- 
ter; ordained  a  Seventy  in  April,  1853, 
in  Salt  Lake  City,  and  ordained  a  High 


Priest  June  21,  1891,  by  Wm.  H.  Kel- 
sey.  While  in  Scotland  he  labored  as  a 
local  missionary  about  two  years  and 
also  presided  over  a  branch.  He  mar- 
ried Janet  Bowman  Aug.  23,  1850,  and 
emigrated  to  America  in  1851,  crossing 
the  ocean  on  the  ship  "Olympus."  He 
landed  at  New  Orleans,  and  in  going  up 
the  Mississippi  river  his  wife  and  child 
died  of  cholera  near  St.  Louis,  Mo. 
Many  other  Saints  were  also  very  sick 
with    the    same    malady,    and    Brother 


BIOGRAPHICAL.    ENCYCLOPEDIA. 


505 


McNeill  was  kept  busy  administering 
among  the  afflicted.  He  worlced  in  the 
coal  mines  during  the  fall  and  winter 
of  1852  near  St.  Louis,  in  order  to  get 
money  to  pay  his  debts.  He  started 
over  the  plains  April  6,  1852,  in  John  S. 
Higbee's  hundred,  and  acted  as  cap- 
tain of  the  first  ten,  The  company  ar- 
rived in  Salt  Lake  City  Aug.  14,  1852. 
Elder  McNeill  remained  in  Salt  Lake 
City  for  a  short  time,  doing  different 
kinds  of  work;  he  helped  to  dig  the 
foundation  for  the  Temple  and  other 
public  work.  In  September,  1853,  he 
moved  to  American  Fork,  Utah  county, 
where  he  assisted  in  building  tire  lort 
as  a  means  of  protection  against  the 
Indians.  Later,  he  followed  farming. 
He  has  served  civilly  as  mayor,  alder- 
man and  justice  of  the  peace.  Brother 
McNeill  has  had  many  and  varied  ex- 
periences since  he  joined  the  Church, 
but  never  for  one  moment  has  he  ever 
doubted  the  divinity  of  "Mormonsim.' 

CHIPMAN,  Washburn,  a  promi- 
nent Elder  in  American  Fork  Ward, 
Utah  county,  Utah,  is  the  son  of  Steph- 
en and  Amanda  Chipman,  and  was 
born  at  Landstown,  Leeds  county,  Can- 
ada, April  16,  1829.  His  parents  were 
baptized  at  Landstown  in  1838,  and  in 
January  of  that  year  they  left  Canada 
to  join  the  main  body  of  Saints.  The 
winter  and  spring,  until  April,  1838, 
were  spent  in  the  State  of  New  York, 
thence  they  journeyed  to  DeWitt,  Car- 
roll county,  Missouri,  thence  to  Far 
"West,  where  they  underwent  many  per- 
secutions, and  remained  there  until  the 
surrender  of  the  Saints  to  the  mob  in 
the  fall  of  1838.  Then  they  returned 
to  DeWitt,  and  remained  there  three 
years,  after  which  they  moved  to  Mont- 
rose, Lee  county,  Iowa,  busying  them- 
selves for  five  years  in  farming,  erect- 
ing homes  for  the  Saints,  etc.  In  the 
early  part  of  August,  1846,  they  started 
westward,  staying  at  Winter  Quarters 
to  recruit.  In  1847  they  were  organized 
inio  a  company  on  the  Elkhorn,  and 
traveled  west  in  Abraham  O.  Smoot's 
hundred,  Major  Russell's  fifty  and  Dan- 
iel Russel's  ten.  They  arrived  in  Utah 
in  September,  1847.  Their  first  house 
was  built  on  what  is  now  known  as 
Pioneer  square.  In  the  spring  of  1848 
they  moved  to  Mill  Creek,  and  began 
farming.  In  July,  18.50,  Washburn,  in 
company  with  his  father,  Stephen 
Chipman,     Arza     and      Barnabas       L. 


Adams,  "Grandfather"  Eldredge,  Ira 
and  John  S.  Eldredge,  surveyed  lands 
on  the  American  Fork,  on  which  they 
afterwards  settled.  In  the  winter  of 
1850-51  Washburn  was  called  as  a  pio- 
neer to  settle  Iron  county,  and  after 
laboring  there  one  year  he  returned  to 
American  Fork,  where  he  has  since 
lived,  following  farming  and  sheep  and 
cattle  raising  for  a  livelihood.  He  was 
baptized  in  1855  and  has  always  re- 
mained an  active  member  of  the 
Church,  serving  in  the  capacity  of  a 
Ward  Teacher,  an  Elder,  and  as  a  Sev- 
enty (in  the  44th  quorum).  He  is  now 
a  president  in  the  67th  quorum  and  a 
member  of  the  Ecclesiastical  Board  of 
American  Fork  Ward.  Elder  Chipman 
filled  a  five-months'  mission  to  Mis- 
souri and  Iowa  in  1872.  For  one  term 
he  served  as  a  city  councilman  in 
American  Fork.  He  acted  in  the  mili- 
tary organization  in  crossing  the  plains, 
and  after  arriving  in  Utah  he  attained 
to  the  office  of  colonel  in  the  Nauvoo 
Legion.  Elder  Chipman  has  three  wives 
and  is  the  father  of  twenty-six  chil- 
dren. 

POX,  Isaac  William,  senior  presi- 
dent of  the  68th  quorum  of  Seventy,  is 
a  son  of  Robert  Fox  and  Martha  Wil- 
son, and  was  born  June  28,  1818,  at 
Hathersage,  Derbyshire,  England.  Bra 
Fox  writes:  "I  married  Margaret  Ann 
Marshall  Slinn,  at  Sheflfield  Old  Church, 
Yorkshire,  England,  June  29,  1839.  I 
was  baptized  Oct.  24,  1848,  by  Crandell 
Dunn,  and  confirmed  at  the  same  time; 
was  ordained  a  Priest  April  8,  1849,  by 
Elder  James  Marsden,  and  ordained  an 
Elder  May  1,  1853,  by  Elder  Thomas  F. 
Broderick.  I  was  called  to  preside  OA'er 
the  Leeds  branch  May  15,  1853;  appoint- 
ed president  of  the  Bradford  conference 
in  December,  1856,  and  called  to  preside 
over  the  Glasgow  conference  in  Janu- 
ary, 1857.  I  was  released  to  emigrate 
to  America  in  May,  1860,  and  arrived  In 
Utah  Oct.  3,  1860.  I  married  Eliza  Brain 
Jan.  5,  1867,  and  was  ordained  a  Seven- 
ty in  the  68th  quorum  Dec.  2,  1862,  by 
John  Brown.  I  married  Catherine  S. 
Simmons  May  31,  1869;  was  set  apart 
as  one  of  the  seven  presidents  of  the 
68th  quorum  of  Seventy  Jan.  17,  1872, 
and  was  appointed  senior  president  of 
the  68th  quorum  Jan.  12,  1880.  I  was 
called  to  preside  over  the  acting  Priest- 
hood in  the  Lehi  district  March  13,  1881, 
by  Bishop  David  Evans,  and  appointed 
a  home  missionary  in  Utah  Stake,  Oct. 


506 


LATTER-DAY    SAINT 


6.  1S86,  by  Pies.  Abraham  O.  Smoot.  " 
Elder  Fox  served  35  days  in  the  Utah 
penitentiary  and  paid  a  fine  of  $53  for 
unlawful  cohabitation  with  his  wives. 
He  is  the  father  of  17  children,  and 
has  at  the  present  writing  77  grand- 
children and   26  great   grandchildren. 

TRANE,  Thomas  Frederik,  a 
prominent  Elder  in  Lehi,  Utah  countj', 
is  a  son  of  Andreas  Peter  Trane  and 
Margrethe  Nielsen,  and  was  born  in 
Lemvig,  Jutland,  Denmark,  Feb.  4,  1846. 
\Vhen  eight  years  old  he  moved  with 
his  parents  to  Copenhagen,  where  ho 
was  baptized  March  17,  1858,  by  Elder 
Lars  Matthiasen,  and  confirmed  the  fol- 


lowing day  by  Niels  Wilhelmsen.  Emi- 
grating with  his  parents  to  America, 
he  sailed  from  Copenhagen  May  2,  1860; 
crossed  the  Atlantic  ocean  in  the  sail- 
ing vessel  "William  Tapscott;"  drove 
an  ox-team  across  the  plains  and  ar- 
rived in  Salt  Lake  City  Oct.  5,  1860, 
without  a  relative  in  America,  and  set- 
tled in  Lehi,  Utah  county.  In  1866  he 
was  called  to  drive  an  ox-team  to  thi^; 
Missouri  river  and  assist  in  bringing 
emigrants  to  Zion.  In  the  summer  of 
1867  he  was  sent  to  Sanpete  county,  and 
served  under  General  Pace  in  the 
Blackhawk  war.  In  the  winter  of  186S 
he  drove  a  ten-horse  team  to  the  Paci- 
fic coast  via  St.  George  and  San  Ber- 
nardino to  San  Pedro,  Cal.  Jan.  28, 
1869,  he  married  Eliza  M.  Howes.  Since 
then  he  has  worked  at  farming,  mining, 
and  merchandising.  He  has  served  in 
I.,€-hi   as  a   school   trustee,   city   council- 


man and  city  treasurer.  He  was  one 
of  the  first  officers  in  the  Y.  M.  M.  I.  A., 
when  it  was  first  organized  in  Lehi,  in 
the  fall  of  1875,  and  was  appointed  pres- 
ident of  the  Y.  M.  M.  I.  A.  after  return- 
ing from  his  mission  in  1897.  He  was 
ordained  an  Elder  in  October,  1866,  and 
a  Seventy  April  7,  1896.  In  the  spring 
of  1896  he  was  called  on  a  mission  to 
California,  where  he  labored  in  San 
Francisco,  Sacramento,  and  San  Diego. 
Elder  Trane  is  the  father  of  eight  chil- 
dren, five  of  whom  are  now  living. 

ANDERSEN,  Mons,  a  pr6minent  El- 
der of  the  Lehi  Ward,  Utah  county, 
Utah,  was  born  Feb.  8,  1829,  at  Rings- 
ager,  Hedemarken,  Norway,  and  emi- 
grated to  America  in  1848,  locating  in 
Wisconsin.  In  1852  he  started  for  Cali- 
fornia, and  on  the  journey  in  passing 
through  Salt  Lake  City  he  was  con- 
verted to  "Mormonism"  through  hear- 
ing Orson  Pratt  preach,  and  was  bap- 


tized by  Robert  T.  Burton  July  9,  1852. 
Ke  remained  in  Utah  and  married 
Christine  Bent.sen,  July  3,  1854.  In  1870- 
72  he  filled  a  mission  to  Norway,  labor- 
ii;g  as  traveling  Elder  and  also  as  presi- 
dent of  the  Christiania  conference.  He 
filled  a  mission  to  the  United  States 
in  1882-83,  laboring  principally  in  Min- 
r.esota  and  Wisconsin.  For  many  years 
he  has  resided  in  Lehi,  Utah  county. 
He  is  the  father  of  seven  sons  and  two 
daugthers,  and  his  grandchildren  num- 
bered 31  in  1890. 


BIOGRAPHICAL.    ENCYCLOPEDIA. 


507 


AXDEIISON,      Christine      Bentsen. 

one  of  the  first  native  women  of  the  is- 
land of  Bornholm,  Denmark,  who  em- 
braced the  gospel  as  preached  by  Lat- 
ter-day Saint  Elders,  is  a  daughter  of 
Jeppe  Bentsen  and  Maren  Christine 
Kofod.  After  learning  the  dressmak- 
ers' and  tailors'  trade  in  her  native 
town,  she  went  to  Copenhagen,  where 
she  joined  the  Baptist  church.  When 
Apostle  Erastus  Snow  and  fellow-labor- 
ers came  to  Denmark  in  1850,  she  was 
among  those  who  heard  their  testimo- 
nies and  believed  that  they  were  men 
sent  of  God.  She  received  a  testimony, 
ond  was  baptized  Aug.  24,  1850,  by  Elder 
George  P.  Dykes,  being  the  second  per- 
son from  Bornholm  to  accept  the  gos- 
pel.    In   the   summer  of  1851,    she   was 


called  by  Apostle  Erastus  Snow  to  ac- 
company two  of  the  Elders  to  Born- 
holm, and  help  them  in  their  work,  by 
finding  a  home  for  them  and  assisting 
them  otherwise.  She  performed  that 
mission  most  faithfully.  Not  only  did 
Fhe  secure  a  home  for  the  missionaries 
in  her  father's  house,  but  she  prepared 
the  way  for  them,  in  many  instances, 
to  preach  the  gospel.  In  a  short  time 
all  the  members  of  her  father's  family 
except  one  were  converted  to  "Mor- 
monism"  and  emigrated  to  America, 
leaving  Denmark  Dec.  20,  1852.  They 
all  arrived  in  Utah  in  the  fall  of  1853, 
except  Jeppe  Bentsen,  the  head  of  the 
family,  who  was  bitten  by  a  dog  in 
Hamburg  and  returned  to  Bornholm. 
He   emgirated,    however,    the   following 


year.  Sister  Christine  was  married  to 
Mons  Andersen.  July  3,  1854,  and  lived 
in  Salt  Lake  City  till  April.  1858,  when 
they  moved  to  Lehi,  Utah  county, 
where  they  still  reside.  Sister  Ander- 
sen has  been  a  teacher  in  the  Relief 
Society  in  Lehi  for  twenty  years.  She 
is  the  mother  of  six  children,  five  of 
whom  are  living  at  the  present  time. 

BUSHMAX,  Martin  B.,  a  promi- 
nent Elder  in  Lehi,  Utah  county,  is  the 
seventh  child  of  Martin  and  Elizabeth 
Bushman,  and  was  born  Feb.  5,  1841,  in 
Bart  township,  Lancaster  county,  Penn- 
sylvania. Hts  parents  were  members 
ot  the  Church  when  he  was  born.  When 
he  was  one  year  old,  his  parents  moved 
to  Nauvoo,  111.,  where  he  became  ac- 
quainted with  Joseph  and  Hyrum 
Smith  and  had  the  privilege  of  hearing 
these  men  of  God  preach,  and  he  often 
sat  upon  their  knees;  and  although  he 
v.  as  but  three  years  old,  when  he  saw 
them  last,  so  impressive  was  their  per- 
sonality upon  his  mind  that  he  dis- 
tinctly remembers  them  to-day,  after 
the  elapse  of  nearly  sixty  years.  He 
went  into  the  Nauvoo  Temple  in  1846 
with  his  mother,  and  remembers  vividly 
what  he  saw.  During  the  great  exodus 
from  Nauvoo  in  1846,  two  of  his  sisters 
died.  He  was  baptized  May  5.  1849,  at 
Council  Bluffs,  low-a.  In  1850  he  re- 
ceived a  patriarchal  blessing,  in  which 
he  was  promised  many  glorious  things, 
find  he  bears  testimony  that  they  have 
all  been  fulfilled  to  the  very  letter.  He 
came  to  Utah  in  1851,  and  in  1861  he 
was  called  on  a  short  mission  to  go  as 
a  teamster  to  the  Missouri  river  after 
poor  immigrants.  At  the  age  of  22 
years  he  married  Lucinda  L.  Goodwin, 
and  later  (March  21,  1867).  he  married 
Martha  Worlton,  as  a  plural  wife.  He 
suffered  imprisonment  for  the  practice 
ol  this  principle  in  1889,  but  he  says 
he  knows  it  is  a  divine  principle.  He  is 
the  father  of  20  children,  all  of  whom 
he  is  proud  of.  March  21,  1863,  he  was 
crdained  an  Elder.  He  was  ordained  a 
Seventy  Jan.  2,  1868,  and  on  Nov.  10. 
1S^89,  he  was  set  apart  as  a  president  in 
the  68th  quorum  of  Seventy.  For  24 
>ears  he  served  as  a  Sabbath  school 
teacher  in  the  Lehi  Ward,  and  has  also 
been  otherwise  active  in  Ward  affairs. 
He  has  done  much  work  for  his  de- 
parted relatives  in  the  Temple,  and  his 
greatest  desire  is  to  see  the  Kingdom  of 


508 


LATTER-DAT  SAINT 


God  spread  upon  the  earth.  In  civil 
life  he  has  held  several  positions  in  the 
city  government. 

ALLEN,  James,  a  prominent  Elder 
in  the  Lehi  AVard,  Utah  county,  Utah, 
is  the  son  of  Thomas  Allen,  and  Mar- 
garet Williams,  and  was  born  Feb.  18 
1.840,  in  Liverpool,  England.  He  was 
baptized  in  1S48  by  Elder  Ross  and  or- 
dained a  Deacon  and  a  Teacher  while 
yet  a  young  man.  He  became  an  El- 
der about  1S58,  and  was  sent  out  as  a 
local  missionary  and  book  agent  in 
Birkenhead,  under  President  George  Q. 
Cannon.  After  laboring  thus  for  a 
number  of  years,  he  emigrated  to  Utah 
in  18C2  and  remained  in  Salt  Lake  City 
till  1870,  when  he  removed  to  Lehi, 
Utah  county,  where  he  resides  at  pre- 
sent. He  took  an  active  part  in  the 
Blackhawk  war  in  1866.  He  labored  as 
a  guard  at  the  president's  office  in  1863. 
He  has  been  a  Ward  teacher  for  about 
twenty  years. 

KNUDSEN,  Christian,  a  promi- 
nent Elder  in  the  Lehi  Ward,  Utah 
county,  Utah,  is  the  son  of  Guldbrand 
Knudsen  and  Marie  Andersen,  and  was 
born   Sept.   24,   1856,    in   Ringsager  par- 


ish. Hedemarken,  Norway.  He  emi- 
grated with  his  parents  to  Utah  in 
1872  and  located  in  Lehi.  Utah  county. 
He  was  baptized  Aug.  30,  1873,  and  or- 
dained an  Elder  in  the  summer  of  1879. 
He  married  Sarah  L.  Ottesen  Nov.  14, 
1879  and  was  ordained  a  Seventy  Nov. 


13,  1889.  During  1896,  1897,  1898  he  filled 
a  mission  to  Norway,  laboring  princi- 
pally in  Tromso,  which  is  the  north- 
ernmost branch  of  the  Church  in  the 
world.  Later  he  presided  over  the 
Stavanger  and  the  Ejdsvold 

branches.  At  Lehi,  where  he 
still  resides,  he  has  officiated  as  a 
Ward  Teacher  for  many  years,  and 
he  has  otherwise  been  active  in  the 
community. 

KNUDSEX,  Mathias,  a  prominent 
Elder  in  the  Lehi  Ward,  Utah  county, 
Utah,  is  the  son  of  Guldbrand  Knud- 
sen and  Marie  Andersen,  and  was  born 
at  Ringsager,  Hedemarken,  Norway, 
July  24,  1859.  He  emigrated  to  Utah 
in  1872  and  located  in  Lehi,  Utah  coun- 


ty, where  he  has  resided  ever  since.  He 
was  baptized  by  Mons  Andersen  July 
23,  1876,  and  ordained  a  Seventy  and  set 
apart  for  a  mission  to  Scandinavia  by 
Edward  Stevenson  June  28,  1895.  Dur- 
ing that  and  the  two  following  years  he 
performed  missionary  work  in  Norway, 
laboring  principally  in  the  Hedemarken 
Trondhjem  and  Tromso  branches.  El- 
der Knudsen  is  the  father  of  eleven 
children.  He  takes  an  active  part  in 
Church  work  in  the  Lehi  Ward. 

WALKER,  Henson,  Bishop  of 
Pleasant  Grove  Ward,  Utah  County, 
from  1853  to  1863,  is  the  son  of  Henson 
Walker  and  Matilda  Arnell,  and  was 
born  March  13,  1820,  in  Manchester, 
Ontario  county,   N.   Y.       When  he  was 


BIOGRAPHICAL    ENCYCLOPEDIA. 


509 


fifteen  years  old,  the  family  moved  to 
Michigan,  and  Henson  spent  much  of 
his  time  wandering  through  the  dense 
forests  in  search  of  game,  with  which 
he  supplied  his  father's  household. 
During  the  succeeding  years  he  heard 
the  gospel  in  its  purity  and  simplicity, 
and  was  much  impressed  by  it,  and  in 
April,  1840,  he  was  baptized  by  Eldei 
Mephibosheth  Serrine.  In  his  back- 
wood's  home  his  advantages  for  ob- 
taining an  education  did  not  increase. 
He  worked  faithfully  on  the  farm  until 
the  summer  of  1841,  when  he  married 
Martha  Bouk.  Leaving  his  home  at 
Howell,  he  moved  to  Salem.  At  the 
close  of  the  year  1841  he  was  ordained 
a  Teacher  and  here  began  the  eccle- 
siastical duties  of  a  life  of  devotion  to 


the  work  of  God.  In  the  year  that  fol- 
lowed, he,  with  his  father-in-law,  trav- 
eled from  New  York  to  Michigan  and 
thence  to  Illinois  by  team.  While  here 
they  visited  the  city  of  Nauvoo, 
where  they  first  met  the  Prophet 
Joseph.  About  this  time  he  was  or- 
dained to  the  office  of  a  Seventy  by 
Joseph  Young.  In  the  early  spring  of 
1843  the  happiness  of  their  sunny 
Salem  home  was  increased  by  the  ar- 
rival of  their  first  child,  a  boy.  But 
when  the  warm  summer  days  came, 
his  wife  sickened  and  died,  leaving  her 
bereaved  husband  to  care  for  the  babe, 
then  only  five  months  old.  Henson 
then  moved  to  the  home  of  his  father- 
in-law,  where  the  child  was  tenderly 
cared  for.  While  living  with  the  Bouk 


family,  he  became  well  acquainted  with 
the  Prophet  Joseph  Smith,  and  stood 
guard  for  him  at  different  times,  when 
his  life  was  in  danger.  The  trials  and 
sufferings  of  the  Prophet  were  then 
at  their  height.  When  the  Prophet 
was  kidnapped,  near  Dixon.  111.,  by 
Joseph  H.  Reynolds  and  Harmon  T. 
Wilson,  in  June,  1843,  Henson  was 
called  with  others  to  rescue  him.  They 
rode  night  and  day  until  they  over- 
took him.  On  their  return  they  rode 
along  by  the  carriage  tnat  contained 
the  Prophet  and  the  officers.  One  of 
the  officers  put  his  head  out  of  the 
carriage  and,  seeing  more  than  a  hun- 
dred people  riding  along,  he  said:  "We 
would  never  have  come  after  the- 
Prophet,  if  we  had  known  he  had  so 
many  friends."  Henson  was  a  mem- 
ber of  the  Nauvoo  Legion  and  enjoyed 
their  drill  very  much,  but  more  than 
all  else  in  the  world  he  enjoyed  stand- 
ing in  the  square  listening  to  the  in- 
spired commanding  tones  of  that  hum- 
ble young  Prophet,  Joseph  Smith.  He 
was  always  happy  when  in  company 
with  him  and  was  more  than  willing  to 
render  him  all  possible  aid.  He  was 
with  the  Legion  at  the  old  frame 
house,  near  the  Mansion,  June  18,  1S44. 
when  the  Prophet  unsheathed  his 
sword  for  the  last  time.  When  Joseph 
left  Nauvoo  for  Carthage,  Henson  was 
very  anxious  to  see  an  armed  escort 
go  with  him,  because  he  was  pledged 
to  support  him.  In  a  dream  he  was 
told  that  Joseph  and  Hyrum  were  all 
right,  that  they  were  beyond  the  reach 
of  the  mob.  And  when  the  next  news 
came,  they  were  truly  beyond  the  reach 
of  all  mobs.  Henson  was  present  at 
the  time  that  Sidney  Ridgon  set  forth 
his  claims  to  the  presidency.  He  also 
witnessed  the  mantle  of  Joseph  rest- 
ing upon  Brigham  Young  and  was  fully 
convinced  that  he  was  the  future 
Prophet  of  God.  He  now  commenced 
work  on  the  Nauvoo  Temple,  remain- 
ing at  work  until  it  was  completed  for 
endowments  and  baptisms  for  the  dead. 
April  10,1846, he  was  married  to  Elizabeth 
Foutz,  by  Apostle  Orson  Hyde,  in  the 
Nauvoo  Temple.  A  few  days  after  the 
celebration  of  this  happy  event,  his 
little  child,  now  three  years  old,  was 
accidentally  drowned.  In  May,  1846,  he 
started  west  with  Elder  Cutler's  com- 
pany and  crossed  the  Missouri  river. 
He  returned  to  assist  suppressing  the 
mob   that   threatened   to  massacre   the 


510 


LATTER-DAY    SAINT 


rest  of  the  inhabitants  who  were  left 
in  the  city.  The  company  then  moved 
on  to  Winter  Quaters.  When  the  call 
came  for  the  Mormon  Battalion, 
though  filled  with  the  bitter  experi- 
ences through  which  he  had  so  lately 
passed,  he  volunteered  to  defend  the 
flag.  He  was,  however,  released  from 
that  service,  but  in  the  spring  of  1847, 
though  just  recovering  from  a  severe 
attack  of  fever,  he  was  called  by  the 
presidency  to  be  one  of  that  immor- 
tal 143  pioneers  who  took  up  their 
weary  march  across  the  trackless 
desert  to  seek  a  new  home  for  the 
Saints  in  the  west.  Putting  his  trust 
in  God  he  left  his  bride  of  one  year 
almost  at  death's  door,  knowing  not 
when  he  would  see  her  again.  The 
water  was  high  and  some  difficulty  was 
experienced  in  crossing  the  rivers.  But 
at  last,  after  many  hardships,  the 
tedious  journey  came  to  an  end  on 
July  23,  1847,  when  he,  in  company 
with  others  of  the  pioneer  party, 
wended  their  way  into  Great  Salt  Lake 
valley.  The  following  day  Pres. 
Brigham  Young  and  Wilford  Woodruff, 
with  the  remainder  of  the  company, 
arrived.  Exploring  parties  were  now 
sent  out  west,  north,  and  south.  They 
soon  returned,  convinced  that  the 
present  site  of  Salt  Lake  City  was 
the  place  for  the  Saints  to  locate.  He 
now  returned  to  Sweetwater  on  the 
trail  to  meet  his  folks.  When  he  ar- 
rived at  the  camn  he  found  his  wife's 
health  much  improved  and  they  re- 
sumed their  journey.  When  they  ar- 
rived in  the  valley.  Father  Bouk  di- 
vided the  Hour  they  had  brought,  and 
the  share  that  fell  to  Henson  and  his 
wife  to  last  them  until  harvest  came 
again  equalled  nearly  a  hundred 
pounds.  They  began  at  once  to  ra- 
tion themselves.  In  a  short  time  Hen- 
son  was  called  to  go  to  California.  He 
began  at  once  to  prepare  for  the  jour- 
ney by  selling  the  few  things  he  had 
gathered  around  him.  When  he  was 
about  ready  to  go  the  presidency  re- 
leased him  from  this  labor,  giving  him 
other  work.  When  planting  time  came, 
he  took  seed  from  his  scanty  allow- 
ance, and,  with  a  number  of  others, 
went  up  to  where  Fort  Douglas  now 
stands  and  began  farming.  They 
planted  various  kinds  of  seed,  and 
when  everything  was  looking  well,  the 
crickets  came.  Many  people  thought 
they     would    be    driven    to     California 


through  starvation.  Men,  women  and 
children,  old  and  young,  all  turned  out 
to  fight  the  crickets;  they  dug  deep 
ditches  around  their  farms  and  tried 
to  drive  them  in  and  drown  them,  but 
all  efforts  were  vain.  One  Sunday 
Jedediaii  M.  Grant  rose  to  speak  to  the 
people.  In  his  remarks  he  said:  "I 
find  that  many  of  the  people  are  be- 
coming discouraged;  but  this  present 
calamity  will  pass  off;  we  will 
have  a  bounteous  harvest  and  a 
big  feast."  On  returning  from  the 
services.  Brother  Walker  said  to  his 
family,  "We  will  not  go  out  to  fighi 
the  crickets  tomorrow.  I  think  they 
will  all  be  dead."  But  on  the  even- 
ing of  the  following  day  they  went 
to  see  if  anything  had  really  hap- 
pened, but  alas!  the  crickets  seemed 
even  thicker  than  before.  And  the  old 
adage,  "It  is  always  darkest  just  before 
dawn,"  was  again  realized,  for  as  they 
stood  watching  their  crops  being  de- 
voured, up  came  the  gulls— those 
blessed  gulls,  thousands  of  them.  They 
lighted  and  began  at  once  the  work 
before  them.  They  ate,  drank, 
vomitted,  and  began  again.  The  dead 
crickets  laid  in  piles  along  the  bank  of 
the  ditch.  Brother  Walker  says:  "I 
wept  for  joy,  as  I  saw  how  mlracyjous- 
ly  we  had  been  saved  from  starvation; 
and  as  I  saw  how  truly  the  words  of 
a  servant  of  God  were  being  fulfilled." 
In  1849  the  Indian  war  broke  out  in 
Provo  and  Brother  Walker  prepared 
to  take  his  place  on  the  defense.  One 
day,  while  they  were  having  a  little 
skirmish,  he  got  into  close  combat 
with  an  Indian.  The  two  stood  behind 
the  trees,  only  moving  aside  long 
enough  to  fire  at  each  other.  They 
continued  the  shooting  until  each  had 
fired  sixteen  shots  at  the  other.  As  the 
sixteenth  shot  was  fired,  the  Indian 
raised  a  little  arid  then  disappeared.  In 
the  spring  of  1850,  Bro.  Walker  went  to 
the  Platte  river,  in  company  with  some 
others,  to  start  a  ferry.  He  worked 
hard,  and  at  the  close  of  the  year  was 
able  to  pay  $75  in  tithing.  After  re- 
turning from  this  expedition  he  started 
out  to  get  a  home.  He  settled  at  what 
i.s  now  known  as  Pleasant  Grove,  where 
he  has  resided  ever  since.  He  took  up 
a  farm  and  the  following  spring  moved 
his  family  to  the  new  settlement.  That 
summer  he  was  called  to  go  with  Fres. 
Brigham  Young  to  St.  George,  which 
he     did     cheerfully.      In    July,    1852,    ab 


BIOGRAPHICAL    ENCYCLOPEDIA. 


511 


Pres.  Young  and  others  of  the  au- 
thorities were  traveling  through  Utah 
county,  they  dined  and  rested  at  his 
home.  They  resumed  their  journey, 
but  in  three  days  returned  and  ap- 
pointed him  presiding  Elder  of  the 
Pleasant  Grove  branch.  At  tKe  close 
of  1853  he  was  ordained  a  High  Priest 
by  Pres.  Young  and  called  to  serve 
as  Bishop  of  Pleasant  Grove.  In  1855, 
after  the  incorporation  of  the  city  of 
Pleasant  Grove,  he  was  elected  mayor. 
These  positions  he  held  faithfully  un- 
til 1863,  when  he  was  called  to  carry 
the  gospel  to  the  nations  of  the  earth. 
He  labored  in  Great  Britain,  was  presi- 
dent of  the  Scotch  mission  and  re- 
turned in  1865.  About  this  time  he 
served  for  several  years  as  selectman. 
He  was  major  of  the  Nauvoo  Legion 
and  a  member  as  long  as  it  lasted.  He 
has  filled  two  missions  since  that  time 
to  the  Northern  States.  During  the 
raid  he  visited  his  relatives  and  friends 
in  Michigan,  the  home  of  his  boyhood. 
In  August,  1889,  he  was  ordained  pres- 
ident of  the  High  Priests'  quorum  by 
Pres.  Abraham  O.  Smoot,  which  posi- 
tion he  holds  at  the  present  time  in 
the  Alpine  Stake  of  Zion.  He  is  the 
father  of  twenty  children,  eleven  of 
whom  are  living.  He  has  95  grand- 
children and  45  great  grandchildren.  El- 
der Walker's  life  has  been  one  of  self- 
sacrifice  and  devotion  to  the  cause  for 
which  he  has  spent  his  life's  strength. 

BROWX,  John,  Bishop  of  Pleasant 
Grove  Ward,  Utah  county,  Utah,  from 
1863  to  1891,  was  the  son  of  John  Brown 
and  Martha  Chipman,  and  was  born 
Oct.  23,  1820,  in  Sumner  county,  Tenn. 
He  was  baptized  into  the  Church  of 
Jesus  Christ  of  Latter-day  Saints  by 
Elder  George  P.  Dykes,  in  July,  1841 
in  Perry  county.  111.,  and  gathered  to 
Nauvoo  the  following  October.  Feb. 
9,  1842,  he  was  ordained  an  Elder  by 
Hyrum  Smith  and  soon  afterwards 
called  to  go  on  a  mission  to  the  South- 
ern States.  He  left  Nauvoo  May  29, 
1843,  labored  in  Tennessee,  Alabama 
and  Mississippi,  baptized  a  large  num- 
ber of  persons  and  oreanized  several 
branches  of  the  Church.  May  21,  1844, 
he  married  Miss  Elizabeth  Crosby,  in 
Monroe  county  Miss.,  and  on  the  12th 
of  November,  1844,  was  ordained  a 
member  of  the  eighth  quorum  of  Sev- 
enty. He  returned  to  Nauvoo  March 
25.  1S45,  and  labored  on  the  Temple,  in 


which  he  received  his  endowments. 
Leaving  Nauvoo  late  in  Januarv,  1846, 
he  returned  to  Mississippi  and  assisted 
in  fitting  out  a  company  of  fourteen 
families,  w'ith  whom  he  started  for  the 
Rocky  mountains,  on  the  8th  of  April 
following  with  teams.  They  traveled 
through  Missouri  to  Independence, 
Jackson  county,  where  three  other  fam- 
ilies from  southern  Illinois  joined  the 
company,  which,  taking  the  Oregon 
trail  to  the  Platte  river,  and  up  that 
stream,  arrived  at  Fort  Laramie  in 
July,  where  they  expected  to  have  met 
with  the  Saints  from  Nauvoo,  but 
finding  nothing  but  a  few  mountaineers 
and  straggling  natives,  the  company 
turned  south  and  located  at  Pueblo,  on 
the  Arkansas  river,  at  the  foot  of  the 
Rocky  mountains,  to  winter.  Elder 
Brown,  with  a  company  of  seven  men, 
returned  from  the  Santa  Fe  route  to 
Independence,  Mo.,  passing  through  the 
batlefield  of.  the  Commanches  and 
Pawnees,  and  continued  back  to  Missis- 
sippi, where  he  arrived  in  October.  Jan. 
10,  1847,  he  started  for  Council  Bluffs 
with  teams,  one  thousand  miles  distant, 
and  arrived  there  just  in  time  to  join 
the  Pioneers.  He  was  chosen  captain 
of  the  13th  ten  and  was  one  of  the 
chief  hunters  of  the  company  on  the 
journey.  Being  with  Orson  Pratt  in 
the  advance  company,  he  was  one  of 
the  first  to  look  into  Great  Salt  Lake 
valley  from  the  Big.  mountain.  Having 
returned  with  the  pioneers  to  Winter 
Quarters  in  the  fall,  he  again  paid  a 
visit  to  Mississippi,  but  came  to  Utah 
the  next  year  (1848)  with  his  family  and 
settled  on  Cottonwood.  In.  the  fall  of 
1849  he  went  on  an  exploring  expedition 
to  the  south  with  about  fifty  other 
men,  under  the  presidency  of  Apostle 
Parley  P.  Pratt.  This  famous  com- 
pany explored  the  Sevier  river  and  the 
country  as  far  south  as  the  Rio  Virgen 
and  Santa  Clara  rivers.  From  this 
adventurous  trip  Elder  Brown  returned 
in  February,  1850.  When  the  Utah 
militia  was  organized,  he  was  chosen 
captain  of  the  first  company  of  mount- 
ed life  guards,  and  was  in  the  skirmish 
with  the  Indians  on  Battle  creek,  Utah 
county,  in  1848.  In  organizing  the 
Nauvoo  Legion  he  was  placed  on  the 
lieutenant-general's  staff  with  the  rank 
of  colonel.  When  the  organization  of 
the  company  for  the  emigration  of  the 
poor  took  place,  he  was  chosen  one  of 
its  directors  and  served  in  that  capacity 


512 


LATTER-DAY  SAINT 


for  several  years.  In  1851  he  went  as 
traveling  agent  for  the  company  to 
Pottawattamie,  Iowa,  and  conducted  a 
large  company  of  emigrants  across  the 
plains,  arriving  in  Great  Salt  Lake 
City,  September  2S,  1851.  He  was  one  of 
the  representatives  of  Great  Salt  Lake 
county  in  the  lower  house  of  the  first 
legislature  of  Utah  Territory,  and  sub- 
sequently represented  Utah  county  in 
the  same  capacity  three  terms.  In  1852 
he  was  sent  to  New  Orleans  to  super- 
intend the  emigration  at  that  point 
the  following  spring,  and  remained  in 
that  city  during  the  winter,  preaching 
the  gospel.  During  March,  April  and 
May,  1853,  eight  vessels  arrived  from 
Liverpool  with  about  two  thousand 
five  hundred  emigrants,  bound  for 
Utah.  They  passed  up  the  Mississippi 
river  in  steamboats  to  Keokuk,  Iowa. 
Bro. Brown  conducted  the  rear  company 
across  the  plains,  arriving  in  Salt  Lake 
City  October  17th.  In  1860  he  was  sent 
on  a  two  years'  mission  to  Great  Brit- 
ain, wliere  he  labored  most  of  the  time 
in  the  London  ,  Kent  and  Essex  con- 
ferences, and  returned  home  in  1862.  On 
Feb.  2,  1863,  he  was  ordained  a  Bishop 
by  Pres.  Brigham  Young  and  sent  to 
Pleasant  Grove,  Utah  county,  to  pre- 
side. Previous  to  this  he  had  resided 
a  number  of  years  in  Lehi.  In  1867 
he  was  sent  on  a  two  years'  mission  to 
the  United  States,  during  which  he 
presided  over  the  missionary  work  in 
the  southern,  middle  and  western 
States.  He  also  assisted  in  the  emi- 
gration at  Omaha  in  1868  and  returned 
to  Utah  in  May,  1869.  Among  the  nu- 
merous civil  offices  of  trust  to  which 
he  has  been  elected  at  various  times, 
may  be  mentioned  that  for  twenty 
years  he  acted  as  mayor  of  Pleasant 
Grove  city,  being  re-elected  biennially 
until  disqualified  by  the  Edmunds  law. 
Having  acted  as  Bishop  of  Pleasant 
Grove  Ward  for  twenty-nine  years,  he 
was  honorably  released  from  this  po- 
sition December  6,  1891,  and  ordained 
a  Patriarch.  He  died  at  his  home  in 
Pleasant  Grove  Nov.  4,  1897,  highly 
respected  and  beloved  by  the  Saints. 

THOKNK,  Joseph  Ephraiin,  Bish- 
op of  Pleasant  Grove  Ward,  Utah 
county,  Utah,  since  1891,  was  born  June 
16,  1853,  in  Pleasant  Grove,  the  son  of 
David  Thorne  and  Elizabeth  Reeves. 
His  parents  were  both  English  and  emi- 
grated from  London  to  Utah  in  1851,  as 


converts  to  "Mormonism."  They  lo- 
cated in  Pleasant  Grove  Utah  county, 
where  they  raised  a  large  and  respect- 
able family,  and  where  Joseph  E.  was 
raised  and  educated.  He  was  baptized 
Aug.  25,  1861,  confirmed  by  Henson 
Walker,  and  ordained  an  Elder  April 
24,  1876,  by  John  D.  T.  McAllister.  In 
1881  he  was  appointed  to  act  as  a  po- 
liceman in  Pleasant  Grove,  serving  in 
that  capacity  for  six  years.  He  was  set 
apart  to  labor  as  a  Priest  Jan.  27,  1885, 


by  Bishop  John  Brown,  and  was  or- 
dained a  Seventy  July  11,  1886,  by  Lewis 
Harvey.  In  1887-88  he  served  as  mar- 
shal, and  for  six  years  (commencing 
with  1889)  he  served  as  mayor  of  Pleas- 
ant Grove.  Aug.  18,  1889,  he  was  or- 
dained a  High  Priest  by  Abraham  O. 
Smoot  and  set  apart  to  act  as  second 
counselor  to  Bishop  John  Brown.  He 
acted  in  that  capacity  until  Dec.  6,  1891, 
when  he  was  ordained  a  Bishop  by  Pres- 
ident Joseph  F.  Smith,  and  set  apart  to 
preside  over  Pleasant  Grove  Ward, 
which  position  he  still  holds. 

LUND,  Louis  Peter,  a  member  of 
the  High  Council  of  the  Alpine  Stake 
of  Zion,  is  the  son  of  Paul  D.  S.  Lund 
and  Anna  Sorensen,  and  was  born  in 
Aalborg,  Denmark,  Feb.  7,  1846.  He 
emigrated  to  Utah  with  his  parents  in 
1853.  His  early  life  was  spent  on  the 
farm  and  in  the  saddle.  In  1863,  he 
crossed  the  plains  to  the  Missouri  river, 
after  immigrating  Saints.  Aug.  1,  1864, 
he  married  Druzilla  Emeline  Allred,  and 
was  called  to  settle  in  Meadow  valley. 


BIOGRAPHICAL   ENCYCLOPEDIA. 


513 


Nevada,  where  he  remained  one  year, 
and  was  then  released  on  account  of 
poor  health.  He  returned  to  Spring 
City,  Utah,  his  former  home,  in  time 
to  take  part  in  the  Blackhawk  Indian 
war.  May  19,  1868,  his  wife  died,  leav- 
ing him  with  two  small  children.  He 
married  Susan  A.  McArthur  Feb.  8, 
1870.  From  this  union  seven  children 
have  been  born,  but  at  different  times 
death  has  claimed  them  all.  July  3, 
1870,  they  moved  to  Pleasant  Grove, 
their  present  home.  Here  Elder  Lurd 
engaged  in  farming,  dealing  in  machin- 
ery and  stockraising.  He  left  his  home 
as  an  Elder,  April  9,  1883,  for  a  mission 
to  England,  but  was  ordained  a  Seventy 
under  the  hands  of  Apostle  John  Henry 
Smith  in  Liverpool,  Jan.  14,  1884,  being 
called  to  preside  over  the  London  con- 
ference, which  position  he  held  until  he 
was  released  to  return  home,  in  charge 
of  the  first  company  of  Saints  of  the 
season.  On  returning  home  he  was 
chosen  one  of  the  presidents  of  the  44th 


quorum  of  Seventy.  In  1886  he  was 
elected  a  member  of  the  city  council  of 
Pleasant  Grove,  and  also  selectman  of 
Utah  county.  He  was  re-elected  select- 
man in  1889.  He  also  served  as  justice 
of  the  peace  in  Pleasant  Grove  precinct. 
In  1892  he  was  elected  assessor  for  Utah 
county,  and  in  1897  he  served  as  a  rep- 
resentative in  the  second  State  legisla- 
ture. He  was  nominated  the  second 
time  for  the  same  office,  but  declined. 
When  Alpine  Stake  was  organized  Jan. 
20,  1901,  he  was  ordained  to  the  office  of 
a  High  Priest,  under  the  hands  of  Pres- 

Vol.  1,  No.  33. 


idents  Stephen  L.  Chipman  and  James 
Clark,  and  set  apart  as  a  member  of  the 
High  Council,  and  as  a  home  mission- 
ary. At  the  present  time  he  is  engaged 
in  farming,  stock-raising  and  merchan- 
dising. 

WARXICK,  Charles  Peter,  sec- 
ond Bishop  of  Manila  Ward, Utah  coun- 
ty, Utah,  was  born  April  5,  1850,  in 
Fareby  parish,  Vestergotland,  Sweden. 
He  heard  the  gospel  and  was  baptized 
a  member  of  the  Church  of  Je.-sus 
Christ    of    Latter-day    Saints    in     1SG3. 


ji"^^ 


and  in  the  same  year  he  emigrated  to 
Utah.  He  arrived  in  Salt  Lake  City, 
Oct.  22,  1866,  after  a  very  trying  jour- 
ney. Seven  of  the  family  were  left  by 
the  wayside,  only  four  living  to  reach 
their  journey's  end.  Charles  settled 
in  Pleasant  Grove,  whei^e  he  has  lived 
ever  since.  March  14.  1874,  he  married 
Christine  Marie  Larsen,  in  the  Endow- 
ment House,  Salt  Lake  City,  Daniel 
H.  Wells  performing  the  ceremony.  In 
the  spring  of  1880  he  loft  home  to  fill 
a  mission  to  his  native  land.  He  re- 
turned home  July  12,  1882.  While  away 
he  labored  diligently  in  the  cause  of 
Christ  in  the  Scone  conference,  baptiz- 
ing 28  souls  into  the  Church.  He  pre- 
sided over  the  Helsingborg  branch  for 
eighteen  months.  That  he  has  gained 
the  confidence  of  the  people  among 
whom  he  has  resided  can  be  seen  by 
the  number  of  resoonsible  positions  he 
has  held  among  them.  He  served  as 
a  member  of  the  city  council  of  Pleas- 
ant   Grove    for     two     terms,    acted    as 

Aug.  17,  1901. 


514 


LATTER-DAY    SAINT 


counselor  to  two  different  presidents  of 
the  Y.  M.  M.  I.  A.,  was  Ward  teacher 
for  seventeen  years,  and  president  of 
the  Scandinavian  meetings  for  many 
years.  He  acted  as  second  counselor 
to  Bishop  Jos.  E.  Thorne  of  Pleasant 
Grove  First  Ward  for  five  years.  Hav- 
ing removed  from  Pleasant  Grove  First 
Ward  into  the  Third  Ward,  now  called 
Manila,  he  was,  in  1898,  chosen  and 
ordained  Bishop  of  the  Manila  Ward, 
which  position  he  still  holds.  Bishop 
Warnick  is  a  very  zealous  and  ener- 
getic worker  in  the  cause  of  truth. 
His  every  thought  is  for  the  interest  of 
his  people  and  the  building  up  of  the 
Church  of  Christ. 

ENGBERG.  Andreas,  a  prominent 
Elder  in  Salem,  Utah  county, Utah,  was 
born  Nov.  8,  1840,  in  Skibsby,  Hjorring 
amt,  Denmark,  He  was  baptized  June 
24,  1856,  and  soon  afterwards  called  to 
labor  as  a  local  missionary.  He  la- 
bored among  the  Saints,  instructing 
them  in  the  English  language,  as  well 
as  the  principles  of  the  gospel,  in  the 
Vendsyssel  and  Aalborg  conferences 
for  five  years.  He  emigrated  to  Utah 
in  1862,  and  soon  afterwards  he  engaged 
in  the  furniture  business  in  Salt  Lake 
City  and  later  in  Payson,  Utah  coun- 
ty. In  1871  he  moved  to  Salem,  Utah 
county,  where  he  worked  as  superin- 
tendent of  the  Co-op.  store  until  1893. 
He  is  at  present  engaged  in  the  drug 
business  and  fruit  raising.  Civilly  he 
has  served  as  justice  of  the  peace  in 
Salem  precinct,  and  as  a  member  of 
the  constitutional  convention  in  1895. 
Bro.  Engberg  was  ordained  a  Seventy 
in  1863.  and  held  that  ofl^ce  until  1900, 
when  he  was  ordained  a  High  Priest. 
He  has  always  held  an  honorable  con- 
nection with  the  Church  from  the  time 
he  first  became  a  member  thereof. 

SCHAERRER,  John  Jacob,  a  High 
Councilor  in  the  Nebo  Stake  of-  Zion, 
is  the  son  of  Henry  Schaerrer  and  Anna 
Gots,  and  was  born  Dec.  28,  1845,  in  a 
village  near  the  city  of  Winterthur, 
Switzerland.  At  the  age  of  eleven 
years, while  attending  the  public  school, 
he  first  heard  of  the  restored  gospel. 
He  at  once  became  interested  in  the 
same  and  asked  his  parents  to  investi- 
gate. The  result  was  that  his  mother 
soon  became  a  convert  to  "Mormon- 
ism."  John  and  his  father  were  bap- 
tized later,  and  in  1860  the  family  emi- 


grated to  Zion,  arriving  in  Great  Salt 
Lake  valley  in  the  fall  of  that  year. 
After  a  brief  stay  in  Salt  Lake  City, 
the  family  moved  north  and  located 
near  Ogden.  In  October,  1861,  they 
were  called,  together  with  other  fami- 
lies, to  go  to  southern  Utah  and  assist 
in  the  upbuilding  of  that  country.  Af- 
ter a  trip  full  of  hardships  they  ar- 
rived in  the  St.  George  camp  about 
Christmas.  John  went  east  to  the  Mis- 
souri river  as  a  teamster  after  emi- 
grants in  the  summer  of  1864.  In  May, 
1877,  he  was  called  to  go  on  a  mission 
to  Switzerland  and  Germany,  where  he 
performed  successful  missionary  work 
and  returned  home  with  a  company  of 
emigrants  in  June,  1879.  On  his  return 
he  was  appointed   to  labor  as  a  home 


missionary  in  the  Utah  Stake  of  Zion 
and  was  also  called  to  act  as  presid- 
ing Priest  in  Payson  Ward.  June  27, 
1891,  he  left  home  on  another  mission 
to  Europe,  having  been  called  to  pre- 
side over  the  Swiss  and  German  mis- 
sion. During  the  time  he  labored  in 
that  capacity,  the  work  of  the  Lord 
made  good  progress  in  those  lands.  On 
account  of  the  cholera  which  raged  in 
northwestern  Germany  in  1893,  all  emi- 
gration was  temporarily  forbidden.  In 
the  spring  of  that  year  Elder  Schaer- 
rer was  arrested  on  the  charge  of  hav- 
ing violated  the  emigration  law,  but 
after  a  thorough  examination  he  was 
discharged  for  lack  of  evidence.  Be- 
ing released  he  left  Bern,  Switzerland, 
Feb.  21,  1894.  for  Utah.  After  his  re- 
turn home  he  \\  as  called  again  to  labor 


BIOGRAPHICAL    ENCYCLOPEDIA. 


515 


as  a  home  missionary  in  the  Utah 
Stake.  He  also  became  the  senior  pres- 
ident of  the  46th  quorum  of  Seventy, 
which  position  he  held  till  the  Nebo 
Stake  was  organized  in  1901,  when  he 
was  ordained  a  Hig-h  Priest  and  set 
apart  as  a  High  Councilor  in  that 
Stake. 

BIGLER,  Jacob  G.,  first  president 
of  the  Juab  Stake  of  Zion,  was  born 
April  4,  1813,  near  Shinnston,  Harrison 
county,  West  Virginia,  son  of  Mark 
Bigler  and  Susannah  Ogden.  He  was 
baptized  at  Far  West,  Caldwell  county, 
Mo.,  June  10,  1838,  by  Stephen  Win- 
chester, passed  through  the  Missouri 
and  Illinois  persecutions,  acted  as 
Bishop  in  Iowa  and  came  to  the  Val- 
ley in  1850.  Soon  afterwards  he  located 
in  Nephi,  Juab  county,  his  present 
home,  from  whence  he  filled  a  mission 
to  Great  Britain  in  18C1  to  1863.  When 

the  settlements  in  Juab  county  were 
organized  into  a  Stake  of  Zion  in  1868, 
Jacob  G.  Bigler  was  chosen  and  set 
apart  as  president  of  the  same,  and  he 
•acted  in  that  capacity  till  1871.  Elder 
Bigler  is  now  nearly  eighty-nine  years 
old. 

GROVER,  Joel,  second  president  of 
the  Juab  Stake  of  Zion,  was  the  son  of 
Thomas  and  Hannah  T.  Grover,  and 
was  born  March  11,  1849,  at  Farming- 
ton,  Davis  county,  Utah,  being  the  first 
white  male  child  born  in  Davis  county. 
H-^  v.'as  baptized  into  the  Church  of 
Jesus  Christ  of  Latter-day  Saints, when 
eight  years  of  age.  At  the  April  con- 
ference, 1867,  he  was  called  by  Pres. 
Heber  C.  Kimball  to  go  on  a  mission  to 
Europe.  He  started  on  this  mission 
May  12,  1867,  crossing  the  plains  most 
of  the  way  by  team,  and  arrived  in 
Liverpool,  England,  July  26th.  He  la- 
bored faithfully  in  the  Kent  and  Glas- 
gow conferences  two  years,  preaching 
the  gospel,  and  after  having  completed 
his  mission,  to  the  satisfaction  of  the 
presidency,  he  was  released  and  de- 
parted from  Liverpool  in  the  steamship 
"Colorado,"  homeward  bound,  July  28, 
1S69.  He  arrived  at  his  home  in  Farm- 
ingtor.  Avgust  20,  1869.  Dec.  5,  1869,  he 
married  Mary  Asenath,  daughter  of  Dr. 
Willard  Richards,  upon  which  occasion 
Pres.  Brigham  Young  predicted  that 
Brother  Grover  would  yet  occupy 
prominent  positions  of  usefulness  in 
the  Kingdom  of  God.  He  was  ordained 


a   High    Priest   and    called    to     preside 
over  the  Juab   Stake   of  Zion   Nov.   10, 
1871.  Subsequently,  there  being  changes 
in    the    presidency,      he    acted    as    first 
counselor   therein,    and    was   a    leading 
figure    in    the    management    of    all    the 
important  matters     pertaining     to   the 
welfare  and   prosperity  of   the     Stake. 
In  1873  he  was  elected  a  representative 
to  the  legislative  assembly  of  the  Ter- 
ritory  of   Utah,   and     was     repeatedly- 
elected    representative    and    councilor; 
he  was  well  recognized  and  admired  as 
a  wise  and  able  representative  of  the 
people.       In  1875  he  tvas  elected  to  the 
office  of  selectman,  and  in  1878  to  that 
of  probate  judge  for  Juab  county;   he 
held  the  latter  oflfice  at  the  time  of  his 
demise.       He   was   an   extensive   stock- 
holder in  the  Nephi  Mercantile  Institu- 
tion and  in  the  Nephi  Mill  and  Manu- 
facturing Institution,  and  held  the  of- 
fices of  piesident  and  superintendent  of 
tlie    store    and    secretary    and    superin- 
tendent  of  the   mill.       He   was   promi- 
nently identified  with  all  the  public  in- 
stitutions of  the  Stake  and  was  a  very 
liberal   subscriber   to   every     legitimate 
enterprise  and  industry  organized  since 
his  arrival  in  Nephi.      When  the  First 
National  Bank  of  Nephi  was  about  to 
be  organized,   he  was  a  subscriber  for 
a  considerable  amount,  and  at  the  pre- 
liminary meetingf  was  chosen  as  one  of 
its   directors.       As   a   financier  he   was 
of  the  first  order,  and  his  judgment  and 
executive   ability   was   quick   and   firm. 
Pres.    Grover    died    in    Nephi    May    13, 
JSSO,       At   the   time   of   his   demise   the 
"Dcffcret  News"  said  of  him  editorially: 
"He  was  a  close,  affectionate  and  last- 
ing friend,  and  while  being  a  faithful 
Latter-day   Saint   and   having  the   love 
and  confidence  of  the  authorities    and 
people    of    the    Church,    he    was    broad, 
liberal  and  charitable  to  such  an  extent 
as    to   gain    the   admiration    and    confi- 
dence of  every  class." 

PAX3IAX,  ■\VilIiain,  fourth  presi- 
dent of  the  Juab  Stake  of  Zion,  was  the 
son  of  James  Paxman  and  Esther  Rey- 
nolds, and  was  born  Oct.  25.  1855,  at 
Hempstead,  Essex,  England.  At  an 
eaily  age  he  went  to  London  and  en- 
tered into  the  service  of  a  tinsmith', 
working  his  way  up  from  errand  boy 
to  first  hand  in  the  large  establish- 
ment in  which  he  worked.  While  in 
London  he  made  the  acquaintance  of 
Father  Kemp,     so    well  known  to  the 


516 


LATTER-DAT    SAINT 


early  London  Saints,  by  whom  he 
was  converted  to  the  faith,  and  was 
baptized  June  15.  1852.  by  Edward  C. 
Brand.  He  married  Ann  Rushen  Keyes 
in  1855,  who  embarked  with  him  on  the 
ship  "Horizon"  for  America  in  1856, 
and  his  first  son,  William  Reed  Horizon 
Paxman.  was  born  on  the  good  ship 
off  the  banks  of  Newfoundland  on  June 
12th  of  that  year,  and  was  named  after 
Captain  Reed  and  the  ship  he  com- 
manded. On  reaching  Boston  Bro. 
Paxman  concluded  to  remain  there  and 
work  for  the  necessary  means  to  prose- 
cute his  journey  to  Utah.  Here  he 
accepted  a  position  as  salesman  in  a 
large  stove  warehouse:  and  in  1861 
came  on  to  Utah,  arriving  in  Salt  Lake 
City  Sept.     13,     1861.       He       moved     to 


American  Fork,  Utah  county,  in  1862, 
where  he  followed  his  trade  of  tinsmith 
for  some  time.  At  American  Fork 
the  innate  powers  and  executive  skill 
in  doing  good  unto  others,  which  ex- 
emplified his  whole  life,  commenced  to 
shine  forth  with  great  lustre,  and  was 
acknowledged  by  the  people  residing 
there  in  electing  him  to  official  posi- 
tions in  their  city  government.  He 
was  also  superintendent  of  the 
American  Fork  Co-operative  Mer- 
cantile Institution.  But  where  his 
great  love  in  blessing  humanity  shone 
the  brightest  at  this  time  of  his  life 
was  in  the  organization  of  the  Sunday 
school  of  American  Fork;  in  this  his 
zeal  and  love  shone  forth  in  such 
power  that  in  a  short  time  he  won  to 
his  side  a  corps  of  teachers,  who. catch- 


ing the  fire  of  his  zeal  and  love  for  his 
work,  made  the  Sunday  school  cause 
of  American  Fork  for  many  years  the 
center  of  strength  of  that  place,  and 
from  which  emanated  the  best  thought 
and  action  for  the  promotion  of  the 
union  and  happiness  of  that  Ward.  The 
love  and  respect  in  which  he  was  held 
by  his  co-laborers  in  this  great  cause 
found  voice  in  a  beautiful  testimonial 
presented  to  him  by  the  teachers  and 
officers  of  the  school,  on  his  departure 
to  fill  a  mission  to  England  in  1875. 
During  his  mission  in  his  native  land 
he  presided  over  the  London  conference 
and  returned  from  there  in  1877,  bear- 
ing with  him  the  love  of  all  who  came 
under  the  influence  of  his  kind  minis- 
try, as  witnessed  by  the  testimonials 
of  the  different  organizations  of  the 
Priesthood  of  London  then  existing, 
that  subsequently  adorned  the  walls  of 
his  home  at  Nephi.  After  his  return 
from  England  he  filled  the  position  of 
Bishop  Edward  Hunter's  agent  for 
Utah  Stake,  for  which  purpose  he  was 
ordained  a  Bishop  and  served  in  this 
position  for  several  years.  Next  we  find 
him  installed  as  president  of  Juab 
Stake  of  Zion,  Jan.  28,  1883,  and  in 
March,  1886,  he  was  on  his  way  to  New 
Zealand  to  fill  a  mission  in  that  far 
distant  land,  where  he  presided  for 
the  term  of  three  and  one-half  years. 
The  Book  of  Mormon  was  translated 
into  the  Maori  language  under  his  pi"es- 
idency  and  supervision.  In  this  mission 
again  shone  forth  the  virtues  and  love 
of  this  truly  good  man,  which  endeared 
him  to  the  hearts  of  the  brethren  and 
fellow  servants  in  the  mission  field.  The 
love  and  admiration  in  which  he  was 
then  held  is  best  told  in  the  language 
of  Brother  Amasa  Aldrich,  a  co-laborer 
with  him  there:  "Humble  and  kind 
to  a  fault,  his  patience  knew  no  bounds. 
The  eternal  sunshine  of  life  radiated 
from  his  very  person  and  the  storms  of 
adversity  were  dispelled  by  his  calm 
and  peaceful  demeanor.  He  braved 
the  perils  of  sea  and  land;  he  traveled 
through  sunshine  and  storm,  to  bring 
the  heart  of  man  to  more  fully  know 
his  Maker.  In  all  the  varied  vicissi- 
tudes of  life  in  that  land  he  was  ever 
the  same.  He  had  a  kind  word  and  a 
hearty  God-bless-you  for  every  man, 
woman  and  child.  No  hardship  was 
too  difficult  for  him  to  surmount,  and 
no  peril  too  severe  to  endure.  In  the 
midst  of  affliction  he  never  murmured 


BIOGRAPHICAL   ENCYCLOPEDIA. 


517 


or  comDlained.       In     him    the  rich  and 
the  poor  had  a  true  and  devoted  friend, 
one   whose   friendship   was   as   deep  as 
the  ocean  and  as  enduring  as  the  ever- 
lasting hills."       Returning-  from     New 
Zealand    in    September,    1889,    he»  again 
resumed  his  duties  as  president  of  the 
Juab  Stake  and  its  Sabbath  schools.  He 
attended  the  St.   Louis  Irrigation   con- 
gress, as  a  delegate     from  Utah,     and 
subsequently   represented   Utah   in     all 
the   Irrigation   conventions    held   up    to 
the   time   of  his   death,    also   served   as 
delegate  to  the  Transmississippi  Com- 
mercial congress  of  1895.      He  died  Oct. 
12,  1897,  at  American  Fork,  Utah  coun- 
ty, from  the  effects  of  injuries  received 
while   repairinsT  the  roof  of  his  house. 
A  numerous  family  survived  him,  con- 
sisting of  three  wives,  by  whom  he  had 
twenty-two      children,        eighteeen      of 
whom   were   living  at   his   demise,   and 
also    forty-two    grandchildren    (thirty- 
three    living).        His    funeral      services 
were    attended    by    Presidents    Wilford 
Woodruff,    George   Q.    Cannon   and   Jo- 
seph F.   Smith     and     several       of     the 
Twelve   Apostles,    together   with   many 
other  prominent  men  of  the  Church.    In 
the  course  of  his  remarks  at  the  fun- 
eral services,  Pres.  Cannon  said:   "The 
name   of   Wm.    Paxman    was    seriously 
considered  in  connection  with  the  fill- 
ing of  one  of  the  vacancies  which  had 
recently  existed  in   the  quorum  of  the 
Apostles.      Brother  Paxman  was  a  man 
not  illustrious  for  his  mighty  achieve- 
ments, as  the  w-orld  generally  views  the 
lives  of  men,  but  he  was  enshrined  in 
the  hearts  of  all  who  knew  him,  for  the 
noble,  pure  and  virtuous  life  which  he 
has  led."    Honored  and  proud  are  those 
who  claim  the  closest  relationship  with 
this    one    of   God's    noble    sons. — Albert 
Jones. 

PAXMAX,  James  Walter,  fifth 
president  of  the  Juab  Stake  of  Zion,  is 
the  son  of  William  Paxman  and  Ann 
Lushen  Keyes  and  was  born  in  Salt 
Lake  City,  Oct.  12,  1861,  two  months 
titer  his  parents  arrived  in  Utah,  they 
having  crossed  the  plains  in  Captain 
Lot  Smith's  train  of  ox-teams.  The 
family  moved  to  American  Fork,  Utah 
county,  in  1862.  where  the  subject  of 
this  sketch  attended  the  public  school, 
end  worked  around  the  home.  At  this 
period  he  nearly  lost  his  life  by  drown- 
ing in  American  Fork  creek,  while  the 
^vaters  of  the  creek  were  high  in  the 


spring  of  the  year.  He  fell  from  the 
sMght  bridge  which  spanned  the  creek; 
his  father,  hearing  the  cries  of  the 
boy's  elder  brother,  rushed  into  the 
."Stream  to  save  his  son,  but  the  force  of 
ihe  waters  carried  him  off  his  feet,  and 
had  it  not  been  for  the  superior  strength 
ot  Brother  Joseph  Wilds,  of  American 
Fork,  by  whom  he  was  rescued,  the 
history  of  Brother  Paxman  would  have 
ended  there.  He  was  taken  home  un- 
conscious, and  knew  nothing  until  he 
found  himself  in  bed.  A  few  days 
sufficed  for  his  recovery.  When  about 
tourteen  years  of  age  he  was  appren- 
ticed to  William  Webb,  shoemaker  of 
American  Fork,  where  he  served  five 
>ears,  and  acquired  a  thorough  knowl- 
edge and  artistic  skill  in  the  building 
of  the  shoe.     He  made  all  the  shoes  of 


the  numerous  Paxman  family,  and  his 
father  exhibited  his  son's  handiwork 
with  pride.  William  entered  the  B.  Y. 
Academy,  at  Provo,  in  1880,  and  studied 
there  for  eighteen  months,  under  the 
watchful  care  of  the  late  Prof.  Karl  G. 
Maeser.  He  moved  to  Nephi  in  May, 
1883,  with  his  parents,  his  father  hav- 
ing been  called  to  the  presidency  of  the 
Juab  Stake  of  Zion.  In  the  spring  of 
1884  he  received  a  call  for  missionary 
rervice  in  Great  Britain,  and  labored 
in  the  London  conference  for  two  years. 
As  a  result  of  his  earnest  labors  in 
those  days  of  gleaning  after  the  har- 
\est  of  so  many  souls,  he  succeeded  in 
baptizing  t%venty-three  persons,  two  of 
them  being  his  own  relatives.  Return- 
ing  home   in   1886    he    was   chosen   and 


518 


LATTER-DAY    SAINT 


sustained  as  counselor  to  his  father  in 
the  presidency  of  Juab  Stake,  being  or- 
dained a  High  Priest  and  set  apart  for 
that  service  in  January,  1SS7,  by  Apostle 
John  Henry  Smith.  He  served  in  that 
capacity  until  his  fathers  death  in 
October,  189S.  and  the  following  Decem- 
ber he  was  set  apart  by  Apostle  George 
Teasdale  as  president  of  Juab  Stake  in 
the  place  of  his  father.  He  married 
Julia  Sudbury,  the  third  daughter  of 
Samuel  and  Kmma  Sudbury,  of  Salt 
Lake  City,  March  1,  1888,  by  whom  he 
has  eight  children,  all  living.  He 
served  as  clerk  of  Juab  county  one 
term,  having  been  elected  to  that  office 
as  the  people's  candidate.  The  large 
mercantile  interest  which  he  is  now 
managing  at  Nephi  is  the  combination 
of  a  small  business  in  the  boot  and 
i-hoe  and  gent's  furnishing  line,  started 
by  himself  in  1890.  He  joined  with 
"Wright  and  McCune  and  Adams  & 
Sons  Co.,  all  of  Nephi,  in  1891.  This 
ccmpany  lately  purchased  the  company 
store  of  the  Bullion-Beck  and  Cham- 
pion Mining  companies,  of  Eureka,  and 
both  institutions  are  being  successfully 
run  under  Pres.  Paxman's  management. 
With  this  business  already  in  hand. 
Pres.  Paxman  is  much  interested  in 
pushing  to  success  the  project  of  bring- 
ing the  surplus  waters  of  Gooseberry 
creek  to  the  great  acreage  of  rich 
farming  lands  in  the  vicinity  of  Nephi, 
notably  the  Levan  bench,  also  the  in- 
creasing of  the  waters  for  the  use  of 
North  Sanpete.  A  company  is  already 
Incorporated  known  as  the  Mammoth 
Reservoir  company  of  which  he  is  the 
secretary.  Work  is  progressing  on  the 
dam.  In  this  project  Brother  Paxman 
sees  in  the  future  the  great  good  that 
v/ill  come  out  of  its  successful  issue— a 
city  on  the  Levan  bench  with  hundreds 
of  homes,  surrounded  with  farms  and 
fields,  yielding  their  now  dormant 
strength  for  the  blessing  and  susten- 
ance of  thousands.  Pres.  James  W. 
Paxman  is  still  a  young  man,  and  the 
energy  and  executive  ability  already 
displayed  on  his  part  has  won  the 
hearty  support  of  men  of  wisdom  many 
years  his  senior,  and  will  still  develop 
in  the  future  for  the  blessing  of  himself 
and  the  Sair  s  over  whom  he  presides. 

YOUNG,  Joseph  Aiigell,  first 
president  of  the  Sevier  Stake  of  Zion. 
was    the    son    of    Brigham    Young   and 


Maiy  Ann  Angell,  and  was  born  Oct. 
14,  1834,  in  Kirtland,  Ohio.  He  was 
baptized  by  his  father  on  the  eighth 
anniversary  of  his  birthday,  Oct.  14, 
1842,  came  to  Utah  in  an  early  day 
and  took  an  active  part  in  the  affairs 
of  the  new  settlements  as  a  frontiers- 
man; he  also  figured  prominently  in 
emigration  affairs.  On  acount  of  the 
persecutions  of  the  "Mormon"  people, 
he  was  deprived  of  the  advantage  of 
an  early  education,  but  was  a  discrim- 
inating and  passionate  reader,  and  at 
the  time  of  his  death  had,  perhaps,  the 
finest  private  library  in  the  Territory. 
In  1854-56  he  filled  a  mission  to  Great 
Britain,  laboring  in  the  Liverpool,  Man- 
chester and  Bradford  conferences.  In 
the  fall  of  1856.   we  find  him  manfully 


^ 

.^P^^fl^^B 

l^^l 

I^^^H 

^^t^  ^^ 

^^^^H^^^^^^H 

i^^^A— 

^'    ^           "^ 

<^^^^Hiffif 

l(P^>^^ 

W^^^^^^M 

^^E%  ^   '  ^*^. 

^ 

^H^^^^w 

facing  the  bitter  storms  and  biting 
frosts  of  one  of  the  most  severe  winters 
ever  known  in  the  mountain  regions, 
pushing  his  way  to  the  Sweetwat«^r 
through  canyons  filled  with  drifting 
snows  and  over  almost  impassable  bar- 
riers, with  a  few  brave  companions, 
in  the  effort,  fortunately  successful,  to 
rescue  the  belated  hand-cart  com- 
panies of  that  season.  He  was 
engaged  for  a  number  of  years 
In  manufacturing  lumber  in  Lamb's, 
City  Creek,  and  North  Mill  Creek 
canyons.  In  1868  he  persuaded 
his  father  to  take  the  large  grading 
contract  on  the  Union  Pacific  railroad, 
and  in  partnership  with  Bishop  John 
Sharp  took  sub-contracts  for  the  work 
through  Weber  canyon.      He  built  and 


BIOGRAPHICAL.   ENCYCLOPEDIA. 


519 


■was  the  first  superintendent  of  the 
Ogden-Salt  Lake  line  (the  old  Utah 
Central),  and  \^as  one  of  the  promoters 
of  the  Utah  Southern.  In  1872  he  was 
appointed  to  preside  over  the  Sevier 
district  of  the  Church,  extending  from 
Gunnison  to  Kanab,  and  in  1874,  when 
the  settlements  on  the  Sevier  were  or- 
ganized as  the  Sevier  Stake  of  Zion, 
Elder  Young  was  appointed  to  preside 
over  the  same.  This  position  he  held 
until  his  death.  As  the  highest  eccle- 
siastical officer  in  that  part  of  the 
country  he  took  a  most  active  part  in 
everything  that  tended  to  build  up  and 
strengthen  the  new  settlements,  and  he 
also  introduced  the  United  order  among 
the  Saints  on  the  Sevier.  His  labors 
in  the  development  of  Sevier  county 
were  enormous,  and  among  the  enter- 
prises which  he  carried  to  a  successful 
issue  was  the  road  through  Clear  creek 
canyon.  He  was  a  representative  of 
Salt  Lake  county  in  the  6th,  11th  and 
12th  sesions  of  the  Utah  legislature, 
and  was  a  member  of  the  upper  house 
representing  Salt  Lake,  Tooele,  and 
Summit  counties  in  the  14th,  15th,  16th, 
17th  and  18th  sessions,  and  Sanpete  and 
Sevier  cc  unties  in  the  19th  session. 
President  Young  died  suddenly  in  Man- 
ti,  Sanpete  county,  Utah,  Aug.  5,  1875. 
At  the  time  of  his  demise  the 
"Deseret  News"  published  the  fol- 
lowing: "Elder  Young  was  es- 
teemed for  his  many  estimable  qual- 
ities of  heart  as  well  as  head.  He 
was  a  man  of  naturally  keen  intelli- 
gence, his  mental  qualities  even  reach- 
ing what  might  be  termed  brilliancy  in 
some  directions,  while  his  generosity 
was  proverbial,  especially  among  the 
working  classes,  all  who  were  ever  in 
his  employ  holding  him  in  esteem  for 
his  universally  kind  and  fair  treat- 
ment." Historian  Edward  W.  Tul- 
lidge  says  of  him:  "Endowed  with 
splendid  talents,  gifted  with  the  genius 
of  statesmanship  and  blessed  with  a 
magnanimous  nature,  which  made  him 
worthy  to  be  the  leader  of  men,  might 
truthfully  be  written  of  the  lamented 
Joseph  A.  Young."  The  legislative 
council,  in  resolutions  of  respect,  said 
of  him:  "He  was  a  man  of  keen  and 
even  brilliant  intellect  and  as  an  or- 
ganizer was  remarkable.  *  »  *  His 
perceptive  faculties  often  enabled  him, 
in  matters  of  great  importance  to  com- 
prehend the  end  from  the  beginning. 
*    *    •    His  physical   organization   was 


strikingly  beautiful,  graceful,  and  per- 
fect. *  *  *  His  sympathy,  consider- 
ation and  kindness  to  the  poor,  under 
all  circumstances,  have  formed  [for 
him]  a  bright  crown."  He  left  eleven 
children,  nine  of  whom  still  survive, 
among  them  being  Major  Richard  W. 
Young. 

SPENCER,  Franklin,  second  pres- 
ident of  the  Sevier  Stake  of  Zion,  was 
born  July  26,  1838,  in  Bracken  county, 
Kentucky,  son  of  William  F.  Spencer 
and  Sarah  Jane  Bradford.  He  joined 
the  Church  in  1864,  and  was  ordained 
^i.  High  Priest  and  Set  apart  to  preside 
over  the  Sevier  Stake  of  Zion  July  15, 
1877,  by  Apostle  Orson  Hyde.  He  acted 
in  that  capacity  till  1887,  when  he  was 
succeeded  in  the  presidency  of  the 
Stake  by  Albert  K.  Thurber.  In  1879-81 
he  filled  a  mission  to  the  Southern 
States. 

THURBER,     Albert     King,       third 

president  of  the  Sevier  Stake  of  Zion, 
was  the  son  of  Daniel  Thurber  and  Re- 
becca Rhodes  Hill,  and  was  born  April 
7,  1826,  in  the  town  of  Foster,  Rhode 
Island.  His  ancestors  were  English  on 
both  sides.  In  a  short  life  sketch 
which  he  wrote  several  years  before 
his  aeath,  he  writes:  "My  grandfather 
was  in  the  Revolutionary  war.  When  I 
was  but  six  years  of  age,  he  took  me 
by  the  hand  and  walked  out  south 
of  the  city  of  Providence,  and  showed 
me  earthworks  (rifle  pits),  which  he  as- 
sisted in  throwing  up  to  resist  the 
threatened  raid  of  the  British  forces 
that  were  lying  at  Newport?  and  in- 
tending to  land  between  that  place  and 
Providence,  and  march  into  the  in- 
terior. I  received  but  a  limited  com- 
mon school  education.  At  nine  years 
cf  age,  I  left  the  paternal  roof,  and 
wei.t  to  reside  with  an  uncle  in  West 
Killingly,  Conn.,  from  which  place  I 
went  to  Pomfret,  and  afterwards  tu 
South  Scituate,  Providence  county, 
Rhode  Island,  where  I  learned  the 
trade  of  a  comb-maker.  In  1844  I  went 
to  Leominster,  Worcester  county, 
Mass.,  and  worked  at  my  trade.  In 
1845  I  was  employed  to  go  to  Auburn, 
New  York,  and  establish  the  business 
of  comb-making.  In  this  I  was  very 
successful.  Here  I  joined  the  Auburn 
guards,  a  state  military  company,  or- 
ganized as  a  reserve  guard  for  the 
state    prison.      I    became    proficient    in 


520 


LATTER-DAY    SAINT 


drill    and    enjoyed    myself    very    much 
With    my    associates    in    this    company. 
Here  I  mad.'  ihe  ac(iuaintance  of  Gov 
ernor    Seward.      I    returned    to      Rhodi. 
Island  and  engaped  as  clerk  in  a  store. 
Thence  I  again  went  to  Massachusetts, 
and  was  there  when  the  report  of  find- 
ing gold  came  from  California,  in  1849, 
reached  the  east.  I  left  Boston,  in  com- 
Iiany   with   forty-three  others  for  Cali- 
fornia   (overland).    The    company    was 
completely    organized,    uniformed     and 
equipped   as  a  military  company.     We 
arrived    in    Salt    Lake    City,    June    15. 
]*<49.    I    knew    nothing    of    the    religion 
of     the     Latter-day     Saints,     but    had 
heard   of   Joseph   Smith's   golden  Bible, 
Nauvoo   and    Salt    Lake.     I   asked    and 
was   granted    the   privilege    of   pitching 
tent   in   the    'Old  Fort.'    After  we   had 
got  our  camp  arranged,  which  was  af- 
ter   dark,    I   stepped    out    of  the   tent, 
which    was    surrounded    with    bystand- 
ers,   and    asked    the    question,      'What 
kind  of  a  God   do  you    'Mormons'     be- 
lieve   in?'     and    was    much    astonishea 
when   answered  by  a  young  man   that 
they  believed  in  a  God  with  body,  parts 
and  jiassions;  one  that  could  see,  hear, 
talk  and  walk.     This  answer  led  me  to 
much  inquiry,  and  resulted  in  my  being 
baptized,    in    September,    1849.      In    No- 
vember   of    the    same    year,    I    started 
again  for  the  California  gold  mines,  in 
company     with     about     thirty    persons 
from  Salt  Lake  City.     I  think  this  was 
the   first   company   of    'Mormons'     who 
went  through  the  south  route  from  Salt 
Lake  to  California  with  wagons.  There 
was    no    house    at    that    time    between 
Provo    and    California.    I    entered    the 
Golden     Gate     State,     carrying    all    my 
wealth   on   my  back,    took  ship  at  San 
Pedro     and     went     to    San    Francisco, 
where  I  arrived  in  March  and  remain- 
ed  one   month.     There   I   cast   my   first 
vote    for   Jack    Hays,    of    Mexican    war 
notoriety,   for  sheriff  of  San   Francisco 
county.     I  spent  the  summer  of  1850  ii. 
wcrKing    in    the   placer   mines    in    Cali- 
fornia,   and   returned   to   Utah   in   Sep- 
ternb-ir  of  that  year.     In  the  fall  of  1851, 
iti    company   with   John   W.    Berry   and 
James  W.  Thomas,  I  moved  to  Spanish 
Fork,  Utah  county,  at  that  time  a  great 
home  for  the  Indians.     I  commenced  to 
study      their      language,      and    became 
.somewhat  proficient.     In  that  acquire- 
ment I  have  been  able  to  do  the  coun- 
try .some   good,   by   aiding   in   an   early 
time  t)ie  settlement  of  many  difficulties 


between  the  Indians  and  the  whites. 
There  were  but  four  other  families 
located  on  the  Spanish  Fork  river  at 
the  time  I  went  there;  and  they  were 
four  miles  above.  Other  settlers  soon 
came  there  to  find  homes.  In  the 
spring  of  1852  the  militia  of  the  coun- 
ty was  organized  and  I  was  elected 
first  lieutenant  of  Company  E,  second 
regiment  of  the  Peteetneet  military 
district.  I  assisted  in  bouilding 
the  settlement  of  Palmyra  (sub- 
sequently abandoned),  of  which  the 
present  city  of  Spanish  Fork  took  the 
place.  In  1853  I  was  selected  as  adju- 
tant to  Major  Stephen  Markham.  Dur- 
ing the  Indian  war  of  1853,  for  a  short 
time,  I  also  acted  as  adjutant  to  Colo- 
nel Peter  W.  Conover.  I  served  two 
years  as  first  counselor  to  Bishop  John 
L.  Butler,  of  Spanish  Fork  Ward,  and, 
on  his  death,  which  occurred  in  1859,  I 
succeeded  him  as  Bishop,  and  contin- 
ued in  that  position  until  1874,  when  I 
was  called  by  President  Brigham 
Young  to  go  to  Grass  valley  and  the 
Sevier  country,  principally  to  use  my 
influence  in  the  interests  of  peace  with 
the  Indians  inhabiting  and  visiting  that 
country.  I  served  eight  years  as  mayor 
of  Spanish  Fork  city,  three  terms  as  a 
selectman  of  Utah  county,  and  seven- 
teen terms  as  their  representative  in 
the  legislative  assembly.  I  was  dele- 
gate from  that  county  to  two  conven- 
tions to  frame  a  constitution  for  State 
government.  I  was  graded  up  in  a 
military  capacity  from  lieutenant  to 
captain;  from  captain  to  major;  and, 
in  1866,  while  in  London  on  a  mission, 
I  was  elected  brigadier-general  of  the 
second  brigade  second  division  of  the 
militia  of  Utah.  I  moved  to  Richfield, 
Sevier  county,  in  1874;  was  first  counse- 
lor to  Joseph  A.  Young,  president  of  the 
Stake.  I  have  served  three  terms  in 
the  legislature  as  councilor  from  Sevier 
and  Sanpete  counties."  After  the  death 
of  President  Joseph  A.  Young,  in  1875, 
Elder  Thurber  acted  as  president  pro 
tem.  of  the  Sevier  Stake  till  1877,  when 
the  Stake  presidency  was  reorganzied 
and  Elder  Thurber  was  chosen  as  first 
counselor  to  Pres.  Franklin  Spencer. 
He  acted  faithfully  in  that  capacity  till 
June  24,  1887,  when  he  was  chosen  and 
set  apart  as  president  of  the  Stake, 
which  oflice  he  filled  with  signal  success 
and  ability  until  his  death,  which  oc- 
curred at  Ephraim,  Sanpete  county, 
March  21.  1888.  Referring  to  his  useful 
career,  the  "Deseret  News"  said  editor- 


BIOGRAPHICAL   ENCYCLOPEDIA. 


521 


tally  at  the  time  of  his  demise:  "Broth- 
er Thurber's  devotion  to  the  public  ser- 
vice was  pre-eminent,  allowing  himself 
so  little  time  to  devote  to  those  imme- 
diately his  own,  that  he  never  gathered 
around  him  more  of  life's  comforts  than 
was  absolutely  necessary  to  enable  him 
to  subsist.  He  had  a  sympathetic 
heart,  as  evidence  of  which  we  have 
seen  his  large,  kindly  eyes  moisten  un- 
der the  influence  of  a  tale  of  distress. 
He  had  been  expecting  his  end  for  some 
time,  and  viewed  the  termination  of 
his  earthly  course  with  that  imperturb- 
able complacency  that  might  be  ex- 
pected from  one  with  as  clear  a  record 
as  his." 

SEEGMILiLER,      William     Henry, 

fourth  president  of  the  Sevier  Stake  of 
Zion.  is  the  son  of  Adam  Seegmiller  and 
Anna  E.  Knechtel.  and  was  born  at 
Baden,  Waterloo  county,  Ontario.  Can- 
ada, Dec.  19.  1843.  He  left  Canada  for 
California  in  1861,  but  on  reaching  Flor- 
ence, Neb.,  he  was  baptized  by  James 
Hagell,  and  then  drove  team  for  Jacob 
Gates  to  Salt  Lake  City,  where  he  lo- 
cated and  worked  for  Pres.  Brigham 
Young.  Here,  also  he  was  ordained  to 
the  office  of  a  Seventy.  In  1862  and  1863 
he  made  two  trips  to  the  Missouri  riv- 
er with  Church  teams  after  the  poor. 
He  also  made  a  trip  to  California.  In 
1867  he  was  called  on  a  special  mission 
to  the  Muddy  (now  Nevada),  where  he 
remained  until  the  settlements  were 
broken  up  in  1871.  He  then  returned 
to  Salt  Lake  City,  and  after  making 
a  trip  to  Canada  in  the  interest  of  fam- 
ily estate  business,  he  went  to  St. 
George  in  company  with  Andrew  Hep- 
pier  and  other  relatives  whom  he  had 
converted  in  Canada.  Through  the  in- 
ttuence  of  Pres.  Joseph  A.  Young  they 
settled  in  Sevier  county  and  located  in 
Richfield  in  1873.  On  this  occasion  Bro. 
Seegmiller  drove  the  first  wagon  that 
ever  passed  through  Clear  creek  canyon 
from  Cove  creek  to  Joseph.  In  1873  he 
was  called  and  ordained  as  Bishop  of 
Richfield,  acting  in  that  capacity  till 
1877.  when  he  was  chosen  as  second 
counselor  to  Franklin  Spencer  in  the 
presidency  of  the  Sevier  Stake  of  Zion. 
Subsequently  he  acted  as  first  coun- 
selor to  Pres.  Albert  K.  Thurber  and 
since  May  26,  1888,  he  has  filled  the  im- 
portant position  of  president  of  the  Se- 
A'ier    Stake.     For   several    years    Elder 


Seegmiller  presided  over  the  Y.  M.  M. 
I.  A.  in  a  Stake  capacity;  he  hag  also 
served  as  city  councilman  and  mayor 
of  Richfield,  and  been  a  member  of  the 
Utah  legislature  for  several  terms.  In 
a  military  capacity  he  has  served  as 
lieutenant-colonel. 

BEAL,  Henry,  first  counselor  to 
Canute  Peterson,  in  the  South  Sanpete 
Stake  of  Zion,  was  born  at  Syracuse, 
Onandaga  county.  New  York,  April  30, 
1S35,  son  of  John  Beal  and  Ann  Deacon. 
His  parents  joined  fhe  Church  in  New 
York  State  and  emigrated  to  Nauvoo  in 
1845,  whence  they  were  expelled  togeth- 
er with  the  rest  of  the  Saints  in  1846. 
While  on  the  journey  mentioned  Henry 
was  baptized  in  the  Missouri  river,  near 
Winter  Quarters,  in  the  spring  of  1847, 
and  came  to  Utah  in  1850,  crossing  the 
plains  in  an  ox-train.  His  mother  died 
on  the  journey.  The  family  located  in 
Manti,  Sanpete  county,  late  in  1850, 
where  Henry  resided  until  1854,  when 
he  settled  on  the  creek  where  Ephraim 
now  is  situated;  he  assisted  in  building 
the  fort  and  erected  the  second  house 
on  the  townsite.  As  one  of  the  first 
settlers  of  Ephraim  he  secured  a  piece 
of  land  near  the  town,  and  has  since 
been  cheifly  engaged  in  farming.  He 
was  the  first  justice  of  the  peace  nnd 
the  first  man  married  in  Ephraim;  as- 
sisted in  building  the  Climax  Roller 
Mill;  was  one  of  the  Incorporators  of 
the  old  Ephraim  co-op  store,  served  as 
a  member  of  the  city  council  of  Eph- 
raim and  was  county  commissioner  for 
several  years;  he  was  elected  mayg^r  of 
Ephraim  in  1895.  He  was  one  of  the 
contractors  in  building  the  Sanpete 
Valley  Railroad  and  graded  eleven 
miles  of  the  Rio  Grande  Western.  He 
acted  as  a  High  Councilor  in  the  San- 
pete Stake  and  has  filled  the  position 
of  first  counselor  to  Pres.  Canute  Pe- 
terson in  the  Stake  presidency  since 
1877.  His  first  wife  was  Mary  Thorpe, 
whom  he  married  in  Ephraim,  July  4. 
1854,  and  with  whom  he  has  had  seven 
children.  By  his  second  wife,  Anna  C. 
Bjerregaard,  whom  he  married  March 
28,  1863,  he  has  had  eight  children,  and 
by  his  third  wife,  Mary  S.  Thomsen, 
whom  he  m.arried  April  25,  1868,  he  has 
had  five  children.  Having  been  con- 
victed of  "unlawful  cohabitation"  with 
his  wives,  he  served  in  the  Utah  peni- 
tentiary from  Oct.  24,  1887  to  Jan.  8, 
1888. 


522 


LATTER-DAY    SAINT 


MAIBEN,  John  Bray,  second  coun- 
selor to  Canute  Peterson,  in  the  presi- 
dency of  the  South  Sanpete  Stake  of 
Zion,  is  the  son  of  Wiliam  Maiben  and 
Catharine  Wiliams  Cator,  and  was  born 
June  16,  1826,  in  Brighton,  Sussex.  Eng- 
land. He  was  baptized  by  John  Banks 
in  London,  England,  July  27,  1848,  or- 
dained a  Deacon  by  John  Banks,  Jan. 
10,  1849;  ordained  a  Priest  by  John 
Hyde,  sen., Nov.  5,  1849,  and  ordained  an 
Elder  by  Apostle  John  Taylor,  June  13, 
1850;  was  appointed  president  of  the 
Flnsbury  branch,  London  conference, 
Dec.  7,  1851,  and  President  of  Holborn 
branch  April  22,  1854;  started  for  Utah 
April  22,  1855,  when  he  was  appointed 
president  of  the  first  ward  in  the  ship 
"Samuel  Curling;"  was  appointed  chap- 


lain in  Moses  Thurston's  independent 
company  July  3,  1855;  arrived  in  Salt 
Lake  City  Sept.  28,  1855;  was  ordained 
a  Seventy  In  the  Eighth  quorum  by 
John  Brown,  Feb.  17,  1856,  and  ordained 
a  president  of  the  quorum  by  Pres. 
Joseph  Young,  Dec.  14,  1857;  appointed 
Bishop  of  Mantl,  Aug.  1,  1875  and  or- 
dained a  High  Priest  and  set  apart  as 
Bishop  by  Pres.  Brigham  Young,  Aug. 
2,  1875;  was  set  apart  as  second  coun- 
selor in  the  presidency  of  the  Sanpete 
Stake  by  Pres.  Brigham  Young,  July 
7,  1877,  and  set  apart  as  first  assistant 
president  of  Manti  Temple  by  Apostle 
Anthon  H.  Lund  Oct.  18,1891.  Elder  Mai- 
ben has  had  a  very  busy  life.havlng filled 
over  fifty  different  ofl^ces,  both  civil 
and  ecclesiastical,  many  of  these  for  a 


long  term  of  years.  In  earlier  days  he 
traveled  extensively  in  the  interests  of 
the  Church,  the  Press,  the  agricultural 
society,  etc.  He  accompanied  Major 
Alexander  McRae  on  the  first  scouting 
expedition  connected  with  the  Echo 
canyon  war.  Subsequently,  he  acted 
as  adjutant  to  Col.  Nathaniel  V.  Jones; 
was  also  secretary  of  the  court  martial 
and  historian  of  the  camp;  and  while 
assisting  Col.  Jones  in  Salt  Lake  City 
to  compile  statistics  he  was  elected 
quartermaster-general  in  the  standing 
army.  He  acted  as  county  superintend- 
ent of  district  schools  in  Sanpete  coun- 
ty. Stake  superintendent  of  Sunday 
schools  for  sixten  years;  had  previously 
acted  as  general  secretary  of  the  Sun- 
day school  union,  and  was  one  of  the 
executive  committee  in  the  first  grand 
Sunday  school  jubilee.  He  is  still  ac- 
tively interested  in  every  movement 
looking  to  the  welfare  of  the  young 
and  the  progress  of  the  Latter-day 
work  and  is  very  desirous  that  Utah  as 
a  State  in  the  great  American  Union 
shall  not  be  a  wTiit  behind  all  other 
States  in  loyality  to  the  government. 

FARNSWORTH,  Moses  Frank- 
lin, chief  recorder  in  the  Manti  Tem- 
ple, was  born  Feb.  5,  1834,  in  Edinburgh, 
Johnson  county,  Indiana,  and  is  the 
son  of  Reuben,  being  in  the  sixth  gen- 
eration in  descent  from  the  emigrant 
ancestor  to  America.  He  reecived  a 
common  school  education,  was  brought 
up  to  the  mercantile  business,  and  be- 
came a  proficient  salesman,  bookkeeper, 
etc.  He  came  to  Utah  in  1853,  driving 
an  ox-team  from  Indianapolis,  Ind.,  to 
Salt  Lake  City,  a  distance  of  nearly 
seventeen  hundred  miles.  He  started 
March  8,  1853,  and  arrived  at  his  des- 
tination Sept.  9,  1853,  and  had  all  the 
experience  that  a  trip  through  the  mud, 
slush  and  snow  over  the  prairies  of  In- 
diana and  Illinois  and  the  waste  plains 
of  Iowa  could  give  in  that  early  day,  as 
well  as  the  hardships  of  the  plains.  Up- 
on arriving  in  Utah,  he  located  at 
Pleasant  Grove,  Utah  county,  and  was 
almost  immediately  enrolled  in  Capt. 
Thorit  Peck's  company  of  militia,  and 
served  in  the  Blackhawk  war.  He  was 
orderly  sergeant,  and  arose  to  the  rank 
of  third  lieutenant  in  company  B,  bat- 
talion of  infantry,  of  Pleasant  Grove 
military  district,  and  was  commissioned 
as  such  by  Gov.  Brigham  Young,  tak- 
ing rank  Nov.  24,  1854.    He  taught  school 


BIOGRAPHICAL.   ENCYCLOPEDIA 


523 


during  the  winter  of  1853-54  and  1854-59, 
took  part  in  the  Echo  canyon  campaign, 
and  was  commissioned  first  lieutenant 
in  Company  B,  first  battalion,  third 
regiment,  infantry  of  Nauvoo  Legion, 
Sept,  28,  1857.  He  was  called  to  take  a 
mission  to  England  in  1862,  and  again  in 
1868,  both  of  which  missions  he  faith- 
fully performed.  In  1870  he  was  called 
to  help  form  the  settlement  of  Kanab, 
Kane  county,  to  which  call  he  respond- 


W  ^H^ 


the  East.  He  gathered  the  ma- 
terial and  wrote  the  history  of  Man- 
ti,  as  published  in  the  local  newspaper 
there;  has  done  a  very  extensive  work 
in  the  Temples  for  his  kindred  dead 
and  is  still  active  and  energetic  in  his 
labors. 

SORENSEX,  Ole,  a  prominent  Elder 
in  Fountain  Green,  Sanpete  county, 
Utah,  was  born  at  Aaby,  near  Aarhus, 
Denmark,  April  7,  1836.  He  was  bap- 
tized April  7,  1860;  ordained  an  Elder 
March  16,  1861,  and  set  apart  to  preside 
over  the  Aarhus  branch.  He  emigrated 
to  Utah  in  1862,  arriving  in  Salt  Lake 
City,  Sept.  27th,  of  that  year.  In  1863  he 
located  in  Fountain  Green,  Sanpete 
county,  where  he  has  resided  ever 
since.     In  1883-85  he  filled  a  mission  to 


-.tfe'i 


ed.  In  all  the  offices  of  trust  and  confi- 
dence held  by  him  he  has  always  dis- 
charged his  duties  faithfully,  and  he  is 
one  of  Utah's  workers  for  the  good  of 
all.  He  has  indeed  shared  in  the  joys 
and  sorrows  of  the  people  of  Utah  since 
his  first  arrival  there.  In  June,  1877,  he 
was  called  to  St.  George,  and  entered 
upon  the  duties  of  recorder  in  the  St. 
George  Temple;  he  continued  there  un- 
til May  9,  1888,  when  he  started  for 
Manti,  and  was  appointed  to  the  same 
position  in  the  Manti  Temple,  which  he 
still  retains.  He  was  ordained  a  Teach- 
er May  16,  1856;  a  Priest  May  16,  1855; 
an  Elder  Nov.  9,  1855;  a  Seventy  May  3, 
1862,  and  a  High  Priest  May  1,  1885. 
He  commenced  gathering  the  genealogy 
of  his  father's  house  in  1877,  and  was 
very  successful  in  its  compilation;  he 
published  the  same  under  the  title  of 
"The  Farnsworth  Memorial,"  in  1897,  as 
the  first  book  of  its  kind  ever  pub- 
lished in  Utah;  it  compares  favorably 
with    any    similar    work    published  in 


Scandinavia,  laboring  first  as  a  travel- 
ing Elder  in  and  later  as  president  of 
the  Aarhus  conference.  Elder  Soren- 
sen  has  labored  as  a  home  missionary 
in  the  Sanpete  Stake,  and  as  president 
of  an  Elders'  quorum. 

LiARSEN.  Christian  Grejs.  first 
president  of  the  Emery  Stake  of  Zion, 
was  born  Dec.  17,  1828,  in  Grejs,  Vejle 
amt,  Denmark,  son  of  Lars  Johansen 
and  Anna  M.  Sorensen.  While  in  the 
military  service  of  the  king  of  Den- 
mark as  a  drafted  soldier,  he  became  a 
convert  to  "Mormonism,"  being  bap- 
tized by  Elder  Andreas  Aagren,  March 
15,  1851,  and  confirmed  the  following 
day  by  Apostle  Erastus  Snow.    In  Sep- 


524 


LATTER-DAT    SAINT 


tember,  following,  he  was  ordained  a 
Priest  and  appointed  to  preach  the  gos- 
pel to  his  military  comrades.  In  De- 
cember, 1S52  (the  term  of  his  military 
service  having  expired),  he  was  called 
to  preside  over  the  Bornholm  confer- 
ence, and  on  the  twenty-fourth  anni- 
versary of  his  birthday  (Dec.  17,  1852) 
he  was  ordained  an  Elder  under  the 
hands  of  Willard  Snow,  John  E.  Fors- 
gren  and  Hans  Peter  Jensen.  Comply- 
ing with  his  missionary  call  he  proceed- 
ed to  the  Island  of  Bornholm,  where  he 
arrived  Dec.  24,  1852,  and  where  he  now 
devoted  some  of  the  best  years  of  his 
life  as  a  zealous  and  successful  laborer 
in  the  Lord's  vineyard.  The  little  flock 
of  Saints  on  the  island  grew  rapidly  in 
number,  under  his  administrations,  and 
many  of  Brother  Larsen's  converts 
have  since  become  active  and  prominent 
members  of  the  Church.  In  the  spring 
of  1857  he  was  released  from  his  mis- 
sionary labors  with  permission  to  emi- 
grate to  Zion.  He  crossed  the  Atlantic 
ocean  In  the  ship  "Westmoreland,"  and 
on  his  arrival  in  Utah  (after  spending 
a  few  weeks  In  Weber  county)  he  set- 
tled in  Ephralm,  Sanpete  county,  where 
he  labored  as  a  Ward  teacher  and  took 
an  active  part  In  local  affairs  until  the 
winter  of  1859-60,  when  he  was  called 
to  preside  as  Bishop  in  Springtown 
(now  Spring  City).  Consequently  he 
moved  his  family  to  that  settlement  and 
presided  there  as  Bishop  from  1860  till 
1868.  In  1873  he  was  called  on  a  special 
mission  to  Europe,  to  succeed  Elder 
Canute  Peterson  In  the  presidency  of 
the  Scandinavian  mission.  Together 
with  other  brethren  he  arrived  in  Cop- 
enhagen, Denmark,  May  30,  1873.  He 
presided  over  the  mission  successfully 
for  two  years  and  returned  to  his  home 
in  Utah  in  1875,  in  charge  of  a  large 
company  of  emigrating  Saints.  In  1880 
he  was  called  to  preside  over  the  Saints 
who  had  settled  in  Castle  Valley,  and 
when  the  settlements  in  that  valley 
soon  afterwards  were  organized  into  the 
Emery  Stake  of  Zion,  Elder  Larsen  was 
set  apart  as  its  president.  He  filled  that 
important  position  until  1899,  when  ill 
health  made  an  honorable  jelease  nec- 
essary. President  Larsen  is  one  of 
the  most  talented  and  successful 
missionaries  which  the  Scandinavian 
mission  has  produced.  He  ranks 
high  as  a  public  speaker,  his  ser- 
mons being  delivered  with  that  force 
and    earnestness    which    is    intended    to 


make  a  deep  and  lasting  impression. 
His  indomitable  will  power  and  keen 
sense  of  justice  makes  him  a  true  type 
of  the  Scandinavian  race,  whose  friend- 
ship is  true  and  abiding  as  the  ever- 
lasting hills,  and  whose  enmity,  if 
aroused,  is  correspondingly  strong. 
President  Larsen,  together  with  his 
brothers,  John,  Lauritz  and  Christian 
J.,  who  have  become  widely  known 
throughout  the  Church,  will  never  be 
forgotten  by  the  Saints  of  God.  Com- 
mencing their  career  as  Latter-day 
Saint  missionaries  in  their  native  land, 
when  they  were  mere  boys,  they  have 
ever  stood  up  manfully  and  fearlessly 
for  truth  and  right,  and  have  never 
flinched  from  duty  or  responsibility. 

MILLER,  Reuben  Gardner,  sec- 
ond president  of  the  Emery  Stake  of 
Zion,  was  born  Nov.  7,  1861,  in  Mill 
Creek,  Salt  Lake  county,  Utah,  son  of 
James  R.  Miller  and  Mary  Jane  Gard- 
ner, who  still  reside  in  Mill  Creek 
Ward.  His  grandfather  was  the  late 
Bishop  Reuben  Miller,  universally 
known  throughout  the  Church.  His 
mother  was  a  pioneer  of  1847,  having 
come  to  Great  Salt  Lake  valley  with 
her  parents,  Robert  and  Jane  Gardner, 
in  the  second  company  of  that  season's 
emigration.  Young  Reuben  was  bap- 
tized Nov.  1,  1877.  by  his  grandfather, 
Reuben  Miller,  and  confirmed  by  Oliver 
Mawson.  Soon  afterwards  he  was  or- 
dained to  the  office  of  a  Priest;  later 
(1884)  he  was  ordained  an  Elder  by 
Asahel  Fuller,  and  still  later  a  Seventy 
in  the  61st  quorum  by  Edward  F.  M. 
Guest.  In  1888-90  he  filled  a  mission 
to  the  Southern  States,  laboring  in  the 
West  Virginia  conference  and  after-" 
wards  as  secretary  of  the  mission  under 
the  direction  of  Pres.  Wm.  Spry.  He 
returned  home  Dec.  21,  1890.  Since  his 
return  from  that  mission  he  has  been 
engaged  in  raising  cattle,  horses  and 
sheep,  and  removed  some  years  ago  to 
Carbon  county,  where  he  served  as  a 
county  commissioner  in  1894  and  1895. 
In  the  fall  of  the  latter  year  he  was 
elected  State  senator  to  the  first  State 
legislature  of  Utah  from  the  twelfth 
senatorial  district;  he  also  served  as 
a  member  of  the  third  State  legislature 
from  Carbon  county  in  the  house  of 
representatives.  At  a  quarterly  con- 
ference held  Jan.  16,  1899,  he  was  or- 
dained a  High  Priest  and  set  apart  to 
preside  over  the  Emery  Stake  of  Zion 


BIOGRAPHICAL   ENCYCLOPEDIA. 


525 


under  the  hands  of  Apostle  Francis 
M.  Lyman.  In  a  local  capacity  Pres. 
Miller  has  held  a  number  of  offlces, 
both  by  election  and  appointment,  and 
is  throughout  a  public-spirited  man 
and  a  natural  leader  among  his  breth- 
ren. 

EWELiLi,  Francis  Marion,  senior 
president  of  the  101st  Quorum  of  Seven- 
ty, was  born  in  Ray  county,  Missouri, 
Nov.  3,  1835,  son  of  \Vm.  F.  Ewell  and 
Mary  Bland.  As  a  member  of  his 
father's  family,  he  went  with  the  ex- 
iled Saints  to  Council  Bluffs,  Iowa, 
where  his  father  joined  the  Mormon 
Battalion,  and  left  his  family  in  poor 
circumstances  in  the  wilderness. 
Francis  was  then  eleven  years  old,  be- 
ing the  eldest  child  in  the  family.     He 


came  to  the  Valley  with  his  mother  and 
family  in  1849,  walking  the  entire  dis- 
tance across  the  plains.  After  living 
for  several  years  in  Weber  county,  he 
located  in  Provo,  Utah  county,  about 
1855.  Here  he  pasesd  through  the  hard 
times  of  1855-56,  during  which  period 
he  lived  on  fish  alone  for  six  weeks. 
At  the  time  of  the  Johnston  army  trou- 
bel  in  1857-58,  he  was  sent  to  do  guard 
duty  in  Echo  canyon.  He  married 
Fanny  Weech  July  27,  1858,  and  soon 
afterwards  he  moved  to  "the  old  Fort" 
in  Gkjshen,  and  later  (1860)  settled  in 
Payson,  where  he.  engaged  in  manu- 
facturing nails  and  hoop  iron,  from 
chains  and  wagon  tires  which  had  been 
brought  in  by  the  army.  Subsequent- 
ly he  located  at  a  mill  which  he  owned 


on  Summit  creek,  near  Santaquin.  He 
served  as  a  soldier  in  the  Blackhawk 
war,  and  about  1877  he  went  into  the 
business  of  manufacturing  shingles.  He 
had  just  completed  and  repaired  his 
mill  on  Summit  creek,  when  it  was 
destroyed  by  fire,  causing  a  loss  of  $2,- 
500.  But  he  built  another  one  further 
up  the  stream.  In  1882  he  moved  to 
Price  river,  Emery  county,  where  he 
presided  over  the  Spring  Glen  branch  of 
the  Price  Ward  from  1883  to  1889,  and 
where  he  still  resides,  and  is  engaged  in 
farming.  In  the  different  places  where 
he  has  resided.  Elder  Ewell  has  served 
as  a  teacher  and  superintendent  of 
Sunday  schools,  and  been  a  member  of 
several  choirs.  He  was  the  first  Sun- 
day school  superintendent  in  Spring 
Glen,  and  the  first  school  trustee  and 
the  leader  of  the  first  dramatic  associa- 
tion organized  on  Price  river.  He  was 
ordained  a  Seventy  Feb.  20,  1888,  and 
set  apart  as  senior  president  of  the 
101st  quorum  of  Seventy  Nov.  5,  1891. 
Brother  Ewell  is  the  father  of  nine 
children,  seven  of  whom  are  living. 

ERICKSON,  Einar,  clerk  of  Cleve- 
land Ward,  Emery  county,  Utah,  is  the 
son  of  Erick  Runolfson  and  Gudrun 
Johanson,  and  was  bom  in  Skaftafels 
amt,  Iceland,  Dec.  30,  1847.  In  the 
spring  of  1873  two  "Mormon"  Elders 
came  to  Westmanoen  (Westman  is- 
land), where  Bro.  Erickson  resided. 
Having  been  apprised  of  their  coming 
by  dreams  and  visions  he  was  ready 
to  receive  their  message,  and  was  con- 
sequently baptized  May  9.  1874,  by  El- 
der Magnus  Byarnason.  On  the  29th 
he  was  confirmed  a  member  of  the 
Church,  and  ordained  an  Elder  by  El- 
der Loptur  Johnson.  A  branch  of  the 
Church  with  eight  members  was  or- 
ganized on  the  island  that  day,  and 
Bro.  Erickson  was  called  to  preside 
over  it,  when  the  misionaries  left  for 
Zion  a  few  days  later.  He  continued 
to  labor  in  that  calling  till  1880,  when 
he  emigrated  to  Utah.  During  the  time 
he  acted  as  branch  president  he  bap- 
tized sixteen  persons.  On  his  arrival 
in  Utah  he  located  in  Spanish  Fork, 
Utah  county,  where  he  subsequently 
was  ordained  a  Seventy  by  Isaiah  M. 
Coombs.  He  was  set  apart  by  Apostle 
Franklin  D.  Richards  for  a  mission  to 
Iceland  April  11,  1885,  and  left  Salt 
Lake  City  for  his  field  of  labor  the  fol- 
lowing day.       He  labored   successfully 


526 


LATTER-DAY    SAINT 


in  Iceland  till  Aug.  18,  1886.  during 
which  time  thirty-one  persons  were 
baptized,  and  seventy-five  Saints  emi- 
grated to  Utah.  He  returned  to  his  home 
in  Spanish  Fork  Sept.  7,  1886.  Together 
with  Theodore  Didrickson  he  labored 
as  an  acting  Priest  among  the  Saints 
from  Iceland   in  Spanish  Fork,   during 


the  winter  of  1887-88.  In  1888  he  assist- 
ed in  the  erection  of  a  meeting  house 
in  Spanish  Fork,  for  the  Icelandic 
Saints.  In  18S9  he  moved  to  Cleveland, 
Emery  county,  Utah,  where  he  resides 
at  the  present  time.  He  was  chosen 
superintendent  of  the  Cleveland  Sun- 
day school  Feb.  9,  1890,  and  set  apart 
as  one  of  the  presidents  of  the  81st 
quorum  of  Seventy  Feb.  8,  1892.  For 
the  past  twelve  years  he  has  labored 
as  a  Ward  teacher  and  as  an  acting 
Priest.  He  is  also  at  present  serving 
as  Ward   clerk   in  Cleveland. 

COLEMLAN,  George,  a  Patriarch  in 
the  Wayne  Stake  of  Zion,  is  the  son  of 
Prime  Coleman  and  Sarah  Thornton, 
and  was  born  in  Warden  parish,  Bed- 
fordshire, England,  May  5,  1827.  Early 
in  life  he  evidenced  a  desire  to  know 
God,  and  identify  himself  with  the  true 
Church.  He  was  baptized  in  August, 
1841,  and  in  the  fall  of  1842,  together 
with  his  father's  family,  he  left  for 
Ameiica  on  board  the  ship  "Swanton," 
which  sailed  from  Liverpool  with  a 
company  of  Saints  in  charge  of  Apos- 
tle Lorenzo  Snow.  They  landed  at 
New  Orleans,  whence  they  continued 
the  journey  up  the  Mississippi  river  to 


Nauvoo,  111.,  where  they  arrived  in 
April,  1843.  In  the  spring  of  1844  George 
lost  his  father  and  sister  by  death;  this 
left  his  mother  with  seven  children, 
of  whom  he  was  the  oldest.  He  was 
ordained  a  Seventy  and  enrolled  as  a 
member  of  the  22nd  quorum,  in  1844. 
With  his  mother's  family  he  crossed 
the  Mississippi  river  in  May,  1846,  in 
Bishop  David  Evan's  company.  On. 
the  way  to  Winter  Quarters  they 
camped  on  the  Nodaway  for  the  winter, 
but  they  ran  out  of  provisions  and  had 
to  go  to  new  quarters  in  search  of 
food,  as  they  had  lived  three  weeks  on 
quarter  rations,  consisting  of  slippery 
elm  bark  and  flour.  During  this  time 
George  was  kept  very  busy  getting  to- 
gether  the   necessary     outfit  and   sup- 


plies for  the  trip  west.  In  the  spring 
of  1849  the  way  was  opened  for  the 
family  to  go  to  the  Valley.  George 
engaged  to  drive  team  from  St.  Jo- 
seph, Mo.,  to  Fort  Hall.  He  continued 
on  to  California  and  did  not  arrive  in 
Utah  till  1852,  when  he  joined  his  rela- 
tives at  Lehi,  Utah  county.  In  1857  he 
married,  and  in  1864  moved  to  Smith- 
field,  Cache  county.  He  filled  a  mission 
to  Arizona  in  1876.  In  1877  he  moved 
to  Escalante,  where  he  was  called  to 
labor  as  second  counselor  to  B:shop 
Anders  P.  Schou.  Later,  hrf  moved  to 
Rabbit  valley,  where  he  became  one  of 
the  first  settlers  of  what  is  now  known 
as  Teasdale,  Wayne  county.  After  la- 
boring here  two  years  as  presiding  El- 
der, a  Ward  organization  was  effected 
in  February,  1886,  when  he  was  chosen 
IMshop,  to  preside  over  the  new  Ward 


BIOGRAPHICAL   ENCYCLOPEDIA. 


527 


(Teasdale);  he  was  ordained  and  set 
apart  to  that  office  by  Bishop  Wm.  B. 
Preston.  He  labored  in  this  capacity 
until  May,  1900,  when  he  was  ordained 
a  Patriarch  by  Apostle  Francis  M. 
Lyman,  his  son,  George  S.  Coleman, 
succeeding-  him  as  Bishop.  In  his  old 
age,  Geo.  Coleman  enjoys  the  love  and 
confidence  of  all  who  know  him.  He 
has  obeyed  every  revealed  principle  of 
the  gospel,  and  to-day  shines  forth  as  a 
light  to  the  youth  of  Zion. 

MANSFIELD,     Matthew    Winberg, 

Bishop  of  Thurber,  Wayne  county, 
Utah,  from  1894  to  1900,  is  the  son  of 
Matthew  Mansfield  and  Johanna  C. 
Winberg,  and  was  born  Jan.  15, 
1862,  on  the  "old  camp  ground," 
east  of  St.  George,  Utah.  He 
lived  in  St.  George  for  twenty  years, 
when  he  removed  to  Thurber,  Wayne 
county  (in  1882),  where  he  still  resides. 
Feb  23,  1882,  he  married  Sina  A.  Hunt, 
with  whom  he  had  seven  children.  She 
died  in  1887,  and  in  1899  he  married  An- 
nie M.  Bastian.  From  his  early  youth 
Elder  Mansfield  has  been  active  in  ec- 
clesiastical work.  He  was  ordained 
successively  to  the  following  orders  of 
the  Priesthood:  Deacon,  Elder,  Seventy 
and  High  Priest.  To  the  latter  office 
he  was  ordained  by  Apostle  Lorenzo 
Snow,  June  24,  1889.  He  has  labored  as 
a  Sunday  school  superintendent,  presid- 
ed over  the  Y.  M.  M.  I.  A.  and  acted  as 
a  Bishop's  counselor.  From  Nov.  26, 
1394,  to  August,  1900,  he  served  as  Bish- 
op of  the  Thurber  Ward.  He  is  at 
present  laboring  as  superintendent  of 
the  Y.  M.  M.  I.  A.  in  Wayne  Stake.  In 
a  civil  capacity  he  has  held  numerous 
offices.  Thus  he  served  as  a  member  of 
the  Utah  State  legislature  during  the 
first  and  third  sessions;  he  was  also  a 
member  of  the  Constitutional  Conven- 
tion of  1887,  and  served  as  assessor  and 
collector  of  Piute  county,  and  county 
attorney  for  several  years.  He  has  been 
engaged  in  saw-milling,  merchandising, 
sheep  and  cattle  raising  and  farming. 
In  1899  he  was  admitted  to  the  bar,  as 
an  attorney,  before  the  Supreme  court 
of  Utah.  Elder  Mansfield  ranks  high 
among  the  "self-made"  men  of  the 
community. 

CALLISTER,  Thomas,  first  presi- 
dent of  the  Millard  Stake  of  Zion,  is  the 
son  of  John  Callister  and  Catherine 
Murphy,  and  was  born  July  8,  1821,  on 
the  Isle  of  Man.  He  was  left  an  orphan 
at  an  early  age,  and  thus  situated  he 


was  obliged  to  battle  for  life,  with  no 
other  resources  than  courage  and  an 
honest  heart.  Early  in  1840  he  heard 
Elder  John  Taylor  preach  on  the  first 
principles  of  the  gospel,  and  in  March, 
1841,  he  was  baptized  by  Elder  Wm. 
Mitchell  and  confirmed  by  Elder  John 
Taylor.  In  the  spring  of  1842,  he  emi- 
grated to  Nauvoo,  and  during  the  sub- 
sequent years  he  endured  with  the 
Church  the  bitter  persecution  which 
characterized  those  days.    In  February, 

1846,  he  left  Nauvoo  for  the  west,  and 
after  spending  the  winter  of  1846-47  at 
Winter  Quarters,  he  went  to  Great  Salt 
Lake    Valley,    arriving    there    Sept.    25, 

1847.  Thus  he  was  "one  of  the  pioneers 
of  Utah,  as  he  had  previously  been  of 
the  principle  of  celestial  marriage."  He 
settled  in  Salt  Lake  City,  and  was  soon 
actively  engaged  in  public  matters  of 
various  kinds.  In  1853  he  was  sent 
south  as  far  as  Red  creek,  Iron  county, 
to  assist  in  pacifying  some  unfriendly 
Indians,  and  on  his  return  was  sent 
west  on  a  similar  mission.  In  1855 
Brother  Callister  was  appointed  Bishop 
of  the  17th  Ward,  Salt  Lake  City. 
Many  of  the  inhabitants  of  that  Ward 
will  remember  the  genial  face  of  their 
former  Bishop,  and  especially  those  that 
were  acquainted  with  his  untiring  ef- 
forts to  alleviate  the  sufferings  of  the 
poor  during  the  "grasshapper  war." 
And  others  who  have  since  grown  to 
man  and  womanhood  will  remember  the 
"juvenile  meetings,"  and  feel  grateful 
for  the  anxious  care  and  fatherly  inter- 
est manifested  in  their  behalf  by  Bish- 
op Callister.  Sept.  18,  1857,  he  received 
orders  from  the  commander  of  the  Nau- 
voo Legion  to  march  the  next  morning 
with  a  portion  of  the  2nd  regiment  to 
the  Sweet  Water  country.  He  was 
absent  on  that  expedition  76  days.  Again 
on  April  3rd  following,  he  w^as  ordered 
east  with  100  cavalry  and  500  infantry. 
He  served  as  major.  The  last  expedi- 
tion took  place  coincident  with  the  ex- 
odus south  in  1858.  On  the  return  of 
the  Saints  to  their  homes.  Brother  Cal- 
lister resumed  the  duties  of  Bishop  of 
the  17th  Ward,  and  continued  to  labor 
therein  until  the  spring  of  1861,  when  he 
was  called  to  Millard  county  and  ap- 
pointed presiding  Bishop  of  the  county. 
He  labored  in  that  capacity  till  1869," 
when  he  was  appointed  president  of 
Millard  Stake,  which  position  he  occu- 
pied for  eleven  years,  or  until  1877, 
when,  in  the  language  of  Apostle  Eras- 
tus  Snow,  he  was  "released  for  a  sea- 


528 


LATTER-DAY  SAINT 


son  that  he  might  rest."  Brother  Cal- 
llster  was  afterwards  ordained  a  Patri- 
arch for  the  Millard  Stake.  At  the  re- 
organization of  the  Nauvoo  Legion,  he 
was  unanimously  chosen  colonel  of  the 
regiment  raised  in  the  district,  known 
as  the  Pahvant.  He  was  also  a  mem- 
ber of  the  Utah  legislature  for  many 
years,  and  in  all  the  positions  occupied 
by  him  he  was  esteemed  for  his  fidelity 
to  right  and  justice.  His  hospitality 
was  hounded  onVy  by  the  demands  ui>on 
it.  and  for  nineteen  years  many  hun- 
dreds in  all  paits  of  Utah  can  testify  to 
the  heartiness  with  which  he  and  his 
estimable  family  entertained  the  pass- 
ers to  and  from  the  South.  Pres.  Cal- 
lister's  labors  in  Millard  county  were 
characteiized  by  a  kind  and  gentle 
spirit,  and  in  his  private  as  well  as 
public  career,  and  in  his  family  rela- 
tions he  manifested  his  faith  in  love 
and  kindness  as  being  the  greatest 
principles  of  government.  His  energy 
was  almost  tireless  In  his  efforts  to 
benefit  the  younger  members  of  his 
Hock.  Sunday  schools  were  organized 
soon  after  his  appointment  to  preside 
in  Millard  county,  and  long  before  the 
Saints  were  "forced  into"  those  organ- 
izations as  a  "measure  of  self-defense" 
for  the  "onslaught"  of  Sectarianism. 
Brother  Callister  was  also  a  promoter 
of  improvement  societies,  and  in  fact 
everything  that  was  for  the  welfare  of 
the  Saints.  And  in  his  pacific  policy 
with  the  red  man  he  was  always  suc- 
cessful, and  universally  esteemed  by 
them.  He  was  the  father  of  32  children, 
not  one  of  whom  has  ever  denied  the 
faith  taught  them  by  their  father.  In 
September,  1879,  he  was  taken  ill  with 
cramp  colic,  and  never  was  well  after- 
wards, and  for  eleven  months  he  was 
almost  entirely  confined  to  his  house 
and  bed,  and  gradually  wasted  away. 
The  day  previous  to  his  death  he  re- 
quested the  attendance  of  the  choir. 
After  singing  and  pi'ayer.  Bishop  Jos. 
D.  Smith  and  others  administered  the 
Saci'ament  to  lirother  ("allister,  when 
the  choir  again  sang  hymns  of  his  se- 
lection. He  then  thanked  the  choir  for 
past  and  present  kindness,  blessed 
them,  and  expressed  the  hope  of  soon 
meeting  them  in  the  great  hereafter. 
The  next  evening,  Dec.  1,  1880,  he  died 
at  his  home  in  Fillmore.  In  the  death 
of  Prest.  Callister,  Fillmore  lost  one  of 
its  most  respected  citizens  and  the 
Church  one  of  its  most  sincere  adher- 
ents and  earnest  defenders. 


HINCKLEY,  Ira  Nathaniel,  sec- 
ond president  of  the  Millard  Stake  of 
7.ion,  is  the  son  of  Nathaniel  Hinckley 
and  Lois  Judd,  and  was  born  in  Upper 
Canada,  Oct.  30,  1828.  He  was  baptized 
in  Nauvoo  when  about  sixteen  years  of 
age.  In  1846  he  left  Nauvoo  in  the 
general  exodus,  and  went  to  Missouri 
v.here  he  lived  for  three  years.  He 
liiarried  in  1848,  and  crossed  the  plains 
to  the  Valley  in  1850.  His  wife  died 
with  the  cholera  while  making  this 
journey.  After  arriving  in  Salt  Lake 
City,  he  located  in  the  First  Ward, 
where  he  acted  as  a  Ward  teacher.  He 
also  served  five  years  as  a  policeman 
in  Salt  Lake  City.  In  1856  he  superin- 
tended the  building  of  a  fort  for  the 
Y.  X.  company,  30  miles  west  of  Fort 
Laramie.  In  1862  he  was  a  member 
of  the  expedition  sent  out  under  Lot 
Smith  to  protect  the  mail  route.  In 
1863  he  settled  in  Coalville,  Summit 
county,  and  in  1867  he  was  called  by 
Pres.  Brigham  Young  to  Cove  creek,  to 
superintend  the  building  of  the 
Church  fort  at  that  place.  He  resided 
there  until  1877,  when  he  was  called  to 
succeed  the  late  Thomas  Callister  as 
president  of  the  Millard  Stake  of  Zion, 
which  position   he   still   occupies. 

CALLISTER,  Thomas  C  Bishop  of 
Fillmore,    Millard    county,    Utah,    from 


1S85   to   1901,    was   born    in     Salt     Lake 
City,  Utah,  Aug.  2,  1852,  son  of  Thomas 


BIOGRAPHICAL    ENCYCLOPEDIA. 


529 


Callister  and  Helen  Mar  Clark.  In 
the  month  of  May,  1861,  he  removed 
with  his  parents  to  Fillmore,  his  father 
having  been  previously  called  to  pre- 
side over  the  Saints  in  Millard  county. 
He  received  the  greater  part  of  his 
educational  training  at  the  Deseret 
University  under  the  tuition  of  Dr. 
John  R.  Park,  and  later  he  completed  a 
commercial  course  at  Morgan's  com- 
mercial college.  He  followed  the  occu- 
pation of  accountant  for  several  years 
and  then  engaged  in  the  business  of 
farming  and  stock-raising.  Feb.  22, 
1885,  he  was  ordained  a  Bishop  and 
set  apart  to  preside  over  the  Fillmore 
Ward.  He  has  filled  the  ofHce  of  State 
superintendent  of  Sunday  schools  in 
Millard  Stake,  Ward  superintendent  of 
Sunday  school  in  Fillmore  Ward  and 
a  member  of  the  High  Council  of  Mil- 
lard Stake.  Civilly  he  has  served  as  a 
member  of  the  legislature,  and  has 
held  several  other  offices  under  the 
Jaw.  The  principal  part  of  Elder  Cal- 
lister's  life  has  been  devoted  to  the 
service  of  the  public. 

ANDERSON,  Christian,  Bishop  of 
Fillmore,  Millard  county,  Utah,  was 
born  May  6,  1840,  at  Gulborg,  Brarup 
parish,     Falster,     Denmark.      He     was 


baptized  March  9,  1854,  by  Elder  N.  C. 
Poulsen,  and  was  called  to  labor  as  a 
local  missionary  on  the  islands  of 
Falster  and  Lolland,  in  May,  1857. 
Later,    he    labored   as   a    missionary    in 

Val.   1,   No.   34. 


the  city  of  Copenhagen.  In  1862  he 
emigrated  to  Utah,  and  located  in 
Gunnison,  Sanpete  county.  He  moved 
to  Richfield,  Sevier  county.  In  1865, 
where  he  resided  till  the  spring  of 
1867,  when,  on  account  of  the  Black- 
hawk  war,  he,  together  with  the  rest 
of  the  settlers,  vacated  that  settle 
ment.  In  the  spring  of  1868  he  moved 
to  Fillmore,  Millard  county,  where  he 
ha<^  resided  ever  since.  He  was  or- 
dained a  Seventy  in  1873,  and  became  a 
president  in  the  42nd  quorum.  In  1876 
he  was  ordained  a  High  Priest  and 
chosen  as  a  member  of  the  High  Coun- 
cil of  the  Millard  Stake.  Since  1879  he 
has  served  as  Stake  clerk,  and  since 
1887  he  has  also  been  Stake  tithing 
clerk,.  In  1888  he  w-as  chosen  presi- 
dent of  the  High  Priests'  quorum  in 
Millard  Stake.  Jan.  27,  1901,  he  was  or- 
dained a  Bishop  and  set  apart  to  pre- 
side over  the  Fillmore  Ward.  In  civil 
life  Elder  Anderson  has  held  such  offi- 
ces as  city  councilman,  recorder,  at- 
torney and  justice  of  the  peace,  m  Fill- 
more city,  and  clerk,  recorder  and 
treasurer  of  Millard  county.  He  has 
been  successfully  engageu  in  farming, 
stock-raising,  mining,  merchandising, 
and  IS  at  present  conducting  a  drug 
store.  In  1863  he  married  Rasmine 
Andersen;  in -1875,  he  married  Anna  K. 
Steck  Beauregard,  and  in  1878  he  mar- 
ried Anna  D.  Christiansen  and  Hannah 
K.  Christiansen.  He  is  the  father  of 
twenty-two  children.  In  1889  and  1890 
he  served  seventeen  months'  imprison- 
ment in  the  Utah  penitentiary  for  liv- 
i  ig'  with  his  plural  wives. 

BOBISON,       Benjamin       Hancock, 

a  High  Councilor  in  the  Millard  Stake 
of  Zion  from  1869  to  1882,  was  born  Nov. 
9.  1831,  in  the  State  of  New  York,  son 
of  Joseph  Robison  and  Lucretia  Han- 
cock. When  but  a  small  boy  he  emi- 
grated with  his  parents  to  Illinois,  ex- 
pecting to  join  the  Saints  in  Nauvoo, 
but  the  Prophet  Joseph  being  martyred 
at  that  time,  the  family  settled  in  Will 
county,  just  south  of  Chicago,  where 
they  remained  till  1854.  Benjamin  mar- 
ried Lillis  A.  Andree,  May  12.  1853.  Hav- 
ing embraced  the  gospel,  the  family 
were  never  satisfied  with  their  Illinois 
home,  although  fortune  smiled  on  them 
financially;  their  hearts  were  with 
their  co-religionists  in  the  Rocky  Moun- 
tains. Consequently  they  sold  their 
home   and   started    for   Utah   in   April, 

Aug.  24.  1901. 


530 


LATTER-DAY    SAINT 


1854:  they  arrived  in  Salt  Lake  City 
in  August  the  same  year.  After  pay- 
ing their  tithing  they  continued  the 
Journey  south  to  Fillmore,  Millard 
county.  Here  Bro.  Robison  worked 
with  his  family,  to  reclaim  the  desert, 
by  breaking  the  soil,  digging  ditches, 
building  forts,  standing  guard  to  pro- 
tect the  community  against  the  In- 
dians, and  in  fact  anything  common 
to  the  lot  of  a  frontiersman.  In  1861 
he  went  back  to  Illinois,  where  he 
spent  the  following  winter  and  summer. 
He  was  called  to  Deseret,  Millard  coun- 
ty, in  the  fall  of  1863,  to  preside  over 
the  Saints  there,   who  were  struggling 


¥ 


his  demise  he  was  mayor  of  the  city, 
and  so  deeply  was  his  loss  felt>  that 
the  court  house  bell  was  muffled  and 
kept  tolling  all  day  long.  By  his  first 
wife  he  raised  four  sons  and  two 
daughters,  and  by  his  second  wife  five 
sons  and  three  daughters,  all  of  whom, 
together  with  their  mothers,  are  fol- 
lowing in  the  path  he  marked  out  for 
them,  being  faithful  members  of  the 
Church. 

STEPHENSON,  Anthony,  Bishop 
of  Holden  Ward,  is  the  son  of  Thos  C. 
Stephensen  and  Maren  Simonsen,  and 
was  born  April  5,  1852,  in  Jerslev  par- 
ish, Hjorring  Amt,  Denmark.  He  emi- 
grated with  his  parents  to  Utah  in 
1862,  crossing  the  Atlantic  in  the  ship 
"Franklin,"  and  located  in  Holden, 
Millard  county,  in  1868,  where  he  has  re- 
sided ever  since.  March  9,  1874,  he 
married  Mary  Ann  Bennett,  in  the  En- 
dowment House,  Salt  Lake  City,  by 
whom  he  has  had  eleven  children,  nine 
of  whom  are  now  living.  On  the  day 
of  his  marriage  he  was  also  ordained 
an  Elder.  Nov.  25,  1889,  he  was  ordain- 
ed a  High  Priest  by  Abraham  H.  Can- 


to put  in,  and  keep  a  dam  in  the  Se- 
vier river;  he  spent  his  time  and 
means  working  to  make  the  undertak- 
ing a  success  until  the  spring  of  1868, 
when  he  was  honorably  released  to  re- 
turn to  his  home  in  Fillmore.  In  1863 
he  married  Su.sannah  Turner,  thus 
obeying  the  principle  of  plural  mar- 
riage. At  the  organization  of  the  Mil- 
lard Stake  of  Zion  he  was  chosen  as  one 
of  the  High  Council,  and  was  set  apart 
to  that  position  March  9,  1869,  which 
office  he  held  until  the  time  of  his 
death,  which  occuirt-d  in  Fillmore,  Dec. 
24,  1882.  Elder  Ilobison  was  a  public- 
spirited  man,  and  filled  many  positions 
of  tiust  in  the  community.  His  natur- 
al ability  always  kept  him  in  the  front 
ranks.  In  law  matters  he  was  regard- 
ed as  good  authority,  and  was  repeat- 
edly elected  justice  of  the  peace  for 
the    city    of    Fillmore.    At    the    time    of 


non,  and  set  apart  as  second  counse- 
lor to  Bishop  Stevens,  of  the  Holden 
Ward;  and  on  Aug.  22,  1890,  he  was  or- 
dained to  the  office  of  a  Bishop,  and 
set  apart  to  preside  over  said  Ward,  by 
Apostle  Francis  M.  Lyman.  From  his 
early  youth  Bishop  Stephenson  has 
taken  an  active  part  in  Church  affairs; 
he  acted  as  president  of  the  Ward  Y. 
M.    M.    I.    A.,    and    as   assistant   super- 


BIOGRAPHICAL    ENCYCLOPEDIA. 


531 


intendent  of  the  Holden  Sunday  school. 
For  eighteen  years  he  was  superin- 
tendent of  the  Holden  Co-operative 
Store.  Before  he  became  associated  with 
the  Bishopric  he  was  a  member  of  the 
21  St  quorum  of  Seventy,  having  been 
ordained  to  that  ofRce  by  Nathan  B. 
Baldwin. 

MEMMOTT,  Thomas,  president  of 
the  High  Priests'  quorum  in  the  Mil- 
lard Stake  of  Zion,  is  the  son  of  Wil- 
liam Memmott  and  Ann  Wilson,  and 
was  born  at  Sheffield,  Yorkshire,  Eng- 
land, Feb.  27,  1838.  His  parents  joined 
the  Church  when  he  was  about  nine 
years  old,  and  he  was  baptized  July  21, 
1850,  by  his  father.  Dec.  30,  1854,  he  was 
ordained  a  Priest  by  Elder  Chas.  Whar- 
ton, and  was  sent  out  to  preach  the 
gospel  on  the  streets  of  his  native 
town.  This  missionary  labor  he  con- 
tinued till  he  emigrated  to  Utah.  April 
12,  1857,  he  married  Emma  Whitham, 
and  he  was  ordained  an  Elder  June  23, 
1859,  by  Edward  L.  Sloan.  That  his 
life  in  the  Sheffield  branch  was  an 
active  one  is  proven  by  the  fact  that 
he  acted  as  branch  book  agent,  branch 
clerk,  presiding  teacher  of  a  district, 
and  choir  leader.  May  14,  1862,  he  left 
Liverpool,  on  board  the  ship  "William 
Tapscott,"  and  sailed  for  America.  On 
his  arrival  in  Salt  Lake  City,  Sept.  30, 
1862,  he  met  his  wife  and  children  who 
had  emigrated  the  year  previous.  Dur- 
ing the  winter  of  1862-63  he  taught 
school  at  Round  valley  (now  Scipio). 
Early  in  1864  he  moved  to  Deseret, 
where  he  asissted  in  putting  in  a  dam 
in  the  Sevier  river,  and  where  he,  in 
common  with  many  others,  endured 
many  hardships.  "While  in  Deseret  he 
was  appointed  clerk  cf  the  branch,  choir 
leader,  a  Teacher  and  superintendent 
of  the  Sabbath  school,  etc.  Oct.  30, 
1865,  he  was  commissioned  adjutant  of 
the  third  battalion,  first  regiment  of 
the  Utah  militia.  He  was  ordained  a 
Seventy  in  September,  1865,  by  John 
W.  Radford,  and  appointed  postmaster 
of  Deseret,  June  16,  1866.  In  October, 
1868.  he  moved  back  to  Scipio,  where 
he  has  resided  ever  since.  Here  he  has 
served  as  choir  leader,  superintendent 
of  Sunday  school,  and  Ward  clerk. 
From  1883  to  1897.  he  served  as  a  presi- 
dent and  as  clerk  of  the  21st  quorum 
of  Seventy.  He  was  made  the  senior 
president  of  the  111th  quorum  Feb.  21, 
1897,   holding  that  position  till  Feb.   25. 


1901,  when  he  was  ordained  a  High 
Priest  by  Apostle  Francis  M.  Lyman 
and  set  apart  as  president  of  the  High 
Priests,  and  superintendent  of  Sabbath 
schools  and  religion  classes,  in  the 
Millard  Stake  of  Zion.  Brother  Mem- 
mott has  served  as  postmaster,  justice 
of  the  peace,  and  notary  public,  in 
Scipio.  His  first  wife  having  died  Sept. 
9,  1898,  he  married  Catherine  Hunter 
May  30,  1900. 

WHITE,  Charles  Dennis,  sec- 
ond president  of  the  Beaver  Stake  of 
Zion,  was  born  Sept.  10,  1851,  in  Lehi, 
Utah  county,  Utah,  son  of  Samuel  D. 
White  and  Mary  H.  Burton.  He  re- 
moved with  his  parents  to  Cedar  City, 
Iron  county,  in  1853,  and  thence  to 
Beaver,  in  1859,  where  he  has  resided 
ever  since.  Here  he  was  baptized,  or- 
dained   a    Deacon    and    presided    ovei 


the  Deacon's  quorum.  In  1868,  when  six- 
teen years  old,  he  was  ordained  an  El- 
der, received  his  endowments  and  was 
sent  to  Laramie,  as  a  Church  team- 
ster, in  Capt.  John  R.  Murdock's  gom- 
pany.  "^'hen  a  branch  of  the  United 
Order  was  organized  in  Beaver,  Brother 
White  was  appointed  to  take  charge  of 
the  Order  teams.  In  1877  he  was  or- 
dained a  High  Priest  and  Bishop  and 
appointed  to  preside  over  the  Beaver 
First  Ward.  He  acted  in  that  capacity 
for  ''ourteen  years,  or  until  June  27, 
1891,  when  he  was  chosen  and  set  apart 
as  Elder  John  R.  Murdock's  successor 
in  the  office  of  president  of  the  Beaver 
Stake  of  Zion,  which  high  and  import- 
ant office  he  still  holds. 


532 


LATTER-DAY    SAINT 


SMITH,   John    Calvin    Ijazelle,  first 
president     of    the     Parowan     Stake    of 
Zion,  was  the  son  of  Calvin  and  Nancy 
M.    Smith,   and   was  born  Sept.   8,   1821. 
in  New  Salem,  Franklin  county,  Mass. 
He  received  the  gospel  in  1841,  at  New 
Salem,    and   was   ordained   a   Priest   in 
1842.    He  went  to  Nauvoo  in  1843,  where 
he    was    ordained    a    Seventy,    and    re- 
ceived his  blessings  in  the  House  of  the 
Lord.     In   1S46  he  married  Sarah   Fish, 
daughter  of  Horace  and  Hannah  Fish, 
anil  remained    at      Nauvoo      until    the 
Saints  were  driven  into  the  wilderness. 
In  1S4S  he  left  Council  Bluffs  and  came 
to   Great    Salt    Lake    valley,    where    he 
lived    until    he    was    sent    to    Parowan, 
where  he  arrived  May  9,  1851.     In  May, 
1852,  he  was  ordained  a  High  Priest  by 
the   direction   of   the    First   Presidency, 
and   was  ai)pointed  to  preside  over  all 
the  settlements  in  Iron  and  Washington 
counties.      This    position    he    held   until 
May,  1855,  when  the  Stake  was  divided 
and  the  temporary  Stake  of  Cedar  was 
organized.      He   still   continued   to   pre- 
side over  Parowan  and  Paragoonah  un- 
til his  death,  which  occurred  at  Paro- 
wan, Iron  county,  Dec.  30,  1855,  of  heart 
disease,  after  an  illness  of  two  months. 
President  Smith  was  loved  and  respect- 
ed by  all  who  knew  him.     He  was  en- 
ergetic and  faithful  in  the  discharge  of 
his   duties,   and    was   always   true   and 
steadfast  in  the  cause  of  righteousness. 
He  received  and  obeyed  the  law  of  con- 
secration   with    gladness    and    died    in 
full  faith    in    all    the  principles    of    the 
gospel,  as  taught  in  the  Church  of  Jesus 
Christ  of  Latter-day  Saints,  and  in  the 
hope   of  a   glorious   resurrection.     (See 
"Deseret  News,"  Vol.  5,  p.  368.) 

DAME,  William  Hume,  second 
president  of  the  Parowan  Stake  of  Zion, 
was  the  son  of  Jeremiah  Dame  and 
Susan  Home,  and  was  born  July  15, 
1819,  in  the  town  of  Farmington,  Straf- 
ford county.  New  Hampshire.  He  left 
his  early  home  in  his  nineteenth  year, 
traveling  west,  and  located  in  Hancock 
county.  III.,  where  he  married  Miss 
Lovina  Andrews.  He  received  the  gos- 
pel in  the  year  1841,  being  baptized  by 
Elder  Samuel  H.  Gurley,  and  was  soon 
afterwards  ordained  a  Teacher.  He  was 
called  to  Nauvoo  by  the  Prophet  Joseph 
in  1844.  Oct.  7,  1844,  he  was  ordained 
a  Seventy,  and  soon  after  began  work 
on  the  Nauvoo  Temple,  af  which  occu- 
pation he  continued  from  time  to  time 


until  1S46,    when   he  again   took  up  his 
march  westward  and  arrived  in  Great 
Salt  Lake  valley  in  the  fall  of  1848.     In 
1850  he  was  called  by  the  Presidency  to 
go    to    lion    county,    in    company    with 
Pres.     George     A.     Smith,  arriving     at 
Parowan    Jan.    13,    1851.      Subsequently 
he    was    ordained    a    High    Priest    and 
placed  in  the  first  High  Council  of  Iron 
county  Stake,  being  the  eleventh  mem- 
ber by  age.     In  1852  he  was  called   by 
Pres.   John   C.    L.    Smith   to   settle   Red 
Creek,  now  Paragoonah.    In  1853,  on  ac- 
count  of    Indian    difficulties,    he   again 
moved  to  Parowan,  and  in  1855  went  to 
Red  Creek,  where  strong  fortifications 
were  built  under  his  supervision.     Jan. 
20,  1856,  he  was  called  back  to  Parowan 
and  was  set  apart  as  president  of  the 
Parowan  Stake  of  Zion,  which  position 
he  held  till  March,  1880.     He  acted  as 
agent    for    the    presiding    Bishop    from 
1866  to  the  day  of  his  death.     Brother 
Dame  was  a  member  of  the  legislative 
assembly  of  the  Territory  of  Utah  for 
three   successive   terms,    1854,    1855   and 
1856.     In  the  year  1860,  at  the  general 
April    conference,    held    at    Salt    Lake 
City,    he    was    called    on    a    mission    to 
England,  and  left  his  home  in  Parowan 
on  the  19th  of  the  same  month.    He  la- 
bored in  England  for  two  and  one-half 
years,  when  he  was  released  to  return 
home   on   account  of   ill   health.     After 
his  return  home  he  performed  many  im- 
portant public  labors  under  the  direc- 
tion of  the  First   Presidency,  and  had 
the  honor  of  establishing,  with  the  aid 
of  a  few  of  his  associates,   the  first  co- 
operative   store   in   Utah.      Pres.    Dame 
was  seized  with  an  attack  of  paralysis 
of  the  brain  on  Friday  evening,  Aug.  15, 
1884,  and  remained  unconscious  until  his 
death,  which     occurred     the     following- 
day,  Aug.  16,  1884.    There  were  few  men 
better  known    in      the    Church      than 
Brother  William  H.  Dame,  being  a  man 
of  great  public  worth  and  notable   for 
his  honesty  and  uprightness  in  all  his 
business   transactions   with    his    fellow- 
man.    He  left  a  numerous  family.— S.  S. 
Barton. 

JONES,  Thomas  Jefferson,  third 
president  of  the  Parowan  Stake  of  Zion, 
Utah,  is  the  son  of  James  H.  Jones  and 
Parthenia  Davis,  and  was  born  Sept. 
6,  1838,  at  Pittsfield,  Pike  county,  Illi- 
nois. He  emigrated  to  Utah  in  1852,  and 
located  in  Centerville,  Davis  county, 
where  he  was  baptized     when      about 


I 


BIOGRAPHICAL  ENCYCLOPEDIA. 


533 


fourteen  years  old.  From  1853  to  18G5 
he  resided  in  Willard,  Box  Elder  coun- 
ty. In  1860  he  went  to  Illinois  on  busi- 
ness, and  after  marrying  a  wife,  he  re- 
turned to  Utah  in  1861.  In  1865  he  went 
south,  having  been  called  as  a  mission- 
ary to  settle  in  the  "Dixie  country.'' 
On  his  arrival  in  the  southern  settle- 
ments he  was  called  to  locate  in  Mea- 
dow valley,  now  in  Nevada.  He  arrived 
there  Dec.  17,  1865,  and  was  the  acting 
Bishop  of  Panaca  from  May,  1871,  to 
March,  1875;  his  jurisdiction  also  ex- 
tended to  the  valleys  situated  further 
up  the  stream.  In  1875  he  was  called  to 
Washington,  Washington  county,  Utah, 
to  take  charge  of  the  factory  at  that 
place.  At  the  organization  of  the  St. 
George  Stake  in  1877,  he  was  chosen 
first  counselor  to  John  D.  T.  McAllister 
in  the  presidency  of  the  Stake;  he  was 
ordained  a  Bishop  and  appointed  to 
preside  in  Washington  April  22,  1877.  He 
filled  these  two  positions  till  1881,  when 
he  was  called  to  the  presidency  of  the 
Parowan  Stake  of  Zion.  He  changed 
his  place  of  residence  to  Iron  county, 
and  presided  over  the  Parowan  Stake 
till  1892,  when  he  was  honorably  re- 
leased. In  1890-91  he  served  six  months 
in  the  Utah  penitentiary  for  alleged  un- 
lawful cohabitation. 

JONES  Uriah  Treharne.  presi- 
dent of  the  Parowan  Stake  of  Zion 
since  1892,  is  the  son  of  Thomas  Jones 
and  Sage  Treharne,  and  was  born  Feb. 
11,  1861,  in  Cedar  City,  Iron  county, 
Utah.  He  was  baptized  June  20,  1869; 
labored  for  some  time  as  a  home  mis- 
sionary in  the  Parowan  Stake,  and  was 
ordained  a  High  Priest,  and  chosen  as  a 
member  of  the  High  Council  in  1886. 
Dec.  22,  1888,  he  was  called  to  officiate 
as  a  counselor  in  the  Bishopric  of  Cedar 
City,  which  position  he  held  until 
March  21,  1892,  when  he  was  set  apart 
to  preside  over  the  Parowan  Stake  of 
Zion.  succeeding  Pres.  Thos.  J.  Jones. 
He  still  occupies  that  position. 

AVEBSTEK,  Francis,  first  counselor 
to  Pres.  Uriah  T.  Jones,  of  the  Parowan 
Stake  of  Zion,  is  the  second  son  of 
Thomas  and  Mary  Webster,  and  was 
born  Feb.  8.  1830,  at  Suton,  near  Wy- 
mondham,  county  of  Norfolk,  England. 
He  was  baptized  in  April,  1848,  by  Elder 
John  Licorice,  and  left  England  for 
Sydney,  New  South  Wales,  Australia, 
June  5,  1848.     He  returned  to   England 


in  1855  and  married  Ann  Elizabeth  Par- 
sons in  London,  England,  Dec.  5,  1855; 
was  ordained  a  Priest  Dec.  23,  1855,  and 
emigrated  to  Utah  in  1856,  crossing  the 
ocean  on  the  ship  "Horizon,"  and  the 
plains  in  Edward  Martin's  hand-cart 
company.  He  arrived  in  Salt  Lake  City 
Nov.  30,  1856,  and  went  to  Cedar  City, 
Iron  county,  where  he  made  his  perma- 
nent home.  Here  he  served  for  twenty 
years  as  a  Ward  teacher;  was  ordained 
an  Elder  Feb.  19,  1860,  and  ordained  a 
Seventy  April  17,  1863.  He  became  iden- 
tified with  the  63rd  quorum  of  Seventy, 
and  was  chosen  to  be  a  president  in 
that  quorum  May  5,  1866.  March  14,  1869, 
he  was  ordained  a  High  Priest  and  set 
apart  to  act  as  a  member  of  the  High 
Council  of  the  Parowan  Stake,  by  Apos- 


tle Erastus  Snow.  He  was  set  apart 
as  second  counselor  to  Bishop  Christo- 
pher J.  Arthur,  of  Cedar  City,  July  29, 
1877,  by  Apostle  Erastus  Snow,  and  la- 
ter he  was  set  apart  as  Bishop  Arthur's 
first  counselor.  May  5,  1884,  he  was  set 
apart  as  first  counselor  to  Bishop  Hen- 
ry Lunt,  by  Pres.  John  Taylor.  In  1889 
he  served  six  months'  imprisonment  in 
the  Utah  penitentiary  for  conscience 
sake.  He  was  set  apart  as  a  member 
of  the  Parowan  Stake  High  Council 
June  23,  1889,  and  he  was  set  apart  by 
Apostle  Heber  J.  Grant  to  be  second 
counselor  to  Pres.  Thos.  J.  Jones  of 
Parowan  Stake  Sept.  23,  1889.  When  the 
Stake  was  reorganized,  March  21,  1892, 
he  was  set  apart  as  second  counselor  to 
Pres.  Uriah  T.  Jones,  and  later  (June  21, 
1896,)   he  was   chosen   first  counselor  to 


534 


LATTER-DAY    SAINT 


Pres.  Jones,  being  set  apart  to  that  po- 
sition by  Apostle  John  Henry  Smith. 
This  office  he  still  holds.  Of  the  numer- 
ous secular  offices  held  by  Elder  Web- 
ster it  may  be  mentioned  that  he  was 
elected  the  first  alderman  of  Cedar 
City.  Feb.  11,  1867;  he  was  chosen  treas- 
urer of  the  Cedar  City  branch  of  the 
United  Order  April  7,  1874,  and  served  as 
a  member  of  the  lower  house  in  the  23rd 
session  of  the  Utah  legislature  in  1878. 
He  has  also  served  two  terms  as  mayor 
of  Cedar  City,  and  in  April,  1876,  he  was 
elected  president  of  the  Cedar  City  Co- 
operative Mercantile  <tnd  Manufactur- 
ing Institution.  Elder  Webster  has  al- 
ways been  an  energetic  and  enterpris- 
ing man.  continually  striving  for  the 
betterment  of  the  community  in  which 
he  has  resided. 

HUNTER,  Joseph  Snaddon,  High 
Councilor  in  the  Parowan  Stake  of 
Zion,  is  the  son  of  Joseph  Hunter  and 
Elizabeth  Davidson,  and  was  born  in 
Clackmannan,  Clackmannanshire,  Scot- 
land.    He   left   Liverpool   together  with 


his  father's  family,  for  Zion.  Nov.  10, 
1849.  bound  for  Zion,  and  crossed 
the  plains  in  1852  with  James 
Porter  and  family,  having  been 
separated  from  his  fathers  family 
in  St.  Joseph.  Mo.,  and  did  not 
.see  them  again  till  he  arrived  in 
Salt  I.Ake  City.  He  was  baptized  in 
August.  1853.  by  Eliazer  F^dwards,  and 
in  April.   1863.   he   was  ordained  a  Sev- 


enty in  the  63rd  quorum  by  Jacob 
Gates.  Jan.  1,  1865,  he  married  Eliza  C. 
Pinnock.  From  April  11,  1882,  to  Febru- 
ary, 1884,  he  filled  a  mission  to  the 
Southern  States,  laboring  in  East  Ten- 
nessee. He  was  ordained  a  High  Priest 
by  Apostle  Franci.«  M.  Lyman  in  June, 
1884,  and  set  apart  as  a  High  Councilor 
in  the  Parowan  Stake  of  Zion,  which 
position   he  still  holds. 

HUNTER.      William      Pinnock        a 

president  of  the  63rd  quorum  of  Sev- 
enty, is  the  son  of  Jos.  S.  Hunter,  and 
Eliza  C.  Pinnock,  and  was  born  at 
Cedar  City,  Iron  county,  Utah,  March 
14.  1869.  He  was  baptized  Aug.  26,  1877, 
by  Robert  W.  Heyborne  and  confirmed 
the  same  day  by  C.  J.  Arthur;  was  or- 
dained a  Deacon  in  1881,  a  Priest  in  1883, 
and  a  Seventy  by  B'righam  H.  Roberts, 
Sept.  21,  1890.  He  was  set  apart  for  a 
mission  to  Samoa  by  Apostle  Abraham 
H.  Cannon,  Nov.  7,  1891,  and  left  Salt 
Lake  City  a  few  days  later.  While  on 
this  mission  he  labored  successfully  in 
Tonga,  principally  on  the  island  of 
Tongatabu,  and  in  the  Haapai  groups. 
He  returned  home  Oct.  5,  1894.  June  24, 
1896,  hs  was  set  apart  as  a  president  of 
the  63rd  quorum  of  Seventy  by  Jona- 
than Golden  Kimball.  He  married 
''harlotte  Rowntree,  of  New  Zealand, 
yVpril  23,  1897,  in  the  Salt  Lake  City 
Temple. 

ADAMS.  Charles,  Bishop  of  Paro- 
wan. Iron  county,  Utah,  since  1885,  was 
born  in  Hillsborough,  county  of  Down, 
Ireland,  Sept.  16,  1843.  His  parents,  hav- 
ing accepted  the  gospel,  left  for  Ameri- 
ca in  December,  1843,  to  gather  with 
the  body  of  the  Church  in  Nauvoo. 
They  arrived  in  that  city  in  safety  and 
remained  there  till  the  general  exodus 
in  1846.  In  1849  they  crossed  the  plains 
to  Great  Salt  Lake  valley  and  later  (in 
1850)  they  started  with  Pres.  Geo.  A. 
Smith's  pioneer  company  for  Parowan, 
Iron  county,  where  they  arrived  in  Jan- 
uary, 1851,  and  where  Charles  grew  to 
manhood  and  has  ever  since  resided. 
He  has  always  been  a  diligent  worker 
both  in  public  and  private  life,  and  has 
faithfully  performed  his  share  of 
pioneer  labor  in  Iron  county.  In  1862, 
1863  and  1866  he  was  sent  back  to  the 
Missouri  river  as  a  Church  teamster 
to  bring  poor  Immigrating  Saints  to  the 
Valley.  His  name  is  identified  with 
.ill   public   enterprises   for  the  develop- 


BIOGRAPHICAL    ENCYCLOPEDIA. 


535 


ment  and  upbuilding  of  Parowan,  and 
he  has  held  nearly  every  position  within 
the  gift  of  the  people  of  his  city  and 
county.  In  Parowan  city  he  has  served 
as  school  trustee,  city  councilman  and 
mayor.      In    Iron    county    he    has    been 


assessor  and  collector  and  county  com- 
missioner. He  has  also  served  both  as 
a  member  of  the  house  and  of  the  coun- 
cil in  the  Utah  legislature.  In  1885, 
when  the  two  Wards  of  Parowan  were 
united  into  one,  Charles  Adams  was 
ordained  Bishop  and  set  apart  to  pre- 
side in  that  capacity.  This  position  he 
still  holds. 

AIjLEN,  Rufus  Chester,  a  vet- 
eran Elder  in  the  Church,  is  the  son 
ol  Alburn  and  Marcia  Allen,  and  was 
born  in  Delaware  county,  New  York, 
Oct.  22,  1827.  He  was  baptized  in  1838 
and  ordained  a  Teacher  in  Nauvoo,  111., 
about  1842.  During  the  general  exo- 
dus from  Nauvoo  in  1846  he  left  for  the 
west.  He  enlisted  in  the  Mormon  Bat- 
talion and  marched  to  Los  Angeles, 
Cal.,  where  he  was  mustered  out  and 
came  to  Great  Salt  Lake  valley  in  1847. 
In  1848  he  went  east  to  meet  the  im- 
migration.  He  was  ordained  a  Seventy 
in  1849,  and  later  became  a  president  in 
the  33rd  quorum.  In  October,  1849,  he 
Vient  south  on  an  exploring  trip,  with 
a  company  under  the  leadership  of 
Apostle  Parley  P.  Pratt,  and  in  1851 
he  was  called  to  go  with  Apostle  Parley 
P.  Pratt  and  others  on  a  mission  to  the 
islands  in  the  Pacific  ocean.  From  San 
Francisco      he      accompanied      Apostle 


Pratt  on  a  mission  to  South  America; 
they  landed  in  Valparaiso,  Chili,  Nov. 
S.  1851,  and  after  an  unsuccessful  at- 
tempt at  introducing  the  gospel  in 
Chili,  they  returned  to  Salt  Lake  City 
in  1852.  Bro.  Allen  was  sent  as  a  mis- 
sionary to  the  Indians  in  the  Rio  Vir- 
gen  and  Santa  Clara  country  in  the 
spring  of  1854,  and  while  laboring  there 
be  was  called  to  act  as  a  High  Council- 
or in  the  Cedar  Stake,  and  was  there- 
lore  ordained  a  High  Priest.  He  was 
leleased  from  this  mission  in  Septem- 
ber, 1857,  and  went  to  Ogden,  Weber 
county,  from  where  hfe  took  part  in 
the  Utah  war  in  1857-58.  He  acted  as 
a  High  Councilor  in  Weber  Stake  for 
two  years,  and  also  as  second  counselor 
in  the  Bishopric  of  the  Third  Ward 
of  Ogden.  In  1866  he  went  east  as  a 
Church  teamster  to  bring  emigrants  to 
the  Valley.  On  his  return  he  settled 
in  Paragoonah,  Iron  county,  where  he 
was  chosen  second  counselor  to  Bishop 
William  Jones.  At  present  he  is  living 
in  St.  George,  Utah,  and  is  laboring 
in  the  Temple  for  his  dead  relatives. 
He  is  also  second  counselor  to  Bishop 
George  F.  Jarvis,  of  the  Second  Ward 
of  St.  George. 

HARMON,        Melvin      Myron,  a 

High  Councilor  in  the  St.  George  Stake 
oi  Zion,  is  the  son  of  Levi  Nehemiah 
Harmon  and  Emily  Chidester,  and  was 
born  in  Salt  Lake  City,  Utah,  April  11, 
1861.  He  was  baptized  in  1869  by  James 
Wilkins,  ordained  an  Elder  by  David 
H.  Cannon  in  the  St.  George  Temple, 
Dec.  20,  1877,  and  ordained  a  Seventy 
Oct.  30,  1887,  by  Jacob  Gates.  In  1893- 
96  he  labored  as  a  missionary  on  the 
Sandwich  Islands.  He  was  ordained 
a  High  Priest  and  set  apart  as  a  High 
Councilor  in  the  St.  George  Stake,  Sept. 

13,  1897,  by  Apostle  Francis  M.  Lyman. 
March  25,  1899,  he  was  chosen  and  sus- 
tained as  tithing  clerk  of  the  St.  George 
Stake  of  Zion,  in  which  capacity  he  is 
laboring  at  the  present  time. 

BRYNER,  Ca.sper,  a  High  Council- 
or in  the  St.  George  Stake  since  1884, 
was  born  in  Zurich,  Switzerland,  Aug. 

14,  1834,  where  he  grew  to  manhood.  At 
the  age  of  twenty  years  he  was  baptized 
by  Elder  Geo.  Myers.  In  1855  he  emi- 
grated to  Utah  in  Richard  Ballantyne's 
company.  He  lived  in  Salt  Lake  City 
till  1858,  when  he  was  called  to  accom- 
pany   Capt.    Joseph    Home      south      to 


536 


LATTER-DAY    SAINT 


"Dixie"  to  laise  cotton.  In  1859  he 
iroved  to  Ogden,  Weber  county,  where 
he  married  Magdalena  Gubler,  in  1861. 
That  same  year  he  was  called  to  go  to 
Dixie.  He  located  at  St.  George,  where 
he  ha.s  resided  ever  since.  He  married 
Susanna  Stalieli  in  1870,  as  a  plural 
wife,  and  in  1880-81  filled  a  mission  to 
Switzerland.  On  account  of  ill  health 
he  returned  home  sooner  than  usual. 
In  1884  he  was  chosen  a  High  Councilor 
in  the  St.  George  Stake,  being  set  apart 
to  that  position  by  Apostle  Francis  M. 
Lyman.  He  served  a  term  of  six 
months'  imprisonment  in  the  Utah 
penitentiary  for  unlawful  cohabitation 
with  his  wives,  from  June  1,  to  Dec.  1, 
1888.  Elder  Bryner  is  still  faithfully 
laboring  in  the  interest  of  the  Church 
r.nd  for  the  benefit  of  the  human  family. 

MILES,  Samuel,  a  High  Council- 
or in  the  St.  George  Stake  of  Zion,  s 
the  son  of  Samuel  Miles  and  Prudence 
Marks,  and  was  born  in  Attica,  Gen- 
esee county.  New  York,  April  8,  1826. 
In  the  winter  of  1833-34  Elders  Orson 
Pratt  and  John  Murdock  preached  the 
gospel  in  Cattaraugus  county,  N.  Y., 
and  the  Miles  family  were  among  those 
who  heard  and  believed.  Brother  Miles 
writes  in  a  life  sketch:  "In  the  fall  of 
1835,  together  with  my  father's  fam- 
ily, I  started  for  the  gathering  place  of 
the  Saints  in  Missouri.  We  passed 
through  Kirtland,  Ohio,  and  camped 
for  the  winter  at  New  Portage.  There 
I  was  baptized  by  Solomon  Warner,  in 
April,  1836.  We  continued  our  journey 
in  May,  1836,  and  arrived  at  Caldwell 
county,  Missouri,  where  we  settled  near 
Far  West.  Many  times  have  I  rejoiced 
in  listening  to  the  Prophet's  preaching 
in  the  public  assemblies  of  the  Saints, 
r  was  present  July.  1838,  when  the  cor- 
ner-stones of  the  Temple  were  laid  at 
Far  West.  The  acts  of  the  mob  militia, 
ordered  out  by  Gov.  Boggs,  in  devastat- 
ing our  fields,  destroying  our  crops, 
and  abusing  i)eaceful-minded  and  aged 
citizens,  their  hideous  yells  and  cries, 
when  they  had  the  Phophet  Joseph 
Smith  and  other  brethren  as  prisoners 
in  their  camp  near  our  house,  are  all 
indelibly  impressed  upon  my  mind;  this, 
with  the  subsequent  expulsion  of  the 
Saints  from  Missouri,  together  with  the 
suffering  endured  before  we  reached 
Illinois,  forms  a  chapter  in  my  life 
never  to  be  forgotten.  Our  family  lived 
in    Lima,    Adams   county.    111.,    till    the 


fall  of  1839,  when  we  settled  in  Com- 
merce, (later  Nauvoo).  I  had  the  priv- 
ilege of  attending  the  Universitj'  of 
Nauvoo  and  receiving  instruction  from 
Prof.  Orson  Pratt,  Lorin  Farr  and  oth- 
ers. At  the  age  of  fifteen  I  taught  a 
primary  school  in  Nauvoo,  and  later 
taught  school  in  the  eastern  part  of 
Hancock  county.  After  the  martydrom 
of  Joseph  and  Hyrum  Smith,  I  rode  50 
miles  to  attend  the  funeral,  passing 
through  Carthage  on  the  way.  I  also 
took  an  active  part  in  defending  the 
city  of  Nauvoo  against  the  mobs.  In 
June,  1846,  I  left  Nauvoo  for  the  west, 
and  on  reaching  Council  Bluffs,  Iowa, 
I  enlisted  in  the  famous  Mormon  Bat- 
talion. My  experiences  from  July  16, 
1846,  to  July  16,  1847,  when  I  was  dis- 
charged at  Los  Angeles,   Cal.,  forms  a 


notable  year  in  my  life.  I  kept  a  daily 
journal,  detailing  the  hardships  and 
trials  endured.  Together  with  other 
discharged  soldiers,  I  started  for  Salt 
Lake  City,  but  we  received  instruc- 
tions from  Pres.  Brigham  Young  to  re- 
main in  California  for  a  while  longer. 
I  finally  arrived  in  Great  Salt 
Lake  valley,  Sept.  6,  1848,  and  lo- 
cated in  Salt  Lake  City.  I  married 
Hannah  M.  Colborn,  Sept.  6,  1849,  and 
the  same  year  I  sent  east  for  my  moth- 
er to  come  to  the  Valley,  mj'  father  had 
died  during  my  absence.  I  was  ordain- 
ed a  Seventy  Jan.  18,  1851,  and  in  1857  I 
filled  a  mission  to  California,  laboring 
mostly  in  the  city  of  Stocktonand  vicin- 
ity. In  October,  1862,  I  went  south  and 
settled  in  St.  George,  Washington 
county,  where  I  followed  school  teach- 


BIOGRAPHICAL    ENCYCLOPEDIA. 


537 


ing.  May  12,  1867,  I  was  ordained  a 
High  Priest  by  Apostle  Erastus  Snow 
and  set  apart  as  a  High  Councilor  in 
the  St.  George  Stake,  and  also  as  Stake 
superintendent  of  Sunday  schools.  In 
the  same  year  (1867)  I  moved  my  fam- 
ily to  Price  (formerly  Heberville),  five 
miles  from  St.  George,  where  I  have 
followed  farming  for  a  livelihood.  I 
have  had  the  privilege  of  performing 
considerable  Temple  work  for  my  rela- 
tives who  have  passed  beyond  the  veil." 

DUPFIN,  James  G..  a  president  of 
the  Ninth  quorum  of  Seventy,  is  the  son 
of  Isaac  DufRn  and  Mary  Fielding,  and 
was  born  in  Salt  Lake  City,  Utah,  May 
30,  1860.  In  the  fall  of  1862,  in  obedi- 
ence to  a  call  from  the  authorities  of 
the       Church,    his     parents     moved    to 


Washington  county,  Utah,  locating  at 
the  town  of  Toquerville,  where  his 
home  has  been  since  that  time.  He 
was  baptized  June  25,  1871,  by  Elder 
Seth  Johnson,  was  ordained  an  Elder 
Jan.  19,  1881,  by  William  Faucett,  and 
the  same  day  he  married  Mary  J. 
Grainger  in  the  St.  George  Temple. 
During  the  years  1882  and  1883,  and 
again  in  1893  and  1894,  he  attended  the 
B.  Y.  Academy  at  Provo.  He  was  or- 
dained a  Seventy  by  Levi  Savage  June 
28,  1885,  and  set  apart  as  a 
president  of  Seventy  in  the  9th 
quorum,  March  3,  1895,  by  Jonathan 
Golden   Kimball.     July   5,   1887,   he   was 


set  apart  as  a  missionary  to  the  South- 
ern States  by  Franklin  D.  Richards.  He 
returned  from  that  mission  In  1889.  Dur- 
ing the  last  nine  months  of  his  mis- 
sion he  presided  over  the  North  Car- 
olina conference.  Oct.  9,  1899,  he  was 
set  apart  by  Francis  M.  Lyman  as  a 
missionary  to  the  Southwestern  States. 
During  the  first  five  months  of  this 
mission  he  labored  as  a  traveling  El- 
der in  and  president  of  the  North  Texas 
conference,  Elder  Wm.  T.  Jack  hav- 
ing been  released  from  the  presidency 
of  the  mission.  Elder  Duffin  was  ap- 
pointed, April  7,  1900,  to  succeed  him 
as  president  of  the  mission.  At  home 
Elder  DufRn  has  been  active  in  the  spir- 
itual and  material  growth  of  his  peo- 
ple. He  has  served  as  county  commis- 
sioner, and  was  a  member  of  the  sec- 
ond legislature  of  the  State  of  Utah. 

BEBEE,  Leroy   AV..     Bishop  of  Vir- 
gen  City    Ward,     Washington  (former- 
ly  Kane)     county,     Utah,     is     the  son 
of  William    Albert    Beebe    and  Louisa 
Newton,      and      was       born      Jan.      25, 
1840,   at  Sheridan,   Chautauqua  county. 
New  York.   Elder  Beebe  writes  as  fol- 
lows in  a  biographical  sketch  prepared 
for   this   work:    "I   emigrated   with   my 
parents   to  Nauvoo,   111.,   in  the   fall  of 
1844,     where    we    lived    till    1846,    when 
we  were  driven  out  by  the  mob.    After 
we  left  the  city,   we  lived  in  a  cellar, 
together  with  seven  other  families,  and 
we  often  had  to  live  on  the  fragments 
of  food  which  were  left  by  the  soldiers. 
We  moved   to  Winter  Quarters,   where 
we     remained    till    1847,    when    jj'e    re- 
crossed  the  Mississippi  river  and  went 
into    Pottawattamie   county.      Here   we 
remained  till  1852,  when  we  crossed  the 
plains   to   Great   Salt   Lake   valley.    On 
arriving   there,    we   located   in    what   is 
now  called  Sugar  House  Ward,    where 
we  resided  till  1854,  when  we  moved  to 
Ogden,  Weber  county.     I  was  baptized 
in  1848,  and  ordained  a  Seventy  in  the 
54th    quorum    July    5,  1857.     I    belonged 
to    the   standing   army,    and    took   part 
in   the   Echo   canyon    affair,    in   1857-58, 
assisting   to   build    the   barracks    there. 
After  my  return  home  I  assisted  in  es- 
corting deserters  and  teamsters  on  their 
ruad  to  California.     Later,  I  was  called 
to    go  to  Samon  river,   (now  in  Idaho), 
and  assist  Saints  to  return  to   Utah.   I 
was    one    of    the    company    that    found 
the  body  of  Bailey  Lake,  who  had  been 
killed     by     the     Indians,    on     Bannock 


538 


LATTER-DAY    SAINT 


creek,  in  March,  1858.  During  the 
"move  south"  we  lived  at  Payson, 
where  I  assisted  in  establishing  a  nail 
factory,  in  which  many  useful  articles 
were  made.  While  at  Payson  I  mar- 
ried Mary  Ann  Sabln.  In  1862,  in  re- 
sponse to  a  call  from  the  authorities 
of  the  Church,  I  went  south  and  located 
at  Virgen  City,  a  smal  settlement  on 
the  Virgen  river,  where  I  still  reside. 
About  1876  I  was  ordained  a  High 
Priest  and  set  apart  as  a  counselor  to 
Bishop  John  Parker,  which  position  I 
held  till  Bishop  Parker  died  in  March, 
1886.  In  November  of  that  year  I  wa^ 
ordained   a   Bishop  by  Apostle  Wilford 


Woodruff,  and  set  apart  to  preside  over 
the  Virgen  Ward,  and  am  still  laboring 
in  that  capacity.  In  earlier  days  I 
took  an  active  part  in  all  the  Indian 
distuibances  in  southern  Utah,  and  I 
accompanied  Jacob  Hamblin  to  the 
Moquis  country  for  the  purpose  of  per- 
suading the  Navajoes  to  discontinue 
their  raids  on  the  settlements.  I  am 
the  father  of  twelve  children,  eiglit  of 
whom  are  living."  Bro.  Beebe  has 
passed  through  most  of  the  trying 
scenes  associated  with  the  history  of 
the  Church  since  the  exodus  from  Nau- 
voo,  but  his  faith  in  the  gospel  of 
Christ  is  stronger  today  than  ever  be- 
fore. 

WORKMAN,       Andrew       JackHun, 

a  veteran  Elder  in  the  Church,  is  the 
son  of  John  Workman  and  Lydia  Bil- 
yen,  and  was  born  July  15,  1824,  in 
Bourbon    county,    Kentucky.      He    was 


baptized  at  the  age  of  17  by  Dwight 
Webste.*.  His  father's  family  moved 
to  Nauvoo,  111.,  in  May,  1843,  and  Bro. 
Workman  distinctly  remembers  the 
Prophet,  as  he  used  to  see  him  daily  in 
Nauvoo.  In  February,  1846,  he  left 
Nauvoo  for  the  west.  When  the  govern- 
ment called  for  five  hundred  volunteers 
to  go  across  the  continent  and  defend 
the  flag,  he  was  one  of  those  who  joined 
the  Mormon  Battalion  and  marched  to 
the  Pacific  coast.  He  served  in  the 
army  one  year  and  nine  months,  but 
after  receiving  his  discharge,  he  re- 
mained in  California  several  years, 
working  part  of  the  time  at  the  gold 
mines,  and  finally  came  to  Utah  in  1855. 
He  married  Rebecca  Dack  in  Salt  Lake 
City  June  4,  1855.  In  September,  1855, 
he  went  to  San  Bernardino,  Cal.,  to- 
gether with  his  wife,  where  he  workea 
in  a  sawmill  till  December,  1857,  when 
he  returned  to  Utah  and  located  tem- 
porarily in  Cedar  City,  Iron  county.  In 
Octobei*,  1858,  he  moved  to  Fort  Har- 
mony, and  in  January,  1859,  he  located 
at  what  is  linown  now  as  Virgen  City, 
being  the  first  white  settler  at  that 
place,  and  he  has  resided  there  ever 
since.  For  more  than  fifty  years  Elder 
Workman  has.  diligently  labored  to 
build  up  the  country  by  digging 
ditches,  and  planting  and  cultivating 
the  earth.  His  wife,  Rebecca,  died  Dec. 
25,  18(;5,  and  he  married  Sarah  John- 
son Eagar  in  1866.  He  is  the  father 
of  eleven  children,  nine  boys  and  two 
girls.  Commencing  with  Joseph  Smith. 
the  Prophet,  he  has  been  acquainted 
with  all  the  leaders  of  the  Church,  and 
he  fays:  "For  sixty  years  I  have  had 
nothing  but  good  advice  and  teaching 
from  them;  I  have  never  at  any  time 
heard  any  one  of  them  give  bad  coun- 
sel." 

GIFPORD  Oliver  D.  Bishop  of 
Springdale,  Washington  county,  Utah, 
since  1895,  is  the  son  of  Samuel  K., 
and  Laura  Ann  Gifford,  and  was  born 
Dec.  10,  1854,  at  Manti,  Sanpete  county. 
TUah.  He  moved  with  his  parents  to 
Washington  county  in  the  fall  of  1863 
locating  at  Shonesburg,  where  he  was 
raised  amid  the  hardships  and  trials  so 
characteristic  of  the  early  days  in 
southern  Utah.  May  15,  1864,  he  was 
baptized  by  his  father,  Samuel  K. 
Gifford.  He  remembers  an  instance, 
in  his  youth,  when  he  was  lying  at 
death's  door,  that  he  was  miraculously 


BIOGRAPHICAL    ENCYCLOPEDIA. 


539 


healed  by  the  power  of  God  through 
the  administrations  of  His  servants. 
He  was  ordained  an  Elder  by  his 
father.  In  1860  or  1861  he  received  a 
patriarchal  blessing  p.t  the  hands  of 
Isaac  Morley,  who  promised  him  many 
breat  blessing,  which  have  already  been 
realized.  He  married  Alice  N.  Allied, 
at  Shonesburg,  Sept.  11,  1873,  and 
yielded  obedience  to  the  principle  of 
plural  marriage,  June  7,  1882,  by  taking 
to  wife  Emily  A.  Hepworth.  He  as- 
fisted  in  building  both  the  St.  George 
and  Manti  Temples.  June  6,  1885,  he  was 
ordained  a  Seventy  by  Edward  Steven- 
son and  Jacob  Gates,  in  which  capacity 
he  labored  till  Nov.  6,  1887,  when  he 
was  ordained  a  High  Priest  and  set 
apart  as  second  counselor  to  W^m.  R. 
Crawford,  Bishop  of  Springdale  Ward. 
After  the  resignation  of  Bishop  Craw- 
ford, Bro.  Gifford  was  chosen  Bishop 
in  his  sttad,  being  ordained  and  set 
apart  by  Apostle  Francis  M.  Lyman, 
Sept.  5,  1895.  This  office  he  still  holds. 
He  is  the  father  of  twenty  children, 
sixteen  of  whom  are  now  living. 

GIPFORD,     Freeborn      Demill,      a 

prominent  Elder  in  Springville,  Wash- 
ington county,  Utah,  is  the  son  of 
Samuel  K.  Gifford  and  Laura  Ann  D^f- 
mill,  and  was  born  Jan.  4,  18b0,  at 
Manti,  Sanpete  county,  Utah.  He 
moved  with  his  parents  to  Shonesburg, 
Kane  (now  Washington)  county,  in 
1863,  where  they  remained  till  1875, 
when  they  moved  to  the  neighboring 
settlement  of  Springdale,  Washington 
county.  Freeborn  was  baptized  in  the 
Virgen  river  Jan.  4,  1858.  His  mother 
died  April  6,  1870.  There  being  no 
opportunity  for  attending  school,  he 
had  to  forego  the  privilege  of  even  a 
common  school  education.  In  those 
early  days  he  remembers  many  trials 
and  privations  that  he  and  others  had 
to  endure,  but  he  says  the  Lord  was 
always  near,  and  though  at  times  it 
looked  like  they  were  eating  their  last 
meal,  yet  means  was  always  provided 
for  obtaining  a  new  supply,  even  if  it 
were  only  corn  bread  mixed  with  water 
and  molasses.  Freeborn  was  ordained 
a  Deacon,  and  set  apart  as  president 
of  the  Deacons'  quorum  in  Springdale 
Ward,  March  28,  1875;  was  ordained  an 
Elder  Jan.  25,  1877.  He  has  been  a 
Sabbath  school  worker  since  1877  and 
has  served  in  every  office  in  the  Sab- 
bath  school   up   to  that   of  superinten- 


dent, which  position  he  holds  at  present 
in  the  Springdale  Ward.  He  has  also 
labored  faithfully  in  the  mutual  im- 
provement cause;  has  acted  as  a  Ward 
teacher,  and  been  Ward  clerk  since  the 
organization  of  the  Springdale  Ward. 
June  28,  1822,  he  married  Aurelia  Jane 
Hepworth.  He  was  ordained  a  Seventy 
June  6,  1885,  and  later  became  a  presi- 
dent in  the  9th  quorum  of  Seventy  Bro. 
Gifford  is  a  man  of  great  faith  and  tes- 
tifies that  he  has  seen  the  mighty  pow- 
er of  God  made  manifest  on  many  dif- 
ferent occasions. 

SNOW,  Jeter,  Bishop  of  Pine  Valley 
Ward  since  1893,  was  born  at  Lehi, 
Utah  county,  Utah,  Dec.  21,  1855.  In 
1865  he  moved  with  his  parents  to 
southern  Utah,  locating  in  Pine  Valley. 
Washington  county,  where  Jeter 
worked  on  the  farm  and  looked  after  the 
stock  during  the  summer, and  attending 
school  in  the  winter.  He  went  to  Lin- 
coln county,  Nevada,  in  1878,  where  he 
engaged  in  freighting  and  farming.  His 
father  died  in  the  spring  of  1879,  and 
Jeter  returned  home  and  was  baptizsd 
and  ordained  an  Elder  Dec.  17,  1^84. 
He  married  Mary  Alice  Gardner  and 
resided  in  Panaca,  Nevada,  for  several 
years.  There  he  took  an  active  part 
in  Church  work,  laboring  as  a  counselor 
in  the  Y.  M.  M.  I.  A.  and  as  a  Ward 
teacher.  In  1888  he  was  chosen  as  sec- 
ond counselor  to  Bishop  Wm,  Gardner 
of  Pine  Valley,  in  consequence  of  which 
he  moved  back  to  Pine  Valley  in  March. 
1889,  and  was  ordained  a  High  Priest 
and  set  apart  by  Pres.  Anthony  W. 
Ivins  to  the  position  for  which  he  had 
been  chosen,  March  19,  1899.  Later,  he 
was  chosen  superintendent  of  the  Pine 
Valley  Sundav  school,  and  appointed  to 
labor  as  a  Stake  Sunday  school  mis- 
sionary. Sept.  13,  1893,  he  was  ordain- 
ed a  Bishop  and  set  apart  to  preside 
over  the  Pine  Valley  Ward  by  Apostle 
Francis  M.  Lyman.  This  poFition  he 
still  holds. 

REDD,  William  Alexander,  Bishop 
of  Harmony  Ward,  Washington  coun- 
ty, Utah,  was  born  September  19,  1861. 
in  Spanish  Fork,  Utah  county,  Utah. 
When  but  one  year  old  he  moved  with 
his  parents  to  New  Harmony.  Wash- 
ington county,  LTtah,  where  he  has  ever 
since  made  his  home.  From  his  early 
youth  a  belief  and  firm  faith  in  God 
had  been  deeply  implanted  in  his  heart. 


540 


LATTER-DAY    SAINT 


During  his  early  manhood  he  held  sev- 
eral minor  offices  in  the  Church.  These 
privileges  helped  to  prepare  him  for 
greater  callings  that  later  in  life  were 
required  of  him.  Patriarch  John 
Smith,  in  a  patriarchal  blessing,  told 
him  that  he  was  chosen  at  his  birth 
to  be  a  messenger  of  glad  tidings  unto 
the  people,  in  gathering  scattered  Is- 
rael, and  it  was  his  calling  to  preside 
among  the  people.  In  obedience  to  a 
call    from   Pres.   John   Taylor,   he  filled 


a  mission  to  the  Southern  States  in 
1S83-89.  During  his  sojourn  there  he 
labored  part  of  the  time  as  president  of 
the  South  Carolina  conference.  He 
was  ordained  a  Bishop  and  set  apart 
to  preside  over  the  Harmony  Ward 
Sept.  15,  1890,  by  Apostle  Francis  M. 
Lyman,  since  which  he  has  labored  di- 
ligently and  successfully  in  that  call- 
ing. With  his  wife,  Mary  Verena 
Bryner,  whom  he  married  Feb.  27,  1884, 
he  is  raising  a  nice  family  of  children. 

IjEITHKAI),  James,  Bishop,  High 
Councilor  and  Patiiarch,  is  the  third 
son  of  John  Leithead  and  Jeany  Har- 
vey, and  was  born  June  14,  1816,  at 
Mu.«selbu rjJT,  Scotland.  In  1832  he  emi- 
grated to  Canada,  and  settled  near 
what  is  now  the  city  of  Toronto.  He 
married  a  daughter  of  Joshua  Lamor- 
eaux  and  Ann  Cross  in  1835.  Elder 
Leithead  writes  in  a  brief  life  sketch 
as  follows:  "We  first  heard  the  gospel 
in  l!«36,  through  Apostle  Parley  P.  Pratt, 
and  the  year  following  we  were  bap- 
tized and  confirmed  into  the  Church  by 


K]lder  John  Taylor.  In  the  summer  of 
1837  a  conference  was  held  in  Canada, 
at  which  Joseph  Smith,  the  Prophet, 
Sidney  Rigdon  and  Apostle  Thos.  B. 
Marsh  were  present.  At  this  confer- 
ence I  was  ordained  a  Priest  and  set 
ajiart  to  preside  over  a  branch  of  the 
Church.  My  wife  and  I  left  Canada  for 
Missouri  in  the  spring  of  1838.  On  this 
trip  we  stopped  a  short  time  at  Kirt- 
land,  Ohio,  and  arrived  in  Far  West, 
Aug.  1,  1838.  I  was  advised  by  the 
Prophet  to  locate  at  Adam-ondi-Ahman, 
about  twenty-five  miles  north  of  Far 
West,  in  Daviess  county.  But  we  had 
very  little  peace  there,  being  continual- 
ly harassed  by  mobs,  and  having  our 
property  destroyed.  We,  however,  suc- 
( '^eded  in  building  a  number  of  houses 
and  making  improvements,  from  which 
wo  were  finally  driven  a  few  months  la- 
ter. After  being  expelled  from  Mis- 
souri we  went  from  place  to  place  until 
1841,  when  we  gathered  with  the  Saints 
at  Nauvoo,  111.  In  1842  I  went  to  Can- 
ada on  a  visit,  returning  in  1843.  While 
in  Nauvoo  I  did  much  work  on  the 
Temple,  and  became  intimately  ac- 
quainted with  the  Prophet  and  the  Pa- 
triarch. In  the  spring  of  1846  I  assisted 
in  ferrying  the  Saints  over  the  Missis- 
sippi river,  and  finally  located  tempo- 
rarily in  Bentonsport,  Iowa,  where  I 
remained  till  1849,  when  I  went  to 
Kanesville;  and  in  1850  I  crossed  the 
jilains  in  Milo  Andrus'  company,  arriv- 
ing in  Great  Salt  Lake  valley  in  Sep- 
tember of  that  year.  I  settled  in  Farm- 
ington,  Davis  county,  where  I  lived  a 
number  of  years  and  assisted  in  de- 
veloping the  country.  I  built  the  first 
grist  mill  in  Davis  county  (at  Farm- 
ington)  for  Willard  Richards,  and  also 
the  first  grist  mill  in  Weber  county. 
When  John  W.  Hess  was  ordained 
Bishop  of  Farmington  I  was  chosen  as 
his  second  counselor,  and  Ward  clerk. 
In  the  fall  of  1866  I  was  called,  together 
Avith  oth.?rs,  to  go  to  the  settlements  on 
the  Muddy  (now  in  Nevada),  and  assist 
in  building  up  that  country.  On  our 
arrival  we  surveyed  a  new  townsite, 
called  St.  Thomas,  and  began  building  a 
settlement.  In  1868  Thomas  S.  Smith, 
president  of  the  mission,  was  released 
on  account  of  ill  health,  and  I  was 
call.^c'  to  be  his  successor.  I  was  or- 
d.iined  a  Bishop  and  set  apart  to  pre- 
side over  the  St.  Thomas  Ward  by 
Apostle  Erastus  Snow.  Andrew  V.  Gib- 
bons and  Warren  Foote  were  my  coun- 
selors.     When    the    line    between    Utah 


BIOGRAPHICAL,    ENCYCLOPEDIA. 


541 


and  Nevada  was  drawn  in  1870,  it  was 
found  that  the  settlements  on  the  Mud- 
dy were  in  Nevada,  and  for  several 
reasons  it  was  decided  to  vacate  them 
and  move  to  Utah.  At  length  we  suc- 
ceeded in  gel  ting-  away,  and  most  of  the 
settlers  from  the  Muddy  located  in 
Long  valley,  Kane  county,  where  we  at 
once  began  to  break  ground  and  build 
houses.  Together  with  others,  I  erect- 
ed three  grist  mills  in  Kane  county.  On 
being  released  from  being  Bishop,  I  was 
set  apart  as  a  High  Councilor  in  the 
Kanab  Stake,  and  was  later  ordained  a 
Patriarch,  which  position  I  at  present 
hold." 

GLAZIER.  John  \V.,  Bishop  of 
Johnson  Ward,  Kane  county,  Utah,  is 
the  son  of  James  Birch  Glazier  and 
Mary  Elizabeth  Pridmore,  and  was 
born  in  Marshall  county,  Alabama,  July 
fi,  1855.  In  his  boyhood  he  had  very 
little  opportunity  to  attend  school,  but 
by  hard  self-efforts  he  acquired  a  fair 
education.  He  married  Nancy  J.  Ro- 
den,  Nov.  18,  1875,  and  on  April  28, 
1876,  they  were  both  baptized  into  the 
Church.  Feb.  26.  1877,  they  started  for 
the  west,  and  going  via  the  Southern 
route,  they  arrived  at  Sunset,  Arizona, 
Oct.  6,  1877.  Here  they  lived  for  a  short 
time  in  the  United  Order,  and  then  con- 
tinued the  journey  to  Utah,  arriving 
in  Kanab,  Kane  county,  March  7,  1878. 
Bro.  Glazier  was  ordained  an  Elder  in 
the  St.  George  Temple,  June  19,  1878, 
and  having  located  in  Kanab,  he  was 
kept  active  laboring  as  a  Ward  teach- 
er, counselor  in  the  Elder's  quorum, 
and  president  of  the  Y.  M.  M.  I.  A.  He 
was  ordained  a  Seventy  by  Edward 
Stevenson,  June  9,  1885,  and,  later,  he 
became  clerk  of  the  85th  quorum  o£ 
Seventy.  With  his  family  he  moved 
to  Johnson,  Kane  county,  March  15, 
1891,  where  he  was  chosen  presiding  El- 
der of  the  Johnson  branch.  He  acted 
in  that  capacity  till  Sept.  1,  1894,  when 
he  was  nominated  by  the  people  of 
Johnson  to  be  their  Bishop,  and  the 
same  day  he  was  ordained  and  set 
apart  to  that  office  by  Apostle  Francis 
M.  Lyman.  Bro.  Glazier  is  still  en- 
gaged in  discharging  the  duties  per- 
taining to  that  important  calling. 

STEWART,  David  Brinton,  Bish- 
op of  Fredonia,  Arizona,  (a  Ward  in  the 
Kanab  Stake  of  Zion),  is  the  son  of  Le- 
vi   and    Artemesia    Stewart,    and    was 


born  at  Big  Cottonwood,  Salt  Lake 
county,  Utah,  Feb.  12,  1867.  Elder 
Stewart  writes:  "When  I  was  about 
three  years  old  my  parents  were  called 
to  move  to  Kanab,  Kane  county,  where 
my  father  was  appointed  to  act  as 
Bishop,  and  where  I  lived  till  1895.  At 
the  age  of  eight  years  I  was  baptized, 
and  four  years  later  I  was  ordained  a 
Deacon.  My  early  youth  was  passed 
on  the  farm  and  in  the  mountains  with 
sheep  and  cattle.  During  the  winter 
of  1888-89  I  attended  the  Brigham 
Young  Academy  at  Prove.  In  the 
spring  of  1890  I  was  ordained  a  Priest, 
and  called  to  labor  as  a  Ward  teacher. 
Later  in  the  same  year  I  was  ordained 
an  Elder  and  appointed  to  act  as  a 
counselor  in  the  presidency  of  the  Y. 
M.  M.  I.  A.  of  Kanab.  Having  been 
called  on  a  mission  to  New  Zealand.  I 
was  ordained  a  Seventy  and  set  apart 
for  this  mission,  by  Apostle  Abraham 
H.  Cannon,  July  17,  1891,  and,  together 
with  other  missionaries,  I  left  Salt  Lake 
City  for  New  Zealand  the  following 
day.  When  I  arrived  at  Auckland,  I 
was  assigned  to  the  Australian  part  of 
the  mission,  where  I  labored  till  Nov. 
17,  1893,  when  I  was  released  with  per- 
mission to  return  to  the  headquarters 
of  the  Church.  I  reached  home  Feb.  7, 
1874,  and  married  Lois  Crosby  in  the 
St.  George  Temple,  May  16,  1894.  In 
May,  1895,  I  moved  to  Fredonia,  a 
branch  of  the  Kanab  Ward,  situated 
over  the  line  in  Arizona,  where  I  took 
an  activ.^  part  in  Church  affairs,  and 
was  called  to  preside  over  the  branch, 
which  I  did  until  Sept.  14,  1895,  when  I 
was  ordained  a  High  Priest  and  a 
Bishop  by  Apostle  Francis  M.  Lyman 
and  set  apart  to  preside  over  the  Fre- 
donia ward,  which  position  I  still 
hold." 

CROSBY,  Jes.se  Wentworth,    Jun., 

second  president  of  the  Panguitch 
Stake  of  Zion,  Utah  (from  1882  to  1900), 
is  the  son  of  Jesse  W.  Crosby  and 
Hanah  E.  Baldwin,  and  was  born  June 
22,  1848,  in  Salt  Lake  City,  Utah.  In 
1861  he  went  to  "Dixie"  (southern 
Utah),  together  with  his  parents,  and 
helped  to  survey  the  city  of  St.  George, 
When  he  was  about  fourteen  years  old 
he  drove  a  six-horse  team  to  southern 
California  and  back.  In  1864  he  drove 
a  four-yoke  ox-team  from  St.  George 
to  the  Missouri  river  and  back,  trav- 
eling about  2,700  miles  in  seven  months. 


542 


LATTER-DAY    SAINT 


He  spent  most  of  the  summer  of  1865 
as  a  guard  on  the  frontiers  in  southern 
Utah,  and  in  1866  he  went  as  a  mem- 
ber of  an  exploring  party  by  way  of 
Kanab,  Escalante  and  the  Fremont 
river,  to  look  out  the  strongholds  of 
the  Indians;  one  man  was  killed  by  the 
Indians  on  this  trip.  In  1867  Elder  Cros- 
by was  ordained  an  Elder  by  John  D. 
T.  McAllister  and  married  Sarah  Pau- 
line Clark,  and  was  ordained  a  Seventy 
April  9,  1868,  by  Geo.  A.  Smith,  and 
filled  a  mission  to  the  Southern  States 
during  that  and  the  following  year,  la- 
boring principally  in  Kentucky,  Ten- 
nessee and  Georgia.  After  his  return 
home  in  the  fall  of  1869  he  was  ordained 
a  High  Priest  by  Apostle  Erastus  Snow 
and  set  apart  as  a  member  of  the  High 


port.  In  answer  to  their  prayer,  as 
the  Saints  verily  believe,  the  Lord  sent 
Mr.  I.  S.  P.  Weeks,  an  engineer  of  the 
Burlington  and  Missouri  River  Rail- 
way, to  offer  them  a  grading  contract. 
The  contract  was  taken  and  Elder 
Crosby  appointed  the  business  manage- 
er.  This  contract  covered  twenty-four 
miles  of  grade,  and  included  the  mov- 
ing of  589,000  cubic  yards  of  material, 
for  which  the  railroad  company  paid 
the  colonists  over  $96,000.  When  the 
settlements  of  the  Saints  in  the  Big 
Horn  country  were  organized  as  a 
Stake  of  Zion,  in  May,  1901,  Elder 
Crosby  was  chosen  as  first  counselor  to 
Byron  Sessions,  president  of  the  Stake, 
which  position  he  now  occupies. 

CAMEKOX,  David,  third  president 
of  the  Panguitch  Stake  of  Zion,  is  the 
?on  of  William  Cameron  and  Jane 
Frances  Lint,  and  was  born  in  Queens- 
bury  parish,  county  of  York,  New 
Brunswick,  Dec.  34,  1838.  With  his 
jarents  he  moved  to  Nauvoo,  111.,  in 
the  fall  of  1845,  thence  to  Chicago,  111., 
in  1846,  and  to  Little  Pigeon,  Iowa,  in 
1849.  David  was  baptized  in  the  spring 
of   1850   and    came    to   Utah    the     same 


Council  in  the  St.  George  Stake.  In 
1872  he  removed  to  Panguitch  (now  in 
Garfield  county),  Utah,  and  helped  to 
settle  that  place  and  the  surrounding 
valleys.  When  the  Panguitch  Stake  of 
Zion  was  organized  in  1877,  he  was 
chosen  second  counselor  to  Pres.  James 
Henrie,  and  in  1882  he  was  called  to 
succeed  Elder  Henrie  in  the  presidency 
of  the  Stake,  which  position  he  held  till 
1900,  with  Mahonri  M.  Steele  and  David 
Cameron  as  his  counselors.  In  1900,  he 
was  called  on  a  special  mission  to  the 
Big  Horn  country,  in  Wyoming,  to  as- 
fist  in  settling  that  valley.  In  the 
fall  of  1900  the  colonists  in  the  Big 
Horn  basin  ran  short  of  provisions,  and 
a  special  fast  meeting  was  held  by  the 
Saints  there,  in  which  they  asked  the 
Lord    to   open    the    way   for    their   sup- 


year,  locating  at  I'rovo,  Utah  county. 
He  was  ordained  an  Elder  by  Doctor 
Sprague  in  April,  1857.  The  same  year 
he  was  called  to  go  east  in  the  Y.  X. 
company,  and  was  stationed  five 
months  at  Devil's  Gate,  on  the  Sweet- 
water. He  also  served  two  months  in 
Echo  canyon  as  a  guard.  In  1861  he 
moved  to  St.  G«orge,  Washington  coun- 


BIOGRAPHICAL    ENCYCLOPEDIA. 


543 


ty,  and  was  one  of  the  men  called  to 
accompany  Jacob  Hamblin  on  his  visit 
to  the  Moquis  Indians  in  the  fall  of 
1862.  He  went  east  to  the  Missiouri 
liver  in  1863,  in  Daniel  D.  McArthur's 
company,  to  bring  poor  emigrants  to 
the  Valley.  Prior  to  1872  he  had  done 
much  service  as  an  Indian  scout.  He 
was  with  the  exploring  expedition  un- 
der Captain  Franklin  B.  Wooley  and 
James  Andrews  when  Escalante  was 
discovered.  In  1875  he  settled  in  Pan- 
guitch,  Garfield  county,  Utah,  where 
he  was  ordained  a  High  Priest  by  Apos- 
tle John  Taylor  and  set  apart  as  a 
High  Counselor  in  Panguitch  Stake  of 
Zion,  April  23,  1877.  In  1878  he  per- 
formed a  short  mission  to  California. 
He  was  appointed  Stake  superintendent 
of  mutual  improvement  associations 
June  1,  1879,  and  elected  justice  of  the 
peace  in  Panguitch  precinct,  Aug.  4, 
1879.  He  married  Alice  J.  Eccles  March 
9,  1882,  in  the  St.  George  Temple,  and 
was  chosen  second  counsellor  to  Jesse 
W.  Crosby,  jun.  (president  of  the 
Panguitch  Stake)  June  18,  1882.  In 
1883  he  was  elected  probate  judge  of 
Garfield  county;  was  re-elected  to  that 
office  in  1885,  and  appointed  to  the 
.^ame  position  by  Pres.  Benjamin  Har- 
rison in  1893.  Aug.  26,  1900,  he  was  set 
apart  as  president  of  the  Panguitch 
Stake  by  Apostle  Abraham  O.  Wood- 
ruff, and  is  now  faithfully  engaged  in 
the  dischargvj  of  the  duties  pertaining 
to  that  high  and  holy  calling. 

ST£]f]LE],     Mahonri    Moriancumer, 

first  counselor  to  Pres.  David  Cameron, 
of  Panguitch  Stake,  is  the  son  of  John 
Steele  and  Catharine  Campbell,  and 
was  born  May  1,  1849,  in  Salt  Lake  City, 
Utah.  Bro.  Steele,  in  a  brief  life  sketch, 
writes:  "With  my  parents  I  was  a 
pioneer  in  Geo.  A.  Smith's  company 
which  settled  Parowan,  Iron  county, 
Utah,  arriving  there  Jan.  13,  1851.  I 
was  baptized  May  29,  1857,  by  Bishop 
Tarleton  Lewis  and  confirmed  by  Prid- 
dy  Meeks.  In  the  winter  of  1860  I 
moved  with  my  parents  to  Toquerville, 
Washington  county.  I  participated  in 
the  battle  with  the  Navajoe  Indians 
Dec.  31,  1866,  and  served  in  the  Utah 
militia  during  the  Blackhawk  Indian 
war,  being  commissioned  first  lieuten- 
ant in  company  C,  of  the  cavalry  corps, 
by  the  governor  of  Utah.  I  was  or- 
dained an  Elder  April  22,  1866,  by 
Bishop  Joshua  T.  Willis.      In  the  sum- 


mer of  1868  I  drove  a  four-yoke  ox- 
team  in  Daniel  D.  McArthur's  com- 
pany to  the  terminus  of  the  Union  Pa- 
cific railroad,  to  bring  emigrants  to 
Utah.  April  19,  1869,  I  married  Emily 
Bunker,  daughter  of  Bishop  Edward 
Bunker,  a  member  of  the  Mormon  Bat- 
talion. In  the  spring  of  1871  I  moved 
my  family  to  Panguitch,  then  in  Iron 
county.  I  took  to  wife  Mary  Ellen 
Jepson  May  11,  1874.  Together  with 
my  father  I  left  home  for  a  mission  to 
Europe  May  13,  1877,  and  I  was  or- 
dained a  Seventy  May  22,  1877,  by  Apos- 
tle Orson  Pratt.  While  on  this  mis- 
sion I  labored  mostly  in  the  Liverpool 
conference,  and  I  was  released  on  ac- 
count of  the  climate  of  England  dis- 
agreeing with  my  health,  returning 
home  in  July,  1878.  June  1,  1879,  I 
was  chosen  first  counselor  to  James 
Henrie,  president  of  the  Panguitch 
Stake  of  Zion,  and  was  set  apart  to 
that  position  by  Apostle  Erastus  Snow. 
I  was  arrested  on  the  charge  of  un- 
lawful cohabitation  April  26,  1887,  and 
placed  under  $1500  bonds.  My  second 
wife  was  subpoenaed  by  deputy  mar- 
shals, that  she  died  May  18,  1887,  short- 
ly after  having  given  birth  to  a  child. 
At  the  reorganization  of  the  Panguitch 
Stake,  June  18,  1882,  I  was  set  apart  as 
first  counselor  to  President  Jesse  W. 
Crosby,  jun.,  by  Apostle  John  Henry 
Smith,  and  on  April  26,  1900,  I  was 
again  chosen  as  first  counselor  in  the 
Stake  presidency,  this  time  to  Pres. 
David  Cameron.  I  was  set  apart  this 
time  by  Apostle  Francis  M.  Lyman. 
Aug.  29,  1898,  I  was  ordained  a  Patri- 
arch by  Apostle  Francis  M.  Lyman." 
Elder  Steele  has  labored  as  Ward  and 
Stake  clerk  and  historian,  and  has 
served  more  than  twenty  years  as 
Stake  tithing  clerk.  He  has  faithfully 
worked  in  the  Stake  presidency  for 
twenty-two  years.  In  civil  life  he 
served  as  the  first  county  clerk  of 
Garfield  county,  and  has  also  acted  as 
school  trustee,  and  as  county  superin- 
tendent of  schools. 

SCHOW,  Andrew  Peter,  Bishop 
of  Escalante,  Garfield  county,  Utah,  is 
the  son  of  Niels  Christian  Schow  and 
Marie  From,  and  was  born  in  Aalborg, 
Denmark,  Nov.  2,  1839.  When  twelve 
years  of  age,  he  was  baptized  by  Hans 
Peter  Jensen,  April  13,  1851,  being  then 
between  eleven  and  twelve  years  old. 
His  parents  were  baptized  by  Elder 
Geo.    P.    Dykes,    Oct.     27,      1850,     being 


544 


LATTER-DAY    SAINT 


among  the  very  first  who  wei>3  bap- 
tized into  the  Church  in  the  -city  of 
Aalborg.  The  family  emigialed  to 
Utah  in  1S53-54,  crossing  the  ocean  in 
the  sailing  vessel  "Jessie  Munn.  "  On 
arriving  in  Utah  Oct.  5,  1854,  they  lo- 
cated in  Brigham  City,  Box  Elder 
county,  where  they,  in  common  with 
the  early  settlers  of  Utah  generally, 
had  to  endure  many  hardshii^s.  In 
1863,  Andrew  crossed  the  plains  as  a 
Church  teamster  in  Thos.  E.  Ricks' 
company  to  bring  emigrants  to  the 
Valley.  Feb.  14,  1865,  he  married  An- 
nie Jespersen,  and  in  1867  he  moved  to 
Panaca,  Nevada.  Together  ^\ith  six 
others  he  started  out  in  search  of  an- 
other place  to  settle,  in  1875,  and  they 
founded   the  settlement  known  now  as 


Escalante,  in  Potatoe  valley.  They 
soon  built  log  cabins  and  began  to  till 
the  earth.  In  May,  1877,  Bro.  Schow 
was  ordained  a  Bishop  by  Apostle 
Erastus  Snow  and  set  apart  to  preside 
over  the  Escalante  Ward, in  which  call- 
ing he  has  labored  faithfully  and  un- 
tiringly up  to  the  present  time. 

ANDKRSON,  Charles  li.,  first 
counselor  to  Pres.  Hugh  S.  Gowans  in 
the  presidency  of  the  Tooele  Stake  of 
Zion,  was  born  April  11,  1846,  in  An- 
skog  parish,  Elfsborgs  Ian,  Sweden; 
baptized  by  A.  Borreson  June  23,  1861, 
emigrated  to  Utah  in  1862  and  located 
in  Grantsville,  Tooele  county,  where  he 
still  resides.  He  went  to  the  Missouri 
river  as  a  Church  teamster  in  1866,  af- 
ter the  poor;  filled  a  mission  to  Scan- 
dinavia in  1878-80,  where  he  labored  as 


a  traveling  Elder  in  and  later  as  presi- 
dent of  the  Gothenburg  conference, 
Sweden.  For  nineteen  years  he  has 
filled  the  position  of  first  counselor  in 
the  presidency  of  the  Tooele  Stake  of 
Zion:  previous  to  that  he  was  a  mem- 
ber of  the  High  Council  of  said  Stake; 


hf  has  also  served  Grantsville  city  as 
councilman  and  mayor;  has  served  two 
terms  in  the  Utah  legislature,  and  is 
at  present  a  member  of  the  Industrial 
Bureau  of  the  Church.  Elder  Ander- 
son is  a  thorough  business  man  and  one 
of  the  foremost  citizens  of  Tooele  coun- 
ty. Since  1879  he  has  emigrated  thirty- 
one  persons  from   the  old  country. 

RICHARDS,        George       Franklin, 

.second  counselor  to  Hugh  S.  Gowans  in 
the  presidency  of  the  Tooele  Stake  of 
Zion,  was  born  Feb.  23,  1861,  in  Farm- 
ington,  Davis  county,  Utah,  son  of , 
Franklin  D.  Richards  and  Nanny 
L.ongstroth.  Hfe  was  baptized  Oct. 
]2,  1873,  by  Oliver  L.  Robinson  and  con- 
firmed the  same  day  by  Abraham 
Rose.  He  graduated  from  the  Univer- 
sity of  Deseret  in  English  language 
and  literature,  in  June,  1881;  took  up  a 
course  in  mathematics  the  following 
year  in  the  same  institution,  and  after 
carrying  the  same  for  six  months,  he 
gave  up  school  for  a  position  with  the 
Utah  Central  (now  the  O.  S.  L.  rail- 
way) as  clerk  in  the  lumber,  carpen- 
ter and  car  building  department,  which 
occupation  he  held  until  October,  1882. 
As  an  inducement  to  stay  longer  he 
was    offered    promotion    and    increased 


BIOGRAPHICAL    ENCYCLOPEDIA. 


545 


wages,  but  duty  called  him  elsewhere. 
While  but  a  boy  of  fifteen  years  he  was 
called  to  labor  as  a  Ward  teacher  and 
at  that  age  reecived  his  endowments  in 
the  Endowment  House,  Salt  Lake  City, 
June  5,  1876,  and  was  ordained  an  El- 
der at  the  same  time  by  Franklin  D. 
Richards.  He  was  frequently  called 
upon  to  act  as  arbitrator  and  reconcil- 
iator  in  the  settlement  of  difficulties 
existing  between  his  neighbors.  March 
9,  1882,  he  married  Miss  Alice  A.  Robin- 
son, daughter  of  Oliver  L.  Robinson 
and  Lucy  Miller,  of  Farmington,  in  the 
Endowment  House,  Salt  Lake  City. 
While  residing  at  Farmington  he  acted 
as  clerk  of  the  Elders'  quorum,  Ward 
teacher.  Stake  home  missionary,  presi- 
dent of  Y.  M.  M.  I.  A.,  etc.,  and  he  was 


ordained  a  Seventy  Feb.  3,  1884,  by 
Seymour  B.  Young.  In  1885  he  pur- 
chased a  farm  in  Plymouth  (now  Field- 
ing), Box  Elder  county,  where  he  re- 
sided until  Jan.  31,  1888,  when  he 
moved  to  Tooele,  Tooele  county,  where 
he  has  since  resided,  and  where  he  has 
filled  many  important  positions.  He 
has  acted  as  secretary  and  later  as 
chairman  of  the  school  district  board 
of  trustees,  chairman  of  the  board  of 
trustees  for  the  Tooele  Irrigation  Com- 
pany; director  and  treasurer  (for  11 
years)  of  the  Tooele  City  Water  Com- 
pany, and  was  Tooele  county's  repre- 
sentative in  the  State  legislature  of 
1899-1900.  Ecclesiastically  he  has  held 
the  position  of  Sunday  school  teacher, 
Ward  teacher,  home  missionary,  etc. 
He      was      ordained      a      High    Priest 


Jan.  29,  1890,  by  Francis  M.  Ly- 
man and  set  apart  as  second 
counselor  to  Pres.  Hugh  S.  Gowans  in 
the  presidency  of  the  Tooele  Stake; 
was  ordained  a  Patriarch  under  the 
hands  of  Elder  Francis  M.  Lyman,  July 
23,  1893.  He  has  administered  patri- 
archal blessings  to  nearly  three  hun- 
dred people,  performed  many  ordina- 
tions, blessings  of  children  and  admin- 
istrations to  the  sick.  Elder  Richards, 
though  but  forty  years  of  age,  is  the 
father  of  eleven  children,  nine  of  whom 
are  still  living. 

ROWBERRY.  John,  presiding  Bish- 
op of  Tooele  county, Utah, was  the  son  of 
John  Rowberry  and  Mary  Parry,  and 
was  born  Aug.  16,  1823,  in  Bishop's 
Frome,  Herefordshire,  England.  He 
embraced  the  gospel  in  Herefordshire, 
his  native  place,  being  baptized  in  1840, 
by  Apostle  Wilford  Woodruff,  who  was 
sent  into  that  part  of  England  by  reve- 
lation.      He    emigrated    from    England 


with  one  of  the  first  companies  of 
Saints  that  came  to  Nauvoo  from  Eng- 
land, and  passed  through  the  persecu- 
tions and  sufferings  of  the  Saints  while 
being  driven  from  that  place.  Previous 
to  leaving  Nauvoo  he  received  his 
blessings  and  endowments  in  the  Nau- 
voo Temple,  on  the  erection  of  which 
he  had  labored  faithfully.  He  crossed 
the  plains  in  1849  in  Ezra  T.  Benson's 
company,  and  in  the  fall  of  the  same 
year  moved  into  Tooele  valley,  and 
made  his  home,  together  with  a  few 
others,  in  what  was  then  a  sage-brush 


Vol.  1,  No.  35. 


Aug.  31.  1901. 


546 


LATTER-DAY    SAINT 


and  willow  fort.  He  presided  over  the 
people  in  Tooele  valley  as  their  Bishop 
until  the  county  was  organized  into  a 
Stake  of  Zion,  in  1877.  He  went  on  a 
mission  to  England  in  1876,  and  after 
his  return  in  1877  he  was  chosen  and 
set  apart  as  the  president  of  the  High 
Priests'  quorum  in  the  Tooele  Stake. 
Shortly  afterwards  he  was  ordained  a 
Patriarch.  He  represented  Tooele 
county  in  the  legislative  assembly  of 
Utah  for  several  years  and  was  an  ac- 
tive advocate  for  laws  and  principles 
that  would  benefit  the  people.  He  died 
at  his  home  in  Tooele  April  4,  1884.  The 
"Deseret  News,"  in  speaking  of  him  at 
the  time  of  his  demise,  says:  "All  who 
knew  him,  speak  well  of  him  as  a 
fatherly  and  kind  Bishop,  always  on 
hand  to  bless  and  aid  the  poor,  and  as 
the  kind  and  affectionate  father  of  a 
large  family.  His  sickness  was  but 
brief,  and  he  passed  away  without  pain. 
His  faith  was  steadfast  in  the  truth, 
and  he  died  in  full  hope  of  a  glorious 
resurrection." 

ATKIN,  Thomas,  junior,  Bishop  of 
Tooele,  Tooele  county,  Utah,  since  1880, 
is  the  son  of  Thomas  Atkin  and  Mary 
Morley,  and  was  born  July  7,  1833,  at 
South,  Lincolnshire,  England.  His  pa- 
rents were  well-to-do  people,  and  en- 
deavored to  give  their  children  a  good 
education.  In  1842  they  first  heard  the 
true  and  everlasting  gospel  preached, 
and  believed  and  accepted  it.  Thomas 
was  baptized  by  Elder  Geo.  Eyers,  July 
3,  1843,  and  soon  afterward  a  branch 
was  organized  at  South.  Together  with 
his  parents  he  emigprated  to  Utah  in 
1849,  leaving  England,  Jan.  29th,  on 
board  the  ship  "Zetland,"  Orson  Spen- 
cer having  charge  of  the  company, 
which  landed  at  New  Orleans  April  3, 
1849.  They  crossed  the  plains  in  Orson 
Spencer's  train,  arriving  in  Great  Salt 
Lake  valley  Sept.  23,  1849,  where  they 
located  in  the  Eleventh  Ward.  In 
the  spring  of  1851,  Thomas,  together 
with  his  father,  moved  to  Tooele  coun- 
ty. He  was  ordained  a  Teacher  in  1852, 
and  married  Mary  Ann  Maughan  May 
20,  1856.  During  the  Johnston  army 
war  in  1857-58  he  served  under  Major 
John  Rowberry  in  a  military  capacity. 
In  1858  he  moved  to  Lehi,  Utah  county, 
for  a  short  time.  At  the  organization 
of  the  Tooele  Ward,  May  24,  1877,  Bro. 
Atkin  was  chosen  as  second  counselor 
to  Bishop  Norton  R.  Tuttle,    and    was 


ordained  a  High  Priest  and  set  apart 
for  that  position  by  Apostle  Erastus 
Snow.  Oct.  31,  1880,  he  was  chosen  and 
sustained  as  Bishop  of  Tooele  Ward, 
being  ordained  and  set  apart  by  Pres. 
Geo.  Q.  Cannon.  Bishop  Atkin  has  al- 
ways tried  to  further  the  interests  of 
the  people  among  whom  he  has  la- 
bored, and  he  has  done  his  honest  share 
toward  upbuilding  and  developing  the 
resources  of  Utah,  particularly  Tooele 
county.  In  civil  life  he  has  been  ac- 
tive, having  held  several  positions  of 
responsibility  and  trust  in  Tooele  coun- 
ty. His  greatest  desire  in  life  has 
been  to  see  the  people  of  God  progress 
and  grow.  "After  58  years  of  mem- 
bership in  the  Church,"  he  writes,  "I 
am  fully  prepared  to  testify  of  Its 
worth,  and  I  do  bear  witness  that  the 
true  Church  of  Christ  is  again  upon 
the  earth,  the  gospel  having  been  re- 
vealed from  heaven  by  God  through 
the  instrumentality  of  the  Prophet  Jo- 
seph Smith." 

ORME,  Charles  Alvin  Bishop 
of  Batesville,  Tooele  county,  Utah,  is 
the  son  of  Samuel  W.  Orme  and  Sarah 
Cross,  and  was  born  at  Tooele  city, 
Tooele  county,  Utah,  Oct.  21.  1869.    His 


youth  was  spent  mostly  on  the  farm, 
and  he  has  continued  in  that  avocation 
up  to  the  present  time,  being  still  en- 
gaged in  larming  and  stockraising.  As 
a  young  man  he  took  an  active  part  in 
the  Sabbath  school  and  mutual  im- 
provement work;  he  was  also  a  Ward 
teacher.       In   1896-99   he    performed     a 


BIOGRAPHICAL   ENCTCLOPEDIA. 


547 


mission  to  Australia,laboring  principal- 
ly on  the  island  of  Tasmania.  When  the 
Batesville  Ward  was  organized,  April  2, 
1899,  Bro.  Orme  was  chosen  to  act  as 
Bishop  of  the  same,  and  he  was  or- 
dained to  that  office  by  Apostle  Fran- 
cis M.  Lyman.  He  is  still  earnestly  la- 
boring- in  that  responsible  calling.  Dec. 
20,  1899,  he  married  Ada  M.  Dunn  in  the 
Salt  Lake  Temple. 

BENNION,  Israel,  Bishop  of  Ver- 
non, Tooele  county,  Utah,  is  the  son  of 
John  Bennion  and  Esther  Ann  Birch, 
and  was  born  June  2,  1860,  in  the  "Old 
English  Fort"  (now  Taylorsville),  Salt 
Lake  county,  Utah.  He  lived  in  Rush 
valley  in  1864  and  1865;  settled  on  the 
Muddy  (Nevada)  in  1868,  and  subse- 
quently resided  in  Panaca  and  Eagle- 
ville.  The  family  returned  to  Tay- 
lorsvile  in  1873,  and  Israel  followed  the 
sheep  and  cattle  business  tiW  1877,when 
he  settled  in  Vernon,  Tooele  county, 
Utah,  where  he  has  resided  ever  since. 
In  1883  he  performed  a  short  mission 
to  the  Southern  States,  but  returned 
on  account  of  poor  health.  During  the 
winter  of  1883-84  he  attended  the  Des- 
eret  University,  and  he  married  Jean- 
nette  Sharp  Oct.  16,  1884.  His  ordina- 
tions in  the  Priesthood  are  as  follows: 
He  was  ordained  an  Elder  Oct.  25,  1882; 
a  Seventy  Jan.  26,  1885,  and  at  the 
same  time  set  apart  as  a  president  in 
the  31st  quorum,  by  Apostle  John  W. 
Taylor;  a  High  Priest  Nov.  29,  1891,  by 
Pres.  Hugh  S.  Gowans,  who  on  the 
same  occasion  set  him  apart  as  first 
counselor  to  Bishop  John  C.  Sharp;  a 
Patriarch  by  Apostle  Francis  M.  Ly- 
man, July  23,  1893,  and  a  Bishop  Feb. 
25,  1900,  by  Apostle  Francis  M.  Lyman, 
who  also  set  him  apart  to  preside  over 
the  Vernon  Ward. 

CLARK,  Thomas  Henry,  Bishop  of 
Grantsville,  Tooele  county,  Utah,  was 
bom  May  7,  1805,  at  Acton,  Hereford- 
shire, England;  as  a  young  man  he 
identified  himself  with  the  religious  so- 
ciety known  as  the  United  Brethren 
over  which  Thomas  Kington  presided, 
and  to  whom  Bro.  Clark  was  next  in 
authority;  he  was  among  the  first  of 
Elder  Kington's  flock  who  yielded  obe- 
dience to  the  e.verlasting  gospel  as 
brought  them  by  Elder  Wilford  Wood- 
druff,  by  whom  he  was  baptized  early 
in  1840;  he  was  ordained  a  Priest  at  the 
time  of  his  confirmation  and  was  or- 
dained an  Elder  June  21,  1840,  under  the 


hands  of  Willard  Richards  and  Wilford 
Woodruff;  after  this  he  traveled  and 
preached  and  baptized  many  hundreds 
into  the  Church.  Emigrating  to 
America,  he  set  sail  from  Gloucester 
April  6,  1841,  for  Quebec,  in  charge  of 
a  company  of  emigrating  Saints,  with 
whom  he  traveled  through  Canada  and 
arrived  at  Nauvoo  July  8,  1841.  He 
suffered  in  common  with  the  Saints 
generally  the  persecution  and  trials  en- 
dured by  the  Church  in  Illinois  until 
the  expulsion  in  1846.  He  then  trav- 
eled to  Winter  Quarters,  whence  he 
was  called  on  a  mission  to  travel 
among  the  branches  of  the  Church  In 
Iowa  and  Missouri,  and  on  his  return 
from  that  mission  he  was  called  on  a 
mission  to  Europe,  which  he  filled  hon- 


orably and  returned  in  the  fall  of  1849, 
bringing  with  him  a  company  of  im- 
migrating Saints.  He  remained  at 
Kanesville  till  July  11,  1852,  when  he 
started  for  Utah.  He  arrived  in  Salt 
Lake  City  Oct.  10,  1849,  and  almost  im- 
mediately moved  to  Grantsville  where 
he  resided  until  his  death,  which  oc- 
curred Oct.  14,  1873.  During  his  resi- 
dence there  he  presided  most  of  the 
time  as  local  Bishop  or  president.  El- 
der Clark  was  a  man  who  by  his  kind- 
ness and  faithful  labors  gained  the 
esteem  of  all  with  whom  he  was  as- 
sociated. He  was  filled  with  integrity, 
spent  his  time  in  teaching  and  exhort- 
ing the  Saints  to  faithfulness  in  the 
gospel,  and  as  long  as  he  had  strength 
to  use  his  voice  he  bore  powerful  tes- 
timonies to  the  truth  of  the  great  Lat- 


548 


LATTER-DAY    SAINT 


ter-day  Work.  The  immediate  cause  of 
his  death  was  dyspepsia,  with  which 
he  was  afflicted  for  six  months  prior 
to  his  demise.  At  the  time  of  his 
death  he  was  6S  years,  5  months  and  7 
days  old. 

CLARK.  John  William,  a  Patri- 
arch in  the  Tooele  Stake  of  Zion,  is  the 
son  of  Thomas  Henry  Clark  and  Char- 
lotte Gaily,  and  was  born  Jan.  12,  1826, 
at  Bishop's  Frome,  Herefordshire,  Eng- 
land. In  1S40  he  was  baptized  by  his 
father,  Thos.  Henry  Clark,  and  con- 
firmed a  member  of  the  Church  by 
Apostle  Wilford  Woodruff.  Together 
with  his  father's  family  he  emigrated 
to  Utah  in  1841,  arriving  at  Nauvoo, 
111.,  July  8th  of  that  year.  He  at  once 
begai^  working  on  the  Nauvoo  House 
and  lived  a  few  miles  from  Nauvoo, 
until  driven  away  by  the  mob  in  1846. 
He  then  located  temporarily  at  Winter 


Quarters  and  remained  on  the  frontiers 
till  1852.  In  the  meantime  he  mar- 
ried Ann  Micklewright,  and  in  July, 
1852,  he  started  on  the  journey  across 
the  plains;  arrived  at  Salt  Lake  City 
Oct.  10,  1852.  He  settled  at  Grants- 
ville,  Tooele  county,  Utah,  the  same 
year  and  has  resided  there  ever  since. 
At  Grantsville  he  assisted  in  building 
the  fort  as  a  means  of  protection 
against  the  Indians,  and  was  otherwise 
active  in  the  upbuilding  of  the  settle- 
ment. He  also  participated  in  the 
Echo  canyon  war  in  1857-58.  Bro. 
Clark  has  always  been  active  in  Church 
work,  having  labored  as  a  Ward  teach- 
er.  Bishop's  counselor  and   member  of 


the  High  Council  in  Tooele  Stake.  He 
was  ordained  a  Patriarch  in  L899  by 
Apostle  Francis  M.  Lyman. 

DE  ST.  JEOR,  Francis,    Bishop  of 
Clover,  Tooele  county,  Utah,  from  1882 
to  1901,  is  the  son  of  Francis  John  De 
St.   Jeor  and   Marie  Macee,     and     was 
born  July  11,  1822,  in  the  parish  of  St. 
John,   on   the   island  of  Jersey    (one  of 
the  Channel  Islands).      Bro.  De  St.  Jeor 
writes:       "My  father  served  as  a  sol- 
dier  under  Napoleon   and   died     when 
I  was  about  eleven  years  old,   leaving 
my  mother  with  four  children.      I  was 
sent  to  France  to  live  with  my  grand- 
father, who  sent  me  to  school,  intend- 
ing to  have  me  trained  for  the  Roman 
Catholic  ministry.       When   my  grand- 
father  died,   my  mother   had   me     ap- 
prenticed   to      learn      the    shoemakers' 
trade.       I   took   an   active   part   in   the 
Protestant  church  Sunday  school  work. 
Feb.  26,  1842,  I  married  Elizabeth  Jeon, 
and  soon  afterward  moved  to  Ganville, 
France,    where    we    remained      several 
months,    and   then   returned    to   Jersey 
Island.       In     the  meantime  the  gospel 
was    introduced   and   a   branch   of   the 
Church  established  on  the  island.  Later 
three    Elders    (John    Banks,    Thos.    B. 
H.    Stenhouse   and     Wm.     C.   Dunbar) 
from  England  came  and  commenced  to 
hold    meetings.       I   was    invited    by   a 
neighbor  to  attend  one  of  these  meet- 
ings, which  I  did  more  out  of  curiosity 
than  anything  else.      J  listened  to  the 
sermon,  and  purchased  some  books  and 
tracts  which  I  carefully  studied.    When 
I  went  to  meeting  again,  I  offered  my- 
self  as   a   candidate   for   baptism,    and 
was  consequently  baptized  Nov.  9,  1849, 
by  Elder  Wm.  C.  Dunbar.      I  received 
a   strong  testimony   of   the   divinity   of 
the  great  Latter-day  Work  at  the  time. 
I  was  ordained  a  Priest  by  Elder  Wm. 
C.   Dunbar  June  3,   185^    and   sent  out 
to  preach  the  gospel.      On  this  my  first 
mission  I  had  the  privilege  of  baptiz- 
ing quite  a  number  of  people.  A  branch 
was  soon  organized  at  St.  John  and  I, 
being  ordained  an  Elder  by  John  Pack, 
was  set  apart  to  preside  over  the  same. 
I   labored   as  a  missionary   in   various 
parts  of  the  Channel  Islands,  till  March 
30,  1855,  when,  together  with  my  family 
and  others,  I  bid  farewell  to  the  island 
of  my  birth  and  started  for  Zion.      We 
crossed  the  Atlantic  on  the  ship  "Chim- 
borazo,"  Edward  Stevenson  being  pres- 
ident  of   the   company,   and   landed  at 
Philadelphia  May  21,  1855.      We  crossed 


BIOGRAPHICAL   ENCYCLOPEDIA. 


549 


the  plains  in  Charles  A.  Harper's  com- 
pany in  which  I  served  as  captain  of 
ten.  We  arrived  in  Salt  Lake  City 
Oct.  29,  1855.  I  settled  in  Tooele,  Tooe- 
le county,  where  I  resided  till  Decem- 
ber, 1856,  when  I  moved  to  Ru»h  val- 
ley. Being-  commissioned  a  captain 
by  Gov.  Brigham  Toung  in  1857,  I  or- 
g-anized  a  company  of  militia,  in  the 
defense  of  the  Saints.  May  9,  1857,  I 
was  ordained  a  Seventy  and  set  apart 
to  act  as  a  president  in  the  43rd  quo- 
rum. During  the  "move"  in  1858  I 
made  my  temporary  home  in  Lehi.Utah 
county.  I  assisted  in  establishing-  the 
first  Sunday  school  in  Rush  valley.  In 
1864  I  married  Harriet  Le  Masur,  and 
moved  to  Deseret,  Millard  county,  in 
January,  1866;  but  after  enduring-  many 
hardships  at  that  place,  and  losing 
crops  and  labor,  I  returned  to  Rush 
valley,  where  I  again  began  to  make  a 
home,  and  by  the  blessings  of  the  Lord 
and  the  kindness  of  friends  I  was  soon 
quite  comfortable.  "WTien  the  St.  Johns 
"Ward  was  organized  June  24,  1877,  I 
was  chosen  second  counselor  in  the 
Bishopric,  being  ordained  a  High  Priest 
by  Pres.  John  Taylor.  The  Clover 
Ward  was  organized  July  22,  1882,  on 
which  occasion  I  was  chosen  to  act  as 
Bishop  of  the  new  Ward.  I  was  or- 
dained and  set  apart  to  that  office  by 
Apostle  Francis  M.  Lyman,  and  la- 
bored to  the  best  of  my  ability  as 
Bishop  of  Clover  Ward  until  June  16. 
1901,  when  I  was  honorably  released. 
A  few  days  later  (June  20,  1901,)  I  was 
ordained  a  Patriarch  by  Apostle  Heber 
J.  Grant.  I  am  the  father  of  eleven 
children,  eight  of  whom  are  living.  I 
have  51  grandchildren  and  13  great- 
grandchildren." 

ALEXANDER,  John,  senior  presi- 
dent of  the  78th  quorum  of  Seventy,  is 
the  son  of  Joseph  Alexander  and  Lyn- 
donia  Higgs  and  was  born  in  Bristol, 
England,  Oct.  23,  1834.  His  parents  be- 
ing in  humble  circumstances,  his  op- 
portunities for  obtaining  an  education 
were  limited.  May  1,  1850,  he  was  bap- 
tized by  Elder  Geo.  Halliday,  and  soon 
afterwards  he  was  appointed  a  book 
agent  in  South  conferen<;e.  He  was 
ordained  a  P  iest  in  1852.  Emigrating 
to  America  he  sailed  from  Liverpool,  on 
the  ship  "Falcon,"  March  28,  1853.  After 
crossing  the  plains  and  arriving  in  the 
"Valley,  he  located  in  Salt  Lake  City, 
where   he   resided     till   1854,     when   he 


moved  to  Pleasant  Grove,  Utah  coun- 
ty. While  at  that  place  he  had  charge 
of  the  lesser  Priesthood  of  the  Ward. 
June  27,  1857,  he  was  ordained  a  Seven- 
ty by  Hyrum  Mace.  In  1858  he  moved 
to  Fillmore,  Milard  county,  and  during 
1859  and  1860  he  labored  in  Deseret, 
helping  to  build  a  dam  in  the  Sevier 
river,  at  that  place.  He  married  Ellenor 
Davidson  in  the  fall  of  1861,  and  in  the 
spring  of  1866  he  went  east  as  a  Church 
teamster  to  bring  poor  emigrants  to 
the  Valley.  During  1879  and  1880  he 
filled  a  mision  to  England,  laboring  in 
the  Birmingham  conference.  In  May, 
1881,  he  married  Mary  Baskerville  and 
moved  to  Goose  creek,  in  Idaho,  when? 
he  became  one  of  the  first  settlers.  He 
was  set  apart  as  one  of  the  presidents 
of  the  78th  quorum  of  Seventy  in  1884; 
later,  he  became  the  senior  president  of 
said  quorum.  July  30,  1890,  he  was  ar- 
rested on  the  'charge  of  unlawful  co- 
habitation, but  was  ubsequently  dis- 
charged. For  a  number  of  years  he 
has  labored  as  a  home  missionary  in 
the  Cassia  Stake.  He  is  at  present  en- 
gaged in  doing  ordinance  work  for  his 
dead  relatives. 

HARPER  William  T.,  second  coun- 
selor to  Wm.  T.  Jack,  president  of  the 
Cassia  Stake,  is  the  second  son  of 
Bishop  Thomas  Harper  and  Hannah 
Jones,  and  was  born  at  Call's  Fort, 
Box  Elder  county,  Utah,  April  7,  1861. 
He  spent  his  youth  laboring  on  his 
father's  farm.  At  the  age  of  17  he 
began  to  labor  at  hauling  freight,  etc., 
in  Montana  and  other  places.  When 
he  was  twenty-two  years  of  age  he 
married  Fannie  Loveland.  In  1884  he 
moved  to  the  State  of  Idaho  and  locat- 
ed at  Marsh  Basin, Cassia  county, where 
there  was  a  small  branch  of  the 
Church  at  that  time.  He  was  chosen 
superintendent  of  the  Sunday  school 
in  August,  1884,  and  in  November  of 
that  year  a  mutual  improvement  asso- 
ciation was  organized  and  he  was 
called  to  act  as  its  president.  When 
the  Albion  Ward  was  organized,  in 
November,  1887,  William  T.  Harper  was 
ordained  a  Bishop  and  set  apart  to  pre- 
side over  it,  in  which  capacity  he  dili- 
gently labored  for  over  twelve  years. 
In  November,  1896,  he  left  for  a  mission 
to  the  Indian  Territory,  where  he  la- 
bored for  twenty  months,  part  of  the 
time  as  president  of  the  Oklahoma  con- 
ference.     At  the  reorganization  of  the 


550 


LATTER-DAT    SAINT 


Cassia  Stake,  in  May,  1900,  he  was  set 
apart  as  second  counselor  to  Pres.  Wm. 
T.  Jack,  by  Apostle  Francis  M.  Lyman, 
and  called  to  make  his  home  in  Oak- 
ley. Bro.  Harper  is  a  man  whose  first 
and  greatest  desire  in  life  is  to  labor 
for  the  spread  of  the  Church  of  God. 

BALL,  Elihu  K.,  a  Patriarch  in  the 
San  Luis  Stake  of  Zion,  Colorado,  is 
the  son  of  John  T.  Ball  and  Margaret 
Honaker,  and  was  born  at  New  Gar- 
den, Russell  county,  Virginia,  Sept.  19, 
1853.  Elder  Ball  writes  thus:  "My 
boyhood  days  were  spent  at  labor  on 
my  father's  farm,  and  my  schooling 
was  somewhat  neglected.  As  a  boy 
I  was  religiously  inclined,  and  in  1869, 
when  I  first  heard  the  gospel  preached 
by  "Mormon"  Elders,  I  was  at  once 
convinced  that  they  were  servants  of 
God.  I  did  not,  however,  join  the 
Church  at  once.  After  having  gath- 
ered much  genealogy,  I  left  my  native 


State  for  Utah,  April  15,  1878,  and  ar- 
rived in  Salt  Lake  City  May  13th,  fol- 
lowing. After  thoroughly  investigating 
the  doctrines  of  the  Church,  I  was  bap- 
tized Aug.  11,  1878,  by  Wm.  L.  Ball. 
Later,  in  the  same  year,  I  was  ordained 
a  Deacon.  I  moved  to  Springdale, 
Kane  county,  in  1879,  and  was  ordained 
an  Elder  there  Sept.  26,  1879,  by  E.  F. 
Green.  In  1880  I  moved  to  Manassa, 
Conejos  county,  Colo.,  where  I  married 
Minta  E.  Kirtland  Sept.  4,  1881.  June 
27,  1886,  I  was  ordained  a  Seventy  by 
Niels  C.  Heiselt.  I  was  appointed  to 
preside  over  the  Mountain  View  branch 
March  6,  1888,  and  was  later  chosen  su- 


perintendent of  the  Sunday  pchool 
there.  March  31,  1894,  I  was  ordained 
a  High  Priest  by  Pres.  Albert  R.  Smith, 
and  on  May  27th  of  that  year  I  was 
set  apart  as  a  High  Councilor  in  the 
San  Luis  Stake  by  Apostle  John  Hen- 
ry Smith,  and  I  was  ordained  a  Patri- 
arch Feb.  16,  1896,  by  Apostle  Heber  J. 
Grant.  I  am  the  father  of  nine  chil- 
dren, five  of  whom  are  living."  Bro. 
Ball  has  passed  through  much  for  the 
gospel's  sake,  but  he  always  bears  a 
faithful  and  powerful  testimony  to  its 
truth. 

JENSEN,  Christen,  Bishop  of  the 
East  Dale  Ward  San  Luis  Stake  of 
Zion,  Colorado,  is  the  fifth  son  of  Pe- 
ter Jensen  and  Kjersten  Andersen,  and 
was  bom  at  Farre,  Aarhus  amt,  Jyl- 
land,  Denmark,  Oct.  28,  1848.  When 
he  was  ten  years  old,  the  Latter-day 
Saint  Elders  found  a  welcome  in  his 
father's  home,  and  while  the  family 
were  investigating  the  gospel,  he 
learned  to  love  its  truths.  His  father, 
however,  thought  him  too  young  for 
baptism.  April  6,  1862,  the  entire 
family,  nine  in  number,  bid  farewell  to 
the  land  of  their  nativity,  and  on  Sept. 
23rd  they  arrived  in  Salt  Lake  City. 
On  this  journey  Christen  was  taken  se- 
verely ill  with  the  ague,  at  Florence, 
Nebraska,  and  he  earnestly  requested 
baptism.  He  was  accordingly  bap- 
tized June  27,  1862,  and  was  instantly 
healed,  and  became  strong  enough  to 
walk  all  the  way  to  Salt  Lake  City. 
The  family  located  at  Moroni,  Sanpete 
county.  The  same  fall,  by  advice  of 
his  parents.  Christen  went  to  southern 
Utah,  where  he  shared  in  the  labors 
and  hardships  connected  with  the 
building  up  of  that  country.  One  sea- 
son, while  there,  flour  sold  at  $25  per 
hundred.  In  1863  he  was  ordained  a 
Deacon.  After  three  years'  sojourn  in 
that  land,  the  Indians  became  very 
troublesome,  killing  a  number  of  the 
settlers.  The  winter  of  1865  was  spent 
in  great  anxiety,  and  Bro.  Jensen,  in 
common  with  others,  was  compelled 
to  stand  guard  each  night  through  the 
entire  winter,  against  the  depredations 
of  the  Navajoe  Indians.  In  April,  1866, 
Apostle  Erastus  Snow  sent  word  for  all 
those  laboring  on  what  is  known  as  the 
Cannon  Ranch  to  move  to  settlements 
at  once  for  safety.  The  word  was 
obeyed,  and  scarcely  had  they  left  the 
ranch,  when  a  number  of  Navajoe  In- 
dians came  there  to  capture  or  to  kill 


BIOGRAPHICAL   ENCYCLOPEDIA. 


551 


them.  Bro.  Jensen's  father  now  sent 
for  him,  and  two  days  after  his  ar- 
rival home  he  was  mustered  into  Com- 
pany A  to  do  service  in  the  Black- 
hawk  war,  and  he  served  in  that  capa- 
city for  three  years.  He  received  his 
endowments  and  was  united  in  mar- 
riage with  Mary  Sophia  Anderson,  Feb. 
8,  1868.  The  same  spring  he  received 
a  call  to  go  as  a  Church  teamster  across 
the  plains,  assisting  the  emigrants  on 
their  way  to  Utah.  On  his  journey, 
while  attempting  to  ferry  across  Green 
river,  the  boat  capsized,  and  out  of 
twenty-five  companions  six  were  laid 
in  a  watery  grave.  On  his  return  home 
to  the  valleys  he  found  the  grasshop- 
pers so  numerous,  that  thousands 
would  be  crushed  to  death  under  foot 
while   walking  over   the   ground;     and 


when  a  swarm  of  them  would  arise  in 
the  air,  the  sun  would  become  dark- 
ened. The  next  few  years  of  his  life 
were  spent  in  building  up  a  home.  In 
1873,  the  principle  of  co-operation  being 
strongly  urged  by  the  General  Authori- 
ties of  the  Church,  he  and  some  nine- 
teen other  families  worked  their  farms 
on  the  co-operative  principle  with  suc- 
cess. The  United  Order  was  introduced 
in  1874,  and  before  starting  upon  a  mis- 
sion to  assist  in  the  completion  of  the 
St.  George  Temple,  he  took  all  his 
earthly  possessions  to  his  Bishop  to  be 
used  under  the  rules  of  the  United 
Order.  He  labored  on  the  Temple  un- 
til the  capstones  were  laid, when  he  was 
released  to  return  home.  About  this 
time    Pres.    Brigham    Young    issued    a 


circular  letter,  stating  that  if  Wards 
could  not  unite  together  in  the  United 
Order,  families  to  the  number  of  50, 
30,  20,  10  or  even  five,  might  unite  to- 
gether in  the  United  Order.  Conse- 
quently, in  1875,  Elder  Jensen  united 
with  30  other  families,  turning  all 
their  possessions  under  one  manage- 
ment. After  one  season's  trial,  the 
majority  favored  to  dissolve.  They 
settled  up,  paying  at  the  rate  of  from 
$1.50  to  $2.00  per  day  fcr  all  labor  done 
and  it  was  found  that  a  net  profit  of 
30  per  cent  was  realized  on  all  the 
property  turned  in,  including  teams, 
farming  implements,  etc.  Dec.  5,  1875, 
Elder  Jensen  entered  into  the  practice 
of  plural  marriage,  taking  to  wife  Car- 
rie Peterson.  In  September,  1879,  while 
engaged  as  salesman  in  the  Moroni  Co- 
op, a  call  came  from  Pres.  John  Taylor 
for  him  to  fill  a  mission  to  Scandinavia. 
He  responded  at  once,  although  at  first 
it  seemed  not  possible  to  get  all  busi- 
ness matters  arranged  on  such  short 
notice.  But  in  less  than  two  weeks 
he  was  ready  to  start  with  eleven 
other  Elders  for  Europe.  On  arriv- 
ing at  Copenhagen,  he  was  assigned  to 
the  Aarhus  conference,  where  he  la- 
bored as  a  traveling  Elder  till  April, 
1880,  when  he  was  appointed  president 
of  said  conference.  While  thus  en- 
gaged in  the  ministry,  he  baptized  sev- 
enty-seven souls.  After  laboring  two 
years,  he  received  an  honorable  release 
from  Elder  Andrew  Jenson,  then  in 
temporary  charge  of  the  Scandinavian 
mission.  In  December,  1881,  he  was 
united  in  marriage  to  Helena  S.  :^ound- 
qvist,  and  later  (in  1883)  he  married 
Mattie  K.  Peterson,  About  this  time 
the  pressure  of  the  Edmunds  law, 
passed  in  1882,  against  celestial  and 
plural  marriage,  became  general.  An 
opportunity  presenting  itself,  he  moved 
part  of  his  family  to  the  San  Luis 
Stake  of  Zion,  Colorado,  and  for  twelve 
years  he  had  the  experience  of  exile 
life.  The  deputy  marshals  frequently 
swore  vengeance  against  him,  should 
he  return  to  Utah.  Not  heeding  these 
threats,  however,  he  regularly  made 
one  or  two  visits  to  his  family  and 
home  in  Utah  each  year.  On  one  oc- 
casion, in  the  winter  of  1891,  after  the 
marshals  had  searched  his  home  from 
cellar  to  garret,  in  fiour  chests,  trunks, 
wardrobes  and  cupboards,they  met  him 
coming  to  his  home  in  broad  daylight, 
but  they,  failing  to  recognize  him, 
turned    into     a    neighbor's     house      to 


552 


LATTER-DAY    SAINT 


search  for  him.  During  these  days  of 
persecution  and  trial  he  was  not  in- 
active, however,  in  gospel  matters.  In 
188G  he  assisted  in  organizing  the  92nd 
quorum  of  Seventy,  and  for  eleven 
years  he  served  as  its  senior  president. 
After  the  persecution  had  relented,  Bro. 
Jensen  made  permanent  arrangements 
to  return  to  his  old  home  in  Utah,  with 
the  families  that  had  been  driven  into 
exile.  liis  entiie  family  now  num- 
bered twenty-one  souls  living,  and  two 
dead.  Plans  for  returning  to  the  old 
home  had  all  been  made;  household 
goods  had  been  sent  to  Utah  by  rail, 
four  of  the  children  had  been  sent 
ahead  to  Utah,  homes  and  lands  were 
sold,  wagons  stood  ready  to  be  loaded 
with  goods,  in  fact,  every  thing  was  in 
leadiness  for  the  homeward  journey, 
and  all  had  been  joy  and  gladness  in 
talking  over  the  happy  return  to  kin- 
dred and  friends,  and  in  fond  anticipa- 
tion of  once  more  living  in  Utah's 
lovely  vales,  when  a  reversal  and  dis- 
appointment befell  the  family.  The 
]jresident  of  the  Stake  came  and  asked 
how  Bro.  Jensen  was  getting  along. 
"Very  well,  we  are  all  ready  for  the 
trip  to  Utah,"  he  answered.  With  a 
calm  voice  the  president  said:  "We 
cannot  let  you  go."  They  agreed  to 
make  it  a  matter  of  prayer,  and  await 
the  impression  received.  Elder  Jensen 
says:  "That  night  brought  an  experi- 
ence I  never  desire  to  go  through  again. 
The  home  of  my  yoyth,  with  all  its  en- 
dearments and  surroundings,  stood  be- 
fore me  like  a  panorama  the  entire 
night.  The  tempter  whispered,  'Can 
it  be  right  to  make  such  a  sacrifice 
after  twelve  years  in  exile?'  "  The 
next  morning  Elder  Jensen  told  his 
experience,  and  the  Stake  president 
said,  "We  will  submit  the  matter  to 
Pres.  Wilford  Woodruff;  will  you  abide 
his  decision?"  To  which  he  answered, 
"Yes,"  and  the  temptation  was  over. 
He  was  ordained  to  the  office  of  a 
Bishop  by  Apostle  John  W.  Taylor, Aug. 
n,  1897,  and  set  apart  to  preside  over 
the  East  Dale  Ward.  This  position  he 
still  holds,  faithfully  striving  to  do  his 
duty  in  guarding  the  inte<-ests  of  the 
people,  over  whom  he  presides.  Since 
his  call  to  preside  over  the  East  Dale 
Ward,  h.3  has  sold  his  home  in  Utah. 
The  entire  family  is  now  located  in  the 
San  Luis  Stake.  -Lewis  Swensen. 

DAIjTON,  John  <".,  Bishop  of  Manas- 
sa,  San  Luis  Stake,  Colorado,  was  born 


at  Parowan,  lion  county,  Utah,  Jan. 
9,  1857.  He  grew  to  manhood  on  the 
farm  and  ranch,  and  received  a  limited 
education  in  the  district  school.  May 
1,  1876,  he  married  Hannah  D.,  daugh- 
ter of  Jesse  N.  and  Emma  Smith.  In 
December,  1878,  he  was  called  to  ac- 
company Pres.  Silas  S.  Smith  on  an 
exploring  mission  through  Arizona  and 
northern  New  Mexico.  He  started  on 
this  mision  the  following  April,  return- 
ing in  September.  Soon  after  his  return 
home,  he  was  chosen  a  counselor  in  the 
Y.  M.  M.  I.  A.  of  the  Ward.  The  year 
following  he  was  called  into  the  Stake 
presidency  of  the  Y.  M.  M.  I.  A.,  la- 
boring in  that  position  until  May,  1882. 
In  February,  1882,  he  was  directed  by 
Apostle  Erastus  Snow  to  again  accom- 
pany Pres.  Silas  S.  Smith  to  the    small 


colony  of  Saints  in  Colorado.  May  17th 
he  bade  farewell  to  his  relatives  and 
friends,  and,  leaving  the  home  of  his 
childhood,  started  on  a  life's  mission. 
On  the  22nd  of  the  following  month 
he,  with  his  traveling  companion,  A.  F. 
McGregor,  arrived  in  San  Luis  valley, 
where  the  Colorado  Saints  had  estab- 
lished three  small  settlements.  In  Oc- 
tober he  was  joined  by  his  wife,  and 
they  together  labored  to  build  a  home 
and  fill  the  mission  to  which  they  had 
been  called.  He  was  ordained  a  Bishop 
by  Apostles  Brigham  Young  and  He- 
ber  J.  Grant  and  Pres.  Silas  S.  Smith, 
and  set  apart  to  preside  over  the 
Manassa  Ward  in  February,  1883,  with 
Silas  S.  Smith,  junior,  and  Samuel  Sell- 
ers as  his  counselors.  Some  time  after- 
ward,    Bro.     Sellers     moved  away  and 


BIOGRAPHICAL,    ENCYCLOPEDIA. 


553 


Martin  Christensen  took  his  place  in 
the  Bishopric.  Side  by  side  they  have 
labored  to  build  up  the  Ward.  Bishop 
Dalton  has  represented  the  people  in 
various  State  and  county  positions.and 
has  always  been  zealous  and  energetic 
in  the  discharge  of  every  duty  enjoined 
upon  him. 

CROWTHER,  James  F.,  a  High 
Councilor  in  the  San  Luis  Stake,  Colo- 
rado, is  the  son  of  Thomas  Crowther, 
and  Jane  Jewkes,  and  was  bom  Sept. 
17,  1860,  at  Ephraim,  Sanpete  county, 
Utah.  He  moved  with  his  parents  to 
Fountain  Green,  Sanpete  county,  in 
1861,  and  his  early  life  was  spent  on  the 
farm.  March  14,  1869,  he  was  bap- 
tized by  Elder  James  Woodward,  and 
was  ordained  a  Deacon  at  about  the 
age  of  thirteen.  Nov.  17,  1881,  a  seri- 
ous accident  occurred  to  him;  while  in 
the  mountains,  hunting,  he  was  mis- 
taken, by  a  companion,  for  a  deer,  and 
shot  through  the  left  arm  and  hip,  but 
with  the  help  of  the  Lord  he  was  re- 
stored to  health.  He  attended  the  Des- 
eret  University  during  the  winters  of 
1882-83  and  1883-84.  Aug.  31,  1884,  he 
was  ordained  to  the  office  of  a  Priest 
by  J.  M.  Jensen,  and  on  Dec.  12th  of  the 
same  year  he  was  ordained  to  the  office 
of  an  Elder  by  his  father,  Thos. 
Crowther.  He  was  united  in  marriage 
to  Mary  Olsen  in  the  Logan  Temple 
Dec.  31,  1884,  and  on  May  3,  1885,  he 
was  ordained  to  the  office  of  a  Seventy 
by  Peter  Lauritzen.  He  moved  with  his 
family  to  Sanford,  Colorado,  in  June, 
1887,  where  he  engaged  in  farming  and 
school  teaching  for  two  years.  In  April, 
1890,  he  engaged  in  the  mercantile  busi- 
ness. Sept.  13,  i891,  he  was  chosen 
as  a  member  of  the  High  Council  of  the 
San  Luis  Stake  of  Zion  and  ordained 
to  the  office  of  a  High  Priest  the  same 
day  by  Silas  S.  Smith.  He  has  been 
a  member  of  the  Sabbath  school  from 
his  early  childhood,  as  pupil,  as  teacher 
and  as  assistant  superintendent  of  the 
Sanford  Sunday  school.  March  3,  1898, 
he  left  home  to  fill  a  mission  in  the  In- 
dian Territory  mission,  where  he  la- 
bored in  northwestern  Arkansas,  and 
in  St.  Johns,  Kansas,  for  two  years, 
after  which  he  was  honorably  released. 
On  his  return  home  he  resumed  his 
duties  as  a  High  Councilor  and  is  also 
serving  as  secretary  and  treasurer  of 
the  Sunday  school  board  in  San  Luis 
Stake. 


BUSHMAN,  John,  Bishop  of  St. 
Joseph  Ward,  Snowflake  Stake,  Ari- 
zona, is  the  seventh  son  of  Martin 
Bushman  and  Elizabeth  Dagen,  and 
was  born  in  Nauvoo,  Hancock  county, 
111.,  June  7,  1843.  He  writes:  "My  pa- 
rents were  expelled  from  Nauvoo  with 
the  Saints  and  went  to  Iowa  where 
they  stopped  at  Kanesville  until  the 
spring  of  1851,  when  they  started  for 
Utah,  arriving  in  Salt  Lake  City  in  Oc- 
tober of  that  year.  We  located  in  Lehi, 
Utah  county,  where  we  built  a  home 
and  experienced  the  trials  and  hard- 
ships of  those  early  tiines.  In  the  fall 
of  1861  I  hauled  stone  for  the  Salt  Lake 
Temple.  I  drove  an  ox-team  to  the 
Missouri  river  after  emigrants  in  18€2. 
In  1865  I  married  Lois  A.  Smith.  Dur- 
ing the  summer  of  1866  and  1867  I  did 


service  in  the  Blackhawk  war.  In  1876, 
being  called,  together  with  200  others,  I 
went  to  Arizona,  where  I  settled  on  the 
Little  Colorado  river,  near  the  spot 
where  St.  Joseph  now  stands.  I  took 
to  wife  Mary  A.  Petersen  in  March, 
1877.  I  was  ordained  a  High  Priest 
in  1879  and  set  apart  as  second  coun- 
selor to  Lot  Smith,  president  of  the 
Little  Colorado  Stake,  by  Pres.  Wil- 
ford  Woodruff;  and  I  was  ordained  and 
set  apart  as  Bishop  of  St.  Joseph  Ward 
in  1889,  which  position  I  still  occupy." 
Elder  Bushman  has  served  as  a  mem- 
ber of  the  board  of  education  of  the 
Snowflake  Stake,  and  has  always 
taken  an  active  part  in  the  upbuilding 
and  development  of  the  resources  of 
the   country. 


554 


LATTER-DAY    SAINT 


GIBBONS.    Andrew    V..    is  the  son 

of  Andrew  Smith  Gibbons  and  Rizpah 
Knight,  and  was  born  near  Kanes- 
ville.  Iowa,  April  3,  1849.  He  came 
to  Utah  with  his  parents  in  1852.  They 
located  in  Bountiful,  Davis  county, 
for  a  short  time  and  then  moved  to 
Lehi,  Utah  county,  where  they  resided 
till  they  were  called  to  move  south  to 
strengthen  the  settlements  in  Iron 
county.  Andrew  grew  to  manhood  on 
the  frontiers  and  consequently  his  op- 
portunities for  gaining  an  education 
were  limited.  Dec.  6,  1876,  he  married 
Nancy  Elizabeth  Harris,  and  on  the 
26th  of  that  month  he  was  ordained  an 
Elder.  In  1883  he  moved  to  Arizona, 
settling  in  St.  Johns.  He  went  to  Old 
Mexico  in  1885.  but  after  a  brief  so- 
journ there  and  in  New  Mexico,  he  re- 


turned to  his  home  in  Arizona.  At  the 
organization  of  the  St.  Johns  Stake, 
July  23,  1887,  he  was  ordained  a  High 
Priest  and  set  apart  as  a  member  of 
the  High  Council,  by  Pres.  Jesse  N. 
Smith,  which  position  he  la  filling  at 
present.  Bro.  Gibbons,  being  a  poly- 
gamist,  passed  through  many  trying 
scenes  during  the  "anti-polygamy 
crusade."  In  civil  life  he  has  been  ac- 
tive and  energetic  to  do  his  share  for  the 
common  welfare  of  his  fellow-men.  He 
represented  Apache  county  at  the  first 
International  Irrigation  Congress  in 
Los  Angeles.  Cal.,  in  October,  1893.  In 
1898   he   was   elected   a   member  of   the 


board  of  county  supervisors,  and  be- 
came chairman  of  said  board.  For  a 
number  of  years  he  was  a  director  in 
and  superintendent  of  the  St.  Johns 
C.  M.  &  M.  L 

ANDERSON,  Charles  Peter,  Bishop 
of  St.  Johns  Ward  (St.  Johns  Stake), 
Apache  Co.,  Arizona,  is  the  fourth  son 
of  ePter  Anderson  and  Maria  Catherina 
Larson,  and  was  born  in  Ledsjo,  Ska- 
raborgs  Ian,  Sweden,  Jan.  2,  1856.  With 


his  parents  he  emigrated  to  Utah  in 
1866,  crossing  the  ocean  in  the  ship  "Ca- 
vour,"  and  traveled  over  the  plains  in 
Capt.  Abner  Lowry's  company  of  ox- 
teams,  arriving  in  Salt  Lake  City,  Oct. 
22,  1866.  Charles  was  baptized  in  Mt. 
Pleasant,  Sanpete  county,  Nov.  4,  1866, 
by  C.  C.  Rowe,  He  went  to  Grants- 
ville,  Tooele  county,  in  1868,  and  mar- 
ried Anna  Louisa  Anderson  Oct.  3, 
1877.  He  was  ordained  an  Elder  by 
Benj.  F.  Barrus  Nov.  7,  1877.  While 
residing  in  Grantsville  he  took  much 
interest  in  mutual  improvement  work, 
and  after  having  held  a  number  of  po- 
sitions in  the  Ward  associations  he  was 
chosen  to  be  a  counselor  in  the  Tooele 
Stake  superintendency  of  mutual  im- 
provement work.  In  September,  1883, 
he  was  elected  a  member  of  the  Grants- 
ville city  council.  Together  with  his 
family  he  was  called,  in  April,  1884,  to 
go  to  St.  Johns,  Arizona,  and  assist  in 
the  settling  of  that  country.      There  he 


BIOGRAPHICAL    ENCYCLOPEDIA, 


555 


labored  as  a  Teacher  and  a  Priest  un- 
der David  K.  Udall,  until  the  St.  Johns 
Stake  was  organized,  July  23,  1887, 
when  he  was  called  and  set  apart  as 
a  member  of  the  High  Council  in  that 
Stake,  and  he  was  ordained  a  High 
Priest  by  Apostle  Francis  M.  Lyman, 
Oct.  6,  1892,  he  was  ordained  a  Bishop 
and  set  apart  to  preside  over  the  St. 
Johns  Ward,  by  Apostle  Anthon  H, 
Lund,  in  which  office  he  has  labored 
to  the  present  time  with  great  energy 
and  faithfulness.  In  civil  life  Bro. 
Anderson  has  been  engaged  in  the 
sheep  business,  and  has  kept  a  drug 
store.  He  also  acted  as  postmaster  of 
St.  Johns.  His  family  at  present  con- 
sists of  a  wife  and  six  children;  he  has 
lost  one  child  by  death. 

DAVIS,  Nofear,  first  counselor  to 
Bishop  Charles  P.  Anderson  of  St. 
Johns  Ward,  Apache  county,  Arizona, 
is  the  son  of  John  Davis  and  Jane 
Caroline  Lesueur,  and  was  born  at 
Montpelier,  Idaho,  March  13,  1866.      He 


was  baptized  at  the  age  of  eight  years 
by  David  Morgan.  In  1878  he  moved 
to  Arizona  with  his  parents,  was  or- 
dained a  Priest  by  Elder  Elijah  N, 
Freeman,  Feb.  4,  1886.  He  labored  as 
an  active  Priest  and  Ward  teacher  for 
a  number  of  years,  was  ordained  an 
Elder  by  Apostle  John  Henry  Smith, 
and  married  Signe  A.  Jacobson  Oct. 
13,  1891.      He  labored  for  a  number  of 


years  in  the  Sunday  school  as  assistant 
superintendent,  and  from  1894  to  1900 
he  filled  the  position  as  second  coun- 
selor in  the  Stake  Y.  M.  M.  I.  A.  super- 
intendency.  ■  Feb.  26,  1898,  he  was  or- 
dained a  High  Priest  and  set  apart  to 
act  as  first  counselor  to  Bishop  Charles 
P.  Anderson,  by  Apostle  John  Henry 
Smith.  He  is  still  energetically  la- 
boring in  that  calling. 

WILTBAXK,  Ellis  W,.  Bishop  of 
Greer  Ward,  St.  Johns  Stake,  Arizona, 
is  the  son  of  Spencer  W.  Wiltbank  and 
Annie  Sanders,  and  was  born  in  Salt 
Lake  City,  Utah,  Nov.  13,  1854.  In  1863 
he  moved  with     his      parents      to    St. 


George,  Washington  county.  He  mar- 
ried Hannah  M.  Hall  in  1875,  and  re- 
ceived his  endowments  in  the  St. 
George  Temple,  Jan.  11,  1877,  being 
among  the  first  who  enjoyed  that  privi- 
lege in  said  Temple.  In  1883  he  moved 
to  Nutrioso,  Arizona,  where  he,  later, 
was  called  to  act  as  a  Bishop's  counse- 
lor, being  ordained  a  High  Priest  in  1887 
by  Pres.  David  K.  Udall.  He  moved 
to  Union  Ward  in  1889,  where  he  served 
as  superintendent  of  the  Sunday  school 
and  president  of  the  Y.  M.  M.  I.  A.  In 
1896  he  was  called  to  act  as  Bishop  of 
Greer  Ward,  St.  Johns  Stake,  being  or- 
dained and  set  apart  to  that  office  by 
Apostle  John  Henry  Smith.  In  that 
calling  he  is  now  diligently  laboring. 

PARR,  Willard,  a  Patria,rch  in  the 
St.  Johns  Stake  of  Zion,  was  born  July 
5,  1856,  in  Ogden,  Weber  county,  Utah. 


556 


LATTER-DAY   SAINT 


He  received  his  infantile  blessing  under 
the  hands  of  Elder  James  Brown  in 
1856,  and  the  ordinance  of  baptism  by 
immersion  at  the  hands  of  his  father  in 
1865,  ^vho  also  confirmed  him  a  member 
of  the  Church.  His  father  is  Lorin  Farr, 
an  American  by  birth,  and  a  man  of 
noble  character,  well  known  through- 
out Utah  for  his  sterling  worth  in  pub- 
lic and  i)rivate  life.  His  mother  is  the 
late  Mary  Bingham  Farr,  also  an 
American,  who  embraced  the  gospel  in 
Vermont  in  the  early  days  of  the 
Church,  .ind  who  was  always  ready  to 
lend  a  helping  hand  to  those  in  sickness 
or  distress  of  any  kind.  His  grand- 
parents, on  both  sides,  embraced  the 
gospel  and  emigrated  to  Utah,  where 
they  proved  faithful  to  the  cause  they 
had  espoused,  and  laid  their  bodies 
down  in  peace  among  the  Saints.  Wil- 
lard's  boyhood  days  were  spent  on  his 
father's    farm,    assisting    in    tilling    the 


soil,  in  connection  with  a  number  of  his 
brothers.  There  he  early  imbibed  the 
spirit  of  industry,  which  has  followed 
him  through  life,  and  learned  many 
other  useful  lessons  which  have  been 
of  great  worth  to  him.  It  was  not  his 
lot  to  enjoy  a  luxurious  home.  He  was 
born  in  a  humble  cottage,  and  beneath 
a  similar  humble  roof  was  he  in  youth 
taught  to  love  God  and  keep  His  com- 
mandments. Having  been  trained  from 
infancy  to  be  obedient  to  his  parents 
and  to  the  Priesthood,  he  was  worthy 
of  holding  a  portion  of  that  Priesthood; 
hence,  on  Jan.  12,  1874,  he  was  ordained 
an  Elder  by  his  father  at  Salt  Lake 
City,  Utah.  Naturally  inclined  to  be 
studious,  he  embraced  every  opportuni- 
ty to  obtain  an  education.  During  the 
winter  months  he  attended  the  district 
school  until  1873,  when  he  had  the  privi- 
lege   of     attending     the     High    School 


taught      by     Prof.  Monch,  five     or    six 
months   of  each    year   for   three   years. 
In    the   year   1S73  an   organization   was 
effected,  called  the  "Young  Men's  Liter- 
ary Society,"  of  which  he  was  an  active 
member.     In  the  spring  and  summer  of 
1875    he    was    employed    as    bookkeeper 
and  shipper  of  lumber  at  Willard  Bing- 
ham's saw-mill,  about  thirty-five  miles 
northeast  of  Ogden.     In  the  fall  of  1876 
he    went   to   work   in   the   tithing  office 
at  Ogden  as  clerk,  where  he  continued 
until   the   next   spring,   when  he   again 
took  up  the  farm  labors  for  his  father. 
Oct.  13,  1877,   he  married  Mary  E.  Bal- 
lantyne,    daughter    of   Richard    Ballan- 
tyne  and  Mary  Pierce.  Two  weeks  after 
marriage  he  began   teaching  school   in 
the  Third  Ward,  Ogden,  where  he  con- 
tinued   six    months,    and    the   following 
winter  taught  at  Hooper.    April  21,  1878, 
he  was  appointed  president  of  the  Y.  M. 
M.    I.   A.    in  the  Fourth   Ward,    Ogden, 
with  E.  A.     Stratford      and     Alma    D. 
Chambers  as  counselors.  He  discharged 
his    duties    faithfully    in    this    work    of 
mutual  improvement  until  there  was  a 
division  of  the  Wards,  in  Ogden,  which 
placed  him  in  the  Third  Ward.     During 
the   summers  of   1878  and   1879   he   was 
employed   as    clerk   in   Lorin   Farr  and 
Sons'  store,  who  dealt  in  woolen  goods 
and  kept  a  tailoring  establishment.     In 
the   fall    of   1879   he,    with    three   of   his 
brotheis,  went  into  the  flour,  grain  and 
feed'  business,   continuing  in   the  same 
until   the   spring  of  1881,    when  he  and 
one  of  his  brothers  started  for  Arizona 
by  team  on  the  25th  of  April.    This  was 
his  first  undertaking  in  seeking  a  home 
away  from  the  city  where  he  had  been 
born  and  raised.    The  Presidency  of  the 
Church  asked   for   volunteers   to  assist 
in  colonizing  Arizona.     Willard  and  his 
brother,  Elijah  N.  Freeman,  gave  their 
names  in  response  to  the  call,  and  after 
a  somewhat  tedious  journey  of  between 
six  and   seven   hundred  miles  they  ar- 
rived in  St.  Johns  June  2,  1881.     Feb.  1, 
1885,    Willard   was   ordained   a   Seventy 
under    the    hands    of    Elder    Joseph    A. 
Moffett;  he  joined  the  83rd  quorum.    In 
1886  he  married  Mary  A.  Romney.     For 
several   years   he   was   chorister  in   the 
St.  Johns  Sunday  school  and  an  active 
teacher  in  the  Ward.     June  14,  1887,  he 
was   ordained   a   High   Priest  by   Elder 
Lorenzo  H.   Hatch,   and  chosen  on  one 
of  the  alternates  in  the  High   Council 
the  same  day,   in   the  Eastern  Arizona 
Stake   of   Zion.     When   the    Stake    was 


BIOGRAPHICAL   ENCYCLOPEDIA. 


557 


divided,  July  23,  1887,  he  was  ordained 
Bishop  and  set  apart  to  preside  in  the 
St.  Johns  Ward  of  the  St.  Johns  Stake, 
by  Apostle  John  Henry  Smith.  He  con- 
tinued in  that  calling  until  1892,  when 
he  was  set  apart  as  a  High  Councilor 
in  the  same  Stake.  Willard's  advance- 
ment has  been  steady  from  youth  up  to 
the  present  time,  holding  many  posi- 
tions of  trust.  He  is  a  member  of  the 
board  of  education,  which  position  he 
has  held  since  its  appointment  by  the 
High  Council  in  1888.  He  has  served  as 
Stake  tithing  clerk  since  1889.  Elder 
Fan-  is  naturally  Spiritual -minded  and 
therefore  a  fit  advocate  with  the  Father 
in  administering  to  His  children  in  the 
capacity  of  a  Patriarch,  to  which  office 
he  was  ordained  in  the  St.  Johns  Stake, 
Nov.  27,  1895,  by  Apostle  Francis  M. 
Lyman.  In  1894  he  was  elected  pro- 
bate judge  of  Apache  county,  and 
served  in  that  position  two  years.  He 
has  had  sixteen  children  born  to  him, 
ten  of  whom  are  living.  Since  locating 
in  St.  Johns  he  has  been  variously  em- 
ployed. For  six  years  he  was  sales- 
man in  the  Co-op.  Store;  farmed  for 
several  years;  taught  school  one  term 
of  three  months;  performed  various  la- 
bors at  the  saw-mill  of  Willard  Farr  & 
Co.,  and  was  employed  two  years  as 
bookkeeper  in  the  Co-op.  Store.  As 
head-teacher  of  the  theological  class 
in  the  Sabbath  school  he  is  ever  aiming 
to  make  it  a  success.  His  heart  is  in 
the  work  and  he  is  a  zealous  laborer. 
Elder  Farr  is  five  feet  ten  inches  in 
height,  of  rather  slender  build,  and  has 
brown  hair  and  eyes.  He  is  unpreten- 
tious in  demeanor,  humble  and  unas- 
suming in  all  the  walks  of  life,  deliber- 
ate in  counsel  and  does  not  jump  at 
conclusions  hastily.  His  chief  desire  is, 
and  has  always  been,  to  serve  God  and 
keep  His  commandments.  To  be  honest, 
to  do  good  to  his  fellowmen  and  live 
so  that  the  Lord  will  approve  of  his  life 
and  labors.  He  is  temperate  in  his 
habits,  a  strict  observer  of  the  Sabbath 
Day  and  the  Word  of  Wisdom.  He  en- 
deavors to  do  right  because  he  loves 
God  and  his  religion. — X. 

LEWIS,  Samuel  Edward,  Bishop 
of  Ramah  Ward,  St.  John's  Stake,  New 
Mexico,  is  the  son  of  Samuel  Lewis 
and  Sarah  Jane  Huntsman,  and  was 
born  at  Parowan,  Iron  county,  Utah, 
July  17,  1854.  He  moved  with  his  par- 
ents   to    Miner.sville,      Beaver     county, 


and  later  to  Panguitch.  While  living  at 
the  latter  place  he  was  ordained  an 
Elder.  In  1878  he  went  on  a  trip  to 
Arizona  and  New  Mexico;  he  located  at 
Springerville,  Ariz.  In  the  fall  of  1879 
he  was  called  by  Apostle  Wilford 
Woodruff  to  labor  as  a  missionary 
among  the  Indians.  April  8,  1881,  he 
married  Daphie  Jane  Hamblin,  in  the 
St.  George  Temple.  In  1882  he  settled 
at  Navajo,  later  called  Ramah,  New 
Mexico,  when  he  was  ordained  a  High 
Priest  by  Jesse  N.  Smith  April  17,  1883, 
and  set  apart  to  act  as  first  counselor 
to  Bishop  E.  A.  Tietjen. «  From  1883  to 
1888  he  labored  much  as  a  missionary 
among  the  Pueblo  Indians.  In  Decem- 
ber, 1893,  he  was  set  apart  as  first 
counselor  to  Bishop  J.  R.  McNiel,  and 
on  Sept.  16,  1894,  he  was  called  to  act 
as  presiding  Elder  of  the  Ramah  Ward. 
He  was  ordained  a  Bishop  by  Apostle 
John  Henry  Smith,  March  20,  1897,  and 
set  apart  to  preside  in  that  capacity 
over  Ramah  Ward.  Since  that  time 
he  has  labored  earnestly  in  the  face  of 
many  obstacles,  to  further  the  interests 
cf  the  Saints  of  that  place. 

McDonald,    Alexander    Findlay, 

first  president  of  the  Maricopa  Stake 
of  Zion,  Arizona,  was  bom  Sept. 
11,  1825,  in  Scotland;  baptized  Jan.  2, 
1847,  by  Hugh  Findlay;  ordained  a 
Priest  in  April,  1847,  by  William  C. 
Dunbar;  ordained  an  ETlder  Jan.  1,  1850. 
by  William  Gibson;  labored  two'and  a 
half  years  on  a  mission  in  the  high- 
lands of  Scotland;  presided  over  the 
Liverpool  conference,  emigrated  to 
Utah  in  1854,  crossing  the  Atlantic  in 
the  ship  "John  M.  Wood,"  and  located 
at  Springville,  Utah  county,  where  he 
assisted  in  building  a  new  grist  mill 
and  where  he  subsequently  served  the 
people  as  mayor.  In  1858  he  was  also 
ordained  a  Seventy  by  Pres.  Joseph 
Young,  and  became  the  senior  presi- 
dent of  the  51st  quorum.  From  1862  to 
1872  he  had  charge  of  the  tithing  office 
in  Provo,  whence  he  was  called  to  take 
charge  of  the  tithing  office  and  Temple 
work  in  St.  George.  During  the  Echo 
canyon  war  in  1857-58,  he  was  acting 
quartermaster  at  Springville,  and  he 
served  as  adjutant  to  Brigadier-Gen- 
eral William  B.  Pace  during  the  Black- 
hawk  war.  From  1877  to  1879  he  filled 
a  mission  to  Great  Britain,  laboring 
mostly  in  the  Scottish  conference.  Af- 
ter his  return  to  Utah  in  1879,  he  was 


558 


LATTER-DAY    SAINT 


called  to  preside  over  the  scattered 
Saints  in  Salt  River  valley.  Arizona, 
and  when  the  Maricopa  Stake  of  Zion 
was  organized  in  1882,  he  was  ordained 
a  High  Priest  and  set  apart  as  Stake 
president  by  Apostle  Erastus  Snow. 
Having  yielded  obedience  to  the  prin- 
ciple of  plural  marriage  he  was  in- 
dicted for  polygamy  in  1884,  when  he 
went  to  Mexico  as  an  exile.  He  par- 
ticipated in  several  exploring  expedi- 
tions in  Mexico  and  Arizona,  and  as- 
sisted in  locating  several  settlements 
in  Mexico,  where  he  acted  for  a  number 
of  years  as  first  counselor  to  Pres. 
George  Teasdale  in  the  presidency  of 
the  Mexican  mission;  he  has  for  many 
years  been  a  resident  of  Colonia  Juarez, 
Chihuahua,   Mexico. 

ROBSON,      Charles    Innes,      presi- 
dent of  the  Maricopa  Stake     of     Zlon, 
from  1886  to  1894,  was  born  of  English 
Ijarents.   Feb.   20,  1837,   at   Northumber- 
land, England.    When  but  ten  years  old 
he  was  apprenticed  to  a  paper-maker, 
where   he   served    for   eight    years,    be- 
coming quite  proficient  in  the  business, 
which  proficiency  afterwards  was  used 
to  good  advantage  in  the  starting  and 
equipping  of  the  paper  mill     in  Utah. 
His     parents     were     religious     people, 
walking   four   to   five   miles    to   church 
every    Sunday.      This     early     religious 
training  did  much  toward  forming  the 
noble,    honest   character   of   the   young 
man.    He  was  baptized  into  the  Church 
of  Jesus   Christ   of  Latter-day   Saints, 
April  6,   1851,  when  but  fourteen  years 
of  age,  and  emigrated   to  Utah  in  the 
spring  of   1854,    with     a     company     of 
Saints.    Bro.  Robson    was    married    at 
the  age  of  twenty-three  and  became  the 
father    of    six    children,    five    of    whom 
lived   to  mourn   his  death.     He   settled 
in  Sugar  House  Ward,  Salt  Lake  coun- 
ty,    and     passed     through     the     "hard 
times"  of  early  Utah,  being  constantly 
placed    in    a    position    which    ♦-^.ed    his 
endurance   and   brought   into   play   the 
nDble,    heroic    traits    of    his    character. 
In  1857  he  was  called  by  Pres.  Brlgham 
Young,   with  others,   to  go  and  relieve 
the   Saints   who   were   besieged   by   the 
Indians  on   Salmon  river.     During  this 
trip  he  had  several  narrow  escapes,  be- 
ing   preserved    only    by    the    power    of 
Ood.    Upon  relieving  the  Saints,  he  and 
six    others    were    sent    back    with    dis- 
I.atches  to  Salt  Lake  City,  and  on  the 
way  back  were  attacked  by  Indians  and 


one  of  their  number  slain.     The  others 
arrived  at  Box  Elder,  in  an  almost  fam- 
ished   condition,    having    been    without 
food   for  three   days.     They  found   the 
town  deserted,  the  doors  and  windows 
of  the  dwellings  nailed  up,  and  no  food 
to   be   had.     This   was   at   the   time  of 
the    move    south.      After    searching    In 
vain  for  some  time  for  food,  they  finally 
heard   the   cackling   of   some   chickens, 
which  in  the  hasty  move  had  been  for- 
gotten.     Upon    these    they    lived    until 
reaching  civilization.     For  his  bravery 
on  this  expedition  Brother  Robson  was 
personally  commended  by  Pres.  Young, 
and  when  the  president  started  the  pa- 
per  factory   In   Utah,    Charles   L    Rob- 
son   was    the    man    chosen    to   put    the 
massive  machinery  in  motion.  Although 
he  was  but  a  lad  when  he  worked  at 
the  business  in  England,  such  was  his 
genius  and  ability  that  he  not  only  put 
the    complicated    machinery      together, 
but   thirty   minutes   after   starting   the 
first    wheel,   he   had   the   massive   ma- 
chinery running  without  a  jar.     Pres. 
Young  and     Heber    C.     Kimball,     with 
their  wives  and  several  other  ladles  and 
gentlemen,   were  present  on  the  start- 
ing day  and  all  praised  his  efforts.  His 
was  a  leading  spirit,  and  early  in  life 
he  was  called  to  preside.    He  was  first 
Ward   clerk,   then     Bishop's     counselor 
and  finally  Bishop  of  the  Sugar  House 
Ward  from  1862  until  he  went  to  Ari- 
zona.    In  1870  he  was  appointed  war- 
den of  the  penitentiary     In  S9,lt     Lake 
county,    in   which   capacity   he   labored 
for  several  years,   reducing  the  expen- 
ses,  and  in  many  ways     showing     his 
ability        and        good        management. 
With    the    permission    of  Pres.  Young 
he  started  for  Arizona  In  1877,  in  com- 
pany  with  F.   M.   Pomeroy  and  G.   W. 
Sirrine,   settling  at  Mesa  City.     In  the 
struggles  of  building  up  a  new  country 
he   was   ever   foremost   in   temporal   as 
well   as   the  religious  work,   and   when 
the  Maricopa  Stake  of  Zion  was  organ- 
ized,  he  was  chosen   first  counselor  to 
Pres.    Alexander    F.    McDonald,    whom 
he  succeeded  In  that  office  in  1886,  fill- 
ing the  same  until  the  day  of  his  death, 
which      occurred    at    Mesa,     Maricopa 
county,    Arizona,    Feb.    24,    1894.     Elder 
Frank  M.  Pomeroy,  in  writing  an  obit- 
uary of  Pres.  Robson,  says:     "His  life 
in   Arizona   was   one   of   continual   toll, 
always  taking  the   lead  In  new  enter- 
prises,  and  aiding  his   brethren  by  his 
example  and  good  advice,  in  reclaiming 


BIOGRAPHICAL    ENCYCLOPEDIA. 


569 


the  land  and  changing  a  desert  Into  a 
fruitful  field.  He  was  president  of  the 
Zenos  co-op  store  from  its  organiza- 
tion, and  his  good  advice  and  business 
tact  aided  much  in  putting  the  now 
flourishing  institution  on  the  solid  ba- 
sis it  occupies.  He  was  director  of 
Mesa  canal  for  years  and  was  mayor  of 
Mesa  for  some  time.  He  made  three 
trips  into  the  interior  of  Mexico  in  the 
interest  of  the  spread  of  truth.  During 
all  these  years  of  toil  he  was  not  with- 
out sorrow,  losing  his  oldest  son  in 
1881,  and  suffering  a  term  in  the  Ter- 
ritorial prison  for  conscience  sake  In 
1884;  but  even  in  the  latter  place  his 
high  qualifications  were  noted,  and  in- 
stead of  passing  the  time  at  toil  or  be- 
hind the  bars,  he  was  given  charge  of 
one  department  of  the  prison,  eating 
and  sleeping  with  the  warden.  Soon 
after  he  began  to  be  troubled  with  heart 
disease,  and  such  was  his  condition, 
seven  years  ago,  that  an  eminent  phy- 
sician, Dr.  Hughes,  of  Phoenix,  by 
whom  he  was  examined,  afterward 
stated  that  he  would  not  have  been 
surprised  had  he  fallen  dead  before 
leaving  his  office.  All  medical  men  by 
whom  he  was  examined  join  in  saying 
that  he  has  been  a  living  miracle  for 
five  years  past,  and  he  testified  but  a 
few  days  before  his  death  that  It  was 
nothing  but  the  prayers  of  the  Saints 
and  the  blessings  of  God  that  had 
kept  him  with  us.  As  usual  each  year, 
he  went  to  Salt  Lake  City  last  spring: 
he  attended  the  dedication  of  the  Salt 
Lake  Temple,  and  while  there  In  the 
Temple  in  close  communion  with  Deity, 
were  passed  the  happiest  moments  of 
his  life.  Shortly  after  returning  home 
from  this  trip  he.  was  kicked  by  a 
frisky  horse,  breaking  his  jaw  In  two 
places.  This  seemed  to  break  his 
strength.  Since  that  time  he  was  up 
and  down,  but  mostly  down,  having  to 
take  morphine  all  the  time  to  get  much 
needed  sleep.  About  two  weeks  before 
his  death  he  was  attacked  with  aneur- 
ism of  the  aorta,  which  with  the  heart 
disease  caused  his  death.  He  passed 
peacefully  to  his  rest,  mourned  and 
respected  by  all  his  acquaintances, 
whether  of  his  religious  persuasion  or 
not." 

HAKES,  Collins  Rowe,  third  pres- 
ident of  the  Maricopa  Stake,  is  the  son 
of  Widen  Vander  Hakes,  and  Eliza 
Amanda  Beebe,  and  was  born  at  Graf- 


ton, Lorain  county,  Ohio,  June  26,  1837. 
With  his  father's  family  he  joined  the 
Saints  in  Illinois,  in  1840,  where  they 
lived  till  1846,  when,  together  with  the 
other  Saints,  they  were  expelled  from 
that  State,  and  went  to  Winter  Quar- 
ters, where  they  remained  till  1848.  Col- 
lins was  baptized  in  the  Missouri  river 
at  an  early  day.  He  crossed  the  plains 
in  Amasa  M.  Lyman's  company  which 
arrived  in  Salt  Lake  City  Oct.  19,  1848. 
In  1851  he  went  with  Apostle  Amasa  M. 
Lyman  and  Chas.  C.  Rich  to  San  Ber- 
nardino, Cal.,  where  he  remained  till 
December,  1857,  when,  together  with 
other  Saints,  he  started  for  Utah,  and 
arrived  at  Parowan,  Iron  county,  Feb. 
23,  1858.  While  residing  in  Parowan 
Bro.  Hakes  was  ordained  an  Elder,  and 
later    a    Seventy,      becoming   Identified 


with  the  69th  quorum.  In  1866  he  was 
sent  by  Governor  Shaffer  to  do  guard 
duty  on  the  Sevier  river  against  the 
Indians.  He  served  three  months  and 
had  many  Interesting  encounters  with 
the  red  men.  In  the  spring  of  1868  he 
moved  to  Kanosh, Millard  county, where 
he  took  an  active  part  in  the  settling 
of  that  place.  When  the  Kanosh  Ward 
was  organized,  with  Culbert  King  as 
Bishop,  Bro.  Hakes  was  chosen  to  be 
his  second  counselor.  "In  1874,"  writes 
Elder  Hakes,  "I,  together  with  many 
other  Saints  of  Millard  county,  or 
ganized  ourselves  into  the  United  Or- 
der, and  spent  a  very  happy  year  in 
that  organization.  My  whole  soul  ac- 
cepted  of  that  principle,  and  I   love  it 


560 


LATTER-DAY    SAINT 


to-day."  He  settled  in  Mesa,  Marico- 
pa county,  Ariz!,  in  1885,  and  at  the  or- 
ganization of  the  Maricopa  Stake,  he 
was  chosen  second  counselor  in  the 
presidency,  which  position  he  held  till 
May  10,  1S91,  when  he  was  chosen  and 
set  apart  as  president  of  the  Stake,  in 
which  capacity  he  is  still  diligently 
serving.  In  March,  1857,  he  married 
Mabel  Ann  Morse,  with  whom  he  has 
had  twelve  children.  Pres.  Hakes  tes- 
tifies as  follows:  "I  remember  having 
seen  the  Prophet  Joseph  and  his  broth- 
er Hyrum  in  Nauvoo;  I  have  been  per- 
sonally acquainted  with  Presidents 
Brigham  Young,  John  Taylor,  Wilford 
Woodruff  and  Lorenzo  Snow  and  I 
know  that  they  were  servants  and 
Prophets  of  God.  I  do  also  know  that 
Pres.  Joseph  F.  Smith  is  a  Prophet, 
Seer  and  Revelator." 

ALLRED.  Joseph  G.,  a  High  Coun- 
cilor in  the  St.  Joseph  Stake  of  Zion, 
is  a  son  of  Joseph  A.  and  Roda  Allred, 
and  was  born  at  Draper,  Salt  Lake 
county.  Utah,  June  2,  1852.  He  was 
baptized  when  eight  years  old  and  or- 
dained an  Elder  Dec.  8.  1874.  In  1883 
he  moved  to  Arizona,  where  he  located 
in  Graham  county.  June  2,  1883,  lie  was 
chosen  second  counselor  in  the  St.  Jo- 
seph Stake  mutual  improvement  su- 
perintendency,  which  office  he  held  till 
1885,  when  he  was  called  to  act  as  sec- 
ond counselor  to  Bishop  M.  H.  Merrill, 
of  the  St.  David  Ward,  Cochise  county, 
Ariz.  In  February,  1888,  he  moved  to 
Thatcher  Ward,  Graham  county,  and 
on  May  11,  1889,  he  was  set  apart  as  a 
High  Councilor  in  the  St.  Joseph  Stake, 
by  Apostle  John  Henry  Smith.  Elder 
Allred  is  also  a  member  of  the  board 
of  education  of  the  St.  Joseph  Stake. 

TYLiKR,  Robert  Marion,  Bishop  of 
Eden  Ward,  St.  Joseph  Stake,  Arizona, 
was  born  Aug.  31,  1864,  in  the  town  of 
Evergreen,  Washington  county  (now 
Giddings,  Lee  county),  Texas,  son  of 
Charles  Marion  Tyler  and  Mary  Catha- 
rine Longley.  He  emigrated  to  Utah 
with  his  parents  in  the  spring  of  1869, 
traveling  as  far  as  Kansas  City,  Mis- 
souri, with  ox-teams  and.  also  drove 
about  one  hundred  head  of  stock  cat- 
tle. There  his  father  sold  teams  and 
cattle  and  took  steamboat  to  Omaha, 
Neb.  Thence  he  traveled  by  railroad 
to  Salt  Lake  City,  Utah.  Later,  he 
moved  to  southern  Utah  and  settled  at 
Kanab,   where   he   helped     to   build   up 


that  place,  which  was  only  a  stockade 
fort  at  that  time,  built  for  protection 
against  Indians.  In  the  fall  of  1879, 
he  moved  to  Arizona  with  his  parents 
and  made  that  trip  also  with  ox-teams. 
He  arrived  in  the  town  of  Woodruff, 
Apache  county.  Arizona,  on  the  little 
Colorado  river,  Jan.  1,  1880.  There  he 
endured  many  hardships.  Year  after 
year  the  settlers  labored  hard,  trying 
to  build  a  dam  that  would  stand  the 
terrible  floods  of  the  little  Colorado 
river,-  part  of  the  time  having  to  eat 
barley  bread,  ground  on  a  bran  mill. 
When  Bro.  Tyler  was  sixteeen  years 
old,  he  drove  a  four-horse  team  and 
hauled  freight  from  the  Atlantic  and 
Pacific  railroad  to  Fort  Apache,  a  dis- 
tance of  one  hundred  miles,  over  a  road 
that  was  much  dreaded  at  that  time, 
on  account  of  the  Apache  Indians,  who 
so  frequently  raided  and  murdered  peo- 
ple in  that  as  well  as  other  parts  of 
Arizona.  This  kind  of  a  life  he  was 
compelled  to  follow,  in  order  to  earn 
the  necessaries  of  life  for  the  family, 
while  his  father  was  trying  to  make  a 
home  at  Woodruff.  But  they  were 
successful  at  last.  Bro.  Tyler  married 
Leonora  Pearce  Feb.  3,  1884,  and  from 
that  time  until  the  present  he  has  la- 
bored and  helped  to  settle  and  build  up 
several  towns  in  Arizona.  His  wife 
died  Feb.  14,  1893,  leaving  him  with  four 
children.  He  married  Charlotte  Webb 
Feb.  15,  1894,  and  moved  to  Eden,  Gra- 
ham county,  Arizona,  where  he  still 
lives,  in  July,  1896.  He  was  ordained 
a  High  Priest  and  Bishop  of  the  Eden 
Ward,  of  the  St.  Joseph  Stake,  Feb.  17, 
1900.  by  Apostle  Heber  J.  Grant.  Prior 
to  this  he  had  acted  as  president  of  the 
Y.  M.  M.  I.  A.,  and  had  been  ordained 
an  Elder  in  the  St.  George  Temple  in 
December,  1886,  by  John  D.  T.  McAllis- 
ter. 

LAYTON,       Richard      Golitely,       a 

High  Councilor  in  the  St.  Joseph  Stake 
of  Zion  (Arizona),  is  the  son  of  Chris- 
topher Layton  and  Isabella  Golitely, 
and  was  born  at  Kaysville,  Davis 
county,  Utah,  March  21,  1861.  He  was 
baptized  when  eight  years  old,  and  was 
ordained  a  Deacon  at  the  age  of  14 
years.  In  1883  he  moved  to  Arizona, 
where  he  married  Annie  Elizabeth 
Home,  Feb.  8,  1886.  He  was  ordained 
an  Elder  Oct.  12,  1893.  in  Salt  Lake 
City;  ordained  a  High  Priest  and  set 
apart  as  a  High  Councilor  in  the  St. 
Joseph  Stake     of     Zion     Feb.     1.     1898, 


BIOGRAPHICAL    ENCYCLOPEDIA. 


561 


chosen      as    president    of     among  the  red  men.       By  the  blessing 


and      w 

the  High  Council  of  said  Stake,  Aug 
3,  1901.  In  September,  1898,  he  was 
set  apart  for  a  mission   to  California. 


of  the  Lord  I  was  soon  able  to  address 
and  instruct  the  Indians  in  their  own 
tongue.  Sept.  30,  1880,  I  was  ordained 
a  Bishop  and  set  apart  to  preside  over 
the  Lamanites  by  Apostle  Lorenzo 
Snow,  being  the  first  man,  in  this  dis- 
pensation, to  hold  that  office  among 
the  Indians.  As  the  colony  was  in- 
creasing, the  Church  purchased  3,000 
acres  of  land  at  Washakie,  Box  Elder 
couty,  Utah,  and  the  colony  migrated 
to  that  place,  and  built  up  a  town, 
erected  houses,  shops  and  mills,  tilled 
the  soil  and  raised  sheep.  A  com- 
plete Ward  organization  was  soon  ef- 
fected, with  the  several  quorums  of 
the  Priesthood  and  the  auxiliary  or- 
ganizations, like  those  in  other  Wards. 
In  1883,  I  went  in  Lorenzo  Snow's  com.- 


Elder  Layton  is  still  laboring  unceas- 
ingly for  the  upbuilding  and  develop- 
ment of  the  resources  of  the  country,  in 
which  he   resides. 

ZUNDELL.  Isaac  E.  D..  Bishop  of 
Thatcher,  Graham  county,  Arizona,  is 
the  son  of  Jacob  and  Sarah  Zundell, 
and  was  born  Nov.  17,  1840,  at  Nauvoo, 
Hancock  county,  111.  With  his  parents 
he  was  expelled  from  Nauvoo  in  1846, 
and  passed  through  the  trying  scenes 
at  Winter  Quarters.  In  1852  he  migrat- 
ed with  his  parents  to  Utah  and  locat- 
ed in  Willard,  Box  Elder  county.  Sept. 
30,  1865,  he  married  Elizabeth  Jane 
Harding,  and  moved  to  Plymouth,  Box 
Elder  county,  where  he  engaged  in  the 
stock  business.  In  the  fall  of  1875  he 
was  called  to  labor  as  a  missionary 
among  the  Indians  who  were  gather- 
ing in  Malad  valley,  on  Bear  river. 
Elder  Zundell  writes:  "I  began  to 
labor  among  the  Indians  under  the  di- 
rection of  Geo.  W.  Hill;  and  being  a 
young  man  I  felt  keenly  the  responsi- 
bility of  my  sacred  calling.  The  eyes 
of  many  of  our  Lamanite  brethren 
were  opened,  and  they  received  the 
gospel.  Twenty-five  brethren  were 
called  in  due  time  by  the  authorities 
of  the  Church  to  study  the  Indian  lan- 
guage; they  all  began  to  do  so,  but  one 
by  one  they  tired  of  it,  till  finally  I 
found   myself     a    lone     white     student 

Vol.  1,  No.  36. 


pany  to  visit  the  Fort  Hall  Reserva- 
tion Indians.  I  was  also  a  member  of 
several  other  parties  to  visit  different 
Indian  tribes.  Sept.  10,  1886,  I  was 
called  to  accompany  Pres.  Chas.  O. 
Card  and  James  Hendricks,  on  an  ex- 
ploring expedition  to  British  Columbia 
and  Canada.  After  a  long  journey  we 
came  to  the  place  now  known  as  Cards- 
ton,  Alberta,  Canada,  where  we  knelt 
down  and  invoked  the  blessing  of  the 
Lord  on  the  land  that  it  might  become 
a  home  for  the  Saints.  On  arriving 
home,  after  a  journey  of  over  four 
thousand  miles,  I  found  my  family  and 
colony  of  Indians  well.  June  17,  1889, 
I  was  sentenced  to  six  months'  impris- 
onment and  fined  $100  for  unlawful  co- 
habitation, by  Judge  Henderson.  I 
served  four  months  and  ten  days  of  my 

Sept.  7,  1901. 


562 


LATTER-DAY    SAINT 


sentence  in  the  Utah  penitentiary  and 
was  then  liberated  on  account  of  good 
behavior.  On  being  once  more  a  free 
man  I  i^esumed  my  labors  among  the 
Indians,  and  thus  continued  till  the 
spring  of  1890,  wlien  I  was  honorably 
released  from  my  Indian  mission,  hav- 
ing lived  among  the  natives  over  four- 
teen years.  By  the  advice  of  Pres. 
Wilford  Woodruff  I  moved  south  with 
my  family.  After  a  visit  to  Mexico  we 
returned  to  the  United  States  and  lo- 
cated at  Thatcher,  Arizona,  where  we 
settled  down  after  our  long  pilgrim- 
age, and  there  we  have  resided  ever 
since.  Feb.  7,  1898,  I  was  set  apart 
to  preside  as  Bishop  of  the  Thatcher 
Ward,  and  at  once  began  to  labor  in 
that  responsible  calling.  Thatcher  is 
a  quiet,  peaceful  and  growing  town, 
with  a  choice  location,  and  contains 
about  one  thousand  inhabitants." 

HARDY,  George  W.,  Bishop  of 
Pacheco  Ward. Juarez  Stake,  Mexico,  is 
the  son  of  Josiah  and  Ann  D.  Hardy, 
and  was  born  at  Mountain  Dell,  Salt 
Lake  county,  Utah,  Dec.  2,  1863.  With 
his  parents  he  moved  to  St.  George, 
Washington  county,  in  1870,  where  he 
labored  for  his  father.  Dec.  2,  1885,  he 
married  Julia  Q.  Rogers  in  the  St. 
George  Temple.  In  tne  spring  of  1891 
he  moved  to  Colonia  Pacheco,  Mexico, 
where  he  has  resided  ever  since.  He 
was  ordained  a  Bishop  and  ordained  a 
High  Priest  and  set  apart  to  preside 
over  the  Pacheco  Ward,  in  December, 
1895.  Elder  Hardy  has  always  been 
an  energetic  worker  in  the  different 
grades  of  the  Priesthood  as  well  as  in 
the  auxiliary  organizations  of  the 
Church.  His  greatest  desire  is  to  see 
the  Church  of  God  grow  and  fill  the 
earth. 

NAEGIjK.  George  Conrnd,  Bishop 
of  Colonia  Oaxaca,  Sonoro,  Mexico,  is 
the  son  of  John  C.  Naegle  and  Rosanna 
Zirnmermann,  and  was  born  Oct.  1, 
1860,  at  Lehi.  Utah  county,  Utah.  While 
yet  a  l>oy  in  his  teens  he  removed  with 
his  parents  to  Beaver  City  and  later 
to  Toquerville,  Washington  county, 
where  he  was  ordained  a  Deacon,  and 
acted  as  an  oflicer  in  the  first  Y.  M. 
M.  I.  A.  organized  at  that  place.  He 
was  ordained  an  Elder  in  the  St.  George 
Temple,  where  he  also  married  Miss 
Sabra  Higbee  (a  daughter  of  Pioneer 
John  S.  Higbee).  Feb.  18,  1880.  After 
that  he  labored  as  a  Ward  teacher  in 


Totiuerville.    and    in    1880-82      attended 
the  B.  Y.  Academy  in  Provo,  where  he 
took  a  commercial  course  of  study,  and 
graduated    in    book-keeping.     He     also 
studied    German      under     Dr.    Karl    G. 
INIaeser.       Being  called  on  a  mission  to 
(Jermany    he   was   ordained    a    Seventy 
April   7,   1884,   by  Apostle     Francis     M. 
Lyman;    and    soon    afterwards    started 
for  Europe.  On  his  arrival  at  the  Swiss 
and  German  mission  headquarters.  May 
21,   1884,   he  was  appointed   to  labor  in 
Switzerland;    later  (May,  1885),  he  was 
appointed    to    preside     over    the    South 
German  conference.      While  laboring  in 
the  latter  capacity  he  made  a  tour  of 
all  the  branches  of  the  Church  in  Ger- 
many and  also  paid  a  visit  to  Denmark. 
In  November,  1885,  he  was  called  on  a 
special  mission  to  Turkey,  to  aid  Elder 
Jacob   Spori,   in   opening     a  mission   in 
Constantinople.      He  responded  willing- 
ly   to    this    call,    and     started     for   the 
Orient;    but    at   Genoa,    Italy,     he    was 
intercepted  by  letter,  which  called  him 
back,   owing  to   the   cholera,   which   at 
that  time  was  raging  in  Greece.  After 
his  return   to   Utah   in   the   summer  of 
1886.    he    removed    with    his    family    to 
Kanab,  where  he  was  ordained  a  High 
Priest  by     Thomas     Chamberlain,  Dec. 
16.  1887.  and  at  the  same  time  set  apart 
to  act  as  first  counselor  to  Bishop  Law- 
rence  C.    Mariger.       Among   the   many 
other    positions    held    by    him    while    a 
resident  of   Kanab   may  be  mentioned 
that  he  acted  as  president  of  the  Ward 
and  of  the  Stake  Y.  M.  M.  I.  A.,  a  home 
missionary,    and     clerk     of    the    Stake 
board  of  education.      Together  with  his 
father.  Elder  Naegle  and  family  moved 
to  Mexico  in  1889,  where  he  located  at 
Colonia    Pacheco,    in    the    heart   of    the 
Sierra  Madre  mountains,  where  he  was 
called  to  act  as  Ward  clerk,  president 
of  the  Y.  M.  M.  I.  A.    a  home  mission- 
ary  and    an    alternate    member   of   the 
High  Council  in  the  Mexican     mission. 
He    was    with    his    brother    Hyrum    C. 
Naegle,  in  June,   1892,   when   the  latter 
was  killed  by  a  bear  in  the  mountains 
west  of  Pacheco;  and  with  the  utmost 
danger    to    his    own    life    Elder    Naegle 
killed  the  bear  and  brought  his  fatally 
wounded    brother     to      the    settlement. 
Soon   after   this   sad   event,    his   family 
suffered    severely    with    typhoid    fever, 
and  his  second  wife  (Anna  Fautz,whom 
he  had  married  in  Utah)  and  baby  girl, 
and   also  his  only   son    (whose   mother 
at  the  time  was  in  Utah  under  doctor's 
care)    died.       After    the    death    of    his 


BIOGRAPHrCAL    ENCYCLOPEDIA. 


563 


12,  1891;  and  ordained  a  High  Priest  by 
Chas.  W.  Penrose  June  9,  1895.       Elder 
Taylor   has  been   actively   engaged     in 
Church  labors  since  his  early  boyhood. 
Thus  he  acted  as  president  of  the  Dea- 
cons' quorum,  president  of  Y.  M.  M.  I. 
A.,  Sunday  school  teacher,  choir  leader, 
member    of    Sunday      school      superin- 
tendency,    Sunday      school    missionary, 
Y.   M.  M.  I.  A.  missionary,  member  of 
the  General  Y.  M.  M.  I.  A.  board, coun- 
selor in  the  Bishopric  of  Sugar  House 
Ward,  etc.      At  the  organization  of  the 
Granite  Stake  of  Zion  ,on  Jan.  28,  1900, 
he  was   set  apart  as  president  of  said 
Stake   by   Apostle   Francis   M.    Lyman, 
which    position    he    is    at    present    effi- 
ciently  filling.       Bro.     Taylor   married 
Elizabeth    Campbell    in    May,    1884,    the 
issue  of  which  union  is  eight  children, 
four   of  whom  are  living.       In  1882   he 
assisted    in   the   architectural   work   on 
the  Manti  Temple.  He  moved  to  Sugar 
House  Ward,  Salt  Lake  county,  in  1892, 
where  he  still  resides.      In  civil  life  El- 
der Taylor  is  a  thrifty  and  successful 
business  man.       He  worked  as  a  civil 
engineer  on  the  Utah  Eastern  and  Ore- 
gon Short  Line  during  their  construc- 
tion.    From  1882  to  1887  he  w^as  assist- 
ant architect  on  the  Manti  Temple.  For 
a  number  of  years  he  has  been  inter- 
ested   in    mining,    being    at    present    a 
membeV    of    the    firm    of    Taylor    Bros. 
Real  Estate  and  Mining  Merchants.  He 
is  also  a  director  in  the  Utah  National 
Bank. 

MILLER,      James     Robison,       first 


boy  he   went   immediately   to  Utah     to 
wait   upon   his     sick     wife,   and   while 
there  he  was  called  on  a  special  mission 
to   Europe,    to    preside    over    the    Swiss 
and   German   mission.       He   arrived   in 
Berne,    Switzerland,    Feb.    16,    1^94,    and 
in  April  following  he  took  charge  of  the 
mission.        He    presided      nearly    three 
years,   during   which   time   the   number 
of  Elders     laboring       in    Germany  and 
Switzerland   was   increased   from   40   to 
82,    among     whom     there     were      nine 
French-speaking  Elders  at  the  time  of 
his  departure.       During  this  period  he 
traveled  through  the  entire  mission  and 
also    Scandinavia,      in    company      with 
Apostle  Anthon  H.  Lund  and  later  with 
Pres.    Rulon    S.    Wells,    both    of   whom 
presided    over    the    European    mission. 
He  also  rendered  Elder  Andrew  Jenson 
efllicient  aid  in  obtaining  historical  data 
for  the  history  of  the  mission.     On  this 
mision  Elder  Naeg-le  was  accompanied 
by   his   wife    (Sabra),   who  had   recov- 
ered from  her  sickness.       She  kept  the 
mission    house   at   Berne,    and    through 
her  kindness  to  the  Elders  and  Saints 
generally    she    acquired    the    endearing 
title  of  "The  missionary  mother."     Af- 
ter   a    most    successful    mission    Elder 

Naegle   returned   to   Utah   in   January, 

1897,  and  soon  afterwards  continued  the 

journey   to  his  home  in  Mexico.       The 

following  year  (1898)  he  removed  from 

Pacheco    to     Colonia   Oaxaca,      Sonoro, 

whence  he  was  called  to  fill  a  mission 

in  the  interest  of  mutual  improvement 

in  St.  Joseph  Stake,  Arizona;  and  while 

there  he  was  chosen  to  succeed  Frank- 
lin Scott  as  Bishop  of  the  Oaxaca  Ward,     counselor  to  Pres.  Frank  Y.  Tayfor,  of 


On  his  return  to  Sonoro  he  w^as  or- 
dained a  Bishop  and  entered  upon  the 
duties  of  his  new  office.  Bishop  Naegle 
is  noted  for  his  polite  and  affable  man- 
ner. He  is  a  natural  linguist  and 
speaks  seven  different  languages. 

TAYLOR,  Frank  Young,  first  pres- 
ident of  the  Granite  Stake  of  Zion,  is 
the  son  of  Pres.  John  Taylor  and  Mar- 
garet Young,  and  was  born  in  Salt 
Lake  City  Nov.  4,  1861.  He  was  bap- 
tized by  Geo.  H.  Taylor  Aug.  5,  1869. 
His  education  was  obtained  in  the  pub- 
lic schools,  in  Morgan's  commercial  col- 
lege, and  in  the  Deseret  University.  He 
was  ordained  a  Deacon  when  a  boy; 
ordained  a  Teacher  by  Geo.  H.  Taylor 
March  18,  1881,  and  later  ordained  a 
Priest.  He  was  ordained  an  Elder  by 
Edward  W.  Davis  Oct.  14,  1882;  ordained 


the  Granite  Stake,  is  the  son  of  Reuben 
Miller  and  Rhoda  Ann  Letts,  and  was 
born  at  Dayton,  La  Salle  county.  111., 
Oct.  2,  1838.  With  his  parents  he  emi- 
grated to  Utah  in  1849,  traveling  across 
the  plains  in  Capt.  Gulley's  company, 
and  arrived  in  the  Valley  in  September. 
His  parents  located  at  w-hat  is  now 
known  as  Mill  Creek,  Salt  Lake  coun- 
ty, where  Jas.  R.  was  raised  and  grew 
to  manhood,  amid  tlie  trying  surround- 
ings of  those  early  pioneer  days,  and 
he  took  an  active  part  in  the  public  af- 
fairs of  the  people.  He  crossed  the 
plains  between  Omaha  and  Salt  Lake 
City  seven  times  as  a  freighter.  Dur- 
ing the  Johnston  army  trouble  in  1857- 
58  he  served  under  Orrin  P.  Rockwell 
as  a  military  man.  He  was  one  of  the 
escort  who  accompanied  Col.  Thos.  L. 
Kane  to  Fort  Bridger,  and  he  was  also 


a  Seventy  by  Pres.  Geo.  Reynolds  Oct.  in  the  company  who  escorted  Gov.  Al- 


564 


LATTER-DAY    SAINT 


fied  Cumiuings  to  the  Valley  early  In 
1858.  James  R.  Miller  was  baptized 
at  Council  Bluffs,  Iowa,  in  November, 
1848  (on  the  same  day  that  Oliver  Cow- 
dery  was  rebaptized).  Some  time  af- 
terwards he  was  ordained  a  Teacher 
and  subsequently  a  Seventy  by  Albert 
P.  Rockwood.  He  was  ordained  a 
High  Priest  and  set  apart  as  first  coun- 
selor to  Bishop  Jas.  C.  Hamilton  of 
Mill  Creek  Ward,  by  Angus  M.  Cannon 
Feb.  23,  1890,  and  served  in  that  capaci- 
ty till  Jan.  28.  1900,  when  the  Granite 
Stake  was  organized,  on  which  occa- 
sion he  was  called  to  the  important 
position  of  first  counselor  in  the  Stake 
presidency.  He  is  still  serving  in 
that  position.  Feb.  20,  1859,  he  mar- 
ried Mary  Jane  Gardner,  who  has  borne 
him  fourteen  children,  seven  of  whom 
are  living.  Elder  Miller  is  a  prosper- 
ous stockraiser  and  farmer,  and  is 
also  engaged  in  mercantile  affairs,  be- 
ing the  head  of  the  firm  of  J.  R.  Miller 
and  Co.,  lumber,  coal  and  hardware 
merchants,  at  Murray,  Utah. 

TAYLOR,  AVilliam,  senior  president 
of    the    second    quorum    of    Seventy,    is 
the   son   of  James     Taylor    and   Agnes 
Taylor  and  a  brother  of  the  late  Pres. 
John    Taylor.       He    was   born    Sept.    2, 
1823,  in  the  village  of  Hale,  Westmore- 
land,  England.       His  father  had  eight 
sons    and    two     daughters.        Together 
with  his  parents.  William  emigrated  to 
Canada  in  1830,  sailing  from  Liverpool 
in  June  of  that  year.      The  family  set- 
tled   in    Toronto,    and    later    the    elder 
Taylor  bought  a  farm  about  ten  miles 
east  of  Toronto,  on  the  shore  of  Lake 
Ontario,   and   located   his  family  on   it. 
In  those  days  that  part  of  Canada  was 
only  sparsely  inhabited,  which  associat- 
ed  with   the   fact   that   the   family     so 
frequently  changed  place  of  residence, 
made  it  impossible  for  William  to  ob- 
tain  more   than  a  very   liimted   educa- 
tion.      When   Apostle   Parley   P.    Pratt 
first  preached  the  gospel  in  Canada  in 
1836,  the  Taylor  family  were  among  the 
first   converts    to     "Mormonism,"     and 
they  soon  commenced  making  prepara- 
tions to  gather  to  the  headquarters  of 
the    Church    in    Missouri.       Selling   out 
their  possessions  in  Canada,  they  start- 
ed   for    that    State    in    1838,  but    armed 
mobs     hindered     them     from    reaching 
their  destination,   hence   the   winter  of 
1S38-39  was  spent  at  Warsav.-,I11.  Father 
Taylor  being  offered  a  job   to   build   a 


mill  in  Henderson  county.  111.,  he  took 
Ills  family  to  that  part  of  the  country, 
where  they  were  visited  by  the  Prophet 
Joseph  Smith  in  September,  1842,  at  the 
time  he  was  hiding  from  his  enemies, 
and  it  was  while  the  Prophet  made  his 
temporary   home   at    the     Taylor   resi- 
dence that  he  wrote  his  famous  epistle 
on    baptism    for   the     dead.       William 
was   nineteen   years    old    at    that   time, 
and    though   he   believed    the   gospel   to 
be  true  he  was  not  baptized  until  sev- 
eral    years     later.      Soon      after      the 
Prophet's    visit,    the    family    moved    to 
a  point  nearer  Nauvoo,  where  William 
obtained    employment    in    the    office    of 
the   "Times  and   Seasons"   and   learned 
the  printer's   trade;    he   also   became  a 
member  of  the   Church.       At   the   time 
of   the    Prophet's   death   William     was 
fiway   from   Nauvoo,   having  been  sent 
to  Wisconsin  on  business  for  the  print- 
ing office.      He  was  ordained  a  Seventy 
in  Nauvoo,   Feb.  26,  1845,  by     Harrison 
Burgess    and    became    identified      with 
the  second  quorum  of  Seventy,  of  which 
he  has  been  a  member  ever  since.  After 
receiving  his  endowments  in  the  Nau- 
voo Temple,  Dec.  24,  1845,  he  started  for 
the  great  and  unknown   west  early  in 
1846.       He     married     Lovina   Chandler 
June  9,  1846,  and  arrived  in  Great  Salt 
Lake   valley   in   October,   1847,    crossing 
the  plains  in  Bishop  Edward  Hunter's 
company:  located  in  Salt  Lake  City.  In 
1852-55   he   filled   a   mission   to   Europe, 
laboring  in   Germany,   the   Channel   Is- 
lands  and   England.       In    returning   to 
Utah   he    had    charge   of   a   large   com- 
pany of  Saints  which  sailed  from  Liv- 
erpool  in   the   ship   "Marshfield,"   April 
8,  1854.      After  his  return  home,  he  la- 
bored for  several  years  as  a  home  mis- 
sionary  and   as   a    minute   man   in   the 
Utah  militia.      He  took  part  in  several 
Indian    wars   and   in   the   Echo   canyon 
expedition    in    1857-58.       In    1862   he    lo- 
cated   in    the    Big    Cottonwood    Ward, 
where  he  has  resided  ever  since.    Yield- 
ing obedience  to  the  principle  of  plural 
marriage  he  became     the     father  of  a 
large    family    of    children,    and    of    the 
four  wives,  whom  he  married  at  differ- 
ent  times,    two   are   yet   alive.       After 
the  organization  of  the  Granite   Stake 
of  Zion  (in  January,  1900),  Elder  Taylor 
received    a    call    to    perform    a    special 
home  mission  among  the  Saints  in  said 
Stake.       In  response  to  this  call   he  is 
now   visiting   the   different   settlements 
in   his  field   of  labor,    preaching   to   the 


BIOGRAPHICAL    ENCYCLOPEDIA. 


565 


people  and  bearing  testimony  to  the 
divinity  of  Joseph  Smith's  mission  and 
the  restoration  of  the  everlasting-  gos- 
pel. 

JENSEN.  James,  Bishop  of  Forest 
Dale,  Salt  Lake  county,  is  the  son  of 
Hans  Jensen  and  Sidsel  Marie  Jakob- 
sen,  and  was  born  June  7,  1841,  in 
Haugerup,  Soro  amt,  Sjaelland,  Den- 
mark, ile  was  baptized  May  21,  1855, 
by  Ole  Larsen,  and  emigrated  with  his 
parents  to  Utah  in  1857,  crossing  the 
plains  with  hand-carts.  On  arriving 
in  Utah  they  located  in  Salt  Lake  City. 
In  1862  James  filled  a  six  months'  mis- 
bion  to  the  States.  He  married  Pe- 
Irine  J.  Sorensen  in  1865.  Feb.  5,  1859, 
he  was  ordained  a  Seventy  by  W.  E. 
Wilcox,  and  was  chosen  to  be  a  mem- 


ber of  the  council  of  the  57th  quorum 
of  Seventy.  From  1867-70  he  filled  a 
mission  to  Denmark,  laboring  first  as 
a  traveling  Elder  in  the  Fredericia  and 
Aarhus  conferences,  and  later  as  presi- 
dent of  the  Aalborg  conference.  March 
30,  1.890,  he  was  ordained  a  High  Priest 
and  set  apart  as  second  counselor  to 
Bishop  Leonard  G.  Hardy,  of  the  Sec- 
ond "Ward,  Salt  Lake  City.  In  1891  he 
removed  to  Forest  Dale,  where  he  was 
ordained  a  Bishop  and  set  apart  to  pre- 
side over  tht  Forest  Dale  Ward,  Aug. 
26,  1896,  by  Pres.  Jos.  F.  Smith.  Bishop 
Jensen  is  a  man  full  of  faith  and  la- 
bors diligently  in  his  present  calling. 
Under  his  administration  the  Saints  of 
Forest  Dale  are  erecting  a  magnificent 
church  edifice,  which,  when  completed, 


will  be  one  of  the  finest  houses  of  wor- 
ship in  Zion. 

WALKER,  William  H.,  a  Patriarch 
in  the  Granite  Stake  of  Zion,  is  the  son 
of  John  Walker  and  Lydia  Holmes, and 
was  born  in  Peacham,  Caledonia  coun- 
ty, Vermont,  Aug.  28,  1820.  He  was 
baptized  in  September,  1835,  by  Abra- 
ham Palmer,  and  ordained  a  Seventy 
by  Benj.  Clapp  in  1846.  Later,  he  was 
chosen  as  one  of  the  ^   esidents  of  the 


57th  quorum  of  Seventy.  May  20,  1892, 
he  was  ordained  a  High  Priest  and  a 
Patriarch  by  Pres.  Joseph  F.  Smith. 
From  1840  till  the  expulsion  of  the 
Saints  from  Illinois  in  1846,  he  resided 
in  Nauvoo,  111.,  whence  he  moved  to 
Council  Bluffs,  Iowa.  Here  he  enlist- 
ed as  a  member  of  the  famous  Mormon 
Battalion,  and  crosed  the  great  plains 
and  deserts  to  the  Pacific  coast.  After 
serving  his  time  as  a  soldier  he  made 
his  way  to  Salt  Lake  City,  where  he 
arrived  in  the  fall  of  1847.  After  re- 
siding in  Salt  Lake  City  for  a  number 
tf  years  he  moved  to  Big  Cottonwood, 
Salt  Lake  county,  where  he  has  con- 
tinued to  reside  ever  since.  In  1852  he 
was  called  on  a  mission  to  South  Afri- 
ca, where  he  spent  about  five  years 
laboring  in  the  Cape  of  Good  Hope  and 
in  the  neighboring  province  on  the  east. 
During  the  past  sixteen  years  he  has 
been  engaged  in  Temple  work  both  in 
the  Logan  and  Salt  Lake  Temples,  and 
together  with  his  sisters  he  has  per- 
formed ordinances  for  over  ten  thou- 
sand people. 


566 


LATTER-DAY    SAINT 


CAXNON,       George       Mousley,       a 

prominent  Elder  in  the  Granite  Stake 
of  Zion,  is  the  son  of  Angus  M.  Can- 
non and  Sarah  Mousley,  and  was  born 
!n  St.  George,  Washington  county, 
Utah,  Dec.  25,  1S61.  His  parents  had 
been  called  on  what  was  known  as  the 
"Dixie"  mission,  and  had  with  the  pio- 
neers of  said  mission  scarcely  reached 
their  destination  when  the  child  was 
born,  he  being  the  first  boy  born  in 
the  town.  He  lived  with  his  parents 
in  St.  George  until  1S6S.  when  he  ac- 
companied them  to  Salt  Lake  City.  He 
was  baptized  and  confirmed  a  member 
of  the  Church  on  his  eighth  birthday 
by  his  uncle,  Pres.  George  Q.  Cannon. 
After  reaching  Salt  Lake  City  he  lived 
in  the  Fifteenth  Ward  until  1872,  and 
thereafter  in  the  Fourteenth  Ward,  in 
which  latter  Ward  he  was  busily  en- 
gaged   in    religious    duties,    being      or- 


dained   successively    to    the    oflfices     of 
Deacon,  Teacher,  Priest  and  Elder.     In 
each  of  these  callings  he  was  a  diligent 
worker  as   well    as   in    the   mutual   im- 
jirovement    associations      and     Sunday 
school.       On    Christmas    day,    1884,     he 
married  Miss  Addie  Morris,  daughter  of 
Elias  and  Mary  I>ois  Morris,  and  took 
up  his  abode  in  the  Seventeenth  Ward, 
Salt  Lake  City.      In  this  Ward  he  was 
chosen  as  one  of  the  presidency  of  the 
Y.  M.  M.  I.  A.       Later,  he  built  a  resi- 
dence in  the  Fourteenth  Ward  and  re- 
sided there  until   Dec  5,  1890,  when  he 
removed    to   a   home   built     on    the   old 
Forest  Farm  of  Pres.   Brigham  Young 
CForest    Dale),    where    he    still    resides. 
Since  that  time  five  other  children  have 
been  born,  and  now  he  is  the  father  of 
eight   children,    six   daughters  and   two 
sons.        In    removing    to    Forest    Dale, 


he  also  planned  and  laid  out  the  addi- 
tion    to    Salt     Lake    City,     which  has 
formed  the  nucleus  of  the  Forest  Dale 
Ward.      At  that  time  no  suburb  of  Salt 
Lake    City    had    street    car    connection 
with    Utah's    capital,      and    a    contract 
(running  for  a  period  of  twenty  years, 
thus   insuring   permanency)    was   made 
with    the    Rapid    Transit      Street     Car 
company,   by  which   electric   street  car 
service  was  guaranteed  to  Forest  Dale 
at  a  reasonable  fare.      George  M.  Can- 
non's education  was  obtained     in     the 
common  schools  of  Salt  Lake  City,  but 
among   his   teachers   he   was   fortunate 
in  having  several  who  possessed     pre- 
eminent ability.      In  1873  he  left  school 
to   take   charge   of   the  weigh-scales  of 
his  father's  coal  yard,  and  to  assist  in 
the  business.       Here  he  obtained  prac- 
tical work  in  book-keeping  and  in  pay- 
ing freights  and  in  selling  coal.      When 
he  returned  to  school  two  years  later, 
he   found    that   in   all   branches,   except 
literary  work,  he  had  advanced  faster 
than  his  classmates  who  had  remained 
in  school.  In  1876  he  was  again  abliged 
to   leave  day   school,   but  attended   for 
several   months   a     night     school.       In 
January,  1877,  he  entered  the  University 
of    Deseret      (now     the     University    of 
Utah),    and    the    next    year    graduated 
as  a  normal.      He  continued  his  studies 
at  the  University  for  two  years  longer, 
with    the   exception    of    two   months   in 
1879,     which     were     spent     mostly     in 
practical  work  in  the  surveying  party 
of  Jesse  W.  Fox.      From  the  University 
he    went    into    the      school-room    as    a 
teacher,  being  employed  as  teacher  of 
a  school  on  the  farm  of  Pres.     George 
Q.   Cannon,    to   which,   although   a   pri- 
vate    school,     the    children     from     the 
neighboring     farms       were      admitted. 
Here,  for  two  years,  he  taught  a  school 
embracing    all    grades    from    beginners 
to    those    studying    subjects    embraced 
in   a   high-school   course.       This  period 
was  always  deemed  by  him  one  afford- 
ing   good    oppoi-tunities      for    personal 
development,    for  aside   from   his   work 
in  the  school  room  he  had   free  access 
to  a  most  choice  library,  while  the  free 
country  air  and  close  proximity  to  the 
river,    in   which   he  daily  plunged,   was 
taken  from  early  spring  until   the  first 
snows  of  autumn,   aided   in   laying  the 
foundation     of    excellent    health     in    a 
physical  organization  originally     slight 
and    delicate.        At    frequent    intervals 
from    the    vear   1876   he    had    worked    in 


BIOGRAPHICAL    ENCYCLOPEDIA. 


567 


the  county  recorder's  office  of  Salt  Lake 
county,   and   in   1882   gave  up  his   work 
in   the   school    room   to   become   deputy 
county    recorder,    a    position    which    he 
held    until    1884,    when    he    was    elected 
county  recorder,  being  re-elected-in  the 
year    1888.       During    the    six    years    he 
held   the  office   of   county   recorder,    no 
public  official  ever  gave  more  strict  at- 
tention  to   the  duties   of  hig  office,    his 
main  failing  in  fact  being  his  anxiety 
to  do  much  of  and  to  personally  super- 
vise all  of  the  work  of  his  office.  Dur- 
ing   this    time    a    complete    system    of 
abstracts  of  the  records  of  the  county 
from  the  days  of  the  pioneers  was  pre- 
pared, the  system  adopted  being  copy- 
righted by  him  and  turned  over  to  the 
county  without  charge.       This  system, 
with  some  changes  incident  to  the  pro- 
gress of  the  times,  is  still  in  use.    After 
leaving  the  county  recorder's  office  Bro. 
Cannon   conducted   a   real   estate   busi- 
ness  for  a   little  over  a   year,   and   on 
Jan.    1,    1892,    was    offered    the    position 
of   cashier   of   Zion's    Savings    Bank    & 
Trust  company,  a  position  which  he  ac- 
cepted and  still  holds.      The  deposits  of 
the    bank    at    that    time    amounted    to 
about  $900,000.     To-day  they  amount  to 
more  than  $2,700,000,  a  growth  unparal- 
leled in  the  State.       Upon  the  division 
on  party  lines  in  the  State  he  joined  the 
Republican   party,    and   has   ever   since 
been    prominent    in    tts    councils.        He 
was    state    chairman   in    1895.    the   year 
the  first  State  officers  were  elected.  He 
was    a    member    of    the    Constitutional 
Convention  which  framed  the  Constitu- 
tion  of   our   State,    and    was   chairman 
of  the   committee   which   produced   the 
articles   therein    on     revenue,    taxation 
and  public  debt.      In  1896  he  was  elect- 
ed the  first  president  of  the  State  sen- 
ate, presiding  in  such  a  way  as  to  win 
not   only    the   applause   of   his   friends, 
but  also  the  commendation   of  his  po- 
litical  opponents.       Since  1896  his     po- 
litical work,  although  conspicuous,  has 
generally  been  only  in   the   interest   of 
his  friends,  although  he  was  prominent- 
ly considered  for  the  position  of  United 
Sta.tes   senator   in   the   year   1901.       All 
his  life  Bro.  Cannon  has  been  a  worker. 
From  the  time  he  was  twelve  years  old 
he  earned  more  every  year  by  his  per- 
sonal labors  than  he  expended  on  him- 
self and  his  family,  and  still  at  the  age 
of  36  he  was  compelled  to  go  into  vol- 
untary    bankruptcy.       This     condition 
was  brought  about  by  a  combination  of 


qualities  and  circumstances.  The  qual- 
ities being  those  resulting  from  a  too 
sanguine  disposition,  a  willingness  to 
enter  with  prominent  men  into  enter- 
prises deemed  for  the  public  good,  and 
a  reluctance  to  yield  or  retreat  from 
any  position  which  he  deemed  might 
eventually  succeed.  As  if  to  add  to 
the  intensity  of  his  misfortunes  the 
dread  scarlet  fever  was  contracted  by 
his  youngest  child, while  he  himself  was 
seized  with  the  "la  grippe,"  and  was 
barely  able  to  attend  to  his  daily  work. 
For  upwards  of  six  weeks  his  fami- 
ly were  quarantined,  '  four  children, 
one  after  another,  contracting  the 
scarlet  fever.  Through  all  this  disease 
his  wife  was  the  only  nurse,  but  at  the 
end  of  the  time  she  had  the  satisfaction 
oi  seeing  not  only  her  husband,  but 
also  every  child,  entirely  restored  to 
health,  with  no  bad  effects  from  their 
long  sickness..  Since  the  organiza- 
tion of  the  Granite  Stake  Elder  Can- 
non has  been  one  of  the  officers  of  that 
Stake,  being  Stake  superintendent  of 
Sunday  schools,  the  workers  in  which, 
including  pupils,  number  something 
over  four  thousand  souls.  His  asso- 
ciates (counselors)  are  Richard  S. 
Home  and  Asahel  H.  Woodruff.  He 
was  set  apart  for  this  work  Jan.  28, 
1900,  having  first  been  ordained  a  High 
Priest  on  the  same  date  by  Apostle 
Francis  M.  Lyman. 

McRAE,  Daniel,  Bishop  of  the  Gran- 
ger Ward,   Salt  Lake  county,   Utah,   is 
the  son  of  Alexander  McRae  and   Eu- 
nice   Fitzgerald,    and    was    born    April 
12,    1846,    in    Nauvoo,    Hancock    county, 
111.       He  came  to  the  Valley,   together 
with  his  parents,  in  1852,  and  was  raised 
and   educated   in   Salt  Lake  City.       He 
was    baptized   April    4,    1861,     by   Thos. 
Flowers,    and   ordained     a  Deacon    the 
same  day.       In  1862  he  made  a  trip  to 
the  Missouri     river      and      back     as  a 
Church  teamster  in  Capt.  Homer  Dun- 
can's   train;     the    next    year    (1863)    he 
went  east  in  the  same  capacity  as  far 
as  Ash  Hollow  in  Capt  .  John  W.  Wool- 
ley's  train;    he  remained  at   that  point 
in  charge  of  stock  and  provisions  while 
the  train  traveled  to  Florence  and  back. 
In    February,    1866,    he    married    Thurza 
Symes,  who  died  Aug.  5,  1867, one  month 
after  giving  birth   to  a  daughter.       In 
the    meantime     Bro.      McRae    was    or- 
dained an  Elder  by  Dr.  Sprague,  and  in 
1868   he   married   Christine   Jensen,     by 


568 


LATTER-DAY    SAINT 


whom  he  has  had  eight  children— four 
sons  and  four  daughters.  He  was 
ordained  a  Seventy  in  1808,  and  became 
identified  with  the  32nd  quorum.  In 
1869-70  he  filled  a  short  mission  to  the 
United  States,  laboring  principally  in 
Mississippi  and  Alabama.  Having  re- 
sided  In   Mill     Creek       Ward     for  nine 


years,  he  moved  to  Brighton  Ward   in 

1881,  and    to    North    Jordan    Ward      in 

1882.  July  29,  1883,  he  was  ordained  a 
High  Priest  and  set  apart  as  first  coun- 
selor to  Bishop  Samuel  Bennion,  which 
position  he  filled  till  Feb.  24,  1884,  when 
the  Granger  Ward  was  organized  and 
he  was  chosen,  ordained  and  set  apart 
to  preside  over  the  same  as  Bishop. 
This  position  he  has  now  filled  with 
honor  and  integrity  for  over  seventeen 
years. 

MILiLER,  Uriah  Gardner,  Bishop 
of  Murray  Ward,  Salt  Lake  county, 
Utah,  is  the  son  of  Reuben  P.  Miller 
and  Margaret  Gardner,  and  was  born 
at  Mill  Creek,  Salt  Lake  county,  Utah, 
Nov.  2S,  1874.  He  was  baptized  by  El- 
der Christian  Jensen,  June  5,  1884;  or- 
dained a  Deacon  Nov.  28,  1887,  by  Jens 
Hansen:  ordained  a  Priest  Nov.  2, 
1S94.  by  Jens  Hansen:  ordained  an  El- 
der Feb.  9,  1896,  by  Elder  Osguthorpe; 
ordained  a  Seventy  June  1.  1896,  by  Geo. 
Reynold.*:,  and  ordained  a  Bishon  and  a 
High  Priest  by  Apostle  Anthon  H. 
Lund.  Oct.  28,  1900.  Bro.  Miller  was 
educated  in  the  public  schools  and  in 
the  Utah  Univeisity.  graduating  from 
the  latter  in   189u.       From  June  2,   1896, 


to  Dec.  21,  1898,  he  filled  a  mission  to 
the  Northern  States,  where  he  per- 
formed successful  missionary  work  in 
Indiana,  Chicago  and  Michigan.  Dur- 
ing the  last  eighteeen  months  he  pre- 
sided over  the  Michigan  conference. 
Nov.  15,  1899,  he  was  called,  together 
with  Elder  H.  C.  Carlisle,  to  fill  a  six 
months'  mission  among  the  people  of 
the  West  Mountain  mining  district.  At 
the  organization  of  the  Granite  Stake 
he  was  chosen  and  set  apart  as  second 
counselor  in  the  Stake  superintendency 
of  Y.  M.  M.  I.  A.  When  the  Murray 
Ward  was  organized  Oct.  28  1900,  he 
was  chosen  to  be  Bishop  of  the  same, 
and  was  unanimously  sustained  in  that 


|n)siiion  by  the  members  of  the  Ward. 
He  is  serving  successfully  in  that  ca- 
r>acity  at  the  present  time.  In  civil 
life  Bishop  Miller  has  followed  school 
teaching,  but  at  present  he  is  engaged 
with  The  Rocky  Mountain  Milling  Co. 

CUMMINGS,  James  Devalson,  first 
Bishop  of  Wilford  Ward,  Granite  Stake 
of  Zion,  is  the  son  of  Benjamin  Frank- 
lin Cummings  and  Mary  Jane  Yearsley, 
and  was  born  at  Willard,  Box  Elder 
county,  Utah,  Sept.  30,  1859.  His  father 
was  a  pioneer  of  1847.  James  was  bap- 
tized Oct.  3,  1867,  in  Salt  Lake  City  by 
Elder  Thomas  Higgs.  His  youth  was 
spent  in  working  on  the  farm,  and  at 
other  labor,  and  his  opportunities  for 
obtaining  an  education  were  not  very 
good.  However,  he  managed  to  ad- 
vance himself  suflficiently  to  enter  the 


BIOGRAPHICAL    ENCYCLOPEDIA 


569 


Deseret  University  as  a  normal  student 
in  1876.  On  graduating  from  that  in- 
stitution he  began  teaching  school  and 
has  continued  in  that  line  for  sixteen 
years, being  to-day  recognized  as  one  of 
the  ablest  teachers  in  Salt  Lake  coun- 
ty. He  has  also  served  as  a  school 
trustee  for  ten  years  in  the  36th  district, 
during  which  time  two  splendid  brick 
school  houses  have  been  erected  there. 
In  1890  he  assisted  in  organizing  the 
X.  L.  C.  R.  Mercantile  Co.  at  Mill 
Creek,  Salt  I.iake  county,  and  became 
the  superintendent  of  that  institution. 
He  has  also  acted  as  postmaster  of 
Mill  Creek.  March  4,  1880,  he  married 
Louisa  Cufley.  Elder  Cummings  has 
always  been  active  in  Church  work. 
In  1876  he  was  ordained  an  Elder,  and 
later  a  Seventy  by  his  fathsr,  Benj.  F. 
Cummings.  He  has  labored  energetic- 
ally in  the  Sabbath  school  and  mutual 
improvement  work,  having  held  many 
positions  of  trust  and  responsibility  in 
those  organizations.  During  1893  and 
1894  he  filled  a  short  mission  to  Cali- 
fornia, where  he  labored  mostly  in  Sac- 
ramento, doing  very  satisfactory  work. 
Having  been  appointed  postmaster  at 
Mill  Creek  he  was  called  home  by  Pres. 
Wilfoid  Woodruff.  June  2,  1898,  he  left 
again  to  labor  as  a  missionary,  this 
time  going  to  the  Northern  States, 
where  he  labored  in  the  Wisconsin  con- 
ference, first  as  a  traveling  Elder  and 
later  as  its  president.  He  was  honor- 
ably released  to  return  to  Utah  May  1, 
1900.  On  his  arrival  home  he  was  ap- 
pointed to  labor  as  a  home  missionary 
in  the  Granite  Stake,  in  which  capaci- 
ty he  acted  till  Sept.  30,  1900,  when  the 
AVilford  Ward  was  organized  from  part 
of  thfe  Mill  Creek  Ward,  and  James  D. 
Cummings  was  chosen  to  act  as  Bishop 
of  the  new  Ward.  He  was  ordained  a 
Bishop  and  a  High  Priest  and  set  apart 
to  preside  over  said  Ward  by  Apostle 
Heber  J.  Grant.  Since  Bro.  Cummings 
began  his  labors  in  the  Bishopric,  the 
Saints  of  Wilford  have  succeeded  in 
erecting  a  beautiful  and  substantial 
Ineeting   house. 

BENNION,  Heber,  Bishop  of  Tay- 
lorsville.  Salt  Lake  county.  Utah,  is  a 
son  of  John  Bennion  and  Mary  Turpin, 
and  was  born  in  North  Jordan,  Salt 
Lake  county,  Utah,  Nov.  28,  18.58.  Be- 
ing raised  on  his  father's  farm,  he  was 
early  inured  to  hard  work.  His  father 
died  when  Heber  was  but  eight  years 


of  age,  and  hence  greater  responsibili- 
ties fell  upon  his  shoulders.  He  was 
educated  in  the  common  schools,  the 
B.  Y.  Academy,  the  L.  D.  S.  College, 
the  Agricultural  College,  the  B.  Y.  Col- 
lege and  in  the  Deseret  University. 
From  1882  to  1884  he  filled  a  mission 
to  the  Northern  States,  laboring  in 
Minnesota  and  Wisconsin.  During  the 
latter  part  of  this  mission  he  presided 
over  the  Minnesota  conference.  In  Sep- 
tember, 1885,  he  married  Susie  Winters, 


of  Pleasant  Grove,  in  the  Logan  Tem- 
ple. He  left  home  for  another  mission 
in  September,  1887,  to  the  Northern 
Stated.  On  this  mission  he  traveled 
quite  extensively  in  Kansas,  West  Vir- 
ginia, Pennsylvania,  Ohio,  and 
New  York.  Most  of  the  time  he 
acted  as  president  of  the  Penn- 
sylvania conference.  In  September, 
1889,  he  was  chosen  to  be  Bishop 
of  Taylorsville,  and  he  is  efficiently 
filling  that  position  at  the  present  time. 
Elder  Bennion  served  as  a  member  of 
the  Territorial  legislature  in  1889,  and 
served  two  terms,  in  succession,  in  the 
State  legislature.  He  is  extensively 
f  ngaged  in  farming  and  stock-raising. 

CRUMP,  William  C,  jun..  Bishop 
of  Bluff  Dale  Ward,  Salt  Lake  county, 
l^tah,  is  a  son  of  Wm.  C.  Crump  and 
Margaret  James,  and  was  born  March 
18,  1860,  at  Herriman,  Salt  Lake  coun- 
ty; he  was  baptized  when  about  eight 
years  old;  received  an  ordinary  com- 
mon school  education;  was  ordained  a 
Deacon  and  Teacher  successively;   was 


570 


LATTER-DAY    SAINT 


ordained  an  Elder  in  1879;  married 
Miss  Lovina  Kidd  Nov.  6,  1879;  acted  as 
a  Ward  teacher  in  Herriman;  i^moved 
to  Riverton  in  1SS3;  lived  there  till 
1888,  when  he  removed  to  San  Luis 
valley,  Colorado;  he  lived  in  Manassa, 
where    he    acted    as     a    Sunday    school 


teacher  and  in  other  positions;  re- 
turned to  Herriman,  Utah,  in  1892,  and 
settled  permanently  in  Bluff  Dale  Ward 
in  1893.  Here  he  labored  diligently 
as  a  Ward  teacher,  a  Y.  M.  M.  I.  A. 
ofTicei-,  a  Sabbath  school  teacher,  etc. 
Jan.  20.  1900,  he  was  ordained  a  High 
Priest  and  Bishop  and  set  apart  to 
preside  over  the  Bluff  Dale  Ward  by 
Apostle   Anthon   H.   Lund. 

BILIjS,  George  W.,  first  counselor  to 
Bishop  Wm.  C.  Crump,  of  Bluff  Dale 
Ward,  is  the  son  of  Wm.  A.  Bills  and 
Kmmeline  Beckstead,  and  was  born 
Aug.  9,  1864,  at  South  Jordan,  Salt  Lake 
county.  Utah.  He  was  baptized  Sept. 
2.  1869,  by  Wm.  A.  Bills.  His  ordina- 
tions to  the  Priesthood  are  as  follows: 
He  was  ordained  a  Deacon  Nov.  18, 
1877;  an  Elder  in  March,  1883, by  Samuel 
L.  Howard;  a  Seventy  Nov.  22,  1891, 
by  Brigham  H.  Roberts,  and  a  High 
Priest  by  Apostle  Francis  M.  Lyman, 
at  the  reorganization  of  the  Bluff  Dale 
Ward,  Jan.  21,  1900.  On  the  same  oc- 
casion he  was  set  apart  as  first  coun- 
selor in  the  Bishopric  of  said  Ward,  in 
which  position  he  still  labor.-^.  Elder 
Bills  married  Lucy  E.  Merrill  Nov.  28, 
1881,  who  has  borne  him  ten  children. 
Prior  to  his  last  ordination  he  labored 


diligently  in  the  Sabbath  school  and 
Y.  M.  M  I.  A.,  and  he  is  throughout 
an  industrious  and  thrifty  member  of 
the  community  in  which  he  resides.  At 
present  he  is  conducting  a  successful 
meat  business. 

DANSIE,  AUVed  John,  second  coun- 
selor in  the  Bluff  Dale  Ward  Bishopric, 
is  the  son  of  Robert  Dansie  and  Char- 
lotte Rudin,  and  was  born  at  Barking, 
county  of  Essex,  England,  July  29, 
1852.  He  was  baptized  by  John  A. 
Hunt  Oct.  26,  1862;  ordained  an  Elder 
July  12,  1875;  ordained  a  Seventy  by 
James  Crane  in  1876,  and  ordained  a 
High  Priest  and  set  apart  to  act  as 
second  counselor  in  the  Bluff  Dale 
Ward  Bishopric  by  Joseph  E.  Taylor 
Aug.  8,  1886.  This  position  he  credit- 
ably filled  till  Jan.  21,  1900,  when  the 
Ward  was  reorganized, and  he  was  hon- 
orably released.  Elder  Dansie  has  re- 
sided in  Utah  since  1862. 

JENSEN,  Jens  Peter,  Bishop  of 
Crescent  Ward  (Jordan  Stake),  Salt 
Lake  county,  Utah,  is  the  son  of  Soren 
Jensen  and  Nielsine  Christine  Neucuib- 
ing,  and  was  born  June  16,  1859,  in  Tom- 
merby  parish,  Thisted  amt,  Denmark. 
In  1878  he  was  baptized  into  the  Church 
by    Elder    Jens  Christensen.       He  was 


ordained  an  Elder  and  sent  out  to 
labor  as  a  local  missionary.  In  June, 
1879,  he  emigrated  to  Utah,  and  located 
in  Draper,  Salt  Lake  county.  He  was 
called  on  a  mission  to  Scandinavia  in 
1894   and    labored   ten    months   in    Den- 


BIOGRAPHICAL    ENCYCLOPEDIA. 


571 


mark,  when  he  was  released  on  account 
of  Door  health.  When  the  Crescent 
Ward  was  organized  in  1895,  he  was 
chosen  to  preside  as  Bishop,  and  he 
is  still  laboring  in  that  capacity. 

NELSON,  Nels  August,  a  High 
Councilor  in  the  Jordan  Stake  of  Zion, 
is  the  son  of  John  and  Annetta  Nelson, 
and  was  born  May  8,  1857,  at  Eringa, 
Hallands  Ian,  Sweden.  With  his  parents 
he  emigrated  to  Utah  in  1864.  He  was 
baptized  May  5,  1865,  by  Niels  Mickel- 
sen;  ordained  a  Deacon  in  1870  by  Niels 
Hansen;  ordained  a  Teacher  in  1873;  or- 
dained an  Elder  Dec.  31,  1883,  by  Nephi 
Howard;  ordained  a  Seventy  Feb.  20, 
1887,  by  Apostle  Abraham  H.  Cannon, 
and  ordained  a  High  Priest  and  set 
apart  as  an  alternate  High  Councilor  in 
the  Jordan  Stake  by  Apostle  Anthon 
H.  Lund  Jan.  21,  1900.  Later  (May, 
1,  1901),  he  was  set  apart  as  a  regular 
High  Councilor  by  Apostle  John  Henry 


Smith.  Elder  Nelson  has  ever  been  an 
energetic  worker  in  the  various  or- 
ganizations of  the  Church,  having  held 
many  responsible  positions  in  both  the 
Sunday  school  and  mutual  improve- 
ment association.  In  his  youth  he 
had  to  spend  much  of  his  time  laboring 
in  mining  camps  and  other  rough 
places,  but  he  always  acknowledged 
that  he  was  a  "Mormon,"  and  never 
felt  so  happy  as  when  he  was  defending 
the  principles  of  the  gospel  against  the 
attacks   of     skeptics     and   unbelievers. 


Jan.  24,  1884,  he  married  Fidelia  Ellen 
Koffoed,  who  has  been  his  faithful 
helpmate  ever  since.  Bro.  Nelson  has 
had  many  trials  and  obstacles  to  over- 
come, but  he  bears  testimony  that  the 
Lord  has  never  failed  to  help  him 
when  he  hum"bly  called  upon  Him  in 
faith.  His  greatest  desire  is  to  live 
in  such  a  manner  that  he  may  be  wor- 
thy of  the  blessings  which  have  been 
promised  to  the  faithful. 

ALiIiEN,  William  Coleman,  Bishop 
of  Draper,  Jordan  Stake,  Salt  Lake 
county,  Utah,  is  the  son  of  Andrew  J. 
Allen  and  Delilah  Andrus.and  was  born 
Feb.  24,  1843,  in  Calloway  county,  Ken- 


tucky. In  1847  he  came  to  Utah, cross- 
ing the  plains  in  Abraham  O.  Smoofs 
company,  and,  together  with  his  pa- 
rents, he  settled  in  Draper,  Salt  Lake 
county,  in  1850.  Here  he  was  baptized 
by  Absolom  W.  Smith  April  14,  1867. 
He  responded  to  a  special  call  in  1862, 
in  going  east  in  Lot  Smith's  company 
to  protect  the  U.  S.  mails  against  In- 
dian depredations.  In  1876  he  went  on 
a  pioneering  mission  to  Arizona,  being 
the  leader  of  a  large  company  of  Saints 
on  the  journey,  and  after  reaching  the 
Tjittle  Colorado  river  he  became  one  of 
the  first  settlers  of  St.  Joseph,  Apache 
county,  which  was  originally  known 
as  Allen's  camp.  Here  he  presided  as 
Bishop  for  two  years,  and  was  subse- 
quently chosen  to  fill  the  position  of 
first  counselor  to  Lot  Smith,  president 
of  the  Little  Colorado  Stake  of  Zion. 
Bro.    Allen   returned    to    Draper,    Utah. 


572 


LATTER-DAY    SAINT 


in  1884,  and  was  chosen  to  be  a  coun- 
selor to  Bishop  Isaac  M.  Stewart,  of 
Draper  Ward,  May  19,  1889.  This  po- 
sition he  held  for  about  a  year,  or  un- 
til May  11,  1890,  when  he  was  called 
to  preside  as  Bishop  of  Draper,  suc- 
ceeding the  late  Bishop  Stewart.  Bro. 
Allen  acted  as  Bishop  of  Drai)er  until 
Aug.  21,  1898.  when  he  was  honorably 
released  from  that  position  and  or- 
dained a  Patriarch  by  Pres.  Jos.  F. 
Smith. 

TERRY.  Joshua,  a  Patriarch  in 
the  Jordan  Stake  of  Zion,  is  a  son  of 
Parshall  and  Hannah  Terry,  and  was 
born  in  Home  district,  Canada,  Aug. 
11.  1825.  He  was  baptized  June  20, 
1840,  by  Wm.  Allred.  His  ordinations 
to  the  Priesthood  are  as  follows:  Was 
ordained  a  Teacher  in  Nauvoo,  111.,  a 
Seventy  in   Salt  Lake  City,   by  Apostle 


Eiastus  yiiuw.  a  High  Priest  and  set 
kpart  as  president  of  the  Shoshone 
mission,  by  Pres.  John  Taylor  in  the 
spring  of  1881,  and  a  Patriarch  May  5, 
1901,  by  Apostle  John  Henry  Smith.  El- 
der Terry  passed  through  the  Missouri 
perse(  utions  together  with  his  father's 
family  and  the  rest  of  the  Saints.  He 
went  to  Nauvoo,  111.,  where  he  assisted 
in  the  erection  of  the  Nauvoo  Temple. 
In  1846.in  common  with  other  Saints,  he 
was  expelled  from  Nauvoo  by  the  mob 
and  went  into  Iowa.  In  the  spring  of 
1847  he  left  Winter  Quarters  for  the 
West  in  Geo.  B.  Wallace's  company. 
After  an  eventful  journey  he  reached 
the    Valley   Sept. .  26.   1847,   and    located 


in  Salt  I.<ake  City,  where  he  assisted 
in  building  the  "old  Fort."  He  drove 
the  first  team  around  what  is  now 
known  as  Beck's  Hot  Springs,  in  Davis 
county.  In  October,  1847,  he  walked  over 
to  Church  Island,  in  Great  Salt  Lake, 
on  dry  ground.  He  went  to  Fort  Hall, 
Idaho,  in  February,1848,  and  lived  there 
for  two  months,  which  made  him  a  pio- 
neer of  that  State.  In  April,  1848,  he 
walked  200  miles  to  Ft.  Bridger,  Wyo- 
ming, not  seeing  anyone  en  route  save 
Indians.  He  remained  at  Ft.  Bridger 
two  years,  thus  becoming  a  pioneer  of 
Wyoming.  Subsequently  he  followed 
trading  among  the  red-men  for  nine 
years,  leading  the  life  of  a  mountain- 
eer. In  February,  1856,  he  went  back 
to  Missouri  as  a  guide  for  the  first  Y. 
X.  Co.  mail.  During  the  Johnston 
Army  trouble,  in  1858,  he  served  as  a 
scout.  He  located  part  of  his  family 
in  Draper  (then  called  Willow  Creek), 
Salt  Lake  county,  in  January,  1855,  and 
settled  there  permanently  in  the  fall  of 
1856,  where  he  has  continued  to  reside 
ever  since.  He  served  11  years  as  jus- 
tice of  the  peace  in  Draper.  Elder 
Terry  is  a  faithful  Church  member,  and 
though  his  life  has  been  full  of  the 
trials  and  struggles  incident  to  the 
building  up  of  a  barren  and  new  coun- 
try, he  has  always  remained  firm  and 
steadfast  to  the  faith.  As  a  pioneer 
he  has  earned  a  crown  of  merit;  he  is 
to-day  the  oldest  surviving  pioneer  of 
Idaho  and  Wyoming.  He  is  the  father 
of  sixteen  children,  eight  of  whom  are 
living.  One  of  his  wives  was  a  Sho- 
shone Indian,  and  his  son  by  her,  Geo. 
Terry,  was  educated  in  Utah,  and  is 
now  chief  of  the  Shoshone  nation.  Bro. 
Terry  has  ever  been  a  warm  friend  of 
the  Indians  and  has  done  much  to  pro- 
mote a  good  understanding  between 
them    and    their,  white  brethren. 

TKRRY,  Joseph,  a  prominent  Elder 
in  the  Draper  Ward,  Salt  Lake  county, 
Utah,  is  the  son  of  Wm.  R.  Terry  and 
Mary  A.  Phillips,  and  was  born  at 
Crooked  Creek,  Van  Buren  county, 
Iowa,  June  6,  1842.  His  parents  being 
members  of  the  Church,  he  was  bap- 
tized at  the  age  of  eight  years,  and 
when  fifteen  years  old  he  was  ordained 
a  Teacher.  In  both  instances  his 
father  oflficiated.  He  was  ordained  a 
Seventy,  and  later  (in  the  spring  of 
1901),  a  High  Priest  by  James  Jensen, 
In  1852  he  emigrated  to  Utah  in  Capt. 


BIOGRAPHICAL    ENCYCLOPEDIA. 


573 


Jolley's  company,  which  arrived  in  Salt 
Lake  City  June  6th  of  that  year.  He 
was  then  only  a  lad  of  ten  years,  but  he 
drove  three  yoke  of  cattle  across  the^ 
plains.  On  arriving  in  the  Valley,  he 
located  at  Draper,  Utah  county,  where 
he  has  resided  ever  since.  EId4r  Ter- 
ry performed  active  service  in  the 
Johnston  army  campaigTi  in  1857-58, 
and  during  the  Blackhawk  war  he 
served  as  a  messenger  and  assisted  in 
recruiting  and  fitting  out  expeditions. 
In  1873  he  went  to  Arizona,  together 
with  many  others,  with  the  intention 
of  settling  there;  but  owing  to  extreme 
drought  and  other  causes,  the  expedi- 
tion was  not  a  success;  consequently  he 
returned  to  Utah  the  same  year.  El- 
der Terry  has  been  a  potent  factor  in 
the  development  of  the  western  coun- 
try, having  always  been  on  hand  to  do 
his  part  fol-  the  public  good.  He  is 
recognized  as  '  a  firm  and  staunch 
Church  member;  for  almost  thirty-five 
years  he  has  labored  continuously  as 
a  Ward  teacher,  and  has  also  been  a 
Sabbath   school  worker. 

SMITH,  Lanritz,  a  prominent  El- 
der in  the  Draper  Ward,  Salt  Lake 
county,  Utah,  was  born  Oct.  5,  1830,  in 
Hjorring,  Denmark.  He  was  baptized 
Aug.  11,  1851,  by  Jens  Thomsen.      Soon 


After  arriving  in  the  Valley  he  located 
in  Draper,  Salt  Lake  county,  where  he 
has  continued  to  reside  ever  since.  He 
was  the  first  Scandinavian  settler  in 
that  locality.  In  1876-77  he  filled  a  mis- 
sion to  the  United  States.  At  home  El- 
der Smith  has  labored  as  a  Ward 
Teacher,  a  Sabbath  school  worker,  and 
a  home  missionary.  He  is  now  a  presi- 
dent in  the  73rd  quorum  of  Seventy,  and 
a  member  of  the  presidency  of  the 
Scandinavian  meetings  at  Draper. 

NELSEN,  Peter  Anthon,  a  prom- 
inent Elder  in  Draper  Ward,  Salt  Lake 
county,  Utah,  is  the  tWird  son  of  Hans 
Nielsen  and  Maren  Hansen,  and  was 
born  in  Odense,  Denmark,  May  12,  1845. 
He  was  baptized  Feb.  22,  1862,  by  Krmd 
Hansen,  and  in  November  of  that  year 


I 


afterwards  he  was  ordained  to  the 
Priesthood  and  labored  as  a  local  mis- 
sionary in  Vendsyssel  and  in  Schlesvig- 
Holstein.  During  1853-54  he  emigrated 
to  Utah;  en  route  he  saw  many  of  hi? 
fellow-travelers  die  with   the     cholera. 


he  was  ordained  to  the  Priesthood  and 
called  to  labor  as  a  local  missionary. 
He  acted  successfully  in  that  capacity 
in  different  branches  of  the  Copenhagen 
conference.  While  thus  engaged  he  was 
imprisoned  in  Prederiksvaerk  twelve 
days  for  preaching  the  gospel.  In  1865 
he  emigrated  to  Utah,  and  on  the  jour- 
ney he  participated  in  the  fight  with 
the  Indians,  in  which  Sister  Grundtvig 
was  kidnapped  by  the  red  men;  she 
was  never  afterward  heard  from.  Nov. 
16,  1865,  Brother  Nielsen  married  Olivia 
Jensen  and  settled  at  Draper,  Salt  Lako 
county,  where  he  still  resides.  From 
1879  to  1881  he  filled  a  mission  to  Scan- 
dinavia, where  he  labored  principally 
on   the  Island   of  Bornholm,    Denmark. 


574 


LATTER-DAY    SAINT 


Here  he  waa  very  successful  in  his 
work.  He  endured  two  days'  imprison- 
ment In  the  town  of  Ronne  for  distri- 
buting tracts.  On  the  journey  to  Utah 
he  was  appointed  leader  of  a  company 
of  emigrating  Saints.  In  1897  he  per- 
formed a  short  mission  to  California. 
At  home  Elder  Nielsen  has  always 
taken  an  active  part  in  Sunday  school 
work.  At  present  he  is  presiding  over 
the  Scandinavian  meetings  at  Draper, 
which  office  he  has  held  for  twenty-five 
years.  In  civil  life  he  has  served  as 
school  trustee,  postmaster,  etc.  He  is 
the  father  of  twelve  children — eight 
sons  and  four  daughters. 

SNOW,  "XVillard  L.,  a  prominent 
Elder  in  the  Draper  Ward,  is  a  son  of 
Willard  Snow  and  Melvina  Harvey,  and 
was  born  in  Lee  county,  Iowa,  March 
8,  1842.  With  his  parents  he  emigrated 
to  Utah  in  1847,  in  Jedediah  M.  Grant's 
company,    and     located     in    Salt    Lake 


City.  In  1856  he  was  baptized  by  Jeter 
Clinton,  and  moved  to  Sugar  House 
Ward,  Salt  Lake  county,  in  1867.  .  In 
1S89  he  moved  to  Draper,  his  present 
home.  April  15,  18o5,  he  married  Sarah 
Ann  Boyer,  and  on  April  13,  1874,  he 
yielded  oVjedience  to  the  principle  of 
plural  marriage  by  taking  to  wife  Flora 
L.  Mousley.  These  wives  have  borne 
him  nineteen  children,  seventeen  of 
whom  are  living.  He  was  ordained  an 
Elder  in  1862,  and  subsequently  he  was 
ordained  a  Seventy  by  Pres.  Seymour 
B.  Young.  Feb.  4,  1901,  he  was  or- 
dained a  High  Priest  by  Apostle  Abra- 


ham O.  Woodruff.  Elder  Snow  has 
always  been  an  industrious  and  thrifty 
worker  for  the  cause  of  God;  he  passed 
through  the  many  struggles  and  hard- 
!  hips  which  fell  to  the  lot  of  the  early 
settlers  in  Utah.  In  1866  he  participated 
;n  the  Blackhawk  war,  and  he  also 
karned  to  know  what  a  grasshopper 
rnd  cricket  war  means.  Bro.  Snow  is 
noted  for  his  faithfulness  and  integrity, 
and  is  a  respected  nnember  of  the  com- 
munity in  which  he  resides. 

RASMUSSEN,  Soren,  a  prominent 
Elder  in  the  Draper  Ward,  Salt  Lake 
county,  Utah,  is  a  son  of  Rasmus  Ras- 
mussen    and    Bertha    Marie    Pedersen, 


and  was  born  April  26,  1865,  in  Gron- 
feldt,  Randers  amt,  Denmark.  The 
"Mormon"  Elders  were  always  made 
welcome  at  the  home  of  Soren's  father, 
who  was  a  well-to-do  merchant,  and 
the  son,  who  quickly  learned  to  under- 
stand the  gospel,  was  baptized  by  Elder 
Rasmus  P.  Maiquardsen,  June  9,  1885. 
He  emigrated  to  Utah  the  same  year 
and  located  in  Draper,  Salt  Lake  coun- 
ty, where  he  has  continued  to  make  his 
home  ever  since.  He  was  successively 
crdained  to  the  offices  of  Teacher  and 
Elder.  The  latter  ordination  he  re- 
ceived in  the  fall  of  1885,  at  which  time 
he  also  married  Anna  Boline  Andersen. 
Sept.  16,  1898,  he  was  ordained  a  Sev- 
enty and  set  apart  for  a  mission  to 
Scandinavia  by  Seymour  B.  Young. 
While  on  this  mission  he  labored  with 
good  success  in  the  Aarhus  conference, 
Denmark  over   two  years.     On  his  re- 


BIOGRAPHICAL    ENCYCLOPEDIA. 


575 


turn  home  in  1900  he  was  appointed  to 
labor  as  a  home  missionary  in  the  Jor- 
dan stake.  Elder  Rasmussen  is  an 
active  worker  in  his  Ward,  taking  much 
interest  in  Sabbath  school  and  mutual 
improvement  work.  He  has  held  many- 
important  positions  in  these  organiza- 
tions. In  civil  life  he  is  a  successful 
business  man,  having  been  engaged 
largely  in  merchandising.  He  has  been 
manager  of  the  Draper  Co-op,  is  at 
present  managing  the  Draper  Mercan- 
tile and  Manufacturing  Co.,  and  repre- 
sents one  of  the  largest  manufactur- 
ing houses  in  the  west. 

PEARSON,  Henry,  a  prominent 
Elder  in  the  Draper  Ward,  Salt  Lake 
county,  Utah,  is  the  son  of  Ole  and 
Anna  Pearson,  and  was  born  in  the 
province  of  Scona,  Sweden,  June  8, 
1839.     His     mother   died    when    he   was 


I 


yet  an  infant,  and  he,  together,  with 
his  sister,  was  taken  by  a  Swedish  no- 
bleman, aifd  earl,  into  his  family,  and 
there  raised.  Henry  attended  the  pub- 
lic school,  and  later  the  high  school  at 
Malmo.  The  earl  desired  that  the  boy 
should  be  sent  to  the  Military  Aca- 
demy, but  his  father  (who  was  in  the 
employ  of  the  earl)  wanted  his  son  to 
learn  a  trade,  and  his  wish  prevailed. 
Consequently,  Henry  was  apprenticed 
to  learn  the  cabinet  maker's  trade  in 
the  city  of  Malmo.  His  father  having 
become  a  convert  to  "Mormonism,"  he 
made  his  son  acquainted  with  its  prin- 
ciples of  the  gospel,  and  notwithstand- 
ing that  much  pressure  of  an  adverse 


nature  was  brought  to  bear  upon  him, 
he  remained  true  to  his  convictions, 
and  was  baptized  into  the  Church  Sept. 
23,  1856,  by  Elder  Nils  B.  Adler.  After 
it  became  generally  known  that  he  had 
become  a  "Mormon,"  he  was  subjected 
to  much  ridicule  and  persecution.  The 
earl  promised  him  both  money  and  a 
future,  if  he  would  renounce  "Mormon- 
ism," but  Henry  remained  faithful,  and 
was  ordained  to  the  Priesthood,  and 
sent  out  to  preach  the  gospel  in  his 
native  land.  In  1862  he  emigrated  to 
Utah,  arriving  in  Salt  Lake  City  Sept. 
23rd  of  that  year.  He  located  in  South 
Cottonwood  for  a  time,  and  then  moved 
to  Draper,  in  1863,  where  he  has  lived 
ever  since.  He  was  ordained  a  Seventy 
by  Richard  Maxfleld,  March  11,  1866, 
and  ordained  a  High  Priest  by  Apostle 
John  Henry  Smith,  May  4,  1901.  He 
married  Sarah  M.  Allen  March  7,  1868, 
the  issue  of  which  union  is  nine  chil- 
dren, six  of  whom  are  living.  His  wife 
died  Feb.  28,  1901.  Elder  Pearson  has 
been  successful  in  raising  a  good  fam- 
ily, and  one  of  his  sons,  Lieutenant 
Henry  Pearson,  distinguished  himself 
at  the  battle  in  Manila  Bay,  during  the 
Spanish-American  war.  Bro.  Pearson 
is  widely  known  for  his  integrity  of 
purpose  and  honest  dealings. 

LARSON,-  Ludvig,  Bishop  of  East 
Jordan  (Jordan  Stake  of  Zion),  Salt 
Lake  county,  Utah, -is  the  son  of  Peter 
and  Mary  Larson,  and  was  born  Dec. 
14,  1873,  in  Byrlof,  Malmohus,  Ian, 
Sweden.  He  emigrated  to  Utgih  in  1876, 
and  settled  at  West  Jordan,  where  he 
still  resides.  He  was  baptized  by 
Elder  Daniel  R.  Bateman  in  May, 
1882;  ordained  a  Deacon  in  1885  by  Jas. 
Glover;  a  Priest  in  December,  1891,  by 
Bishop  John  A.  Egbert,  and  an  Elder 
Feb.  2,  1896,  by  Wm.  L.  Bateman.  He 
attended  the  B.  Y.  Academy  in  Provo 
during  1895,  taking  the  mutual  im- 
provement course.  On  his  return  home 
he  was  made  president  of  the  Y.  M.  M. 
J.  A.  May  12,  1897,  he  was  called  to  labor 
as  a  Sunday  school  missionary.  He 
was  ordained  a  Bishop  and  a  High 
Priest,  Jan.  21,  1900,  by  Apostle  Francis 
M.  Lyman,  and  set  apart  to  preside 
over  the  East  Jordan  Ward,  in  which 
position  he  is  still  faithfully  laboring. 

PEHRSON,  John  Peter,  first 
counselor  to  Bishop  Ludvig  Larson  of 
the  East  Jordan  Ward,  Salt  Lake  coun- 


576 


LATTER-DAY    SAINT 


ty,  is  a  son  of  John  P.  Pehrson  and 
Johanna  Hanson,  and  was  born  Oct.  21, 
1854,  in  Malmo,  Sweden.  He  was  bap- 
tized by  Elder  Bengt  Malmros,  Dec.  26, 
1878;  ordained  a  Deacon  April  13,  1874, 
and  ordained  a  Priest  Aug.  17,  1874.  At 
the  time  of  the  latter  ordination  he  was 
also  called  to  take  charge  of  a  district 
of  the  branch  as  acting  Teacher.  In 
November,  1874,  he  was  sent  out  as  a 
local  missionary  to  preach  the  gospel. 
He  was  ordained  an  Elder  May  30,  1875, 
and  called  to  preside  over  the  Christian- 
stad  branch.  June  3,  1876.  he  was  re- 
leased from  his  mission  and  emigrated 
to  T'tah,  where  he  located  at  West  Jor- 
dan. Salt  Lake  county.  Oct.  23,  1876, 
he  married  Mathilda  Anderson.  In  1885 
he  was  appointed  to  preside  over  the 
Scandinavian  meetings,  in  the  neighbor- 
hood where  he  resided.  For  15  years  he 
labored  diligently  as  a  Ward  Teacher 
in  West  Jordan.  Dec.  22,  1889,  he  was 
ordained  a  Seventy  by  Samuel  Bate- 
man,  and  later  he  became  a  president  in 
the  33rd  quorum  of  Seventy.  He  was 
ordained  a  High  Priest  and  set  apart  as 
first  counselor  to  Bishop  Hyrum  GofC 
of  Ea.st  Jordan  Ward,  by  President 
Angus  M.  Cannon  Dec.  15,  1895.  When 
the  Jordan  Stake  was  organized,  in 
January,  1900,  he  was  chosen  as  first 
counselor  to  Bishop  Ludvig  Larson  of 
East  Jordan  Ward,  which  position  he 
still   occupies. 

ELLWOOD,  Robert,  president  of 
the  High  Priests'  quorum  of  the  Jordan 
Stake  of  Zion,  is  the  son  of  Joseph  Ell- 
wood  and  Dorethy  Snuddin,  and  was 
born  Dec.  9,  1826,  at  Empingham,  Rut- 
landshire, England.  Dec.  24,  1849,  he 
married  Elizabeth  Underwood.  Elder 
Ell  wood  writes,  in  a  brief  life  sketch: 
"We  first  heard  the  gospel  in  October, 
1852,  and  on  the  25th  of  that  month  we 
were  baptized  by  Elder  Charles  Welch. 
Later,  I  was  ordained  a  Priest  and  af- 
terwards an  Elder,  and  was  called  to 
preside  over  the  Empingham  branch, 
which  position  I  held  till  1856.  In  that 
year  I  emigrated  to  Utah  with  my  fam- 
ily, crossing  the  ocean  in  the  ship 
"Thornton."  I  remained  in  Cincinnati, 
Ohio,  for  five  years,  where  I  took  an 
active  part  in  the  branch  work.  We 
crossed  the  plains  in  Captain  Sextus  E. 
Johnson's  company,  reaching  the  valley 
Sept.  27,  1861.  Soon  after  our  arrival  in 
Utah  we  located  at  West  Jordan,  Salt 
Lake  county,  where  I  was  ordained  a 
High  Priest,  Jan.  7,  1S66.      In  1873  I  was 


called,  together  with  others,  to  go  and 
settle  on  the  Little  Colorado  river,  in 
Arizona,  but  as  the  company  did  not 
succeed  in  making  settlements,  we  re- 
turned home  again.  During  1877  and 
1878  I  filled  a  short  mission  to  the  State 
of   Wisconsin.      On     returning    home    I 


was  appointed  to  serve  as  a  home  mis- 
sionary in  the  Salt  Lake  Stake,  which 
position  I  held  for  many  years.  In 
February,  1886,  I  was  called  to  preside 
over  the  West  Jordan  Ward  as  acting 
Bishop,  in  which  capacity  I  labored  OA'er 
two  years.  At  the  organization  of  the 
Jordan  Stake  of  Zion,  Jan.  21,  1900,  I 
was  appointed  and  set  apart  as  presi- 
dent of  the  High  Priests'  quorum, 
which  position  I  still  hold." 

BECKSTEAD,      Gordon      Silas,       a 

president  of  the  95th  quorum  of  Seven- 
ty, and  a  prominent  Elder  in  West  Jor- 
dan, Salt  Lake  county,  Utah,  is  the  son 
of  Henry  Beckstead  and  Lucene  Bybee, 
and  was  born  July  13,  1854,  at  East  We- 
ber, Weber  county,  Utah.  In  1861  he 
moved  with  his  parents  to  West  Jordan, 
Salt  Lake  county.  He  was  baptized  by 
James  Wood  June  20,  1864,  and  con- 
firmed a  member  of  the  Church  by  Milo 
Andrus.  In  February,  1871,  he  was  or- 
dained an  Elder  by  Joseph  Parrish.  At 
the  age  of  21  years  he  married  Elzina 
J.  Beckstead.  In  1884  he  was  ordained 
a  Seventy  by  Enoch  B.  Tripp,  and  in 
1889,  when  the  95th  quorum  of  Seventy 
was  organized,  he  was  chosen  secretary 
and  treasurer,  and  later  became  a  presi- 
dent in  that  quorum,  w^iich  position  lit- 


BIOGRAPHICAL    ENCYCLOPEDIA. 


577 


still  occupies.  When  the  Brlgham 
Young  Academy  expedition  was  organ- 
ized in  1900,  to  go  into  Central  and 
South  America  on  an  exploring  trip^ 
Bro.  Beckstead  was  chosen  as  second 
counselor  to  Pres.  Benjamin  Cluff,  jun., 
and  made  captain  of  the  company;  he 
was  also  given  charge  of  the  packing 
outfits  ana  the  animals.  Being  hon- 
orably released,  he  returned  home  be- 


fore the  trip  was  completed,  on  account 
of  illness  in  his  family.  Elder  Beck- 
stead  has  been  a  true  pioneer,  having 
aided  very  materially  in  the  develop- 
ment and  upbuilding  of  this  western 
country.  He  has  assisted  in  digging 
canals,  clearing  ground,  and  building 
houses  and  towns.  In  Church  work,  he 
has  taken  an  active  part  in  the  quorums 
of  the  Priesthood,  as  well  as  in  the 
auxiliary  organizations.  He  is  the 
father  of  nine  children — six  boys  and 
three    girls. 

TURNKR.  Jaine»  Finch,  a  president 
of  the  33rd  quorum  of  Seventy,  was 
born  Oct.  15,  1841,  in  the  county  of  Kent, 
JSngland,  son  of  James  Turner  and 
Mary  Ann  Finch.  He  was  baptized  in 
1852,  in  Kent,  and  emigrated  with  his 
parents    to    Salt    Lake    City,    Utah,    in 

1854.  Soon  afterwards  the  family  set- 
tled in  Little  Cottonwood  Ward  (now 
Union),  where     thye     tried     farming  in 

1855,  but  lost  their  crop  by  grasshop- 
pers. They  next  moved  to  West  Jor- 
dan, where  they,  prior  to  the  harvest 
of    1856,    subsisted    on    bran,    fish      and 

Vol.  1.  No.  37. 


weeds  for  some  time.  The  following 
winter  (1856-57)  James  had  a  narrow 
escape  from  being  killed  by  Indians  in 
Utah  valley.  During  the  Echo  can- 
yon campaign  in  1857-58  he  was  en- 
gaged in  active  military  service,  though 
but  sixteen  years  old,  and  passed 
through  untold  hardships, together  with 
his  companions.  At  the  time  of  "the 
move"  in  1858,  he  was  appointed  to  re- 
main behind,  together  with  others,  ta 
burn  the  property  of  the  Saints,  in  case 
the  soldiers,  whom  he  witnessed  pass 
through  Salt  Lake  City,  should  prove 
hostile;  for  some  time  after  their  ar- 
rival in  the  valley,  he  was  one  of  those 
who  were  appointed  to  watch  their 
movements.  In  1861  he  was  called  to 
haul  rocks  from  the  Little  Cottonwood 
canyon  for  the  Salt  Lake  Temple.  He 
drove  a  4-yoke  ox-team,  and  it  took 
two  days  or  more  to  make  a  round  trip; 


some  of  the  rocks  he  hauled  weighed 
four  or  five  tons.  He  was  ordained 
an  Elder  April  10,  1862.  and  received 
his  endowments.  In  1862  and  1863  he 
made  two  trips  to  the  Missouri  river 
and  back  as  a  Church  teamster,  to 
bring  poor  Saints  to  the  Valley.  Jan. 
16,  1864,  he  married  a  daughter  of 
Thomas  and  Susannah  Margetts,  with 
whom  he  has  had  twelve  children- 
eight  boys  and  four  girls.  He  labored 
for  many  years  as  a  teacher  in  the 
West  Jordan  Ward, and  was  ordained  a 
Seventy  by  Samuel  Bateman  Jan.  13, 
1884.  Three  years  later  (March  20, 
1887),  he  was  set  apart  as  one  of  the 
seven  presidents  in  the  33rd  quorum  of 

Sept.  14,  1901. 


578 


LATTER-DAY    SAINT 


Seventy.  In  1898-99  he  filled  a  mis- 
sion to  Kn^land.  where  he  labored  dili- 
gently in  that  capacity.  Civilly  Elder 
Turner  has  filled  many  positions  of 
honor  and  trust,  among  which  may  be 
mentioned  that  he  served  seven  years 
as  a  school  trustee  and  four  years  as 
constable  in  West  Jordan  precinct. 

DAHIi,  Alexander,  Sen.,  a  pioneer 
settler  of  East  Jordan  Ward,  Salt  Lake 
county,  I'tah,  was  born  Aug.  11,  1831, 
in  Frederikstad,  Norway,  fourth  child 
of  Poul  and  Anna  Marie  Dahl.  He 
lived  witl;  his  parents  on  a  Norwegian 
farm  until  he  was  eighteeen  years  old, 
when  he  took  up  the  carpenter's  trade, 
and  mastered  the  same  in  five  years. 
Becoming  a  convert  to  "Mormonism" 
he  was  bai)tized  Sept.  26,  1852,  and  was 
ordained  to  the  office  of  a  Teacher.  As 
such  he  look  a  lively  part  in  dissemin- 
ating the     principles      of       the     gospel 


among  his  relatives  and  others,  at  the 
time  the  Elders  were  imprisoned  in 
Froderikstad.  The  duty  of  preaching 
th.i  gospel  thus  rested  upon  the  young 
Saints  outside,  and  Bro.  Dahl,  with  oth- 
ers, took  his  part  with  great  interest. 
In  the  fall  of  1854  he,  together  with  a 
small  number  of  other  Norwegian  emi- 
grants, embarked  for  America,  having 
joined  the  main  body  of  emigrants  from 
Scandinavia  in  Copenhagen,  under  the 
direction  of  Elder  Peter  O.  Hansen,  but 
on  its  way  to  England  the  steamer  was 
forced,  by  terrific  storms,  to  seek  shel- 
ter in  the  rock-bound  harbor  of  Man- 
«lal,    Norway,   where   the   company     re- 


mained about  a  week  and,  during  that 
time,  many  meetings  were  held  and  the 
brethren   bore   testimony  of  the  gospel 
to   the  inhabitants  of  that  little  town, 
with  seemingly  good  effect.      The  com- 
pany, numbering  440  Scandinavian  emi- 
grants, left  Liverpool, on  board  the  ship 
"James  Nesmith,"    Jan.      7,     1855,    and 
reached   New   Orleans  on  Feb.   23,  1855. 
From    that    city    they    continued    their 
journey  up  the  Mississippi  and  Missouri 
rivers   to  Fort  Leavenworth   and   Mor- 
mon-Grove, where  their  camp  was  in- 
fested  with   the   cholera   and   many   of 
the  emigrants  died,  among  whom  was 
Christian   Dahl,   a  brother  of  the  sub- 
ject of  this  sketch.     In  June  the  com- 
pany left  Mormon  Grove,  under  the  di- 
rection of  Elder  Jacob  F.  Secrist,  who. 
however,  died  by  the  way,  and  his  first 
assistant  Elder  Noah  T.  Guyman,  then 
took     charge     of     the     company     and 
brought  it  to  Salt  Lake  City,   arriving 
there  Sept.  27,  1855.       Bro.  Dahl  sought 
and    found    employment    at    his    trade 
as  a  carpenter  for  a  while,  but,  owing 
to    the   great    scarcity    of   food,    caused 
by   the     grasshoppers     destroying     the 
crops  that  year,  he  was  forced  to  quit 
and  leave  the  city,  as  he  could  not  find 
anybody  that  he  could  board  with.  Af- 
ter about  three  years  of  struggling  to 
make  a  living  b-y  working  at  his  trade, 
in   various   places,   he   secured   a  small 
farm,   but   in   1857    he   was   called   out, 
as   a   militia   soldier   to   meet   and   hold 
back  Johnston's  army,   which  was  ap- 
proaching   Utah  with  evil   intent;   and 
thus  he  camped  for  that  purpose,  with 
thousands  of  others,   in   Echo  canyon; 
and      when      he     was      released       and 
returned   the   Saints  had  moved   south. 
As  he  located   temporarily  in     Spanish 
Fork,   he   formed   the  acquaintance     of 
Miss  Ellen  Jorgensen,  daughter  of  Kar- 
na  and   Soren   Jorgensen,   and   married 
her     afterwards.       Bishop     Butler,     of 
Spanish    Fork,    performing    the      cere- 
mony.      As   a   result   of   this   marriage 
he  has  nine  children — six  sons  and  three 
daughters.        Bro.    Dahl    has   made    his 
home  in  East  Jordan  Ward  since  1859, 
and  is  now  one  of  the  most  prosperous 
and   enterprising   farmers   in   that     lo- 
cality,   highly    respected     by     all    who 
know  him.— C.   C.   A.  C. 

BUTLKK,  Alva.  Bishop  of  Butler 
Ward  (Jordan  Stake  of  Zion),  Salt 
Lake  county,  Utah,  was  born  Jan.  13, 
1845,  in  Randolph  county,  Indiana,  son 


BIOGRAPHICAL    ENCYCLOPEDIA. 


579 


of  Samuel  Butler  and  Hannah  Barker. 
While   yet  a  child  in  arms,   he  moved 
with  his  parents  to  Miami  county.    His 
mother  died  in  the  spring  of  1856,  and 
the    rest    of    the    family    emi^ated    to 
Utah  in  1857,  locating  in  South  Qotton- 
wood  Ward,   Salt   Lake  county,   where 
Alva  was  baptized  in  January,  1858,  by 
Joseph  Hammond.      In  1864  he  made  a 
trip  to  the  Missouri  river  after  immi- 
grating Saints.       He   was  ordained     a 
Seventy    March    11,    1866,    and    married 
Jane    E.    Lubrum    March    16,    1867,      by 
whom  he  had  nine  children — four  sons 
and  five  daughterse.       Having  located 
in   Granite   Ward   in   1881,    he   was   or- 
dained a  High  Priest  by  Angus  M.  Can- 
non May  7,  1881,  and  set  apart  as  sec- 
ond   counselor    to    Bishop    Solomon     J. 
Despain  May  7,  1881.      He  acted  in  that 
capacity  until  March  16,  1887,  when  he 
was  ordained  a  Bishop  by  Franklin  D. 
Richards   and   set   apart   to   preside   in 
that  capacity  over  the   Granite  Ward, 
which  position     he  occupied  until  1901. 
Having   lost   his   first     wife     by   death 
(May    2,   1893),    he    married    Emma     J. 
Finch  March  28,  1895,  by  whom  he  has 
had  one  child  (now  dead).      When  the 
Granite  Ward   (on   May   12,   1901)     was 
divided   into   two  Wards,   Elder   Butler 
was  set  apart  to  act  as  Bishop  of  the 
north    part    of    the    same    which      was 
named  Butler  Ward.      This  position  he 
still  occupies. 

MUIR,  James  Alma,  Bishop  of 
Granite  Ward  (Jordan  Stake  of  Zion), 
Salt  Lake  county,  Utah,  was  born 
April  22,  1859,  in  Salt  Lake  City,  Utah, 
son  of  Thomas  Muir  and  Isabella  Simp- 
son. When  eight  years  old,  he  was 
baptized  by  John  Sharp,  and  after- 
wards ordained  a  Deacon  and  an  Elder 
successively.  He  was  ordained  a  Sev- 
enty Sept.  18,  1887,  and  ordained  a 
High  Priest  and  set  apart  as  Bishop 
of  Granite  Ward,  March  12,  1901,  by 
Apostle  John  Henry  Smith.  Since  his 
early  youth  Bishop  Muir  has  been  a 
faithful  and  zealous  worker  in  the  in- 
terest of  the  Church ;  for  fourteen  years 
he  acted  as  assistant  superintendent  of 
the  Granite  Ward  Sabbath  school,  and 
as  an  officer  in  the  T.  M.  M.  I.  A.  He 
also  labored  for  many  years  as  a  Ward 
teacher,  and  was  a  president  in  the  93rd 
quorum  of  Seventy.  In  1895-97  he  filled 
a  successful  mission  to  the  Southern 
States,  laboring  in  the  East  Tennessee 
conference.       He   married   Miss     Janet 


Dryburgh  Oct.  18,  1883,  and  located  per- 
manently in  Granite  Ward,  where  he 
is  recognized  as  an  honest,  industrious 
and  thrifty  citizen,  having  done  much 
for  the  upbuilding  of  the  country.  He 
worked  for  many  years  as  a  black- 
smith and  also  in  the  Church  quarry 
at  Wasatch  getting  out  stone  for  the 
Salt  Lake  Temple.  He  has  assisted 
in  erecting  three  L.  D.  S.  meeting 
houses,  is  at  present  postmaster  of 
Granite,  and  is  conducting  a  stone 
quarry  of  his  own. 

CRANE,  James,  Bishop  of  Herriman 
Ward  (Jordan  Stake  of  Zion),  Salt 
Lake  county,  Utah,  from  1877  to  1886, 
was  born  in  the  village  of  Penally, 
Pembrokeshire,  South  Wales,  In  April, 
1830.  While  yet  an  infant  his  father 
died,  and  James  was  raised  with  stran- 
gers under  circumstances  of  want  and 
poverty.  He  was  baptized  March  21, 
1851.  One  month  later  (April  21,  1851) 
he  was  ordained  to  the  office  of  a  Priest 
and  sent  out  to  preach  the  gospel.      In 


the  following  December  he  was  or- 
dained an  Elder.  He  emigrated  to 
American  in  1856,  crossing  the  Atlantic 
in  the  ship  "Samuel  Curling,"  which 
sailed  from  Liverpool  April  19th  of  that 
year.  He  found  employment  around 
New  York  city  until  the  spring  of  1858, 
when  he  removed  to  the  State  of  Iowa. 
There  he  married  Alice  Davies,  and  in 
1859  came  to  Utah  with  his  wife.  They 
located  in  the  Sugar  House  Ward, 
where  Elder  Crane  acted  as  a  Ward 
teacher   and    was    ordained    a    Seventy 


580 


LATTER-DAY    SAINT 


Aug.  20.  1869.  A  few  days  later  (Aug. 
26th)  he  was  made  a  president  of  the 
26th  quorum  of  Seventy.  In  March, 
1S69,  he  removed  to  Herriman.  A  few 
months  later  he  was  appointed  to  act 
as  second  counselor  to  Pres.  Ensign  I. 
Stocking,  a  position  which  he  Allied  un- 
til 1876,  when  Pi-es.  Stocking  removed 
from  the  Ward,  and  Elder  Crane  was 
appointed  presiding  Priest  of  Herri- 
man,  acting  in  that  capacity  under  the 
direction  of  Hishop  Archibald  Gardner, 
of  West  Jordan,  until  the  reorganiza- 
tion of  the  Ward,  June  IT,  1877,  when 
he  was  ordained  Bishop  of  the  same. 
This  position  he  occupied  until  the  time 
of  his  death,  which  occurred  July  6, 
1SS6.  Hishop  Crane  raised  a  large 
family  and  lived  long  enough  to  see 
most  of  his  children  grow  to  man  and 
womanhood;  and  they  are  all  faithful 
members  of  the  Church  at  the  present 
time.  His  name  is  held  in  honorable 
remembrance  by  the  Saints  of  Herri- 
man,  who  esteem  him  for  his  kindness 
and  nobility  of  character.  He  was  a 
wise  and  consistent  leader  and  an  ex- 
emplary  Latter-day   Saint. 

CRANE,  James  Staiinard,  Bishop 
of  Herriman  Ward  .since  1897,  was  born 
May  3,  1857,  at  Pulham.  Norfolk,  Eng- 
land, son  of  John  L.  Crane  and  Sarah 


Stannard.  He  emigrated  to  Utah  wi^n 
his  parents  in  1866  and  was  baptized 
by  James  Ashman  in  the  10th  Ward, 
Salt   Lake   City,   in  1867.       He   was  an 


active  member  of  the  10th  Ward  Sun- 
day school  until  1870,  when  he  moved 
to  Herriman,  where  he  soon  became  a 
zealous  worker  in  Church  affairs,  act- 
ing as  Sunday  school  teacher  and  sec- 
retary of  Y.  M.  M-  I.  A.  He  was  or- 
dained a  Priest  Dec.  16,  1877,  and  set 
apart  to  attend  to  the  administration 
of  the  Sacrament  in  the  Ward;  or- 
dained an  Elder  Oct.  9,  1878,  by  John  A. 
Egbert,  and  married  Sarah  Ann  Dan- 
sie  Oct.  11,  1878,  by  whom  he  has  had 
ten  children.  Feb.  10,  1884,  he  was 
ordained  a  Seventy  by  Wm.  W.  Taylor, 
and  he  labored  as  a  Ward  teacher  till 
Dec.  12,  1887,  when  he  was  ordained  a 
High  Priest  and  set  apart  to  act  as 
second  counselor  to  Bishop  Robert 
Dansie,  This  position  he  held  until 
June  7,  1896,  when  he  Avas  chosen  and 
set  apart  as  first  counselor  to  Bishop 
Dansie.  He  labored  in  that  capacity 
as  long  as  Bishop  Dansie  lived,  after 
which  he  had  charge  of  the  Ward  as 
presiding  Elder  until  Nov.  7,  1897,  when 
he  was  ordained  a  Bishop  by  Pres.  Jo- 
seph F.  Smith  and  set  apart  to  preside 
as  such  in  Herriman.  Of  the  many 
secular  positions  which  Bishop  Crane 
has  held  may  be  mentioned  that  he  has 
served  six  years  as  justice  of  the  peace 
in  Herriman,  six  years  as  school  trus- 
tee, six  years  or  more  as  road  super- 
visor, eight  years  as  vice-president  and 
director  of  the  Herriman  Irrigation 
Company,  many  yea  i  as  watermaster. 
etc  Though  only  forty-five  years  old, 
Bishop  Crane  has  made  a  fine  record, 
and  is  still  actively  engaged  in  the 
work  of  God. 

CRUMP,  Charles  C,  a  Patriarch 
in  the  Jordan  Stake  of  Zion,  and  a 
resident  of  Herriman,  Salt  Lake -coun- 
ty, Utah,  was  born  March  25,  1830,  in 
Ponti.«bury  Hill,  Shropshire,  England, 
son  of  William  and  Martha  Crump.  He 
writes:  "I  embracf-d  the  gospel  of 
Jesus  Christ  at  a  place  called  Abber- 
soaking,  Monmouthshire,  England;  at 
the  age  of  nineteen  years,  being  bap- 
tized and  confirmed  by  Elder  Prut- 
herel,  and  shortly  afterwards  or- 
dained a  Deacon.  Some  time  later  I 
was  ordained  a  Priest,  and  while  in 
England  I  labored  with  the  local  breth- 
en  in  assisting  to  spread  a  knowledge  of 
the  gospel  in  and  around  the  adjoining 
villages  and  towns.  Of  my  father's 
family  there  were  four  sons  and  five 
daughters,  whose  names  are  re  pective- 


BIOGRAPHICAL,    ENCYCLOPEDIA. 


581 


ly,  William,  Richard,  Charles  and 
Reynold.  The  daughters  were  Eliza- 
beth, Mary,  Susannah,  Sarah  and 
Martha.  Up  to  this  present  writing 
I  am  the  only  one  of  the  family  that 
has  embraced  the  gospel.  I  left  my 
native  land  to  gather  with  the  Saints 
to  Utah  in  February,  1852,  on  board 
the  sailing  vessel  "Ellen  Maria"  with  a 
company  of  Saints  in  charge  of  Elder 
Isaac  C.  Haight.  The  voyage  through- 
out was  a  pleasant  one.  We  landed  at 
New  Orleans  April  6,  1852,  and  from 
that  city  we  took  steamer  to  St.  Louis, 
Mo.,  and  thence  to  Westport.  From 
th.it  point  Elder  Abraham  O.  Smo?t 
took  charge  of  the  company  and  was 
our  captain  overland  to  Sait  Lake  City. 
Our  outfit  for  the  overland  journey  was 


purchased  at  Westport,  and  our  com- 
pany consisted  of  about  thirty  wagons. 
I  drove  an  ox- team  which  carried  ten 
souls  and  the  necessary  supplies.  This 
was  the  first  company  that  emigrated 
under  the  Perpetual  Emigration  Fund. 
While  crossing  the  plains  we  suf- 
fered severely  from  the  cholera  which 
was  prevailing  in  certain  parts  of  the 
United  States  at  that  time.  We  ar- 
rived in  Salt  Lake  City  in  September, 
1852.  After  staying  about  three  weeks 
in  Salt  Lake  City,  I  moved  to  Taylors- 
ville,  Salt  Lake  county,  where  I  helped 
to  build  a  fort  for  protection  against 
the  Indians,  and  was  also  called  to  act 
as  a  guard  at  the  south  point  of  the 
valley,  and  also  on  the  west  side — 
three  days  at  each  place    every     week 


during  the  summer  of  1853.  About  this 
time  Pres.  Brigham  Young  called  for 
twenty  families  to  go  and  strengthen 
the  Herriman  settlement,  and  I  was 
one  of  the  twenty  who  volunteered  to 
go.  About  this  time  Herriman  was 
greatly  molested  by  the  Indians,  and 
one  of  the  first  things  we  had  to  do 
was  to  build  a  fort  for  protection 
against  their  raids.  The  brethren  be- 
gan to  take  up  land  and  cultivate  the 
same.  The  water  at  irst  was  very 
scarce,  but  later  it  was  increased  by 
developing  the  springs  in  the  adjoin- 
ing mountains.  The  settlers  were  al- 
so troubled  by  crickets  and  grasshop- 
pers who  w'ould  eat  up  the  growing 
crops.  In  the  fall  of  1857,  when  Johns- 
ton's army  was  approaching  Utah,  I 
was  called,  in  connection  with  many 
others,  to  go  to  Echo  canyon,  to  meet 
the  soldiers  and  prevent  them  from 
coming  into  the  valley  that  winter.  We 
were  successful  and  returned  home  to 
spend  the  latter  part  of  the  winter.  In 
the  following  spring  (1858)  I  was  again 
sent  to  Echo  canyon  to  hold  the  sol- 
diers back  until  they  were  willing  to 
yield  to  the  terms  prescribed  by  Pres. 
Brigham  Toung.  On  my  return  home, 
I  found  my  wife  and  two  children  ready 
to  move  south  the  following  morning, 
and  with  a  yoke  of  oxen  I  moved  to 
Pond  Town  (now  Salem),  in  Utah  coun- 
ty, where  I  built  a  "wickiup"  as  a  tem- 
porary shelter  for  my  family,  and  re- 
mained there  until  peace  was  restored; 
after  which  I  returned  to  Herriman 
and  resumed  my  occupation  as  a  farm- 
er. In  the  spring  of  1863  I"*  was 
called  to  go  to  Florence,  Nebraska, 
with  ox-teams  to  assist  in  bringing  the 
Church  poor  to  the  Valley.  I  traveled 
in  Capt.  Peter  Nebeker's  train.  In 
June,  1877,  when  Herriman  was  organ- 
ized as  a  Ward,  I  was  ordained  and  set 
apart  by  Daniel  H.  Wells  as  second 
counselor  to  Bishop  James  Crane.  Sub- 
sequently (Nov.  25,  1885)  I  was  set  apart 
as  first  counselor  to  Bishop  Crane  in 
place  of  David  M.  Bowen,  who  had  re- 
signed that  position.  Bishop  Crane 
died  July  6,  1886,"  after  which  I  was 
caled  to  act  as  presiding  Elder  in 
Herriman  until  the  appointment  of 
Bishop  Robert  Dansie,  which  took  place 
Dec.  12,  1887.  After  the  death  of  Bishop 
Dansie  (Oct.  12,  1896)  I  was  appointed 
to  act  as  presiding  Elder  in  Herriman, 
and  occupied  that  position  till  Nov.  7, 
1897,   when  James   S.   Crane   was  made 


582 


LATTER-DAY    SAINT 


Bishop  of  the  Ward  and  I  was  ordained 
a  Patriarch  by  Joseph  F.  Smith.  My 
family  consists  of  two  wives,  Margaret 
and  Sarah,  wlio  have  borne  me  six  sons 
and  nine  daughters." 

BUTTKRFIKLD.  Thomas,  one  of  the 

first  settlers  of  Herriman,  Salt  Lake 
county,  Utah,  was  born  June  7,  1811,  in 
the  town  of  Farmington,  Kennebec 
county,  Maine,  son  of  Zechariah  and 
Martha  Butterfield.  He  was  raised  on 
a  farm  and  his  education  was  limited, 
In  1835  he  first  heard  the  fulness  of  the 
gospel  and  was  baptized  by  Joseph 
Butterfield,  his  uncle.  The  following 
year  he  removed  to  Kirtland,  Ohio, 
where  he  received  his  endowments  in 
the  Kirtland  Temple  and  was  ordained 
into  the  3rd  quorum  of  Seventy  in 
1838,  at  the  time  the  Seventies  removed 
as  a  body  to  Missouri  in  the  famous 
Kirtland  Camp.       He  settled  at  Adam- 


except  when  absent  on  a  two  years' 
mision  to  Salmon  river.  He  was  the 
second  presiding  Elder  of  Herriman, 
and  for  a  number  of  years  the  village 
was  known  as  the  Butterfield  settle- 
ment, thus  named  in  honor  of  himself 
and  family.  He  raised  a  large  family 
and  lived  to  see  his  grown-up  children 
pursue  a  course  of  righteousness  in  the 
midst  of  the  Saints.  Ripe  in  years  El- 
der Butterfield  died  at  his  home  in  Her- 
rimaa  in  1890,  highly  respected  by  all 
who  knew  him.  As  a  sample  of  his 
generosity  we  may  mention  that  while 
living  at  Kirtland,  Ohio,  he  learned 
that  the  Prophet  Joseph,  on  a  certain 
occasion,  was  very  much  in  need  of 
financial  assistance,  when  Elder  But- 
terfield gave  him  all  the  money  he  had 
($100),  for  which  the  Prophet  subse- 
quently blessed  him  and  prophesied 
that  he  should  never  want  for  bread 
as  long  as  he  lived.  This  prediction 
svas  indeed  literally  fulfilled. 

BUTTKRFIELI),     Thomas,  Junior. 

a  prominent  Elder  in  the  Herriman 
Ward,  was  born  April  23,  1853,  in  Her- 
riman, Salt  Lake  county,  Utah,  son  of 
Thomas  Butterfield  and  Mary  Jane 
Parker.  He  was  baptized  Sept.  29, 
1861,  by  Elder  George  Ward;  ordained 
a  Deacon  by  Elder  Ensign  I.  Stocking, 
and  ordained  an  Elder  Feb.  26,  1872,  by 


ondi-Ahman,  Daviess  county,  and  spent 
the  winter  of  1838-39  at  Far  West.  The 
next  spring  he  removed  to  Illinois,  hav- 
ing been  driven  out  of  Missouri  by  the 
mob.  He  subsequently  settled  on  the 
prairie  about  three  miles  west  of  Nau- 
voo,  III.,  on  the  Carthage  road;  shared 
again  in  the  persecutions  and  drivings 
in  1846;  lived  at  Council  Bluffs,  Iowa, 
about  two  years  and  came  to  Great  Salt 
Lake   valley   in  1848,  in  John     Taylor's 

company.  After  spending  the  winter  Elder  Abinadi  Pratt.  In  response  to  a 
at  West  Jordan,  he  settled  at  Fort  Her-  call  from  the  authorities  of  the  Church, 
riman  in  the  spring  of  1849.  being  one  he  went  to  Arizona,  to  fill  a  mission 
of  the  first  settlers  at  that  place,  where  and  settle  up  that  country,  in  1873.  At 
he  resided  until  the  day  of  his  death,     a  special  meeting  held  in  West  Jordan 


BIOGRAPHICAL,    ENCYCLOPEDIA. 


583 


June  17,  1877,  for  the  purpose  of  or- 
ganizing the  Herrjman  Ward,  he  was 
appointed  treasurer  of  the  Ward  and 
Ward  teacher.  Nov.  12,  1878,  he  was 
apointed  president  of  the  Y.  M.  M.  I. 
A.  at  Herriman,  which  position  he  held 
for  six  years.  He  was  ordained  a 
Seventy  March  11,  1884,  by  Elder  Sam- 
uel Bateman;  set  apart  to  fill  a  mis- 
sion to  Great  Britain  Oct.  7,  1884,  by 
Pres.  Jacob  Gates,  and  started  on  said 
mision  Oct.  11,  1884.  On  his  arrival 
in  England,  he  was  assigned  to  labor 
in  the  Newcastle  conference.  He  re- 
turned home  Oct.  17,  1886.  A  year 
later  (Jan.  8,  1888)  he  was  appointed 
superintendent  of  the  Herriman  Sun- 
day school,  which  position  he  held  elev- 
en years.  May  10,  1899,  he  was  set 
apart  to  fill  a  mission  to  the  Eastern 
States.  He  started  on  this  mission 
May  11,  1899,  and  was  assigned  to  labor 
in  the  New  England  conference;  re- 
turned home  May  2,  1901.  He  was  or- 
dained a  High  Priest  and  set  apart  as 
an  alternate  High  Councilor,  in  the  Jor- 
dan Stake  of  Zion,  by  Pres.  Orrin  P. 
Miller,  May  15,  1901. 

BUTTERPIELD  Samuel,  a  promi- 
nent Elder  of  Herriman,  Salt  Lake 
county,  Utah,  is  a  son  of  Thomas  But- 
terfield  and  Mary  Jane  Parker  and  was 
born    in    Herriman,    Salt   Lake   county, 


Utah,  Feb.  27,  1855;  was  baptized  when 
thirteen  years  old  by  Ensign  I.  Stock- 
ing, ordained  an  Elder  and  received  his 
endowments  in  1873,  and  married  Sarah 
Jane   Farmer   Oct.    17.   1875.       In   June, 


1879,  he  was  ordained  to  the  office  of  a 
Seventy  by  Joseph  Young  and  started 
on  a  mision  to  the  Southern  States.  He 
labored  in  West  Virginia  and  Ken- 
tucky, together  with  Gordon  S.  Bills 
and  Frank  McDonald  as  companions. 
They  baptized  sixteen  souls  and  or- 
ganized a  branch  of  the  Church  in 
Lawrence  county,  Kentucky.  Elder 
Butterfield  returned  to  Utah  Jan.  19, 
1881.  From  July,  1882,  to  July,  1899, 
he  acted  as  first  assistant  superintend- 
ent of  the  Ward  Sunday  school,  and 
since  the  latter  date  he  has  filled  the 
position  of  superintendent.  During  the 
past  twenty  years  he  has  also  labored 
as  a  Ward  teacher  and  ever  since  his 
eaily  youth  filled  positions  of  honor 
and  trust. 

BILLS,  Gordon  Silas,  Bishop  of 
Riverton  Ward  (Jordan  Stake),  Salt 
Lake  county,  Utah,  was  born  March 
18,  1854,  in  West  Jordan,  Salt  Lake 
county,  Utah,  son  of  William  Andrew 
Bills  and  Emmeline  Beckstead.  He  was 
baptized  June  26,  1864,  by  Wm.  A.  Bills 
and  confirmed  July  3,  1864,  by  Milo  An- 
drus;  ordained  an  Elder  Sept.  17,  1875, 
by  Oluf  F.  Due,  and  ordained  a  Seven- 
ty June  4,  1876,  by  Archibald  N.  Hill. 
He  presided  over  the  Y.  M.  M.  I.  A. 
of  the  South  Jordan  Ward  for  a  num- 
ber of  years  and  was  called  on  a  mis- 
sion to  the  Southern  States  in  1879.  He 
remained  on  that  mission  about  two 
years,  laboring  principally  in  Ken- 
tucky, and  baptized  quite  a  number. 
He  also  organized  two  branches  of  the 
Church,  namely  one  on  Muddy  creek, 
Johnson  county,  and  another  on 
Georgie's  creek,  Lawrence  county,  Ken- 
tucky. At  different  times  he  suffered 
considerable  persecution  by  the  hands 
of  mobs.  While  stopping  over  night 
at  the  house  of  Wm.  Vernon,  in  Law- 
rence county,  Ky.,  Oct.  30,  1880,  to- 
gether with  Elder  Daniel  Densley.jun., 
about  twenty-five  masked  men,  who 
were  under  the  influence  of  liquor, 
gatheerd  around  the  house,  and  de- 
manded admittance.  On  being  refused, 
they  burst  the  door  open,  entered  the 
room  and  asked  to  see  the  two  stran- 
gers who  were  stopping  there.  In  the 
meantime  the  Elders  were  dressing, 
and  the  lady  of  the  house  lit  a  lamp, 
which,  however,  the  mobbers  kicked 
out  of  her  hands.  She  then  threw  a 
newspaper  on  the  fire,but  they  prompt- 
ly stamped   this  intended  light  out  by 


584 


LATTER-DAY    SAINT 


their  feet.  The  Elders,  who  by  this 
time  ha(i  partly  dressed  themselves, 
were  taken  by  main  force  out  of  the 
house  and  compelled  to  march  a  con- 
sidt.-rable  distance  in  the  rain,  having 
also  to  wade  several  streams.  At  length 
a  couple  of  trees  were  reached,  where 
a  temporary  scaffold  was  built  by  the 
mobbeis  for  the  purpose  of  hanging 
the  Elders,  who  were  placed  face  to 
face  with  each  other  and  told  to  say 
what  they  had  to  say  quickly.  At 
this  juncture,  a  son  of  the  Vernon 
family  came  up  and  swore  that  he 
knew  and  could  identify  a  number  of 
the  outlaws.  The  mobbers  promptly 
fired  two  shots  at  him  and  then  carried 
him  bodily  away;  but  a  few  moments 
later  a  woman  came  through  the  woods 


with  a  lighted  torch,  and  on  her  ap- 
proach, the  mobbers,  fearing  identifica- 
tion, fled  hurriedly  in  all  directions,  not 
knowing,  however,  that  the  person  with 
a  light  was  a  woman.  The  Elders, 
who  escaped  without  a  scratch,  now  re- 
turned to  the  house  and  stopped  there 
the  remainder  of  the  night.  Elder 
Bills  returned  from  this  mission  in 
January,  1881;  and  in  the  spring  of 
1885  he  removed  to  Riverton,  where  he 
was  ordained  a  High  Pt-iest,  Aug.  8, 
1886,  by  Joseph  E.  Taylor,  and  set  apart 
to  act  as  second  counselor  to  Bishop 
Orrin  P.  Miller.  Later,  he  was  pro- 
moted to  the  position  of  first  counselor 
which  office  he  filled  till  Jan.  21,  1900, 
when    he    was   ordained   a    Bishop   and 


set  apart  to  jjreside  over  the  Riverton 
Ward;  this  position  he  still  holds.  Kl- 
der  Bills  married  his  first  wife  Sept.  27, 
1875,  and  he  yielded  obedience  to  the 
principle  of  plural  marriage,  May  1, 
1879,  by  taking  to  wife  Bertha  Lina 
Jensen.  By  his  two  wives  Bishop  Bills 
is  the  father  of  eighteen  children.  Dur- 
ing the  anti-polygamy  raid  in  1885-90, 
he  was  often  chased  by  U.  S.  deputy 
marshals,  he  being  the  first  man  in 
Riverton  to  whom  these  officials  sought 
to  pay  their  compliments.  In  moving 
his  plural  family  from  place  to  place, 
one  of  his  children  (a  baby)  was  ex- 
posed to  the  cold  night  air,  which 
caused  it  to  take  sick  and  die.  He  him- 
self was  often  exposed  to  hardships 
and  sufferings  during  the  raid,  but 
through  being  constantly  warned  of  ap- 
proaching danger  by  true  friends,  he 
escaped  arrest  and  imprisonment.  Be- 
sides his  ecclesiastical  positions.  Elder 
Bills  has  held  a  number  of  civil  offices 
among  the  people,  and  is  always  on 
hand  to  do  his  full  share  of  public  and 
charitable  work.  By  his  kind  and  af- 
fable manner  and  upright  course  in  life, 
he  has  gained  the  hearts  and  good  will 
of  the  people  among  whom  he  resides. 

BLAKE,  Thomas,  Bishop  of  South 
Jordan  Ward  XJordan  Stake),  Salt  Lake 
county,  Utah,  was  born  of  goodly  pa- 
rents  May  9,     1859,     in       the     town   of 


Bridgeport,  Dorsetshire,  England.  He 
was  baptized  April  4,  1871,  and  emi- 
grated to  Utah  in  1876,  sailing  from 
Liverpool  with  a  company  of  Saints  in 
the  steamship   "Nevada"   May  24,   1876. 


BIOGRAPHICAL    ENCYCLOPEDIA. 


585 


and  arriving  in  Salt  Lake  City,  June 
14th  following.  Soon  after  his  arrival 
in  Utah  he  engaged  in  the  sheep  busi- 
ness, which  avocation  he  has  followed 
most  of  the  time  since.  He  was  or- 
dained an  Elder  Sept.  5,  1880,  a  Seven- 
ty March  20,  1887,  and  a  president  of 
Seventy  Nov.  22,  1897.  In  1897-99  he 
filled  a  mission  to  Great  Britain,  re- 
tuning  home  Dec.  26,  1899,  in  charge  of 
a,  company  of  emigrating  Saints.  When 
the  South  Jordan  Ward  was  reorgan- 
ized, July  8,  1900,  he  was  ordained  to 
the  office  of  Bishop  and  set  apart  to 
preside  over  said  Ward  in  that  capa- 
■city. 

HANSEN,  John,  a  pioneer  settler  of 
Riverton,  Salt  Lake  county,  Utah, 
writes  the  following:  "I  was  born 
April  28,  1832,  on  the  island  of  Fyen, 
Denmark.  I  owe  the  natural  influence 
which  I  possessed  early  in  life,  to  my 
grandfather,  who  made  his  home  with 
my  parents  for  many  years.  He  was  a 
very  pious  and  good  man,  and  took 
almost  the  entire  care  of  me,  teaching 
me  about  God.  He  died  when  I  was 
four  years  old.  The  Spirit  of  God 
came  to  me  when  I  was  about  twenty- 
one  years  of  age,  and  also  the  spirit 
of  my  grandfather,  who  seemed  to  talk, 
sing  and  pray  with  me;  but  the  Spirit 
of  God,  after  remaining  with  me  about 
thre«  years,  left  me  in  the  depth  of 
great  sorrow.  After  that  I  was  like 
one  hungry  for  something  that  I  could 
not  get,  and  I  could  find  nothing  to 
satisfy  the  longing  of  my  heart.  One 
•evening,  just  as  my  brother  and  my- 
self were  retiring  for  the  night,  a  spirit 
suddenly  appeared  before  us  in  the 
form  of  a  man,  who  said,  *Why  are  you 
so  sorrowful  and  lonely?'  I  replied, 
'The  Spirit  of  God  which  was  once  with 
me  has  withdrawn,  which  has  caused 
me  great  sorrow.'  He  then  said,  'If  you 
will  cease  praying  to  the  Lord,  I  will 
givp  you  anything  you  desire,  and  any- 
thing that  a  man  could  wish  for  on 
this  earth.'  He  repeated  these  words 
three  times;  but  I  decided  to  perish 
rather  than  ascent  to  this  evil  spirit's 
proposition;  from  that  day  to  this, how- 
ever, I  have  had  to  contend  against  this 
evil  influence.  This  happened  when  I 
was  about  twenty-six  years  old.  In 
1864  I  became  a  convert  to  "Mormon- 
ism"  and  emigrated  to  Utah  the  same 
year,  locating  in  Salt  Lake  City.  In 
1867  I  went  out  into  the  country  with 


my  family  in  search  of  a  home.  On 
our  way  we  had  to  cross  a  river  by 
means  of  a  ferryboat.  My  four  year- 
old  son,  while  playing  together  with 
some  other  children  on  the  boat,  fell 
into  the  river.  A  band  of  Indians  wit- 
nessed this  scene,  and  some  of  them 
made  an  attempt  to  save  the  child,  but 
all  in  vain;  he  was  drowned.  Shortly 
after  this,  while  traveling  on  the  road, 
in  a  wagon,  my  boy  came  to  me  about 
noon-day,  telling  me  not  to  mourn  for 
him,  as  he  had  a  place  appointed  for 
him,  and  was  going  to  be  my  guardian 
angel.  That  summer  the  grasshop- 
pers destroyed  my  crops,  and  the  next 
year  the  grain  was  again  spoiled,  after 
which  I  returned  to  Salt  Lake  City, 
having  lost  everything  I  owned.  I 
have  worked  considerably  on  railroad 
contracts  since  that  time,  and  in  that 
business  I  did  well.  In  1870,  I  went 
into  the  country  again,  and  settled  in 
what  is  now  Riverton.  I  worked  on 
a  canal  till  I  again  lost  everything  I 
owned,  with  the  exception  of  a  lame 
horse.  But  after  spending  about  three 
years,  working  on  the  canal,  I  made 
a  success  of  farming,  which  avocation 
I  still  follow.  I  have  been  able  to  loan 
out  from  two  to  three  hundred  bushels 
of  grain  every  season,  for  many  years, 
to  help  many  of  my  brethren  to  get  a 
start  for  themselves.  I  do  not  wish  to 
live  for  myself  alone,  but  for  the  good 
of  my  fellow-men,  and  am  thankful  to 
God  that  I  am  able  to  do  so.  In  1880 
I  was  sent  on  a  mission  to  Denmark 
and  was  the  means  of  bringing  twelve 
persons  into  the  Church.  I  returned 
home  in  1881.  In  1897  I  went  back  to 
Denmark  to  gather  genealogy.  I  am 
now  over  69  years  old,  and  am  thank- 
ful for  the  principles  of  the  gospel, 
which  lead  into  all  truth." 

KUHRE,  William  D.,  Bishop  of 
Sandy  Ward  (Jordan  Stake),  Salt  Lake 
county,  Utah,  was  born  Jan.  21,  1863,  in 
Ephraim,  Sanpete  county,  Utah,  the 
son  of  Morten  Pedersen  Kuhre  and 
Hansine  K.  Jensen.  His  father,  who 
was  born  in  Ronne,  Bornholm,  Sept. 
15,  1838,  went  to  Greenland  on  a  whal- 
ing expedition,  at  the  age  of  fourteen, 
and  followed  a  sea-faring  life  for  sev- 
eral years.  In  1859  he  embraced  the 
Baptist  faith,  but  shortly  afterward 
he  became  acquainted  with  the  doc- 
trines of  the  Latter-day  Saints.  He, 
however,  went  to  sea  again,  but  becom- 


586 


LATTER-DAY    SAINT 


Ing-  convinced  of  the  truth  of  the  gos- 
pel, he  made  it  a  matter  of  prayer  that 
the  way  might  be  opened  up  for  him 
to  return.  He  was  unexpectedly  re- 
leased from  the  service,  and  returned  to 
Copenhagen,  and  on  April  28,  1860,  the 
day  after  he  got  ashore,  he  was  bap- 
tized by  H.  C.  Jensen,  and  confirmed 
May  6,  1860,  by  Elder  A.  Petersen.  At 
a  conference  held  in  Copenhagen,  Oct. 
6,  1860,  he  was  called  to  the  office  of  a 
Priest  and  shortly  after  set  apart  to 
labor  as  a  missionary  on  West  Sjaelland. 
He  was  ordained  an  Elder  Jan.  7,  1861, 
by  Niels  "Wilhelmsen.  Being  called  to 
do  service  in  the  navy,  he  was  re- 
leased from  his  mission  Feb.  25,  1861, 
and  ordered  to  the  naval  ship  "Holger 
Danske."  His  service,  however,  was 
of  short  duration,   for  he  was  released 


from  further  duty  a  month  later.  April 
26,  1861,  he  was  again  called  into  the 
missionary  field,  and  appointed  to  pre- 
side over  Thorslunde  branch,  on  Sjael- 
land; he  continued  his  labors  without 
interruption  until  February,  1862,  when 
he  was  released,  with  permission  to 
emigrate  to  Zion.  Feb.  1,  1862,  he 
married  Hansine  K.  Jensen,  who  was 
born  in  Copenhagen  July  27,  1838,  and 
in  whose  family  he  had  been  a  frequent 
visitor  during  his  misionary  period. 
They  sailed  from  Hamburg,  April  21, 
1862,  on  the  ship  "Athenia,"  which  ar- 
rived in  New  York  June  6th.  Thence 
the  journey  was  continued  to  Florence, 
Neb.,  from  which  point  the  trip  across 
the  plains  was  commenced,  in  an  ox- 
train    that    arrived    in    Salt    Lake    City 


in  September  following.  The  Kuhre 
family  went  to  Ephraim,  Sanpete 
county,  where  they  arrived  Oct.  4,  1862, 
and  where  their  first  child,  the  subject 
of  this  sketch,  was  born,  as  stated 
above,  Jan.  21,  1863.  When  Bro.  Peter- 
sen with  his  wife  were  working  in  the 
field  just  outside  the  town  of  Ephraim, 
Oct.  17,  1865,  having  with  them  their 
little  boy  and  a  girl  named  Eliz.  Peter- 
sen, they  were  suddenly  attacked  by 
a  band  of  Indians;  and  before  help 
could  reach  them,  the  husband  and 
wife,  and  the  girl,  were  all  killed,  while, 
strange  as  it  may  appear,  the  savages 
did  not  injure  the  child,  who,  in  the 
absence  of  any  relatives  in  America, 
was  adopted  by  John  and  Ellen  Dob- 
bie,  of  Manti.  The  Dobbie  family 
shortly  afterward  removed  to  Salt 
Lake,  taking  the  child  with  them,  and 
to  their  everlasting  credit  be  it  said, 
that  they  gave  him  all  the  care  and 
every  advantage  that  were  within  their 
reach.  Bro.  Kuhre  removed  to  Sandy 
in  1881,  and  has  resided  there  ever 
since.  In  1886  he  married  Alice  A. 
Drown,  of  West  Jordan.  They  have 
six  children.  He  has  always  been  an 
active  worker  in  Church  matters,  and 
was  selected  as  second  counselor  to 
Bishop  James  Jensen,  in  1892,  and  upon 
the  division  of  the  Salt  Lake  Stake  in 
January,  1900,  he  was  called  to  the 
ofiice  of  Bishop,  and  was  set  apart  Jan. 
21,  1900.  on  his  37th  birthday.  This  po- 
sition he  occupies  at  the  present  time. 

WIIjSON,  William  W.,  first  coun- 
selor to  Bishop  Wm.  D.  Kuhre,  of 
Sandy,  Salt  Lake  county,  Utah,  was 
born  Sept.  18,  1856,  in  Hull,  England, 
son  of  Thomas  Wilson  and  Harriet 
Benneel.  He  was  baptized  in  1864 
by  John  Harper,  emigrated  to  Utah  in 
1871,  locating  in  Salt  Lake  City,  where 
he  was  ordained  a  Deacon  in  1875.  Since 
1877  he  has  been  a  resident  of  Sandy, 
where  he  married  Annie  Ostlund,  with 
whom  he  has  l^^d  six  children.  He 
was  ordained  an  Elder  in  1883,  and  a 
Seventy  in  1884  by  Thos.  H.  Hewlett. 
Later,  he  became  one  of  the  seven 
presidents  of  the  93rd  quorum  of  Sev- 
enty, which  position  he  occupied  until 
May  14,  1892,  when  he  was  ordained  a 
High  Priest  by  Angus  M.  Cannon  and 
set  apart  as  first  counselor  to  Bishop 
James  Jensen.  He  held  this  office  till 
January,  1900,  when  he  was  chosen  as 
first  counselor  to  Bishop  Wm.  D. Kuhre. 


BIOGRAPHICAL    ENCYCLOPEDIA. 


587 


Prior  to  his  becoming  a  member  of  the 
Bishopric,  he  acted  as  president  of  the 
Deacons'  quorum,  president  of  the  Y. 
M.  M.  I.  A.,  secretary  of  the  Sunday 
school.  Ward  clerk,  etc.  In  a  secular 
capacity  he  has  served  the  people  as 
justice  of  the  peace  of  Sandy  precinct 
for  seven  years,  and  was  a  member  of 
the  first  State  legislature,  in  which 
capacity  he  was  one  of  the  chief  ad- 
vocates   of    the    eight-hour    labor    law 


ity.  He  emigrated  to  Utah  in  1873,  ar- 
riving in  Salt  Lake  City  July  24,  1873, 
and  located  in  Sandy,  Salt  Lake  county, 
where  he  has  resided  ever  since.  Here 
he  acted  as  Ward     teacher     for  eight 


passed  by  said  legislature.  At  the 
present  time  he  is  a  member  of  the 
local  school  board  and  postmaster  of 
Sandy.  Bro.  Wilson  is  also  a  prac- 
tical business  man,  having  served  as 
president  of  the  Sandy  Co-op,  president 
of  the  Sandy  Irrigation  Company,  and 
treasurer  and  director  of  the  Sandy 
Pipe  Line  Company. 

GAELTE,  Andreas  Olson,  a  promi- 
nent Elder  of  Sandy,  Salt  Lake  county, 
Utah,  was  born  July  7,  1837,  in  Hallarod 
parish,  Onsjo  herred,  Malmohus  Ian, 
Sweden.       He     was     baptized     Feb.   2, 

1868,  in  Landskrona,  Sweden,  by  B.  P. 
Textorius,  and  confirmed  the  same  day 
by  N.  B.  Walter,  was  ordained  a  Dea- 
con, May  17,  1868,  by  P.  Rundquist;  or- 
dained a  Priest  Sept.  6,  1868,  by  P. 
Rundquist;  labored  as  a  district  presi- 
dent;   was   ordained    an   Elder   June   6, 

1869,  by  John  Hagman;  was  appointed 
president  of  the  Helsingborg  branch, 
Scona  conference,  in  1870,  and  subse- 
quently labored  three  years  as  a  local 
missionary  in  Christianstad  and  vicin- 


years,  being  set  apart  to  that  position 
Oct.  25,  1874.  In  1882,  when  Sandy 
branch  was  organized  as  a  Ward,  El- 
der Gaelte  was  ordained  a  High  Priest 
and  set  apart  as  second  counselor  to 
Bishop  Ezekiel  Holman  by  Angus  M. 
Cannon,  which  position  he  occupied 
until  the  Bishopric  was  changed.  Since 
1882  he  has  officiated,  in  nearly  all  the 
baptisms  that  has  taken  place  in  Sandy 
Ward. 

LARSON,  Jonn  A.,  a  member  of  the 
High  Council  of  the  Jordan  ptaKe,  and 
a  prominent  Elder  of  Sandy,  Salt  Lake 
county,  Utah,  was  born  Oct.  8,  1854,  in 
Slemminge,  Skurup  parish,  Malmohus 
Ian,  Sweden.  Becoming  a  convert  to 
"Mormonism,"  he  was  baptized  Dec.  18, 
1876,  in  Malmo,  Sweden,  by  Nils  Bengt- 
son.  He  emigrated  to  Utah  in  1877, 
and  located  in  Sandy,  where  he  still 
resides.  In  1879  he  was  ordained  an 
Elder,  and  he  was  ordained  a  Seventy 
June  5,  1884,  by  Lauritz  Smith.  He  mar- 
ried Hilda  H.  H.  Ostlund,  Jan.  1,  1880, 
daughter  of  Erick  E.  and  Hannah  Ost- 
lund. In  January,  1900,  when  the  Jor- 
dan Stake  was  organized,  he  was  or- 
dained a  High  Priest  and  set  apart  as 
a  member  of  the  High  Council  by  Apos- 
tle Anthon  H.  Lund.  On  the  same  oc- 
casion his  wife  was  chosen  and  set 
apart  as  first  counselor  in  the  Stake 
Relief  Society  organization. 


588 


LATTER-DAY    SAINT 


ERICKSON.  John  a  prominent  El- 
der of  Sandy,  Salt  Lake  county,  Utah, 
wus  born  Aup.  26.  1854,  in  Sweden,  son 
of  Erirk  Madson  and  Catharine  Pear- 
son. He  was  baptized  Aug.  24,  1878, 
by  Elder  C.  P.  Larson,  at  Upsala,  Swe- 
den: emigrated  to  Utah  in  July,  1880, 
locatini;  in  Salina,  Sevier  county,  Utah, 
where  he  resided  till  1882,  when  he 
moved  to  Sandy,  where  he  still  resides. 
He  was  ordained  a  Priest  in  1881  by 
I^ishop  Jens  Jensen  in  Salina;  ordained 
an  Elder  March  30,  1884,  by  Jens  Jen- 
sen, and  ordained  a  Seventy  June  1, 
1SS4.  by  Elder  William  W.  Tay- 
lor, at  Sandy.  Elder  Erickson  has  al- 
ways been  a  zealous  and  faithful  work- 
er in  the  Church,  having  taken  an  ac- 
tive part  as  a  Ward  teacher  and  acting 
as  president  of  the  Scandinavian  meet- 
ings in  Sandy.  He  married  Miss  Anna 
Amelia  Johnson,  Dec.  6,  1879,  the  issue 
of  which  union  is  nine  children,  five  of 
whom  are  living.  Elder  Erickson  has 
done  much  to  build  up  the  country, 
being  a   prosperous   farmer. 

PKARSON,  Henry,  a  High  Coun- 
cilor in  the  Jordan  Stake  of  Zion,  and 
a  resident  of  Sandy,  Salt  Lake  county, 
Utah,  was  born  May  17,  1854,  in  Stora 
Kopinge,  Malmohus  Ian,  Sweden.  He 
was  baptized  Nov.  5,  1873,  in  Malmo: 
called  into  the  ministry  Aug.  25,  1875, 
and  labored  in  the  Sfona  conference; 
baptized  25  souls;  emigrated  to  Utah 
in  1878,  and  located  at  Sandy,  Salt  Lake 
county:  ordained  a  Seventy  Feb.  20, 
1887;  filled  a  mission  to  the  United 
States  and  Sweden  in  1896-98,  laboring 
first  about  eight  months  in  the  city  of 
Chicago,  111.,  and  on  his  arrival  In 
Sweden  was  appointed  traveling  Elder 
in  the  Gothenburg  conference;  from 
March, 1897, to  April, 1898, he  presided  over 
that  conference;  was  ordained  a  High 
Priest  and  set  apart  as  a  High  Coun- 
cilor in  the  Jordan  Stake  of  Zion,  Jan. 
21,  1900,  by  Apostle  Francis  M.  Lyman. 
Elder  Pearson  has  acted  as  an  officer 
in  the  Y.  M.  M.  I.  A.,  a  teacher  in  the 
Sunday  school,  president  of  the  Scan- 
dinavian meetings  in  Sandy,  and  as  a 
home  missionary  in  the  SaVt  Lake  and 
Jordan  Stakes  of  Zion.  In  a  financial 
point  of  view  he  is  a  thrifty  citizen, 
and  is  at  present  carrying  on  a  real 
estate  business. 

BUKGON,  Willard  Charles.  Bish- 
op of  Union  Ward,  Jordan  Stake,   is  a 


son  of  James  Burgon  and  Matilda 
Koote,  and  was  born  Nov.  5,  1853,  at 
Cosijort,  Hampshire,  England.  He  was 
baptized  when  about  eight  years  old, 
emigrated  to  Utah  in  1872,  and  located 
temporarily  in  Salt  Lake  City;  after- 
wards he  sought  and  obtained  employ- 
ment in  the  mining  camp  of  Pioche, 
Nev.,  in  order  to  earn  means  for  emi- 
grating his  parents  to  Zion.  As  a 
member  of  a  surveying  party,  he  visit- 
ed Arizona.  From  1873  to  1876  he  labored 
as  a  stonecutter  on  the  Temple  block 
in  Salt  Lake  City,  and  also  learned  the 
trade  of  a  stone  and  brick  ma.son.  He 
was  ordained  an  Elder  by  Patriarch 
Wm.  J.  Smith  in  September,  1874,  and 
in  1875  he  married  Emma  Crouch,  who 
like  himself,  was  a  native  of  England. 


In  the  fall  of  1876  he  located  with  his 
wife  and  one  child  in  Union,  where  he 
has  resided  ever  since.  Here  he  labored 
as  a  Ward  teacher  and  as  a  counselor 
in  the  presidency  of  the  15th  quorum 
of  Elders.  He  was  ordained  a  Seventy 
and  became  identified  with  the  93rd 
quorum  of  Seventy.  As  a  brick  mason 
he  built  the  Union  meeting  house,  and 
finished  a  meeting  house  at  Granite. 
In  1895-97  he  filled  a  mission  to  Great 
Britain,  laboring  first  as  a  traveling 
Elder  in  the  Birmingham  conference 
and  later  as  president  of  the  Chelten- 
ham conference.  He  baptized  eleven 
persons  and  re-opened  the  Channel  Is- 
lands mission.  After  his  return  home, 
he  was  appointed  to  labor  as  a  home 
missionary  in  the  Salt  Lake  Stake  of 
Zion.       Subsequently,  he  was  called  o» 


BIOGRAPHICAL    ENCYCLOPEDIA. 


589 


a  special  mission  to  Cache  valley  in  the 
interest  of  Y.  M.  M.  I.  A.  work.  In 
this  labor  he  was  imminently  success- 
ful and  gained  a  host  of  friends.  Fol- 
lowing his  wonted  avocation,  he  built 
meeting  ■  houses  in  Sandy  and  River- 
ton,  and  a  school  house  in  Draper.  At 
the  organization  of  the  Jordan  Stake 
of  Zion,  Jan.  21,  1900,  he  was  chosen 
and  ordained  a  High  Priest  and  Bishop 
and  set  apart  to  preside  over  the  Union 
Ward  by  Apostle  Francis  M.  Lyman; 
in  this  office  he  succeeded  Bishop 
Ishmael  Phillips.  Bishop  Burgon  is  a 
diligent  Temple  worker,  living  attend- 
ed to  ordinances  for  his  dead  ancestors 
dating  back  as  far  as  1600.  In  a  secular 
capacity  he  has  held  several  offices, 
among  which  that  of  justice  of  the 
peace  in  Union  precinct.  He  is  a  man 
with  a  gentle  and  kind  disposition,  and 
lives  in  the  hearts  of  the  people  over 
whom  he  presides. 

SMART,  Thomas  Henry,  senior 
president  of  the  95th  quorum  of  Seven- 
ty, and  a.  resident  of  Union,  Salt  Lake 
county,  Utah,  is  the  son  of  Thomas 
Smart  and  Elizabeth  Bayliss,  and  was 


born  Nov.  10,  1829,  in  Leicester,  Leices- 
tershire, England.  He  was  baptized 
into  the  Church  July  16,  1843;  ordained 
an  Elder  Sept.  17,  1848,  and  later  sent 
out  as  a  local  missionary  to  preach  the 
gospel.  July  8,  1852,  he  married  Sarah 
Ann  Morgan,  and  the  following  year 
(1853)  they  emigrated  to  Utah,  crossing 
the  ocean  on  the  sailing  vessel  "Ellen 
Maria,"    and    arriving     in      the    Valley 


Sept.  20,  1853.  During  the  Johnston 
army  affair  in  1857-58  Bro.  Smart  served 
under  Col.  John  R.  Winder,  and  Orrin 
P.  Rockwell,  and  proved  himself  to  be 
a  brave  soldier.  He  was  ordained  a 
Seventy  March  11,  1866,  by  Richard 
Maxfield  and  .became  identified  with 
the  73rd  quorum.  His  wife  Sarah  hav- 
ing died,  he  married  Mary  A.  R.  Cun- 
ningham Jan.  18,  1869.  In  1877,  soon 
after  the  organization  of  Union  Ward, 
Salt  Lake  county,  he  was  called  to  pre- 
side temporarily  over  the  Sandy  branch 
(then  a  part  of  Union  Ward)  during 
the  absence  of  President  John  W. 
Sharp  on  a  mission.  Sept.  24,  1883,  he 
was  set  apart  as  a  president  in  the 
73rd  quorum  of  Seventy,  and  later  he 
became  senior  president  of  said  quo- 
rum. In  1887  he  served  six  months  in 
the  Utah  penitentiary  for  conscience 
sake.  Elder  Smart  has  labored  faith- 
fully twenty-seven  years  as  a  member 
of  the  Ward  choir  and  as  a  Ward 
Teacher.  Jan.  5,  1901,  he  was  ordained 
a  High  Priest  by  Orrin  P.  Miller.  Bro. 
Smart  is  a  member  of  that  school  of 
sturdy  pioneers  who  found  no  obstacle 
too  great  to  overcome  if  it  stood  in  the 
way  of  the  progress  of  their  communi- 
ty. 

TURNER,  James,  a  veteran  Elder 
of  West  Jordan  Ward,  Salt  Lake  coun- 
ty, Utah,  is  the  son  of  James  Turner 
and  Mary  Stedman,  and  was  born 
March  28,  1819,  in  Lenham,  county  of 
Kent,  England.  He  married  Mary 
Ann  Finch,  July  17,  1840,  and  later  he 
moved  to  London,  where  he  embraced 
the  gospel,  being  baptized  Feb.  5,  1850, 
by  John  Parson,  and  became  a  member 
of  the  Kent  Road  branch,  London.  Soon 
afterwards  he  was  ordained  a  Deacon, 
and  sent  as  a  missionary  to  Lenham, 
where  he  succeeded  in  raising  up  a 
branch  of  the  Church  in  the  latter  part 
of  1851.  He  was  ordained  a  Priest  Jan. 
7,  1852,  and  an  Elder  Nov.  10,  1852.  Un- 
der his  presidency  the  Lenham  branch 
grew  rapidly  in  membership,  though 
considerable  persecution  and  opposition 
were  encountered;  when  he  emigrated 
to  Zion  in  1854,  there  were  about  thirty 
faithful  Saints  in  that  branch,  which 
belonged  to  Kent  conference.  He  ar- 
rived in  Salt  Lake  City,  Oct.  5,  1854, 
and  located  temporarily  in  Little  Cot- 
tonwood Ward,  renting  a  farm  of 
Bishop  Silas  Richards;  but  the  grass- 
hoppers   destroyed    the    crop    that    he 


590 


LATTER-DAY    SAINT 


tried  to  raise  In  1855.  That  year  he 
located  at  West  Jordan,  which  now  be- 
came his  permanent  home.  He  was 
ordained  a  Seventy  Feb.  21,  1857,  and 
later  that  same  year  he  was  sent  into 
the  mountains  in  a  military  capacity 
to  prevent  Johnston's  army  from  en- 
tering the  Valley.  He  spent  most  of 
the  winter  of  1857-58  on  that  expedition 
and  took  part  in  the  move  in  the  spring 
of  1858.  Jan.  7.  1866,  he  was  ordained 
a  High  Priest  and  set  apart  to  act  as 
first  counselor  to  Bishop  Archibald 
Gardner  in  the  West  Jordan  Ward.  He 


occupied  that  position  for  many  years. 
In  1887  he  went  to  Mexico  with  other 
brethren  on  a  short  trip,  and  on  re- 
turning home  he  was  arrested  on  the 
charge  of  unlawful  cohabitation  and 
sentenced  to  fifty  days'  imprisonment 
in  the  Utah  penitentiary  for  living  with 
his  wives.  The  time  of  his  incarcera- 
tion was  from  Sept.  18,  1888,  to  Nov.  6, 
1888.  Elder  Turner  is  one  of  those  El- 
ders who  have  borne  the  burden  of  the 
day  faithfully  and  true,  and  has  never 
swerved  from  the  path  of  duty  jind 
rectitude. 

DIMOXD,        William       Samuel,       a 

High  Councilor  in  the  Jordan  Stake  of 
Zion,  and  a  resident  of  West  Jordan, 
Salt  Lake  county,  Utah,  was  bom  Sept. 
6,  1856,  at  Crewkerne,  Somersetshire, 
England,  son  of  Henry  Dimond  and 
Elizabeth  Jane  Webber.  He  was  bap- 
tized by  Albert  Dewey  in  Crewkerne, 
in  1871,  ordained  a  Teacher  and  a 
Priest   in    the   Crewkerne    branch     and 


emigrated  'o  Utah  in  1874,  crossing  the 
Atlantic  m  the  steamship  "Wyoming." 
The  next  year  (1875)  he  located  in 
West  Jordan  Ward,  Salt  Lake  county, 
where  he  was  ordained  an  Elder  Nov. 
21,  1880,  by  John  A.  Egbert;  he  married 
Emma  M.  Newbold  March  10,  1881.  Six 
years  later  (May  10,  1887)  his  wife  with 
her  babe,  was  accidentally  drowned  in 
the  Provo  river,  between  Woodland 
and  Heber  City.  Elder  Dimond  suc- 
ceeded in  saving  his  three  other  chil- 
dren. Aug.  7,  1887,  he  was  ordained  a 
Seventy  by  James  F.  Turner,  and  be- 
came a  member  of  the  33rd  quorum  of 
Seventy.  He  married  Amelia  M.  Page, 
in  the  Logan  Temple,  Nov.  27,  1889.  In 
1895-97  he  filled  a  mission  to  New  Zea- 
land, where  he  labored  principally 
among  the  whites  in  the  Manawatu  dis- 
trict. After  his  return  home,  he  was 
chosen  and  set  apart  as  superintendent 
of  the  West  Jordan  Sabbath  school,  and 
when  the  Jordan  Stake  of  Zion  was  or- 
ganized, Jan.  21,  1900,  he  was  ordained 
a  High  Priest  by  Apostle  Anthon  H. 
Lund  and  set  apart  to  act  as  a  High 
Councilor  in  said  Stake. 

BATEMAN,  Samuel,  senior  presi- 
dent of  the  33rd  quorum  of  Seventy, 
is  the  son  of  Thomas  Bateman  and 
Mary  Street,  and  was  born  July  1,  1832, 
at  Manchester,  England.  His  father 
was  a  brickmaker  and  a  bricklayer  in 
good  circumstances,  when  the  gospel 
found  him.  He  embraced  the  same 
about  1838,  emigrated  with  his  family 
to  America  about  1839,  and  located  at 
Nauvoo,  111.  In  1841,  Samuel  witnessed 
the  laying  of  the  corner  stones  of  the 
Nauvoo  Temple  and  heard  the  Prophet 
Joseph  Smith  preach.  In  1845  he  saw 
the  capstone  laid  and  did  some  work 
in  and  about  the  Temple  and  on  the 
Nauvoo  brick  yard.  On  the  occasion 
of  the  alarm  of  fire  in  the  Temple  be- 
ing given,  he  was  one  of  the  first  on 
the  Temple  roof  to  help  put  it  out. 
After  working  hard  on  the  frontiers  for 
several  years,  the  family  started  for 
the  Rocky  Mountains  in  the  spring  of 
1849.  At  Council  Bluffs  they  turned 
out  two  yoke  of  cattle  to  Bro.  Geo.  A. 
Smith,  in  consequence  of  which  they 
were  delayed  another  year;  but  in  the 
spring  of  1850,  they  made  another  start 
and  in  the  fall  of  that  year  they  arrived 
in  Salt  Lake  City.  In  December,  1850, 
Samuel  volunteered  to  go  to  Iron  coun- 
ty  on   a   mission,   and    in   1853   he    was 


BIOGRAPHICAL    ENCYCLOPEDIA 


591 


placed  in  charge  of  the  boys  chosen  to 
stand  guard  against  the  Indians  who 
were  then  on  the  war  path.  In  1854 
he  married  Marinda  Allen,  daughter 
of  Daniel  R.  Allen  and  Eliza  Marten. 
In  September,  1857,  a  messenger  report- 
ed the  approach  of  Johnston's  army, 
and  Bro.  Samuel  was  called  by  Major 
Daniel  R.  Allen  to  raise  a  platoon  of 
cavalry.  Leaving  Salt  Lake  City  Sun- 
day, Sept.  27,  1857,  they  arrived  at  Fort 
Bridger  on  the  30th.  Here  a  company 
of  fifty  men  were  organized  into  pla- 
toons of  ten  men  each  to  go  out  and 
meet  the  army.  Samuel  was  appoint- 
ed captain  of  the  first  platoon,  with 
"Wm.  Pickard  as  his  adjutant;  Lot 
Smith  was  appointed  captain  over  all 
the  platoons,  with  Horton  D.  Haight 
as  his  adjutant.  This  expedition  went 
to  Black's  Fork,  where  they  met  the 
enemies'  freight  train,  which  they  com- 
pelled to  turn  back.  From  this  point 
a  part  of  the  company  proceeded  to 
the  Big  Sandy.  Scouts,  who  were  sent 
out,  reported  on  their  return  that  a 
train  of  some  twenty-five  wagons  was 
nearing  Green  river.  The  expedition 
decided  to  return  and  burn  these  wag- 
ons, and  a  company  of  twenty-six 
men  was  sent  to  intercept  them.  On 
meeting  the  train  the  boys  found  fifty- 
one  wagons.  They  took  the  teamsters, 
numbering  over  sixty  men,  prisoners, 
and,  after  allowing  them  to  take  their 
personal  clothing  out,  they  set  fire  to 
the  wagons;  the  expedition  then  re- 
turned to  Big  Sandy.  After  riding 
up  Big  Sandy  for  a  short  distance, they 
discoveerd  another  train  of  twenty- 
five  wagons,  two  of  which  the  enemy 
was  permitted  to  keep;  the  others 
were  burned.  The  expedition  en- 
camped a  short  distance  from  the  road, 
and  while  stopping  here,  Orson  P.  Ar- 
nold was  shot  through  the  thigh  by  the 
accidental  discharge  of  a  gun;  the  con- 
tents burned  Philo  Dibble's  face,  passed 
through  the  thigh  of  Orson  and  glazed 
the  back  of  Samuel's  head,  making  two 
holes  in  his  hat.  The  Elders  g-athered 
around  Orson  and  administered  to  him. 
Just  as  the  administration  was  over, 
a  scout  came  running  into  camp,  in- 
forming them  that  the  enemy  would 
be  upon  them  immediately.  Orson 
begged  the  boys  to  leave  him  and  pre- 
pare to  defend  themselves,  "for,"  said 
he,  "I  shall  be  gone  before  they  get 
here."  But  the  alarm  proved  false 
and  they  did  all  in  their  power  to  make 
their    wounded     comrade     comfortable 


until  further  aid  could  be  obtained. 
Traveling  on  to  Green  river,  the  ex- 
pedition was  reinforced  by  a  number  of 
other  men,  and  Bro.  Arnold  was  sent 
on  to  his  friends  in  the  Valley.  From 
Green  river  the  expedition  went  to  the 
Big  Sandy,  and  from  there  to  the  Mud- 
dy. On  arriving  at  Fort  Bridger  the 
boys  found  that  the  place  had  been 
burned,  and  being  without  provisions, 
they  removed  to  the  island  field  and  re- 
lieved their  hunger  by  eating  potatoes 
and  turnips.  Here  Samuel  had  the 
privilege  of  riding  Gen.  Johnston's 
mule  that  had  been  stampeded  with  the 
army  cattle.  Late  in  1857  some  of 
the  most  destitute  brethren  in  camp 
were  called  to  go  home.  By  the  ad- 
vice of  the  captain  and  friends  Samuel 
very  reluctantly  became  one  of  them. 
After  arriving  in  the  Vallely  safe  and 
well,  he  was  appointed,  together  with 
others,  to  watch  the  enemy  in  its 
movements,  while  the  Saints  prepared 
to  go  south.  In  the  spring  of  1861  he 
accompanied  Pres.  Brigham  Young  and 
party  on  a  visit  to  the  settlements  in 
southern  Utah,  on  which  tour  he  trav- 
eled about  twelve  hundred  miles.  In 
1868  he  attended  the  "School  of  the 
Prophets."  In  1870  he  was  called  to 
accompany  Pres.  Brigham  Young  on  a 
trip  north.  .  In  1871  he  married  Har- 
riet Egbert,  daughter  of  Samuel  Eg- 
bert and  Maria  Beckstead.  He  was 
with  Pres.  John  Taylor  during  the  anti- 
polygamy  raid,  and  was  with  him  also 
at  the  time  of  his  death  in  July,  1887; 
he  was  likewise  a  guard  around  Pres. 
Wilford  Woodruff  a  part  of  the  time. 
In  1888-89  he  served  a  term  of  eighty- 
five  days  in  the  Utah  penitentiary,  and 
paid  a  fine  of  $75,  for  obeying  the  law  of 
plural  marriage.  Bro.  Samuel  has 
spent  many  years  in  the  interest  of  the 
Church,  and  public  necessity  has  forced 
him,  during  his  life,  to  become  a  "jack 
of  all  trades."  Thus  he  has  been  a 
brick  and  adobe-maker,  a  mason,  a 
miller  in  a  saw  and  grist  mill;  a  farmer 
and  canyon-man,  a  bee  and  stockrais- 
er,  a  tax  collector  and  road  supervisor, 
a  carpenter  and  blacksmith,  an  estray 
poundkeeper,  a  trustee,  a  machinist,  a 
caller  (or  prompter)  in  dances,  a  con-, 
stable,  a  soldier,  a  watermaster,  super- 
intendent of  the  first  organized  Sun- 
day school  in  the  West  Jordan  Ward, 
etc.  At  present  he  is  senior  president 
of  the  33rd  quorum  of  Seventy,  having 
been  ordained  a  Seventy  in  an  early 
day  by  Royal  Barney. 


592 


LATTER-DAY    SAINT 


BATEfVIAN,  Kdwnr«l  A.,  an  alternate 
nu'inber  of  the  High  Council  in  the 
Jonlan  Stake  of  Zion  and  a  prominent 
Elder  in  East  Jordan.  Salt  Lake  coun- 
ty. L'tah.  is  the  son  of  Samuel  Bate- 
man  and  Marinda  Allen,  and  was 
born  Jan.  29.  1S65.  at  West  Jordan. 
Utah.  He  was  blessed  by  Bishop 
Archibald  Gardner  March  19.  1865;  bap- 
tized by  his  father.  Samuel  Bateman 
June  li),  1873.  and  confirmed  by  John 
T.  Hill.  At  the  age  of  thirteeen  years 
he  was  ordained  a  Deacon,  later  be- 
cominff  president  of  the  quorum,  and 
he  was  ordained  an  Elder  by  Robert 
Walters.  Feb.  21.  1886.  Oct.  15,  1886.  he 
married  Frances  Alice  Glover,  in  the 
Logan  Temple.  In  his  services  for  the 
public  and  the  Church  he  has  acted  as 
trustee  of  the  district  school  for  nine 
years,  and  treasui^r  of  the  school 
board;  was  estray  poundkeeper  for 
about  five  years;  has  acted  as  secretary 
and  treasurer  of  the  West  Jordan 
Manufacturing  and  Mercantile  Com- 
pany since  July.  1898,  and  is  still  hold- 
ing that  office;  was  ordained  a  Seven- 
ty by  Enoch  B.  Tripp,  March  20,  1887, 
and  ordained  a  High  Priest  and  set 
apart  as  an  alternate  High  Councilor  in 
the  Jordan  Stake  of  Zion,  by  Apostle 
Anthon  H.  Lund,  Jan.  21,  1900.  He 
was  appointed  assistant  superintendent 
of  the  East  Jordan  Sunday  school.  June 
5,  1898,  and  chosen  as  superintendent  of 
said  school  Oct.  26,  1899.  This  latter 
office  he  still  holds. 

RUNDQUIST,      Peter      Trulson,     a 

president  in  the  33rd  quorum  of  Sev- 
enty, was  born  Dec.  14,  1844,  in  Kjells 
Nobbelof  parish,  Onsjo  herred,  Malmo- 
hus  Ian,  Sweden,  son  of  Truls  Mattson 
and  Gunilla  Pehrson  and  the  ninth  of 
ten  children.  Becoming  a  convert  to 
"Mormonism."  he  was  baptized  and 
confirmed  by  Martin  Lundwall  July  30. 
1864.  and  soon  afterwards  he  was  or- 
dained a  Teacher.  After  serving  his 
country  as  a  .«oldier  he  was  ordained 
an  Elder  and  appointed  to  labor  as  a 
missionary  in  the  Scona  conference. 
During  the  six  years  spent  by  him  in 
the  missionary  field  he  presided  suc- 
cessively over  the  Helsingborg  branch, 
the  district  comprising  the  Helsingborg 
and  Kullaberg  branches,  a  district 
<  ontaining  the  Trelleborg  and  Lyngby 
branches,  a  district  comprising  the 
Ysiad  and  Cimbrishamn  branches,  a 
district    consisting    of    the  Landskrona 


and  Svalof  branches,  and  a  district 
comprising  the  Lund  and  Gardstanga 
branches,  after  which  he  labored  for 
nine  months  as  a  traveling  Elder  in 
the  whole  conference.  He  emigrated 
to  Utah  in  1871  ajid  married  Hannah 
Nilson  July  29.  1872.  His  wife  died 
Jan.  21.  1876.  leaving  him  with  two 
children,  and  he  married  Bengta  John- 
son April  27,  1877.  He  was  ordained 
a  Seventy  March  20.  1887  (becoming 
identified  with  the  33rd  quorum)  and 
filled  a  mission  to  Sweden  in  1891-94. 
During  this  mission  he  labored  four 
months  in  the  Helsingborg  branch, pre- 
sided a  year  over  the  Carlskrona 
branch  and  acted  as  president  of  the 
Scona  conference  the  remainder  of  the 
time.  Since  Feb.  9,  1896,  he  has  acted 
as  a  president  in  the  33rd  quorum  of 
Seventy,  and  has  labored  for  many 
years  as  a  Ward  teacher.  From  1871 
to  1881  Elder  Rundquist  resided  in  Salt 
Lake  City,  and  since  the  latter  date 
he  has  been  a  resident  of  West  Jordan, 
Salt  Lake  county;  farming  is  his  prin- 
cipal  occupation. 

DIMOND,  Robert  Kdwin,  a  presi- 
dent in  the  33rd  quorum  of  Seventy,  is 
the  son  of  Henry  Dimond  and  Eliza- 
beth Jane  Webber,  and  was  born  April 


•JO,  1865,  in  Crewkerne,  Somersetshire, 
England.  He  was  baptized  Sept.  20, 
1880,  by  Elder  John  Lee  Jones,  emigrat- 
ed to  Utah  in  1880,  and  located  at  once 
in  West  Jordan,  Salt  Lake  county, 
which    has    been    his   home   ever   since. 


BIOGRAPHICAL    ENCYCLOPEDIA. 


593 


He  was  ordained  a  Teacher  in  1887;  or- 
dained an  Elder  Nov.  13,  1887;  married 
Mary  Elizabeth  Bateman  Nov.  24,  1887, 
and  was  ordained  a  Seventy  Dec.  22, 
1889.  In  1891-94  he  filled  a  successful 
mission  to  Samoa.  He  acted  as  sec- 
ond assistant  superintendent  of  the 
West  Jordan  Sunday  school  from  1895 
to  1898;  as  first  assistant  superinten- 
dent of  said  school  from  1898  to  1899, and 
was  set  apart  as  a  president  in  the  33rd 
quorum  of  Seventy  Feb.  9,  1896.  In  1900, 
accompanied  by  his  wife  and  his  broth- 
er, Walter  A.  Dimond,  he  visited  rela- 
tives and  friends  in  England  for  the 
purpose  of  obtaining  genealogy.  He 
also  paid  a  visit  to  the  Jersey  Islands 
and  the  Paris  exposition.  Elder  Di- 
mond is  by  occupation  a  sheep-raiser 
and  farmer. 

BECKSTEAD,  Henry  Byram,  seni- 
or president  of  the  95th  quorum  of  Sev- 
enty, is  the  son  of  Henry  Beckstead 
and  Bird  Bybee,  and  was  born  June  28, 
1850,  at  Farmington,  Davis  county, 
Utah.  In  1861,  together  with  his  pa- 
rents, he  moved  to  South  Jordan,  Salt 
Lake  county,  and  he  was  baptized  by 
his  father,  Henry  Beckstead,  Oct.  20, 
1861.  He  joined  the  Territorial  militia 
in  1866  and  became  the  bugler  in  Sam- 
uel Bateman's  command.  When  the 
first  Sunday  school  was  organized  in 
South  Jordan,  in  1866,  Henry  enrolled 
himself  as  a  member  of  the  school,  of 
which  he  later  became  the  superinten- 
dent. June  4,  1876,  he  was  ordained  a 
Seventy  by  Archibald  Hill.  During  1882 
and  1883  he  filled  a  mission  to  the 
Southern  States,  laboring  mostly  in 
Alabama,  where  he  had  many  exciting 
experiences  with  mobs  and  other  ene- 
mies of  the  truth;  but  by  the  help  of 
the  Lord  he  succeeded,  every  time,  in 
escaping  any  serious  injury  from 
wicked  hands.  Elder  Beckstead  was 
released  earlier  than  usual  on  account 
of  a  severe  spell  of  chills  and  fever. 
At  the  organization  of  the  95th  quorum 
and  in  1897  he  became  the  senior  pres- 
member  of  the  council  of  that  quorum, 
and  in  1897,  he  became  the  senior  pres- 
ident of  the  same.  Elder  Beckstead 
has  labored  assiduously  in  many  dif- 
ferent branches  of  Church  work,  and  is 
a  constant  and  faithful  Latter-day 
Saint.  He  has  contributed  a  liberal 
share  toward  the  building  up  of  the 
western  country,   having  taken  an   ac- 


tive interest  in  all  enterprises  intended 
for  public  benefit. 

WARBURTON, Joseph,  fourth  Bish- 
op of  the  First  Ward,  Salt  Lake  City, 
is  the  son  of  James  and  Sarah  War- 
burton,  and  was  born  Sept.  21,  1831,  at 
Radcliffe,  Lancashire,  England.  In 
early  life  he  adopted  the  religion  of  the 
Swedenborgians,    which    enjoins      total 


abstenance  from  intoxicating  drink, 
and  strict  vegetarianism.  His  religious 
views  underwent  a  revolution  in  the 
summer  of  1847,  when  he  attended  a 
camp  meeting  of  the  Latter-day  Saints, 
and  for  the  first  time  heard  the  pure 
gospel  from  the  lips  of  an  Elder.  From 
that  time  he  was  convinced  of  the  di- 
vine character  of  "Mormonism."  He 
was,  for  a  man  of  his  active  tempera- 
ment, somewhat  slow  to  practically 
carry  out  his  convictions  in  this  matter, 
for  although  he  continued  to  attend  the 
meetings  of  the  Saints  twice  a  week, 
it  was  not  till  Oct.  26,  1851,  that  he 
identified  himself  with  the  Church,  be- 
ing admitted  to  baptism  on  that  date. 
In  the  spring  of  1851,  he  was  ordained 
a  Teacher,  and  labored  faithfully  in 
that  calling  until  Dec.  29th  of  the  same 
year,  when  he  was  ordained  an  Elder. 
In  1853,  the  Radcliffe  branch  was  di- 
vided into  two  districts,  and  Joseph 
was  appointed  to  take  charge  of  dis- 
trict number  one.  In  the  same  year 
he  was  appointed  second  counselor  to 
the  president  of  the  Radcliffe  branch, 
and    officiated    In    that    capacity    about 


Vol.  1,  No.  38. 


Aug.  21,  1901. 


5U4 


LATTER-DAY    SAINT 


nine  months.  In  the  meantime  the 
branch  president  emigrated  to  Utah, 
and  Brother  V/arburton  was  appointed 
to  succeed  him.  He  was  released 
from  the  presidency  of  the  branch  in 
January.  1855,  and  appointed  to  preside 
over  the  Pendlebury  branch.  This 
change  was  no  sinecure,  as  his  new 
field  was  in  an  embarrassed  condition, 
financialy  and  otherwise.  With  his 
characteristic  energy,  however,  he  soon 
had  it  in  a  satisfactory  and  compara- 
tively flourishing  condition.  June  4, 
1854, Brother  Warburton  married  Emma 
Wathmough,  by  whom  ten  children 
have  been  born  to  him,  namely  six  sons 
and  four  daughters,  eight  of  whom  are 
now  living.  From  the  time  that  Brother 
Warburton  was  ordained  an  Elder  to 
the  present,  some  of  the  gifts  of  the 
gospel  have  been  conspicuously  mani- 
fested through  him,  more  especially  the 
power  to  heal  the  sick  by  the  laying 
on  of  hands  and  prayer  of  faith.  Many 
instances  might  be  cited  of  manifesta- 
tions of  the  power  of  God  in  his  ad- 
ministrations to  the  afflicted,  both  as 
having  occurred  in  his  native  land  and 
this.  Once  in  Radcliffe,  when  on  his 
way  to  fill  an  appointment,  the  voice 
of  the  Spirit  said  to  him:  "You  must 
go  to  James  Crossley's."  He  resisted 
this  admonition  for  some  time,  but  as 
it  was  thrice  repeated,  he  yielded  and 
proceeded  to  the  house  of  Brother 
Crossley,  whose  place  of  work  was  at 
a  factory,  13  miles  distant  from  his 
home.  When  he  arrived,  he  found 
that  he  had  been  brought  home  dan- 
gerously ill,  and  Mrs.  Crossley  was  in 
great  distress  on  account  of  his  pre- 
carious condition.  The  patient  was 
administered  to,  and  as  soon  as  the 
ordinance  was  performed, Brother  War- 
burton said,  "How  do  you  feel  now, 
James?"  "I'm  all  right,"  was  the 
cheerful  response,  and  he  immediately 
arose.  All  who  were  present  knelt 
down  and  thanked  God  for  His  good- 
ness in  restoring  the  sick  man.  Brother 
Crossley  went  down  stairs  and  asked 
his  wife  to  get  him  some  food,  and  the 
wife,  whose  heait  was  full,  threw  her 
arms  about  the  neck  of  her  husband 
and  exclaimed,  "God  bless  thee,  Jim- 
my, lad,  I  will,"  and  both  wept  for 
joy,  the  scene  being  affecting  in  the 
extreme.  Another  case  was  that  of  a 
young  woman  named  Anna  Johnson, 
who  was  convinced  of  the  truth  of  the 
gospel  and  gave  in  her  name  for  bap- 


tism. Before  the  time  for  the  ad- 
ministration of  that  ordinance  had  ar- 
rived, she  was  taken  violently  ill. 
Brother  Warburton  anointed  and 
prayed  over  her,  the  result  being  that 
she  was  healed  instantaneously,  all  the 
violent  symptoms  vanishing,  but  leav- 
ing her  in  an  enfeebled  condition. 
Brother  Warburton  remarked  that  it 
was  but  a  trick  of  the  devil;  he  had, 
however,  overshot  the  mark.  The  next 
night,  instead  of  one  being  baptized, 
four  came  forward  and  were  added  to 
the  Church  by  the  gospel  door.  An- 
other instance  that  occurred  in  the 
First  Ward  some  time  ago  may  be 
named.  A  boy  named  Edward  Blair 
was  in  a  dangerous  condition  from 
diphtheria.  He  was  administered  to 
by  Brother  Warburton,  to  whom  the 
lad's  mother  said,  "What  do  you  think 
about  him.  Bishop?"  "In  three  days 
he  will  be  out  at  play,"  was  the  reply. 
"Thank  God,"  said  the  mother,  who 
shed  tears  of  joy  at  the  comforting  as- 
surance. And  so  it  was:  within  the 
specified  time  little  Edward  was  out 
upon  the  street  apparently  as  well  as 
usual.  May  20,  1856.  Elder  Warbur- 
ton left  England  for  America  on  the 
ship  "Wellfleet,"  and  landed  in  Boston 
on  the  13th  of  July.  Four  days  after- 
wards he  left  that  city  for  Lawrence, 
Mass.,  where  he  obtained  work  at  the 
Pacific  Mills.  There  being  no  branch 
of  the  Church  at  that  place,  he  set 
about  discovering  scattered  members. 
About  this  time  he  received  a  visit 
from  Alexander  Steel  and  wife,  who 
were  making  similar  inquiries.  A  num- 
ber of  other  Saints  were  found,  the 
authorities  at  New  York  were  com- 
municated with  and  one  of  the  brethren 
arrived  from  that  city  and  organized 
a  branch,  over  which  Elder  Steel  was 
appointed  to  pi-eside,  with  Brother 
Warburton  as  his  counselor.  When 
Brother  Steel  departed  for  Utah,  June 
1,  1859,  Elder  Warburton  was  appointed 
to  pieside  over  the  Lawrence,  Grove- 
land  and  Lowell  branches.  Groveland 
and  Lowell  were  twenty  miles  apart, 
and  Lawrence  was  located  between  the 
other  two  places  over  which  he  ap- 
pointed brethren  to  preside  when  he 
was  absent.  Brother  Warburton  la- 
bored faithfully  in  the  position  to 
which  he  had  been  assigned  until  June 
1,  1860,  when  he  left  for  Utah.  He 
landed  on  the  Eighth  Ward  Square. 
Salt  Lake  City,  on  the  2nd  of  Septem- 


BIOGRAPHICAL    ENCYCLOPEDIA. 


595 


ber,    and    moved    with    his    family      (a 
wife  and  two  children)  into  a  granary 
in  the  First  Ward.       The  building  was 
ten   feet  long  by  eight   feet  wide,   and 
in    this    contracted    structure    they    re- 
sided until   the   spring  of   1861.       Their 
first    son    was    born    in    that    granary. 
In    June,    1861,    Elder    Warburton    was 
ordained   a   Seventy   and   became   con- 
nected  with   the   62nd   quorum     at     its 
organization.       In   March   he   was   ap- 
pointed first  counselor  to  Bishop  Hen- 
ry Moon,  of  the  First  Ward,  and  acted 
in    that   capacity     until     Nov.   14,    1870. 
Bishop  Moon  having  removed  to  Farm- 
ington,  Davis  county.  Brother  Warbur- 
ton was  called  by  Pres.  Brigham  Young 
to  the  position  of  acting  Bishop  and  to 
presidf'   in   that   calling,    in     the     First 
Ward,  he  being  also  the  choice  of  Bish- 
op Hunter  for  the  office.       He  was  ac- 
cordingly ordained  a  High  Priest  on  the 
date  last  named  and  assumed   the   re- 
sponsibilities of   his   appointmeht.     He 
acted  in  this  capacity  until  June  7,  1877, 
when  the  Ward  was  reorganized  and  he 
was  regularly  ordained  a  Bishop  under 
the  hands     of       Apostle     John  Taylor. 
Brother   Warburton   has   been   faithful 
and  true  to  every  charge,  and  has  re- 
joiced in  the  blessings  of  his  first  con- 
nection with  the  Church  throughout  his 
entire  career.       For  several  years  past 
he  has  been  a  worker  in  the  Salt  Lake 
Temple.       Bi    lop  Warburton  is  slight- 
ly  under   medium     height,     of   slender 
build,  wiry  and  sinewy, capable  of  much 
more    physical    endurance      than    most 
men  of  larger  bodily  proportions.     His 
complexion  is  fair.       In  manner     he  is 
frank   and    straightforward,    and   when 
he  expresses  his  view  upon  any  ques- 
tion, he  does  so  pointedly,  so  as  to  ren- 
der it  unnecessary  to  misunderstand  his 
meaning. 

THORUP,  John  Theobald,  first 
counselor  in  the  Bishopric  of  the  First 
Ward,  Salt  Lake  City,  is  the  son  of 
Herman  A.  Thorup  and  Mary  C.  Chris- 
tensen,  and  was  born  in  Copenhagen, 
Denmark,  May  25,  1856.  He  was  bap- 
tized into  the  Church  of  Jesus  Christ 
of  Latter-day  Saints  Aug.  3,  1866,  by  his 
father,  an(J  emigrated  with  his  parents 
to  America  in  186S.  They  sailed  from 
Copenhagen  May  7th, and  arrived  in  Chi- 
cago, 111.,  June  1st,  of  that  year.  The 
family  remained  in  Chicago,  agreeable 
to  the  counsel  of  Pres.  Charles  Wider- 
borg,  over  one  year:   Aug.  1,  1869,  they 


left  Chicago  for  Utah,  arriving  in 
Provo  Aug.  16th.  In  1872  Brother  Thorup 
was  ordained  an  Elder,  and  in  Septem- 
ber, 1873,  together  with  his  parents,  he 
removed  to  Salt  Lake  City,  and  located 
in  the  First  Ward,  where  the  family 
has  resided  ever  since.  At  the  October 
conference,  1879,  Elder  Thorup  was 
called  on  a  mission  to  Europe.  He  left 
Salt  Lake  City  Oct.  21,  1879,  in  company 
with  his  brother,  Herman  F.  F.  Thorup, 
and  thirteen  other  Elders  for  his  mis- 
sionary field.  Three  of  his  companions 
were  destined  for  the  United  States 
and  twelve  for  Europe.  Oct.  28th,  those 
bound  for  Europe  sailed  from  New 
York  on  the  steamship  "Wyoming." 
The  first  day  on  the  ocean  was  a  little 
rough,  but  during  the  rest  of  the  time 
the  weather  was  very  pleasant.    One  of 


the  saloon  passengers  asked  the  captain 
of  the  ship,  if  he  often  had  such  a  good 
voyage.  "No,"  said  he,  "not  even  In 
the  months  of  June  and  July."  The  pas- 
senger then  asked  the  captain,  if  he 
had  any  Idea  why  the  weather  was  so 
favorable,  "No,"  he  answered,  "unless 
it  is  because  I  have  'Mormon'  Elders  on 
board.  I  always  have  good  luck  when 
I  carry  'Mormon'  passengers."  Going 
from  England  to  Germany,  Elder  Thor- 
up and  party  met  some  travelers  who 
had  left  America  just  six  hours  later 
than  the  missionaries,  and  who  said 
that  they  had  experienced  a  very  rough 
time  on  the  ocean,  that  the  fire  in  the 
engine  room  was  put  out  during  a 
storm,  and  that  the  hatchways  had  to 


596 


LATTER-DAY    SAINT 


be  closed  for  several  days.  Nov.  11, 
1S79.  Elder  Thorun  arrived  in  Copen- 
hagen, Denmark,  and  was  appointed  by 
Pit's.  Niels  Wilhelmsen  to  labor  in  the 
Aarhus  tonference.  On  his  arrival  in 
Aarhus  h3  was  assigned  to  the  island  of 
Fyen  to  labor  as  a  traveling  Elder.  Af- 
ter laboring  on  that  island  for  nine 
months,  he  was  transferred  to  the  Aal- 
borg  conference,  where  he  took  charge 
of  the  Hjorring  branch  until  he  was 
released  to  return  home.  While  presid- 
ing in  Hjorring  he  also  had  charge  of 
the  Frederikshavn  and  Saeby  districts 
for  about  three  months.  On  one  occa- 
sion while  laboring  in  that  field  he  was 
behind  in  his  accounts  and  did  not 
know  where  to  get  money  to  straighten 
them  up.  But  in  walking  through  the 
street,  after  his  day's  work,  he  espied, 
to  his  surprise,  a  10-kroner  bill  lying  at 
his  feet.  He  picked  it  up  and  acknowl- 
edged it  as  a  gift  sent  by  God  to  relieve 
him  from  his  financial  embarrassment. 
On  the  evening  of  Dec.  8,  1880,  he  had  a 
discussion  with  three  ministers  and 
four  deacons  of  the  Lutheran  church,  in 
a  country  school  house;  the  house  was 
crowded  with  people,  and  truth  pre- 
vailed. Dec.  12,  1880,  Elder  Thorup  or- 
ganized a  Relief  Society  in  the  Hjorring 
branch.  Feb.  5,  1881,  after  having  made 
arrangements  to  spend  the  day  in  the 
city  of  Hjorring,  a  voice  spoke  to  him 
loudly  and  distinctly,  telling  him  that 
there  would  be  an  extra  train  for  the 
east  that  afternoon.  He  stopped  for  a 
moment  and  then  walked  on.  But  the 
voice  repeated  the  same  words  as  be- 
fore, when  he  stopped  to  think;  as  he 
had  just  come  home  from  the  east,  he 
did  not  know  that  his  presence  was 
needed  in  that  direction.  However,  he 
resolved  to  go  to  Sindal,  and  in  passing 
out  of  his  office  door  he  heard  the  same 
voice  again,  and  this  time  it  told  him 
to  take  some  consecrated  oil  with  him. 
He  left  on  the  train  and  went  to  the 
house  of  Brother  Jens  Jensen,  the  pre- 
siding Elder  of  the  Sindal  district. 
(Brother  Jensen  and  family  have  since 
emigrated  to  Utah  and  now  reside  in 
Hyrum.  Cache  county).  When  he 
reachjd  the  door,  he  was  met  by  Sister 
Jensen,  who  exclaimed.  "Brother  Thor- 
un. if  an  angel  had  come  down 
from  heaven,  it  would  not  have  pleased 
me  any  more  than  to  see  you  at  this 
time."  Then  she  explained  that  a  Mr. 
and  Mrs.  Nielsen,  who  were  neighbors, 
desired  to  be  baptized  that  very  night. 


Elder  Thorup  went  to  Mr.  Nielsens 
house  and  found  them  ready  and  anx- 
iou.s  to  be  baptized,  and  he  attended 
to  the  oroinance.  He  had  no  sooner 
finished  confirming  the  new  converts, 
than  a  sister  came  in  and  requested 
him  to  come  and  administer  to  her 
daufihter,  who  was  very  sick  with  a 
fever.  He  complied,  and  the  next  morn- 
ing the  young  woman  was  well.  Dur- 
ing his  sojourn  in  Denmark,  Elder 
Thorup  baptized  forty-eight  souls,  re- 
joice! in  his  labois,  and  called  it  the 
happiest  period  of  his  life.  He  was  re- 
leased to  return  home  in  the  summer 
of  1881.  The  large  company  of  Saints, 
with  which  he  traveled,  had  a  pleasant 
voyage,  snd  arrived  in  Salt  Lake  City 
July  16,  1881.  On  Aug.  24,  1882,  Elder 
Thorup  married  Caroline  Ostermann,  of 
Sandy,  Salt  Lake  county.  April  14,  1884, 
he  was  ordained  to  the  office  of  a  Sev- 
enty, and  became  identified  with  the 
16th  quorum.  During  the  years  1884-86. 
ho  iresided  over  the  Y.  M.  M.  I.  A.  of 
the  First  Ward,  and  from  1883  to  1887 
he  acted  as  one  of  the  school  trustees 
of  the  First  school  district.  Jan.  23, 
1887,  he  was  ordained  a  High  Priest  by 
Pres.  Angus  M.  Cannon,  and  set  apart 
to  act  as  second  counselor  to  Bishop 
Jos.  Warburton,  of  the  First  Ward. 
April  11,  1887,  he  yielded  obedience  to 
the  principle  of  plural  marriage  by  tak- 
ing to  wife  Miss  Andrea  Berg.  On  ac- 
count of  the  removal  from  the  Ward  of 
First  Counselor  Joseph  Booth,  Elder 
Thorup  was  set  apart  as  first  counselor 
in  the  First  Ward  Bishopric,  Oct.  24, 
1897,  which  position  he  still  holds. 
Brother  Thorup  has  been  engaged  in 
the  mercantile  business  since  he  was  a 
boy,  and  to-day  he  is  the  manager  of 
the  Thirteenth  Ward  Store,  one  of  the 
oldest  general  mercantile  houses  in 
Salt   Lake  City. 

UASMUSSEN,  Niels  second  coun- 
selor to  Bishop  Joseph  Warburton,  was 
born  May  29,  1854,  in  Maderup,  Saerslev 
liarish,  Odense  amt,  Fyen,  Denmark, 
son  of  Henrik  Hasmussen  and  Rebekka 
Hansen.  His  father  died  when  he 
was  nine  years  of  age.  which  left  the 
responsibility  of  supporting  a  family  of 
six  children  upon  the  mother.  Niels 
was  baptized  May  2,  1866,  by  Elder 
Hans  H.  Niel.sen.  and  in  company  with 
the  rest  of  the  family,  he  emigrated  to 
Utah,  in  1866.*  sailing  from  Hamburg, 
Germany.     May   29,     1866,     in    the  ship 


BIOGRAPHICAL    ENCYCLOPEDIA. 


597 


"Cavour,"  and  arriving  in  New  York 
July  31st.  "While  upon  the  ocean," 
writes  Elder  Rasmussen,  "cholera 
broke  out  among  the  passengers,  and 
as  we  were  entering  the  harbor  of  New 
York,  quite  a  number  of  them  were 
stricken  with  the  plague  and  several 
deaths  had  occurred.  The  sick  were 
taken  to  the  hospital,  and  left  there, 
while  the  main  company  went  on;  but 
the  dreaded  disease  played  havoc 
among  us, during  the  long  railway  jour- 
ney of  about  ten  days'  duration.  I  shall 
never  forget  the  heartrending  and  dis- 
tressing scenes  that  I  witnessed  on  that 
memorable  journey,  when  strong  and 
brave  men,  as  well  as  weak  women  and 
children,  succumbed  to  the  terrible  de- 
stroyer; and  the  bodies  of  the  dead 
were  left  to  be  buried  by  strangers  at 
different  points  along  the  railroad.  The 
river  steamer  that  carried  us  from  St. 
Joseph,  Mo.,  to  Wyoming,  Neb.,  was 
two  days  in  making  that  trip,  during 
Avhich  time  the  deck  of  the  steamer 
was  almost  literally  covered  with  the 
dead  and  dying  among  our  people.  Fre- 
quently the  steamboat  had  to  stop  and 
put  the  dead  on  shore  for  burial.  While 


staying  two  days  at  Wyoming,  prepar- 
ing for  the  journey  across  the  plains, 
and  during  the  early  part  of  that  jour- 
ney, the  mortality  continued  among  us 
at  a  fearful  rate,  until  about  one  hun- 


dred persons  out  of  a  total  of  between 
two  and  three  hundred,  who  left  Scan- 
dinavia in  the  spring,  had  perished  by 
the   wayside.       My     own     brother  and 
mother  fell  victims  to  the  terrible  dis- 
ease Aug.  16th    and     24th  respectively, 
and   were,   like  the  other  dead,   buried 
without   coffins,     in   shallow   graves  by 
the    roadside,    after   being   sewn   up   in 
sheets.    The  survivors  passed  on,  never 
more     to  behold     their     lonely    resting 
places   again.     We  traveled   in   the  Ill- 
fated  train  in  charge  of  Captain  Abner 
Lowry,  who  was  ably  assisted  by  Elder 
Geo.    Farnsworth.    of   Mount   Pleasant, 
Sanpete  county.    His  name  will  ever  be 
held  in    affectionate  remembrance      by 
all  the     survivors     from     that     fearful 
journey,  especially  by  those  who  recov- 
ered  from   their  sickness   through     his 
untiring  efforts  in  alleviating  their  suf- 
ferings, which  he  did  in  many  instances 
very  successfully.     A  relief  mule  train, 
under  Captain  Arza  E.  Hinckley  (sent 
out  by  Pres.  Brigham  Young),  met  us 
about  four  hundred  miles  east  of  Salt 
Lake  City.     All  the  orphans,  of  which 
there  were  many  in  our  company,  were 
taken  by  that  train.    This  included  our 
family,  which  now  had  been  reduced  to 
five    in    number.    We    arrived    in  Salt 
Lake  City  Oct.  7,  1866.   while  the  main 
company,  which  lost  nearly  half  their 
cattle  in   the  snows  in  the  mountains, 
reached  the     valley     about  two  weeks 
later.    The  day  after  our  arrival  in  Salt 
Lake  City  the  orphan  emigrants  were 
all  provided  with     homes.       My  oldest 
sister  and  I  were  taken  care  of  by  Or- 
son P.  Miles  and  family,  of  the  Eighth 
Ward,  with  whom  we  lived  till  the  fol- 
lowing March  (1867).  when  I  became  an 
inmate  of  the  home  of  Henry  A.  Dixon, 
father  of  Utah's  present     State  treas- 
urer. John  D.  Dixon.     Bro.   Dixon  was 
one   of   the   best   men   I   ever   met;    he 
treated  me  with  the  greatest  kindness 
and   consideration,    and   I   remained   in 
his  family  till  Jan.  1,  1873,  when  I  left 
Provo.  Utah  county,  whence  the  Dixon 
family  had  moved  and  returned  to  Salt 
Lake  City,  when  I  accepted  a  position 
offered  me  by   Bishop   Edward   Hunter 
and  Joseph  C.   Kingsbury,  in  the  Gen- 
eral Tithing  Office,  where  I  have  been 
employed  ever  since  (or  for  a  period  of 
about  thirty-four  years),  except  a  short 
time  spent  on  a  mission."     Elder  Ras- 
mussen was  ordained  an  Elder  Feb.  21, 
1871.  by  Alonzo  H.  Raleigh,  and  in  1878 
he  filled  a  short  mission  to  the  States, 


598 


LATTER-DAY    SAINT 


laboring  principally  in  Iowa  and  Ne- 
braska. For  many  years  he  served  as 
a  counselor  to  James  E.  Malin  in  the 
presidency  of  the  first  quorum  of  El- 
ders in  the  Salt  Lake  Stake  of  Zion. 
and  he  was  ordained  a  High  Priest  and 
set  apart  as  second  counselor  to  Bish- 
op Joseph  Warburton,  of  the  First 
Ward,  Salt  Lake  City,  Oct.  27,  1897, 
which  position  he  still  occupies.  Prior 
to  this  ordination  he  had  been  an  active 
worker  in  the  Ward  Y.  M.  M.  I.  A.,  had 
served  as  Ward  clerk.  Ward  teacher, 
Sunday  school  worker,  etc.  For  several 
years  he  filled  the  position  of  first  as- 
sistant superintendent  of  the  First 
Ward  Sunday  school  and  since  Decem- 
ber, 1886,  he  has  acted  as  superintend- 
ent of  said  school.  Elder  Rasmussen 
married  Laura  A.  M.  Thorup  Sept.  11, 
1879,  and  Christine  V.  Thorup  Nov.  21, 
1885.  By  each  of  his  wives  he  has  had 
six  children,  eleven  of  whom  are  now 
alive;  his  firstborn  child,  a  son,  died 
Dec.  26.  1884.  His  first  wife  (Laura) 
died  Feb.  7,  1898.  Bro.  Rasmussen  says 
that  though  he  has  passed  through 
trying  ordeals  in  his  life,  he  has  been 
greatly  blessed  of  the  Lord,  both  spirit- 
ually and  temporally,  and  has  never  for 
a  moment  doubted  the  divinity  of  the 
great  Latter-day  work. 

SCHULTHESS,     Arnold     Henry,     a 

prominent  Elder  of  the  First  Ward, 
Salt  Lake  City,  was  born  June  9,  ises! 
in  Neukirch,  Canton  Thurgau.  Switzer- 
land, son  of  Arnold  R.  Schulthess  and 
Marie  Moor.  He  attended  the  regular 
public  schools  and  subsequently  the 
high  school  from  the  time  he  was  six 
till  he  was  fourteen  years  old,  and  emi- 
grated to  Utah  in  1819,  together  with 
his  parents,  two  sisters  and  a  brother, 
locating  in  Salt  Lake  City.  Arnold  was 
baptized  Jan.  3,  1882.  and  until  he  was 
seventeen  years  old,  he  worked  at  home 
with  his  father,  who  had  a  nursery;  he 
was  also  actively  engaged  as  a  Deacon 
in  the  Ward,  and  became  a  counselor 
in  the  presidency  of  the  Deacons- 
quorum.  Later,  he  was  ordained  an 
Elder.  In  1884-86  he  filled  a  mission  to 
Europe,  laboring  in  the  East  Swiss 
and  the  North  German  conferences, 
part  of  the  time  as  president  of  the 
former.  After  his  return  home,  in  Sep- 
tember. 1S86,  he  became  an  active  work- 
er in  the  First  Ward  as  a  Ward  teach- 
er, a  coun.selor  in  the  Y.  M.  M.  I.  A., 
choir     leader,   and     a     Sunday     school 


worker.  He  was  ordained  a  Seventy 
Oct.  5,  1886,  and  apopinted  a  home  mis- 
sionary May  17,  1887,  in  the  Salt  Lake 
Stake.  For  eleven  years  he  presided 
over  the  German  meetings  in  Salt 
Lake  City.  He  married  Rachel 
B.  Theurer  (Dec.  14,  1887),  daughter  of 
Bishop  Fred.  Theurer,  of  Providence, 
Cache  county.  Feb.  24,  1S89,  his  wife 
gave  birth  to  two  sons,  and  died  the 
same  day.  The  twins  (Arnold  and 
Frederick)  lived  one  and  seven  months 
respectively.  The  bereaved  husband 
now  returned  to  his  parental  home, 
where  he  lived  until  March  11,  1S91, 
when  lie  married  Louise  Billeter,  who 
has  since  become  the  mother  of  two 
sons  and  three  daughters.  Oct.  5,  1S98, 
he  received  a  call  to  take  a  second  mis- 
sion to  Europe,  this  time  to  preside 
over  the  German  mission.  During  his 
presidency  he  had  opportunity  to  ex- 
plain the  principles  of  the  gospel  to 
some  of  the  city  officials  in  the  city  of 
Berlin,  with  the  result  that  the  mission- 


aries wtre  given  greater  liberties  to 
preach,  and  also  granted  other  priv- 
ileges, which  they  had  not  hitherto  en- 
joyed. He  edited  "Der  Stern,"  a  semi- 
monthly periodical  published  in  the  in- 
terest of  the  Church  in  Germany  and 
Switzerland,  and  also  issued  a  new  set 
of  tracts  on  the  first  principles  of  the 
gospel,  and  a  new  edition  of  Bible  ref- 
erences, besides  assisting  in  publishing 
a  revised  edition  of  the  Latter-day 
Saint  hymn  book  in  the  German  lan- 
guage. During  his  mission,  nearly  nine 
hundred    persons    were    added    to      Ihe 


BIOGRAPHICAL    ENCYCLOPEDIA. 


599 


Church  by  baptiBm  in  Germany.  Being 
released  from  his  labors  abroad,  Elder 
Schulthess  returned  home  Sept.  26,  1901, 
and  a  few  days  later  (Oct.  3,  1901),  he 
was  set  apart  as  one  of  the  presidents 
of    the   138th   quorum    of   Seventy. 

HARDY,  Leonard  Gootlridge, sixth 

Bishop  of  the  Second  Ward,  Salt  Lake 
City,  Utah,  is  a  son  of  the  late  Bishop 
Leonard  W.  Hardy, and  was  born  in  Salt 
Lake  City,  June  24,  1852.  He  was  bap- 
tized when  eight  years  old,  and  or- 
dained to  the  office  of  an  Elder  when 
about  twenty-one  years  of  age,  having 


f^\ 

■^ 

Jw 

^^^^KKei 

^^^^^^^^BBBf 

;.  ^. 

previously  been  ordained  a  Teacher.  He 
was  one  of  the  first  settlers  of  Moun- 
tain Dell,  in  Parley's  canyon,  and  re- 
sided there  for  about  fifteen  years. 
June  21,  1877,  he  was  ordained  a  High 
Priest  and  set  apart  to  act  as  second 
counselor  to  the  late  Bishop  Alex.  C. 
Pyper,  of  the  Twelfth  Ward,  Salt  Lake 
City,  occupying  that  position  until  call- 
ed on  a  mission  to  the  United  States  in 
1879.  He  left  home  in  October  of  that 
year,  labored  in  Indiana  one  year,  part 
of  the  time  alone,  baptized  five  and  re- 
turned home  in  the  fall  of  1880,  because 
of  sickness,  the  locality  where  he  lab- 
ored being  unhealthy.  He  labored  as 
a  home  misionary  in  the  Salt  Lake 
Stake  of  Zion  for  a  number  of  years. 
In  November,  1886,  he  was  appointed  to 
fill  the  unexpired  term  of  Nathaniel  V. 
Jones  as  collector  of  Salt  Lake  county, 
and  at  the  August  election  in  1887  he 
was  duly  elected  for  that  position.      In 


1891  he  succeeded  Samuel  Petersen  as 
Bishop  of  the  Second  Ward.  Salt  Lake 
City,  which  position  he  held  till  1899, 
when  he  removed  to  Canada,  where  he 
assisted  in  building  up  some  of  the 
new  settlements  of  the  Saints  in  that 
part  of  the  country.  Lately  he  re- 
turned to  Salt  Lake  City,  Utah,  where 
he  is  now  engaged  in  the  mercantile 
business. 

SMITH,  Andrew,  a  prominent  El- 
der of  the  Second  Ward,  Salt  Lake 
City,  wa^  born  in  Linister,  Ayrshire, 
Scotland,  Feb.  28,  1837,  son  of  Alexander 
Smith  and  Elizabeth  Young.  He  was 
baptized  Jan.  29,  1852,  by  John  Leish- 
man,  ordained  a  Teacher  by  John 
Thornton  and  labored  in  the  Johnstone 
branch  of  the  Glasgow  conference.  He 
emigrated  from  Liverlpool,  England, 
May  4,  1856,  in  the  ship  "Thornton,"  ar- 
rived in  New  York  June  14th  and  con- 
tinued by  rail  to  Iowa  City,  where  he 
arrived  June  24th.  After  preparing 
for  the  journey  over  the  plains,  he  left 
Iowa  City  July  15th,  in  Capt.  James  G. 
Willie's  company,  containing  120  hand- 
carts, six  wagons  and  about  five  hun- 
dred emigrants,  of  whom  66  perished  on 
the  journey  from  over-exertion  and 
cold.  Bro.  Smith  assisted  in  burying 
the  most  of  these  people.  On  reaching 
a  point  about  one  hundred  and  fifty 
miles  west  of  Fort  Kearney,  the  cap- 
tain of  the  company,  called  for  two 
volunteers  to  go  in  search  of  some  thir- 
ty head  of  cattle  which  had  been  stam- 
peded by  the  Indians.  No  one  re- 
sponding to  this  call,  Andrew  Smith 
and  Joseph  Elder  were  selected  to  per- 
form this  work.  Before  leaving  camp, 
however.  Captain  Willey  gave  them  in- 
structions to  keep  away  from  the  road 
as  much  as  possible  and  not  to  kindle 
any  fires;  and  he  promised  that  if  these 
instructions  were  followed,  they  would 
return  to  camp  unmolested.  They 
started  from  camp  on  horseback,  each 
armed  with  a  gun  and  a  pistol,  going 
eastward.  When  about  seventy-five 
miles  from  camp,  they  found  a  pack  of 
large  buffalo  wolves  knawing  at  the 
legs  of  a  live  buffalo  which  was  stand- 
ing near  the  road.  Bro.  Smith  stepped 
up  to  the  buffalo  and  patted  it  on  the 
head,  while  he  and  his  companion  both 
pointed  their  pistols  at  the  wolves  and 
drove  them  off  a  few  feet.  But  in- 
stead of  running  away,  these  hungry 
brutes   turned   around   and   stood   look- 


600 


LATTER-DAY    SAINT 


ing  at  their  Intruders  and  showing 
their  white  teeth  in  great  rage,  until 
the  brethren  went  away,  upon  which 
the  wolves  immediately  returned  to 
their  victim  and  finished  their  job  by 
literally  eating  the  buffalo  alive.  "Soon 
afterws'-ds,"  writes  Elder  Smith,  "we 
met  Almon  W  .Babbitt  and  two  teams- 
ters who  were  traveling  westward.  As 
wc  approached  them,  they  halted,  un- 
hitched their  teams  and  began  prepara- 
tions to  defend     themselves,     believing 


that  we  were  hostile  Indians.  When 
they  learned  who  we  were,  Mr.  Bab- 
bitt said,  that  he  always  feared  the 
tribe  of  Indians  who  roamed  in  this 
part  of  the  country,  and  remarked  that 
if  he  ever  got  through  this  once,  he 
would  never  cross  the  plains  again  in 
the  manner  he  traveled  this  time.  We 
proceeded  on  our  ourney  eastward.  In 
the  night  we  came  to  a  dry  creek,which 
we  were  to  cross.  But  our  animals, 
who  were  frightened,  refused  to  take  us 
over,  and  instead  ran  us  out  on  the 
prairie,  about  a  mile,  where  we  then 
camped  for  the  night.  Next  morning 
we  returned  to  the  cros.sing,  where  we 
found  fresh  moccasin  tracks  leading  out 
from  the  brush  on  to  the  dusty  road, 
showing  plainly  that  Indians  had  just 
left  there.  Continuing  our  journey,  we 
slept  the  following  night  at  a  point  op- 
posite Fort  Kearney.  Next  morning 
a  few  soldiers,  thinking  we  were  In- 
dians, came  out  to  see  us.  On  seeing 
them  approach,  we  prepared  to  defend 
ourselves,  thinking  in  turn  that  they 
were    Indians.       We    went    with    them 


to  the  fort  and  received  good  treat- 
ment. We  asked  for  provisions  to  go 
back  with;  this  was  refused,  but  we 
could  have  provisions  if  we  desired  to 
go  east.  So  we  remained  at  the  fort 
until  Franklin  D.  Richards  (who  had 
presided  in  the  British  mission)  and 
his  company  of  missionaries  arrived, 
when  we  accompaned  them  westward, 
and  traveled  with  them  until  we  joined 
our  own  hand-cart  company.  On  our 
return  to  our  company  we  were  in- 
formed that  Mr.  Babbitt  and  his  teams- 
ters had  been  killed  by  the  Indians, 
some  of  whom  we  saw  mounted  on  Mr. 
Babbitt's  mules  and  wearing  his  and 
his  teamster's  clothing.  I  also  learned 
from  a  mountaineer,  who  kept  a  trad- 
ing house  by  the  roadside,  that  Almon 
W.  Babbitt  had  been  killed  by  twelve 
young  Indian  warriors,  who  were  on 
the  war  path  at  that  time,  and  who 
said  that  they  knew  Babbitt  was  not 
a  Mormon  because  he  swore  like  a 
trooper  while  fighting  with  them.  Our 
search  for  the  lost  cattle  had  been  in 
vain."  After  the  terrible  experience 
with  the  hand-c£^rt  company,  Bro. 
Smith,  together  with  the  other  sur- 
vivors, arrived  in  Salt  Lake  City  Nov. 
9,  1856,  being  helped  in  by  relief  teams 
sent  out  to  meet  them.  Bro.  Smith 
remained  in  the  city  until  midwinter, 
when  he  went  to  Cedar  valley  and  re- 
mained in  that  place  until  1859.  While 
residing  there  he  was  called  out  with 
others  to  assist  in  protecting  life  and 
property  from  the  invasion  of  Johns- 
ton's army.  In  1859  he  traveled  350 
miles  east  to  meet  Capt.  Geo.  Rowley's 
hand-cart  company,  which, when  found, 
was  short  of  provisions.  Elder  Smith 
shared  what  he  had  brought  along  for 
his  relatives  with  the  company.  After 
a  few  days'  journey  towards  the  city, 
he  went  security  for  1,000  pounds  of 
flour  to  a  mountaineer,  to  assist  the 
company  in:  but  after  they  had 
weighed  the  flour  and  were  about  to 
start  on  their  journey,  relief  came  from 
the  Valley.  After  arriving  in  the  City 
on  thp.t  occasion  he  turned  his  horses 
and  cattle  into  the  Perpetual  Emigra- 
tion Fund  Company,  to  assit  in  the 
immigration  of  his  father's  family  to 
Utah.  Oct.  21.  1859.  he  married  Jane 
McKay,  and  the  following  year  was 
sent  back  on  the  plains  by  Pres.  Brig- 
ham  Young,  in  charge  of  several  teams, 
to  help  in  the  Church  train.  He  was 
ordained    an    Elder    April    5,    1862,    and 


BIOGRAPHICAL  ENCYCLOPEDIA. 


601 


helped  to  quarry  the  rock  for  the  pill- 
ars  of   the   Tabernacle,    then   in   course 
of  erection  in  Salt  Lake  City.       "On  a 
certain    occasion,"    says    Elder    Smith, 
••Pres.    Young   stated      that   the   work- 
men  would   have   to  cease  their  labors 
on   the  Temple  because  of  the  lack  of 
charcoal  with  which  to  produce  heat  to 
sharpen   the   workmens'    tools.       I   told 
the  President     that     I     would     furnish 
all    the   coal    needed,    if   he   would   pro- 
vide two  yoke  of  cattle,  a  wagon  and 
a    tent.       This    the    President    readily 
agreed  to  do,  ajid  I  accordingly  burned 
the  charcoal."     Elder   Smith   also  con- 
tracted  with    Pres.    Young     to    furnish 
the  necessary  logs  to  make  80,000  feet 
of  lumber  annually,  for  two  years; part 
of  this   lumber   was   used   for   the   roof 
of   the   Tabernacle,    in   Salt  Lake   City. 
About    this    time    a   number    of   strong 
pine  poles,  varying  in  length  from  six- 
ty to  seventy-five  feet,  were  needed  for 
scaffolds  around   the  Tabernacle.   Pres. 
Young  was  so  anxious  to  secure  these 
poles  that  he  allowed  Bro.  Smith  to  put 
his  own   price     on     them,    if   he   would 
only  get  them.    Agreeable  to  the  Presi- 
dent's  wishes   Bro.    Smith    went   up   in 
City  Creek  canyon   and   cut   the   poles. 
Then,  improvished  with  a  peculiar  har- 
ness, which  he  had  improvised  for  the 
purpose  to  fit     his      own     person,     he 
dragged  the  poles  with  main  strength 
severaJ   hundred   yards    to    the    top   of 
precipices  that  were  from  fifty  to  one 
hundred     feet    high,    over      which    he 
pitched  the  poles.      Thus  he  succeeded 
at   last   in   geting   the   required    timber 
to    points    where    the    teams    could    get 
at   them.       In    the   construction   of   the 
Union   Pacific   railroad   in   1868-69,    Bro. 
Smith   was   foreman   of   a  company   of 
men,    numbering   several   hundred,     on 
Sharp    &    Young's      grading     contract. 
Subsequently,  he  worked  at  the  Church 
quarry,    in    Little    Cottonwood    canyon, 
for  some  time,  and  also  had  charge  of 
a  gang  of  men  who  worked  on  the  old 
Church  canal,  which  is  now  being  used 
by  the  Salt  Lake  City  municipality.  On 
^ne    occasion,    while      at    work    at    the 
Church  quarry.  Bishop  Sharp  informed 
him   that  as  there     was       no     coal     to 
Fharpen  the  drills  they  would  have  to 
•  luit  work.      Bro.   Smith  requested  the 
Bishop  to  let  a  teamster  haul  wood  to 
a  small  fiat,  just  below  the  quarry,  and 
he    (Smith)    would   then   burn    two   pits 
of  coal  for  him.       This  was  according- 
ly done,  and  the  quarrying  of  rock  for 


the  Temple  continued.  For  three  years 
Bro.  Smith  was  employed  as  a  gardener 
for  Walker  Bros.,  attending  to  their 
gaidens  during  the  summer  months 
and  working  in  their  warehouse  in  the 
winter.  In  early  days  he  was  fre- 
quently body  guard  around  the  person 
of  Brigham  Young.and  guard  for  many 
years  at  the  President's  office.  He 
served  on  the  regular  police  force  of 
Salt  Lake  City  for  seventeeen  years, 
besides  having  previously  performed  a 
great  deal  of  special  police  duty.  He 
was  ordained  to  the  office  of  a  Seven- 
ty Feb.  28,  1876,  under  the  hands  of 
John  Nicholson,  and  set  apart  as  one 
of  the  seven  presidents  of  the  24th 
quorum  of  Seventy,  March  13,  1878,  by 
Horace  S.  Eldredge.  Having  obeyed 
the  principle  of  plural  marriage  by  tak- 
ing Annie  Carlin  to  wife,  about  1865, 
he  was  arrested  on  March  18,  1885,  on 
the  charge  of  unlawful  cohabitation, 
and  placed  under  ?1,500  bonds.  When 
he  was  arraigned  for  trial  in  the  Third 
District  Court,  he  testified  in  his  own 
case  and  was  found  guilty  by  the  jury. 
Oct.  13,  1885,  he  was  sentenced  by 
Judge  Charles  S.  Zane  to  six  months' 
imprisonment  and  to  pay  a  fine  of  $300 
and  costs  of  suit  ($129).  He  served  his 
full  term  in  the  Utah  penitentiary  and 
30  days  extra  for  the  fine  and  costs, and 
was  finally  released,  after  a  rigid  ex- 
arhination,  April  16,  1886.  From  1888  to 
1893  he  was  employed  by  the  Church  as 
day  watchman  at  the  President's  office, 
and  from  1893  to  1898  he  served  as 
night  watchman  at  the  Salt  Lake  Tem- 
ple. He  was  a  special  attendant 
around  the  person  of  Pres.  Wilford 
Woodruff  for  several  years,  and  aq- 
companied  the  First  Presidency  to  the 
World's  Fair  in  Chicago  in  1893.  Since 
1898  he  has  served  the  Church  as  gate 
keeper  and  tourist  guide  at  the  east 
gate  of  the  Temple  Block,  which  posi- 
tion he  holds  at  the  present  time.  El- 
der Smith  is  the  father  of  twenty  chil- 
dren, namely  twelve  sons  and  eight 
daughters. 

WEILEll,  Jncob,  second  Bishop  of 
the  Third  Ward.  Salt  Lake  City,  Utah, 
was  born  March  14,  1808,  in  Lancaster 
county,  Tenn.,  was  baptised  March  16, 
1840,  by  Lorenzo  D.  Barnes,  removed  to 
Nauvoo,  111.,  in  1841.  and  was  expelled 
from  Illinois,  together  with  the  rest  of 
the  Saints,  in  1846.  Having  spent  the 
winter   of   1846-47    at   Winter   Quarters, 


602 


LATTER-DAY    SAINT 


he  went  to  Great  Salt  I^ake  valley  in 
1847,  as  one  of  the  orignal  pioneers  un- 
der the  Immediate  leadership  of  Pres. 
Brlgham  Young.  He  acted  as  Bishop 
of  the  Third  Ward.  Salt  Lake  City, 
about  fourteen  years,  and  died  at  his 
home  in  Salt  Lake  City  March  24,  1896. 
At  the  time  of  his  death  the  "Deseret 


News"  said  editorially:  "Jacob  Weiler 
departed  this  life  at  an  advanced  age. 
and  with  a  record  of  good  deeds  that 
will  cause  his  name  to  be  held  in  hon- 
orble  remembrance  from  geneiation  to 
generation.  Jacob  Weiler  was  one  of 
Utah's  pioneers — one  of  the  first  to  en- 
ter Great  Salt  Lake  valley  in  July,  1847. 
He  was  a  member  of  the  fourth  ten 
of  the  Pioneer  band.  From  early  life 
he  has  been  an  indefatigable  worker, 
and  this  characteristic  was  a  marked 
feature  of  his  labors  in  a  Church  capa- 
city. For  nearly  forty  years  he  pre- 
sided over  the  Third  Ward  of  this  city, 
having  been  called  to  the  office  of  Bish- 
op in  1S56,  and  was  deeply  beloved  by 
his  flock.  Not  long  since,  owing  to  his 
advanced  years,  the  Ward  received  an- 
other Bishop,  while  Elder  Weiler  was 
ordained  to  the  ofllce  of  Patriarch.  He 
goes  down  to  the  grave  full  of  years 
and  good  works,  and  with  the  love  of 
his  associates  and  the  e.steem  of  all 
who  knew  him.  His  going  is  the  de- 
parture of  another  of  those  noble  souls 
who  composed  Utah's  pioneer  band, 
and  whose  numbers  are  now  thinned 
to  a  very  few,  indeed,  that  we  still 
have  the  privilege  of  gazing  upon." 


SMITH,  Andrew,  .iuiiior,  first  coun- 
selor to  Bishop  Oliver  Hodgson  of  the 
Third  Ward  Salt  Lake  City,  is  the  son 
of  Andrew  Smith  and  Jane  McKay,  and 
was  born  in  Salt  Lake  City,  Utah, 
March  24,  1864.  He  was  baptized  Sept. 
.'),  1872,  by  Joseph  McMurrin.  At  the  age 
of  thirteen  years  he  was  ordained  a 
Deacon,  and  several  years  later  he  was 
ordained  an  Elder.  Oct.  17,  1888,  he 
married  Martha  B.  Golightly,  and  he 
was  ordained  a  Seventy  April  2,  1891, 
by  Geo.  Reynolds;  later,  he  became 
clerk  of  the  10th  quorum  of  Seventy. 
Fiom  1895  to  1898  he  filled  a  mission  to 
Australasia,  \vhere  he  first  labored  as 
u  traveling  Elder  in  Tasmania,  and 
later  as  president  of  the  New  South 
Wales  conference.  Sept.  27,  1897, when 
the  Australasian  mission  was  divided, 
he  was  chosen  president  of  the  Austral- 
ian mission.  On  his  return  home  he 
was  appointed  to  labor  as  a  home  mis- 
sionary in  the  Salt  Lake  Stake.  Jan. 
11,  1901,  he  was  ordained  a  High  Priest 
and  set  apart  as  first  counselor  to 
Bishop  Oliver  Hodgson  of  the  Thinl 
WaKd,  Salt  Lake  City,  in  which  posi- 
tion he  is,  at  present,  diligently  labor- 
ing. Elder  Smith  has  always  been  ac- 
tively engaged  in  Sunday  school  and 
mutual    improvement     work,     and   lias 


taken  much  interest  in  choir  work, 
having  been  a  member  of  the  Taberna- 
cle and  Ward  choirs.  His  education  was 
gained  in  the  public  schools  and  in  the 
Deseret  University.  He  is  a  carpenter 
by    trade,    but   for   a   number   of  years 


BIOGRAPHICAL    ENCYCLOPEDIA. 


603 


he  has  been  engaged  in  the  police  de- 
partment  of   Salt    Lake   City. 

BUCKWALTER.      Calvin      Shuler, 

second  counselor  to  Bishop  Hodgson  of 
the  Third  Ward,  Salt  Lake  City,  Utah, 
is  the  son  of  Henry  S.  Buckwalter  and 
Harriet  Victoria  Orton,  and  was  born 
at  American  Fork,  Utah,  Sept.  7,  1872. 


Calvin's  early  life  was  spent  on  the 
farm,  and  he  received  his  education  in 
the  public  schools  and  in  the  L.  D.  S. 
college  in  Salt  Lake  City.  He  was 
baptized  when  about  eight  years  of  age 
by  Elder  John  Cottam.  Sept.  9,  1898, 
he  was  ordaned  to  the  office  of  a  Sev- 
enty by  Brigham  H.  Roberts  and  set 
apart  for  a  mission  to  Great  Britain. 
While  on  this  mission  he  labored  suc- 
cessfully in  the  Nottingham  conference. 
During  his  absence  of  twenty-seven 
months  he  visited  the  most  important 
English  cities  as  well  as  many  of  those 
in  continental  Europe.  After  his  re- 
turn home,  Nov.  12.  1900,  he  was  called 
to  the  position  of  second  counselor  in 
the  Third  Ward  Bishopric,  being  or- 
dained a  High  Priest,  and  set  apart  for 
that  position  by  Chas.  W.  Penrose.  El- 
der Buckwalter  has  always  taken  an 
active  part  in  Sabbath  school  and  Y. 
M.  M.  I.  A.  work  in  his  Ward.  In 
civil  life  he  is  a  painter  by  trade,  but 
at  present  he  occupies  a  position  under 
the  county  administration  at  the  city 
and    county   building. 


WEILER,  Elijah  M,. a  prominent  El- 
der in  the  Third  Ward,  Salt  Lake  City, 
is  a  son  of  Bishop  Jacob  Weiler  and 
Annie  Maria  Malin  and  was  born  in 
Chester  county,  Penn.,  April  18,1839.  In 
1841  he  went  with  his  parents  to  Nau- 
voo.  111.  Elijah  emigrated  to  the  Val- 
ley in  1847,  with  his  mother,  his  father 
having  crossed  the  plains  ahead  with 
the  original  pioneers  of  1847.  The 
family  moved  into  the  Third  Ward  in 
1848,  where  Elijah  still  resides;  and  is 
at  the  present  time  the  oldest  resident 
member  of  that  Ward.  He  was  bap- 
tized in  1849,  and  was  ordained  a  Sev- 
enty in  1849  by  Levi  Savage.  In  1862 
he  served  as  a  volunteer  under  Lot 
Smith  and  in  1863  he  crossed  the  plains 
as  a  night  herder  under  Capt.  John  M. 
WooUey.  He  married  Emily  P.  Cris- 
mon  in  1864.  During  the  Blackhawk 
war  in  1865  he  did  active  military  ser- 
vice in  Colonel  Heber  P.  Kimball's 
command.  Two  years  later  he  was 
called  to  settle  on  the  Muddy  (now  in 
Nevada)  as  a  missionary  settler.  In 
an  early  day  Bro.  Weiler  became  a 
member  of  the  firm  of  Crismon  &  Wei- 
ler, contractors,  and  he  assisted  in 
building  many  of  the  railroad  lines  in 
Utah.  In  1873  he  was  elected  county 
commissioner,  in  Salt  Lake  county  and 
he  served  in  that  capacity  for  about 
fifteen  years.      He  married  Agnes  Bolto 


in  1887.  In  1897  he  was  elected  a  mem- 
ber of  the  city  council,  in  Salt  Lake 
City.       Elder  Weiler  is  truly  a  pioneer, 


604 


LATTER-DAY    SAINT 


and  has  done  his  share  of  "killing 
snakes  and  building  bridges."  He  has 
followed  farming  and  contracting  most 
of  his  time  in  life,  but  is  at  present 
engaged  in  mining,  being  vice  presi- 
dent, director  and  secretary  of  one  of 
the  principal  mines  in  Utah.  He  is  the 
father  of  17  children,  12  of  whom  are 
living. 

BUCKWALTER,    Henry  Shuler,    a 

prominent  Elder  in  the  Third  Ward, 
Salt  Lake  City. is  the  son  of  John  Buck- 
waiter  and  Sarah  Shuler,  and  was  bom 
in  Chester  county,  Penn.,  May  12,  1831. 
Elder  Buckwalter  writes:  "My  father 
embraced  the  gospel  in  1839,  but  died  in 
1841,  leaving  my  mother  with  six  small 
children  in  poor  circumstances.  We 
emigrated  to  Nauvoo,  111.,  in  1842,  where 
I  was  baptized  in  the  Mississippi  river 
in  July.  1843.  I  witnessed  the  trying 
scenes  surrounding  the  martyrdom  of 
the  Prophet  and  Patriarch.  I  was  at 
the  meeting  called  by  Sidney  Rigdon 
Aug.  8,.  1844,  when  he  proclaimed  him- 
self a  guardian  to  the  Church.     I  saw 


and  heard  Brigham  Young  when  his 
voice  and  manner  became  changed,  so 
that  he  talked  and  looked  just  like  the 
Prophet  Joseph  Smith.  Together  with 
the  body  of  the  Church,  I  endured  the 
j)ersecutions,  which  culminated  in  our 
expulsion  from  Nauvoo,  by  a  mob  in 
1846.  While  encamped  in  Iowa,  I  saw 
the  hand  of  a  kind  Providence  extended 
to  the  Saints  on  many  occasions.  At 
one  time,  when  we  were  without  food, 
and  had  no  prospects  of  getting  any,  a 


tlock  of  quails  flew  into  our  midst,  and 
we  captui^d  all  we  needed,  and  were 
thus  supplied  with  food.  In  April,  1852, 
after  residing  in  St.  Louis,  Mo.,  for  a 
few  years,  I  started  for  the  great  west 
and  arrived  in  Salt  Lake  City,  Utah, 
Aug.  11th  of  that  year.  I  settled  in 
the  Ninth  Ward,  where  I  was  ordained 
a  Teacher  in  1853,  by  Bishop  Seth  Taft. 
Agreeable  to  counsel  from  Pres.  Brig- 
ham  Young,  I  visited  my  friends  and 
I'elatives  in  Pennsylvania  in  the  winter 
of  1854-55.  On  this  trip  I  bore  testi- 
mony in  a  private  way  to  many.  Go- 
ing east  on  this  occasion  I  crossed  the 
plains  to  the  Missouri  river  in  Pres. 
John  Taylor's  company  and  was  or- 
dained an  Elder  by  Pres.  John  Taylor, 
in  September,  1854.  While  traveling  I 
contracted  the  disease  known  as  the 
gravel,  in  its  worst  form,  through 
drinking  impure  water,  and  I  suffered 
with  that  complaint  till  the  spring  of 
1857,  when  I  was  instantly  healed  by 
the  power  of  God,  at  a  reformation 
meeting  held  in  American  Fork,  Utah 
county,  to  which  place  I  had  moved  In 
1855,  and  where  I  resided  until  1877. 
While  there  I  was  ordained  to  the  offlce 
of  a  Seventy  by  Pres.  Joseph  Young.  In 
the  spring  of  1857  I  was  called  to  par- 
ticipate in  an  expedition  east,  to  assist 
in  protecting  the  overland  mail  from 
Indian  depredations,  and  also  to  assist 
in  locating  a  new  colony  on  Deer  creek, 
in  the  Black  Hills,  near  Ft.  Laramie. 
In  1861  I  went  to  the  Missouri  river  as 
a  Church  teamster  in  Capt.  Ira  Eld- 
redge's  train,  to  bring  emigrants  to  the 
Valley.  Sept.  24,  1861,  I  married  Har- 
riet Horton,  who  has  borne  me  nine 
children.  In  1857  I  was  ordained  a 
Seventy  by  Joseph  Young.  For  more 
than  thirty-five  years  I  have  labored  as 
a  Ward  teacher  in  the  different  Wards 
where  I  have  resided." 

JENKINS,  Thomas,  second  Bishop 
of  the  Fourth  Ward,  Salt  Lake  City, 
lUah  (from  1866  to  1875),  is  the  son  of 
John  Jenkins  and  Hannah  Cartwright, 
and  was  born  in  Herefordshire  Sept.  18, 
1829.  He  was  baptized  by  Elder  Wm. 
Noles  in  1838.  and  was  subsequently  or- 
dained a  Teacher  and  a  Seventy,  be- 
coming a  member  of  the  10th  quorum 
of  Seventy.  In  1866  he  was  ordained 
a  High  Priest  and  a  Bishop  and  set 
apart  to  preside  over  the  Fourth  Ward 
by  Bishop  Leonard  W.  Hardy.  He  la- 
bored in  that  high  and  responsible  po- 


BIOGRAPHICAL,    ENCYCLOPEDIA. 


605 


sition  till  1875,  when  it  wos  contemplat- 
ed by  the  Church  authorities  to  annex 
the  Fourth  Ward  to  the  Seventh  Ward, 
and  Bro.  Jenkins  resigned  his  position 


as  Bishop  -of  the  Fourth  Ward.  Bro. 
Jenkins  was  a  member  of  the  "minute 
men"  corps,  which  did  such  active  ser- 
vice during-  the  early  Indian  uprisings 
in  Utah  In  the  spring  of  1851  he  had 
a  most  exciting  experience  in  Skull 
valley;  the  Indians  had  stolen  a  large 
herd  of  cattle  from  the  settlers,  and 
while  riding  at  a  fast  gait  in  pursuit 
of  the  red  men,  Bro.  Jenkins'  horse 
leaped  over  a  steep  precipice,  descend- 
ing in  the  top  of  a  large  tree,  which 
limb  by  limb  gave  way  and  let  rider 
and  beast  to  th  e  ground  unharmed. 
Jan.  16,  1851,  Elder  Jenkins  married 
Ann  Smith,  and  later  he  yielded  obedi- 
ence to  the  principle"  of  plural  marriage 
by  taking  to  wife  Mary  R.  Avery  in 
1855;  in  1866  he  also  married  Mary  A. 
Fuller;  in  1870  he  married  Mahala  El- 
mer and  subsequently  he  mariied  Mary 
Ann  Baily.  He  is  the  father  of  twen- 
ty-seven children,  fifteeen  of  whom  are 
living,  and  they  are  all  faithful  mem- 
bers of  the  Church.  He  has  over  55 
grandchildren. 

SPERRY,  Harrison,  third  Bishop 
of  the  Fourth  Ward,  Salt  Lake  City, 
Utah,  is  the  son  of  Joy  Sperry  and 
Mary  Lamont,  and  was  born  in  Mecca, 
Trumbull  county.  Ohio,  March  24,  1832. 
He  first  heard  the.  gospel  in  the  early 
forties,  in  Hancock  county.  111.,  and 
accepted  it;   he  was  baptized  by  Elder 


Zenos  Gurley  in  1842.  In  1846,  together 
with  his  fathers  family,  he  left  for  the 
west,  going  as  far  as  Mount  Pisgah, 
Iowa,  where  his  mother  died.  From 
there  he  went  to  Highland  Grove.where 
his  father  died,  Jan.  1,  1847.  In  the 
spring  of  that  year,  Harrison,  together 
with  his  two  older  brothers  (William 
and  Charles)  and  a  sister  (Elizabeth), 
and  a  niece,  continued  the  journey 
westward,  crossing  the  plains  in  Jede- 
diah  M  Grant's  company,  and  arriving 
in  the  Valley,  Oct  17,  1847.  They  lived 
in  Salt  Lake  City  that  winter  and 
shared  in  the  hardships  of  those  early 
days,  living  on  roots,  etc.  Early  in 
1849  Bro.  Sperry  and  two  others  had 
quite  an  experience  with  the  Indians, 
while  taking  care  of  a  herd  of  cattle 
south  of  Salt  Lake  City,  on  Big  Cot- 
tonwood creek.  The  Indians  came  upon 
them  during  the  night  and  succeeded  in 
getting  away  with  the  whole  herd  of 
animals.  In  the  morning  the  alarm 
was  given  and  a  company  followed  the 
Indians  south,  and  had  an  engagement 
with  them  at  what  is  now  known  as 
Pleasant    Grove,    and    the    cattle    were 


regained  fiom  the  Indians.  In  1849- 
50.  during  the  "Provo  war,"  Brother 
Sperry  enlisted  as  a  U.  S. soldier  and  did 
active  seivice  in  that  war  with  the  red 
men.  He  served  as  a  "bushwhacker" 
and  had  some  very  exciting  experiences. 
About  1852  he  settled  down  and  engaged 
in  faiming  in  Salt  I.,ake  City  and  vicini- 
ty, which  occupation  he  has  successful- 
ly followed  ever  since.  He  married 
Mary  Mosley  in  1852.  with  whom  he  had 


606 


LATTER-DAY    SAINT 


three  children:  she  died  in  1859.  In 
1861  he  married  Susan  Mosley,  with 
whom  he  has  had  ten  children,  and  in 
1873  he  married  Ellen  Butterworth,  who 
has  borne  him  nine  children,  making 
him  the  father  of  twenty-two  children, 
eleven  of  whom  are  living.  Brother 
Sperry  was  ordained  a  Seventy  by  Har- 
rison Burgess  at  an  early  day,  and  was 
ordained  a  High  Priest  and  a  Bishop 
May  20,  1875,  and  set  apart  to  preside 
over  the  Fourth  Ward  by  Bishop  Ed- 
ward Hunter.  Prior  to  his  ordination 
as  Bishop  he  had  served,  for  a  number 
of  years,  as  a  counselor  in  the  Fourth 
Ward  Bishopric.  He  served  a  term 
in  the  Utah  penitentiary  for  conscience 
sake  in  1887. 

WINTER,  Thomas  AVilliain,  first 
Bishop  of  the  Fifth  Ward,  Salt  Lake 
City,  Utah,  was  born  Nov.  20,  1812,  at 
Portsea,  Portsmouth,  Hampshire,  Eng- 
land, son  of  Thos.  John  Winter  and 
Mary  Collier.  He  married  Ann  Dredge 
in  1833,  with  whom  he  had  one  child 
(Thos.  Winter),  who  is  now  a  resident 
of  the  Sixth  Ward.  Salt  Lake  City.  His 
chief  avocation  in  England,  after  he 
grew  to  manhood,  was  the  building  of 
railroad  bridges.  Becoming  a  convert 
to  "Mormonism,"  he  was  baptized  in 
June,  1844,  at  Bath,  Somersetshire, Eng- 


land, by  Elder  Thomas  Smith.  He  emi- 
grated to  America  with  his  wife  and 
son  in  1849,  crossing  the  Atlantic  in  the 
ship  "Zetland,"  and  after  spending  a 
year  in  St.  Louis,  Mo.  (where  he  was 
ordained  a  Priest  by  Nathaniel  H.  Felt), 


he  continued  the  journey  to  the  Valley, 
arriving  in  Salt  Lake  City  Sept.  5,  1850. 
He  located  with  his  family  in  the  Fifth 
Ward,  where  he  lived  in  tents  and 
wagons  for  some  time  on  the  very  spot 
where  he  afterwards  permanently  re- 
sided until  the  day  of  his  death.  When 
the  Fifth  Ward  was  organized  in  1853, 
he  was  chosen  to  preside  there,  being 
ordained  a  Bishop  April  11,  1853,  by 
Apostle  Orson  Hyde.  He  occupied  that 
position  till  July,  1860,  when  he  resigned 
and  the  Fifth  Ward  was  then  attached 
temporarily  to  the  Sixth  Ward.  Be- 
sides his  first  wife.  Bishop  Winter  mar- 
ried four  other  wives,  with  whom  he 
had  thirteen  children;  some  of  these 
are  quite  prominent  in  the  Church  at 
the  present  time.  Bishop  Winter  died 
in  Salt  Lake  City  Aug.  11,  1882. 

BRIMLEY,  Richard,  second  Bishop 
of  the  Fifth  Ward,  Salt  Lake  City,  son 
of  John  Brimley  and  Rachel  Whittle, 
was  born  Aug.  26,  1822,  in  the  village  of 
Euxton,   Lancashire,  England;   he  was 


baptized  by  Elder  James  Lee  in  the 
fall  of  1828,  at  Euxton,  and  became  a 
member  of  the  Dauber's  Lane  branch. 
He  was  soon  afterwards  ordained  to  the 
Priesthood,  and  as  an  Elder  of  the 
Church  he  presided  over  the  Euxton, 
Leyland  Moss  and  Longton  branches 
successively.  Together  with  his  wife, 
Ann  Southworth,  and  seven  children, 
he  emigrated  to  America  in  1868,  cross- 
ing the  Atlantic  in  the  ship  "Constitu- 
tion," which  sailed  from  Liverpool  June 
24th  and  arrived  at  New  York  Aug.  5th 
of  that  year.       This  was  the  last  sail- 


BIOGRAPHICAL    ENCYCLOPEDIA. 


607 


ing  vessel  ever  chartered  by  the  Church 
to  bring  Saints  over  the  Atlantic.  El- 
der Brimley  and  family  crossed  the 
plains  in  Capt.  John  Gillespie's  ox- 
train,  which  arrived  in  Salt  Lake  City 
Sept.  15,  1868;  and  soon  after  his  ar- 
rival Elder  Brimley  identified  himself 
with  the  Sixth  Ward,  Salt  Lake  City, 
where  he  subsequently  acted  as  second 
counselor  to  Bishop  Wm  H.  Hicken- 
looper,  and  also  as  superintendent  of 
the  Waxd  Sunday  school.  When  the 
Fifth  Ward  was  reorganized  in  1877, 
Elder  Brimley  was  called  to  act  as 
Bishop,  and  he  filled  that  position  until 
1884.  -  He  was  ordained  to  the  office  of 
a  High  Priest  under  the  hands  of  Sam- 
uel W.  Richards  and  Edwin  D.  Wool- 
ley  Nov.  26,  1869.  Elder  Brimley,  who 
is  now  79  years  of  age,  is  one  of  the 
firm_  and  faithful  members  of  the 
Church,  and  has  devoted  nearly  his 
entire  life  in  the  interest  of  God's  cause. 
He  is  the  father  of  seven  children,  of 
whom  six  are  now  alive:  among  his 
posterity  are  43  grandchildren  and 
three  great-grandchildren,  all  of  whom 
are  being  raised  in  the  Church. 

SEDDON,  Samuel  Matthew  Thomp- 
son, third  Bishop  of  the  Fifth  Ward, 
Salt  Lake  City,  is  the  son  of  Thomas 


Seddon  and  Hann&h  Thompson,  and 
was  born  Nov.  29,  1858,  in  Salt  LaJte 
City,  Utah.  He  was  baptized  when 
about  eight  years  old  by  Elder  James 
T.  Snarr.  Samuel's  education  was 
gaintd    in    the    public    schools   of     Salt 


Lake  City.  He  was  ordained  a  Dea- 
con and  a  Teacher  when  a  young  boy; 
later,  he  was  ordained  an  Elder  by 
Robert  R.  Irvine,  and  in  1882  he  was 
ordained  a  Seventy.  Nov.  30,  1884,  he 
was  ordained  a  Bishop  and  a  High 
Priest  and  set  apart  to  preside  over  the 
Fifth  Ward,  by  Pres.  Angus  M.  Can- 
non. Bishop  Seddon  has  always  been 
actively  engaged  in  Church  work,  as 
will  be  seen  by  the  following:  As  a  lad 
he  served  in  the  presidency  of  the  Dea- 
con's quorum  of  the  Sixth  Ward.  He 
was  second  counselor  in  the  Y.  M.  M.  I. 
A.  of  the  Fifth  Ward.  Jn  Sunday  school 
work  he  labored  as  a  missionary  and 
as  a  teacher,  till  1884,  and  as  Bishop 
of  the  Fifth  Ward  he  has  been  suc- 
cessful in  gaining  the  love  and  confi- 
dence of  the  Saints.  In  civil  life 
Bishop  Seddon  is  a  thrifty  and  ener- 
getic citizen,  and  has  always  been  en- 
gaged in  labors  looking  to  the  up- 
building of  the  country.  He  followed 
farming  and  stock-raising  as  a  young 
man.  Later,  he  was  engaged  by  the 
city  in  various  capacities.  He  was 
deputy  water  master  from  1894-1898, and 
during  1898-1899  he  was  water  master, 
street  supervisor  and  supervisor  of  the 
irrigation  department.  He  was  also  a 
member  of  the  State  National  Guard, 
and  attained  the  rank  of  first  lieuten- 
ant. He  married  Florence  Griffiths  in 
1881,  the  issue  of  which  union  is  nine 
children,  seven  of  whr)m  are  living. 

HICKKNLOOPER, William  Hainey, 

first  Bishop  of  the  Sixth  Ward,  Salt 
Lake  City,  Utah,  was  born  in  West- 
moreland county.  State  of  Pennsylva- 
nia, Sept.  22,  1804.  His  father  was 
Andrew  Hickenlooper,  son  of  Andrew 
Hickenlooper,  who,  with  his  wife,  came 
to  York  county,  Pennsylvania,  at  an 
early  day,  and  afterwards  moved  to 
the  western  frontier  of  Pennsylvania, 
near  the  present  site  of  Pittsburg:  they 
were  of  German  descent.  His  mother 
was  Rachel  Long,  daughter  of  John  (of 
Scotch  descent)  and  Rachel  Long.  His 
father  was  a  farmer  and  was  a  soldier 
in  the  Revolution,  serving  three  terms 
of  enlistment,  in  the  American  army. 
AVilliam  H.  remained  on  the  farm  un- 
til he  was  about  seventeeen  years  of 
age,  Avhen  he  started  out  to  earn  his 
own  livelihood;  he  followed  various 
occupations  for  a  number  of  years. 
Aug.  29,  1837,  he  married  Sarah  Haw- 
kins,  of  Indiana  county,   Pennsylvania 


608 


LATTER-DAY    SAINT 


(daughter  of  Caleb  and  Sarah  Haw- 
kings,  formerly  from  Maryland),  by 
whom  he  had  three  children — one  son 
and  two  daughters.  In  the  winter  of 
1838-39  William  and  family  were 
residing  in  Aimstrong  county,  Pennsyl- 
vania—at the  time  that  the  Latter-day 
Saints  were  being  so  bitterly  persecut- 
ed in  Missouri.  Rumors  were  current 
throughout  the  country  that  the  "Mor- 
mons" were  burning  and  pillaging  the 
houses  of  the  citizens  in  that  State; 
these  rumors  having  been  spread  by 
the  enemies  of  the  Saints  to  draw  pub- 
lic attention  from  their  own  horrible 
crimes  and  provide  a  temporaiy  excuse 
for  the  infamous  treatment  of  the 
"Mormons."  At  this  time  many  of  the 
Saints  who  had  remained  in  New  York 
'ere  emigrating  to  Missouri,  going  by 


raft  down  the  Allegheny  and  Ohio  riv- 
ers, then  traveling  up  to  the  gathering 
place.  One  of  these  rafts,  containing 
three  families,  on  its  way  down,  was 
anchoied  on  the  Allegheny  river  for  the 
night,  about  two  miles  from  Williams' 
farm;  that  night  it  froze  so  hard  that 
the  raft  could  not  be  got  loose,  and 
the  voyagers  were  compelled  to  land. 
Although  many  similar  rafts  passed 
down  during  the  winter,  this  was  the 
only  one  frozen  in.  Elder  Freeman 
Nickerson,  or  Father  Nickerson,  as  he 
was  familiarly  called,  was  the  leader  of 
the  detained  company,  and  he  at  once 
began  to  prea<h  the  new  and  everlast- 
ing gospel  to  the  i)eople  in  that  vicinity. 
One   day,    shoitly     afterward,    William 


met  Father  Nickerson  at  a  neighbor's 
house  and  invited  him  home,  being 
anxious  to  see  a  "Mormon" — a  real,  live 
"Mormon,"  though  he  looked  very 
much  like  an  ordinary  mortal  and  ap- 
peared to  be  an  intelligent  man — and 
to  learn  of  the  principles  of  "Mormon- 
ism."  about  which  so  much  was  being 
said,  and  which  many  thought  was  a 
"Yankee  trick."  Father  Nickerson  ac- 
cepted the  invitation,  and  was  intro- 
duced to  William's  wife  and  mother-in- 
law-  as  a  "Mormon"  preacher.  The 
whole  family  were  of  the  Baptist  per- 
suasion. Supper  was  provided,  and 
Father  Nickerson  consented,  by  the 
earnest  request  of  William,  to  remain 
all  night.  When  William  asked  what 
was  the  difference  betweeen  the  "Mor- 
mons" and  other  religious  sects,  the 
Elder  answered,  "We  believe  the  Bible: 
they  do  not."  William  disputed  this, 
but  was  forced  to  yield  point  after 
point  to  his  opponent,  throughout  a 
long  argument.  During  the  evening 
the  remainder  of  the  family  treated 
the  Elder  so  coldly  that  William  felt 
ashamed,  and  when  the  latter  went  out 
late  in  the  evening  to  attend  to  some 
outside  chores.  Father  Nickerson  de- 
parted, to  the  great  annoyance  of  his 
host.  Shortly  afterward  the  Elder 
called  and  told  William  that  he  was 
going  to  preach  at  a  certain  time  and 
place,  and  gave  him  an  invitation  to 
be  present  His  wife  objected,  how- 
ever, saying  if  he  went,  his  horse  would 
fall  and  he  would  have  his  neck  broken. 
The  night  before  the  meeting  it  stormed 
and  the  road  being  so  slippery,  William 
decided  to  stay  at  home.  Again  Father 
Nickerson  called,  and  announced  an- 
other meeting,  and  William's  wife  in- 
sisting that  if  he  attended  she  would 
go  with  him,  they  both  went.  William 
took  his  New  Testament  along,  intend- 
ing to  expose  every  error,  but  found  no 
u.se  for  it;  he  learned  that  the  Elder 
was  strictly  truthful  in  his  statements 
and  correct  in  his  references.  Father 
Nickerson's  daughter,  who  had  recent- 
ly lost  her  husband,  and  was  in  mourn- 
ing, exercised  the  gift  of  tongues  in  the 
meeting.  This  puzzled  William  con- 
siderably; at  first  he  thought  it  ridicu- 
lous, but  the  more  he  reflected  the  more 
he  was  forced  to  the  conclusion,  by  the 
appearance  of  the  lady  and  other  cir- 
cumstances, that  she  was  at  least  sin- 
cere, and  there  might  be  something  in 
it   aftei-  all.       Mrs.   Hickenlooper     bor- 


BIOGRAPHICAL,    ENCYCLOPEDIA. 


609 


rowed  the  Book  of  Mormon  for  a  week, 
and  William  read  it  through  to  dis- 
cover whether  it  was  an  imposition. 
When  Elder  Nickerson  asked  what  he 
thought  of  it,  he  answered  that  if  he 
was  going  to  write  a  fraud  he  would 
make  it  more  mysterious;  the  book"  was 
too  plain.  The  Elder  replied,  "The 
Lord  delights  in  plainness;"  which  fact 
William  had  to  admit.  Mrs.  Hicken- 
looper  partially  believed  the  first  ser- 
mon she  heard  preached,  but  her  hus- 
band had  met  with  a  number  of  im- 
postures, and  thought  he  would  be 
wary.  Mrs.  Hawkins  was  at  this  time 
.severely  afflicted  with  rheumatism,  and 
Father  Nickerson,  who  made  another 
visit  to  the  family,  told  her  if  she  had 
faith  she  could  be  healed,  and  after 
some  argument,  she  began  to  think  of 
the  matter.  One  day  the  old  lady  was 
lying  on  the  bed,  fully  awake;  suddenly 
she  sat  up  and  began  to  repeat — Wil- 
liam and  family  being  present  in  the 
room,  and  hearing  plainly  every  word — 
the  55th  chapter  of  Isaiah.  Going 
through  the  entire  chapter,  she  followed 
with  the  chapter  immediately  preced- 
ing, and  then  with  some  from  the  Book 
of  Mormon.  Williaw  was  greatly  sur- 
prised at  this,  for  he  remembered  the 
part  which  came  from  the  Book  of 
Mormon;  he  knew  well  the  old  lady  had 
never  read  that  book,  or  had  any  op- 
portunity of  learning  its  contents. 
When  asked  to  explain,  she  declared 
she  had  had  a  vision;  that  the  Bible 
had  been  presented  to  her,  and  she  had 
read  the  two  chapters  in  their  order; 
that  the  Book  of  Mormon  was  also 
placed  before  her,  and  she  also  read 
from  it;  that  the  letters  in  the  Bible 
were  very  plain  and  seemed  as  large 
as  her  thumb,  while  those  of  the  Book 
of  Mormon  were  much  smaller  and 
could  not  be  seen  so  easily.  She  was 
a  conscientious  woman,  and  was  very 
careful  in  her  statement.  The  next 
morning  Father  Nickerson  again  came 
to  the  house,  and  was  told  of  the  events 
of  the  day  before.  He  knelt  down  with 
the  family  and  prayed,  then  laid  hands 
on  Mrs.  Hawkins,  rebuking  her  sick- 
ness in  the  name  of  the  Lord;  the  rheu- 
matism immediately  left  her  body,  as 
did  also  a  pain  which  she  had  felt  for 
some  time  in  her  side.  The  old  lady 
at  once  expressed  a  desire  to  be  bap- 
tized. Mrs.  Hickenlooper  did  the  same, 
and  William,  who  had  by  this  time 
pretty      thoroughly      investigated      the 

Vol.  1,  No.  39. 


claims  put  forth,  was  convinced  of  the 
divinity  of  the  message,  and  the  follow- 
ing Sunday  was  appointed  to  attend 
to  the  ordinance  in  the  Allegheny  river, 
then  frozen  over.  On  going  down  to 
the  river,  where  they  expected  to  have 
to  cut  the  ice  on  Sunday,  they  found 
that  that  very  morning  the  ice  had 
broken,  and  they,  with  five  others,  were 
baptized.  This  was  in  February,  1839. 
A  branch  of  the  Church  numbering 
about  forty  members  was  organized, and 
William  was  ordained  to  the  office  of 
an  Elder  by  Elder  Freeman  Nickerson, 
March  34,  1S39,  and  was  oppointed  to 
preside  over  the  branch  which  shortly 
increased  to  about  one  hundred  mem- 
bers. A  few  days  after  this  organiza- 
tion, the  river  opened,  and  Father 
Nickerson  proceeded  with  his  company. 
In  the  year  1842,  William  paid  a  visit 
to  Nauvoo,  purchased  a  lot,  and  had  a 
house  built  on  it.  Here  he  first  saw 
the  Prophet  Joseph  Smith.  One  day 
the  Prophet  met  him  and  said,  "You're 
the  man  I  want  to  see.  I  want  some 
money  to  send  up  the  river  for  lum- 
ber for  the  Temple."  William  loaned 
the  amount  desired,  which  was  all  he 
had  with  him,  and  went  off  wondering 
how  the  Prophet  knew  he  had  any 
money.  Some  of  the  people  tried  to 
discourage  him,  saying  he  would  never 
get  it  back,  but  it  was  returned  ac- 
cording to  agreement.  In  April,  1844, 
he  moved  with  his  family  to  Nauvoo, 
111.,  and  was  there  at  the  time  of  the 
martyrdom  of  the  Prophet  and  Patri- 
arch and  during  the  eventful  scenes 
that  followed.  Nov.  2,  1844,  William 
was  ordained  a  Seventy,  and  became  a 
member  of  the  5th  quorum.  Aug.  31, 
1845,  he  was  ordained  to  the  office  of  a 
High  Priest,  at  Yelrome,  or  what  was 
generally  known  as  the  Morley  settle- 
ment, and  was  made  a  member  of  the 
High  Council  of  the  Stake,  of  which 
Solomon  Hancock  was  president.  In 
the  following  spring  he  was  driven  with 
the  Saints  into  Nauvoo,  twenty-eight 
miles,  leavmg  house,  lot,  farm  and  all. 
He  left  Nauvoo  for  the  west  in  obedi- 
ence to  Pres.  Brigham  Young's  instruc- 
tions, and  was  about  thirty  miles  dis- 
tant at  the  time  of  the  battle  of  Nau- 
voo; passed  through  Garden  Grove. 
Mount  Pisgah,  and  crossed  the  plains 
in  Daniel  Spencers  hundred,  Ira  Eld- 
i-edges  fifty,  Samuel  Ensign's  ten.  and 
reached  the  Great  Salt  Lake  valley, 
then  in  L^pper  California,    Sept.  22,  1847, 

Sept.  28,  1901. 


610 


LATTER-DAY    SAINT 


his   forty-third   birthday.       He   built   a 
lo?  cabin  half  a  block  south  of  the  "Old 
Fort."    near    his      late     residence,    into 
which  he  moved  with  his  family.       At 
the  time  of  the  organization  of  the  forts 
into  five  Wards.  William  was  appointed 
to   preside   over   what   was   then   called 
the   Fifth,    having   been    previously   or- 
dained a  Bishop  by  Pies.  John  Smith- 
in  1847— by  direction  of  the  High  Coun- 
cil,   with    Joseph    Stratton      and    Jacob 
Houtz  as  his  counselors.      In  1848,  Pres. 
Krighani  Young  organized  the  city  into 
Wards,  commencing  at  the  First,  as  at 
present,    and    William    was    appointed 
to  preside  over  the   Sixth.       That  sea- 
son, when  the  destitute  members  of  the 
Mormon    Battalion      arrived     in    Great 
Salt    Lake     valley.       he     went   around 
among  the  people  to  gather  something 
for   their   relief;    some    gave    a   pint   of 
wheat,  and  a  few  gave  more;    but  the 
people   were  very   poor,   and   provisions 
scarce.      Nov.  9,1850.  in  Salt  Lake  City, 
he  married  Sarah  C.  Ward,  daughter  of 
Wm.   and   Susanna  Ward,   of  England, 
by    whom    he    had    one    son    and    three 
daughters.      She  was  born  July  8,  1819, 
in    Keyham,    I.,eicestershire.    England; 
emigrated    to  Utah    in   1850.       Nov.    16, 
1S.'<G,  in  Salt  Lake  City,  he  married  Ann 
Ham, daughter  of  John  and  Sarah  Ham. 
of  England,  by  whom  he  had  three  sons 
and  two  daughters;   she  was  born  Jan. 
1.   1825,     in       Dundeswell,     Devonshire, 
England;    emigrated    to    Utah    in    1856; 
crossed    the   plains   with   Captain   Ells- 
worth's hand-cart  company.  On  March 
29,    1866.    Sarah,    his     first    wife.      died. 
July  9.   1S60.   Pres.   Brigham  Young  di- 
rected    Bishop     Hickenlooper    to     take 
(  harge  of  the  Fifth  Ward  also,  Bishop 
Winter  having  resigned;  he  did  so,  and 
I)resided  over  both  Wards  until  June  12. 
1877.   when   the  Fifth  Ward  was     reor- 
ganized, and  Richard  Brimley.  then  his 
second   counselor,    was   chosen     as     its 
Bishop.       Bishop       Hickenlooper     died 
Jan.  14.  1888,  in  Salt  I>ake  City.      At. the 
time  of  his  death  Bishop  Hickenlooper's 
living  posterity  numbered   twelve  chil- 
dren,  thirty-six   grandchildren   and   fif- 
ty-two great-grandchildren— 100  in  all." 

THORN,  "William,  Bishop  of  the 
Seventh  Ward,  Salt  Lake  City,  Utah, 
is  the  son  of  Thomas  Thorn  and  Mar- 
garet McGienty.  and  was  born  Oct. 
26.  1815,  at  Chalford,  Aston  parish. 
Oxfordshire,  England.  Elder  Thorn 
writes   in   a   brief  biographical   sketch: 


"My  parents  were  very  poor;  my  father 
died,  when  I  was  nine  years  old,  leav- 
ing my  mother  with  four  small  chil- 
dren—three boys  and  one  girl.  I.  be- 
ing the  oldest  child,  went  out  to  work 
for  a  farmer  for  about  eight  cents  a 
day,  but  by  working  overtime  I  was 
able    to    help    my    mother    to    pay    her 


house  rent.  My  mother  took  in  wash- 
ing to  support  the  family.  After  a 
v.hile  I  obtained  other  employment  and 
managed  to  save  enough  to  go  to  a 
night  school.  Wherever  I  worked  I 
endeavored  to  do  my  best  and  soon 
found  favor  with  my  employers.  After 
folowing  various  kinds  of  employment 
in  my  native  town,  I  decided  to  go  to 
London,  which  I  did.  I  went  there  not 
knowing  anyone,  but  soon  found  em- 
ployment in  a  livery  stable,  and  made 
friends  and  acquaintances.  Later,  I 
worked  for  a  lord  as  his  groom,  and 
finally  I  became  engaged  in  training 
blooded  horses  for  the  army  and  for 
racing  and  for  hunting.  I  was  en- 
gaged in  this  work  when,  in  the  fall 
of  1848,  I  first  heard  the  gospel 
preached  by  Elder  James  D.  Ross  and 
others.  From  the  time  I  first  heard 
'Mormonism"  T  believed  it  was  true, 
but  I  was  so  taken  up  with  other  af- 
fairs that  I  did  not  obey  it  practically 
till  April  23,  1849,  when  I  was  baptized 
and  confirmed  a  member  of  the  Church 
by  Elder  Wm.  Booth.  Subsequently 
I  was  ordained  a  Priest  by  Wm.  Booth 
and  did  local  missionary  work.  In 
the  fall  of  that  year  I  assisted  in  or- 
ganizing a  branch  of  the  Church  in 
Knightsbridge.    London,    and    in    July. 


BIOGRAPHICAL    ENCYCLOPEDIA. 


fill 


1S50,     I     helped  to  raise  up  a  branch  at 
Windsor.     Berkshire,    of    which    latter 
branch     I    became    the    seci'etary    and 
treasurer.       Jan.   6,  1851,  I  left  London 
for  America,  crossing  the  ocean  in  the 
ship  "Geo.  W.  Bourne,"  and  landing  at 
New  Orleans  March  20th.      From  there 
I  went  to  St.  Louis,  Mo.,  and  thence  to 
Council  Bluffs,  Iowa,   by  boat.       While 
on  this  journey    my      son     Henry    fell 
overboard   and   was   drowned   April  12, 
1851.       At   Council   Bluffs     we  obtained 
our  outfit  and  organized  for  the  journey 
Avest:   Elder  Alfred  Cordon  was  chasen 
captain  of  the  company,  and  we  start- 
ed   on    the    long-     and     wearisome    trip 
acros.^  the  plains  July  1,  1851.      We  ar- 
rived  in  the  Valley  Oct.  2,  1851,  nearly 
nine  months  after  we  had  left  London. 
T  located  on  the  spot  where  I  still  re- 
side  in    the   Seventh   Ward,    Salt   Lake 
City.       Soon    after   my   arrival     I   was 
appointed    to    be    a    Ward    teacher      in 
that    Ward.        During    the    first   winter 
I  suffered  much  from  rheumatic  fever, 
and  I  also  had  my  feet  frozen.      March 
23,   1852.   I  married     Mariah     Susannah 
Merrick,  and  in  November  of  that  year 
I  was  ordained  an  Elder  by  James  W. 
Cummings.       Feb.    5,    1853.    I    was     or- 
dained a  High  Priest  by  Wm.  W.  Ma- 
jor.      During  the  Johnston  army  trou- 
ble in  1S57-5S  I  did  military  service  in 
Echo  canyon  as  commissary  under  Col. 
Thos.    Callister:    later.    I    attained     the 
rank  of  captain.      While  I  was  absent 
my  family    moved    soutli,      to    Spanish 
Fork,  Utah  county,  but  after  the  trou- 
ble  wa.«  over  they  retu-rned.       Dec.   15. 
1S61.    I    was     chosen     to   act   as   second 
counselor    to    Bishop    Jonathan      Pug- 
mire,   jun..   of   the   7th   Ward,   and   was 
also    called    to     be     a    member    of    the 
High  Council,  which  position  I  held  for 
a  numbt-r  of  years.      At  the  reorganiza- 
tion of  the     Seventh     Ward   Bishopric, 
:\Iarch  12.  1S65,  I  was  called  to  serve  as 
first  counselor  to  Bishop  Thos.  McLel- 
land.        "When    Bishop    McLelland      re- 
signed  his   position   as   Bishop  Dec.   24, 
ISTO.    I    was   appointed    to   preside   over 
the    Ward    with      Elders      Henry    Din- 
woody    and    Thos.      H.     Woodbury     as 
counselors,    which    position    I    held    till 
June  15.  1877,  when  the  Ward  was  re- 
organized, and  I  was  ordained  a  Bishop 
and   set   apart     to     preside  as  such   by 
Pres.  Daniel  H.  Wells.  This  responsible 
position  I  have  held  tip  to  the  present 
time." 


McLiACHLAN,  William,  first  coun- 
selor to  Bishop  Wm.  Thorn  of  the  7th 
Ward,  Salt  Lake  City,  is  the  son  of 
Gilbert  McLachlan  and  Hannah  M'. 
Glencorse,  and  was  born  May  30,  1840. 
at  Gatelawbridge,  in  the  parish  of 
Morton,  Dumfriesshire,  Scotland.  He 
attended  school  until  his  thirteeenth 
year,  when  he  engaged  to  work  as  clerk 
in  a  hardware  store.  While  in  Essex, 
England,  working  for  his  half  brother, 
he  first  became  acquainted  with  the 
principles  of  the  gospel,  as  revealed  in 
these  latter  days,  and  was  baptized  in- 
to the  Church  July  9,  1859,  by  Elder 
Jos.  Silver.  He  was  soon  ordained  a 
Priest  in  the  Drunnow  branch,  of  the 
Essex  conference,  and  later  an  Elder 
by  Alexander  Ross.  Nov  6,  1860,  he 
married    Caroline     Filer.       Elder     Mc- 


Lachlan writes:  "In  the  year  1862  my 
wife's  mother  and  sister  emigrated  to 
Utah,  and  during  that  year,  in  answer 
lo  prayer,  the  Lord,  by  his  spirit,  spoke 
to  me  audibly  and  promised  that  I 
should  have  the  privilege  of  gathering 
with  the  Saints  the  following  year.  This 
promise  was  literally  fulfilled,  for  we 
arrived  in  Salt  Lake  City  Oct.  4,  1863. 
but  we  lost  by  death,  while  enroute  to 
Utah,  our  two  boys.  We  located  in 
Salt  Lake  City,  living  iirst  in  the  13th 
Ward  and  later  we  moved  into  the  7th 
Ward,  where  I  have  continued  to  re- 
side. In  1865  I  became  superintendent 
of  the  7th  Ward  Sunday  school,  and 
subsequently  Ward  clerk,  which  posi- 
tion I  held  till  1875.  I  was  also  treas- 
urer  for  the   Sunday  school  Union   for 


612 


LATTER-DAY    SAINT 


a  number  of  years  prior  to  1875.  Oct. 
n,  1875,  I  was  ordained  a  Seventy  by 
Pres.  Geo.  Q.  Cannon,  and  set  apart  for 
a  mission  to  New  Zealand.  While  la- 
boring as  a  missionary  in  that  coun- 
try I  greatly  enjoyed  myself  in  spread- 
ing the  gospel  truths  to  my  fellow-men. 
I  returned  home  in  March,  1877,  and  on 
June  15th,  of  that  year,  I  was  ordained 
a  High  Priest  and  set  apart  as  first 
counselor  to  Bishop  Wm.  Thorn,  of  the 
7th  "Ward;  I  am  still  serving  in  that 
rapacity,  and  as  superintendent  of  the 
Ward  Sabbath  school. 

LAMBERT.  George  Cannon,  senior 
president  of  the  23rd  quorum  of  Seven- 
ty, is  the  second  son  of  Charles  Lam- 
bert and  Mary  Alice  Cannon,  and  was 
born  at  Winter  Quarters  (Nebraska), 
April  11,  1848.  Had  it  not  been  for  the 
Indians  in  that  region,  in  the  spring  of 
the  previous  year,  killing  the  family's 
team  animals,  thus  preventing  the 
journey  westward  being  made  with  the 
pioneers,  he  would  doubtless  have  been 
born  in  Great  Salt  Lake  valley.  As  it 
happened,  he  was  a  year  and  a  half  old 
when,  in  October,  1849,  the  family 
reached  Utah,  Pres.  Brigham  Young 
in    the   spring  of  1848     having  advised 


them  to  retuin  again  to  Missouri  and 
remain  another  year,  i)romising  that 
they  should  be  blessed  in  so  doing.  Geo. 
C.  Lambert  grew  to  manhood  in  Salt 
Lake  City,  which  since  his  arrival  here 
has  ever  been  his  home.  Among  his 
earliest  recollections  are  those  of  dig- 
ging roots  and  gathering  weeds  for  the 


family's  subsistance  during  the  famine 
resulting  from  the  lavages  of  grass- 
hoppers in  Utah  in  the  early  fifties.  His 
boyhood  days  were  chiefly  spent  in 
herding  cows,  working  on  the  faim 
and  hauling  wood  from  the  mountains. 
His  educational  advantages,  while  the 
best  his  parents  could  give  him, and  the 
rudimentary  conditions  then  prevailing 
afforded,  were  extremely  limited,  con- 
sisting only  of  brief  attendance  at 
school  during  weather  not  favorable 
for  outdoor  work,  and  never  after  he 
was  fifteen  years  old.  During  the 
summer  of  1866,  when  18  years  of  age, 
he  served  on  an  Indian  expedition  in 
Sanpete  county,  and  figured  conspicu- 
ously in  the  Thistle  Valley  fight.  In 
January,  1867,  he  commenced  working 
at  the  printing  business,  first  on  the 
"Juvenile  Instructor,"  and  later  on  the 
"Deseret  News,"  serving  an  apprentice- 
ship in  all  departments  and  alternating 
office  work  with  making  business  trips 
through  the  country,  superintending 
the  Paper  Mill,  then  owned  by  the 
"Deseret  News"  Co.,  and  managing 
the  farm  and  attending  to  the  outdoor 
business  of  his  uncle,  Geo.  Q.  Cannon. 
For  a  number  of  years  he  was  a  part- 
ner with  the  latter  in  the  publishing 
business,  which  he  managed  with  suc- 
cess, doing  a  large  part  of  the  editorial 
as  well  as  the  mechanical  work  of  the 
business.  The  idea  of  publishing  the 
"Faith  Promoting  Series"  originated 
and  was  carried  into  effect  by  him,  and 
the  book  selling  and  stationery  busi- 
ness since  carried  on  in  the  name  of 
Geo.  Q.  Cannon  &  Sons  was  started  by 
him.  In  the  fall  of  1882,  he  w^as  called 
on  a  mission  to  England  and  sold  out 
his  business  interests  to  his  uncle,  Geo. 
Q.  Cannon.  He  served  almost  two  years 
and  three  months  on  his  mission,  one 
month  as  a  traveling  Elder  in  the  Lon- 
don conference  and  thf  rest  of  the  time 
in  the  mission  headquarters  in  Liver- 
liool,  first  in  the  business  department 
and  latterly  in  the  editorial  depart- 
ment. He  also  found  time  in  the  midst 
of  these  labors  for  considerable  outside 
missionary  work,  for  extensive  travel 
throughout  England,  Scotland,  Wales, 
Ireland,  the  Isle  of  Man,  France,  Den- 
mark, and  Sweden,  and  for  consider- 
able literary  work  on  the  side,  among 
the  latter  being  the  compilation  of  the 
"Iteady  Reference,"  since  found  so 
useful  to  missionaries.  He  returned 
home  the  latter  part  of  Deceml.er,  188+, 


BIOGRAPHICAL    ENCYCLOPEDIA. 


613 


and  was  told  by  Pres.  John  Taylor  on 
his  arrival  that  he  had  another  mission 
for  him  to  perform,  in  going  to  work 
in  the  "Deseret  News"  office,  either  in 
the  business  or  editorial  department. 
Feeling-  that  he  was  better  fitted  for  the 
former  than  the  latter,  he  so  engaged 
to  work,  but  almost  immediately  there- 
after, the  crusade  having  commenced 
and  the  editor  of  the  "News"  having 
to  absent  himself,  rendered  his  services 
in  that  department  necessary.  He 
continued  so  to  labor  for  the  next  six- 
teen months,  until  May  11,  18S6,  when, 
having  been  convicted  of  having  two 
wives,  and  sentenced  to  serve  six 
months'  imprisonment  and  pay  a  fine 
of  thi-ee  hundred  dollars  as  a  penalty 
therefor,  he  was  transferred  from  the 
office  to  the  penitentiary.  Two  days 
after  his  incarceration  commenced, 
Hon.  Caleb  W.  West,  then  governor  of 
Utah,  visited  the  penitentiary,  and, 
calling  the  Latter-day  Saints  there  im- 
prisoned together,  appealed  to  them  to 
abandon  their  plural  wives  and  promise 
to  obey  the  law  in  the  future  as  to  their 
marriage  relations,  promising,  if  they 
^\■ould  so  consent,  to  secure  their  par- 
don. Elder  Lambert  was  selected  by 
Pres.  Lorenzo  Snow  and  the  other  for- 
ty-seven brethren  there  imprisoned  to 
indite  a  reply  declining  the  offer,  which, 
when  completed,  was  signed  by  them 
and  forwarded  to  the  governor.  On 
regaining  his  liberty.  Nov.  11,  1886,  El- 
der Lambert  engaged  in  the  business 
department  of  the  "Deseret  News"  of- 
fice, first  as  assistant  manager  and  af- 
terwards for  several  years  as  superin- 
tendent, until  October,  1892,  when,  the 
business  having  been  leased,  he  as- 
sumed the  management  of  the  Granite 
Paper  Mill  for  a  corporation,  of  which 
he  was  a  member.  Six  months  later 
the  mill  was  accidentally  destroyed  by 
fire,  entailing  a  heavy  loss,  after  which 
he  pui'chased  the  remnant  of  the  stock, 
and.  in  the  name  of  the  Lambert  Pa- 
per Co.,  went  into  the  business  of  im- 
porting and  dealing  in  paper  and  kin- 
dred goods,  by  wholesale,  his  sons  be- 
ing associated  with  him.  For  the 
greater  part  of  his  life  Elder  Lambert 
has  held  the  office  of  a  Seventy,  hav- 
ing been  ordained  and  been  a  member 
of  the  23rd  quorum,  and  since  the  year 
1892  has  been  senior  president  of  that 
quorum.  If  it  be  conceded  that  pre- 
natal influences  tend  to  shape  human 
character,    it   need   not    be   difficult     to 


account  for  the  ))rominent  traits  in 
that  of  Geo.  C.  Lambert.  The  devotion 
to  principle,  firmness  in  maintaining 
their  convictions,  abhorrence  for  tyran- 
ny, untiring  energy  and  dogged  per- 
sistence in  accomplishing  that  which 
they  undertook,  exhibited  by  his  pa- 
rents, especially  during  the  crucial 
trials  through  which  they  passed  in  the 
two  years  immediately  preceding  his 
birth,  are  all  reflected  and  emphasized 
in  his  character. — X. 

WALLACK,  Henry,  secound  coun- 
selor to  Bishop  Wm.  Thorn  of  the  7th 
Ward,  Salt  Lake  City,  Utah,  is  the  son 
of  John  Wallace  and  Elizabeth  Ashley 
and  was  born  April  27,  1840,  in  Frome 
Somersetshire,  England.  He  was  bap- 
tized by  John  H.  Kelson  March  16,  1854, 


and  in  1858  he  was  ordained  a  Priest  by 
Elder  David  Mead.  In  1861  he  went  to 
London,  where  he  remained  till  May  12, 
1862,  when  he  left  for  Utah,  where  he 
arrived  Oct.  5th  of  that  year.  He  fol- 
lowed various  kinds  of  employment,  till 
1868,  when  he  purchased  a  business  in 
Salt  Lake  City  and  manufactured  can- 
dy. In  1885,  in  connection  with  Geo. 
Husler,  he  bought  the  Utah  Cracker 
Factory  business,  now  known  as  the 
National  Biscuit  Company,  and  he  is 
still  successfully  conducting  that  busi- 
ness. He  has  also  been  an  active  pro- 
moter of  other  home  industries,  and  is 
interested  in  the  Utah  Sugar  company, 
being  one  of  the  original  stockholders 
in  said  company,  and  also  in  the  Z.  C. 
M.  I.       In  1889  he  aided  in  opening  up 


614 


LATTER-DAY    SAINT 


the  Teton  Basin,  Idaho,  for  settlement, 
and  still  holds  interests  there.  Elder 
Wallace  has  been  an  active  Sunday 
school  worker  since  1861.  In  1865  he 
was  ordained  a  Seventy  and  later  be- 
came a  president  in  the  23rd  quorum. 
Dec.  24,  1899,  he  was  ordained  a  High 
Priest  and  set  apart  as  second  coun- 
selor to  Bishop  Wm.  Thorn,  of  the  7th 
Ward,  and  he  is  still  laboring  in  that 
capacity.  Elder  Wallace  married  El- 
len Harper  Feb.  7,  1861,  in  the  Endow- 
ment House,  Salt  Lake  City.  To- 
gether with  members  of  his  family  he 
has  made  two  journeys  to  Europe  in 
the  interest  of  his  genealogy,  etc.,  since 
he  first  came  to  Utah.  In  civil  life 
Bio.  Wallace  has  served,  as  a  school 
trustee  and  as  a  member  of  the  city 
council   with   credit  and  ability. 

SHEKTS,  Klijah  Funk,  second 
Bishop  of  the  Eighth  Ward,  Salt  Lake 
City,  Utah,  is  a  son  of  Frederick  Sheets 
and  Hannah  Page,  and  was  born  March 
22,  1821,  in  Charlestown,  Chester  coun- 
ty, Pennsylvania,  where  his  early  boy- 
hood was  passed.  Being  left  an  or- 
phan at  the  age  of  six  years  he  lived 
about  two  years  with  his  grandparents 
Page,  after  which  he  found  a  home  in 
the  family  of  the  late  Bi.shop  Edward 
Hunter,  who  at  that  time  was  a 
wealthy  farmer  in  Chester  county.  En- 
gaged in  farming  and  stock-raising, 
he  remained  with  Mr.  Hunter  for  nine 
years.  His  opportunities  for  attend- 
ing school  were  very  limited,  amount- 
ing to  about  six  weeks  a  year  from  his 
eighth  to  his  sixteenth  year.  Though 
rai.sed  on  a  farm,  young  Eliah  was 
naturally  inclined  to  mechanical  pur- 
.''uits,  and  at  the  age  of  seventeen  he 
apprenticed  him.self  for  three  years  to 
Mr.  Taylor  Dilworth,  to  learn  the  trade 
of  a  blacksmith.  While  thus  employed 
he  first  heard  the  restored  gospel 
preached  by  Elders  Edwin  D.  Woolley, 
Elisha  H.  Davi.s,  Erastus  Snow,  Lo- 
renzo D.  Barnes  and  others;  the  lat- 
ler  was  the  principal  instrument  in  the 
hands  of  the  Lord  to  rai.se  up  a  branch 
Of  the  Church  in  Chester  county,  Penn. 
Young  Eliah  was  converted  to  the 
truth  at  once  and  was  baptized  by 
Erastus  Snow  July  5,  1840.  In  1841  he 
emigrated  to  Nauvoo,  III.,  arriving 
there  in  September.  In  April,  1842, 
he  was  ordained  to  the  office  of  an 
Elder,   and    was   also   one   of  about     a 


hundred  men  who  volunteered  to  work 
six  months  on  the  Nauvoo  Temple 
without  pay.  Sept.  4,  1842,  he  left  Nau- 
voo, in  company  with  Joseph  A.  Strat- 
ton,  en  a  mission  to  Pennsylvania. 
They  were  gone  twenty  months,  dur- 
ing which  time  they  baptized  about  six- 
ty souls;  they  returned  to  Nauvoo  May 
4,  1844,  with  a  company  of  thirty  emi- 
grating Saints.  Soon  after  his  re- 
turn to  Nauvoo,  Elder  Sheets  was  called 
on  another  mission,  this  time  to  Great 
Britain.  Together  with  Elders  Jo- 
seph A.  Stratton,  Elisha  Davis  and  J. 
B.  Meynell,  he  arrived  in  Liverpool. 
England,  Aug.  24,  1844.  He  labored 
successfully    in    Lancashire.    Yorkshire. 


Herefordshire  and  Radnorshire,  and 
spent  considerable  of  his  time  in  visit- 
ing the  different  branches  and  encour- 
aging the  Saints.  He  presided  over 
the  Bradford  conference  several 
months  and  later  had  charge  of  the 
Herefordshire  confeience.  In  return- 
ing to  America,  he  went  as  a  passen- 
ger in  the  ship  "Liverpool"  which 
sailed  from  Liverpool,  England.  Jan. 
16,  1846.  He  was  one  of  the  Elders  called 
home  to  receive  his  blessings  in  the 
Nauvoo  Temple,  before  the  Church  left 
for  the  wilderness;  but  the  company 
arrived  too  late  for  him  to  enjoy  that 
privilege.  On  the  day  of  his  departure 
from  Liverpool  he  was  married  to  Miss 
Margaret  Hutchinson,  of  Radnorshire, 
on  shipboard.  Elder  Wilford  Woodruff 
performing  the  ceremony.  Soon  after 
his  return  to  Nauvoo,  he  made  prepara- 
tions to  go  to   the  west,   and   with    an 


BIOGRAPHICAL    ENCYCLOPEDIA. 


615 


outfit  consisting  of  a  yoke  of  oxen,  a 
cow  and  an  old  wasoa  (borrowing  an 
additional  yoke  of  cattle  from  Joseph 
A.  Stratton),  he  crossed  the  Mississippi 
river  about  the  1st  of  May,  1846.  He 
spent  the  winter  of  1846-47  at  Winter 
Quarters,  where  his  wife  took  sick  and 
died  Feb.  1,  1847.  Their  only  child  died 
a  few  weeks  later.  April  6,  1847,  he 
married  Susannah  Musser,  and  two 
months  later  resumed  the  journey  west- 
ward. He  crossed  the  plains  as  cap- 
tain of  ten  in  Perregrine  Sessions'  com- 
pany of  fifty,  which  arrived  in  the  Val- 
ley Sept.  22,  1847.  With  his  young 
wife  he  located  in  the  "Old  Fort,"  and 
(luring  the  winter  of  1847-48  he  assisted 
in  making  roads  into  the  canyons; 
hauled  wood  for  winter  use  and  cut 
loR-s,  and  built  a  house  in  the  fort  for 
his  family.  In  the  spring  of  1848,  he 
went  to  work  with  "Burr  Frost,  in  a 
blacksmith  shop,  and  followed  his 
trade,  besides  doing  a  little  farming, 
till  December.  1850.  when  he  was  called 
on  a  mission  to  Iron  county  as  one  of 
Geo.  A.  Smith's  company  of  pioneers 
to  that  part  of  the  country.  Thus  he 
became  one  of  the  first  settlers  of  Paro- 
wan.  He  remained  on  that  mission 
about  six  months  and  then  returned 
to  Salt  Lake  City,  where  he  soon  af- 
terwards was  elected  a  member  of  the 
ity  council  and  alderman  of  the  first 
municipal  ward,  which  office  he  held 
continuously  for  about  twelve  years. 
May  11,  1856,  he  was  ordained  to  the 
office  of  a  High  Priest  and  Bishop  and 
set  apart  to  oreside  over  the  Eighth 
Ward.  Previous  to  that  h*^  held  the 
position  of  a  president  in  the  second 
duorum  of  Seventy,  having  been  or- 
dained a  Seventy  April  9.  1845,  by  Wil- 
ford  Woodruff,  while  on  his  mission  in 
Great  Britain.  Feb.  8,  1857,  Bishop 
Sheets  yielded  obedience  to  the  higher 
law  of  marriage  by  taking  to  wife 
Elizabeth  Leaver,  with  whom  he  sub- 
sequently had  ten  children.  May 
11.  1861,  his  wife  Susannah  Mus- 
ser died  in  Salt  Lake  City.  She  had 
borne  him  seven  children.  Dec.  7.  1861, 
he  married  a  fourth  wife,  Emrha  Spen- 
cer, who  subseciuently  bore  him  ten 
children;  she  died  in  May,  1890.  In 
1868  Bishop  Sheeets  was  called  by  Pres. 
Brigham  Young  to  go  to  Provo.  Utah 
county,  where  he  was  chosen  as  a 
counselor  to  Pres.  Abraham  O.  Smoot 
at  the  time  the  Stake  of  Zion  in  Utah 
county  was  reorganized.  He  also  acted 


as  a  member  of  the  city  council  and 
alderman  of  Provo  city  and  took  an 
active  part  in  the  building  of  the  Provo 
Woolen  Factory.  Agreeable  to  the 
counsel  of  Pres.  Brigham  Young,  he 
took  a  grading  contract,  together  with 
Abraham  O.  Smoot,  on  the  Union  Pa- 
cific railroad.  They  organized  a  co- 
operative company,  numbering  75  men 
who  all  made  good  wages.  The  con- 
tract represented  $50,000.  In  1869-70 
Bishop  Sheets  filled  a  short  mission  to 
the  States  of  Pennsylvania  and  New 
York.  Besides  preaching  the  gospel 
he  visited  many  of  his  relatives  and 
friends,  and  gathered  considerable  of 
his  family  genealogy.  He  also  spent  a 
pleasant  time  at  Washington,  D.  C,  in 
the  society  of  Captain  Wm.  H.  Hooper, 
who  at  that  time  was  Utah's  delegate 
to  Congress.  In  1870  Bishop  Sheets 
was  appointed  assessor  and  collector  of 
Utah  county.  April  28,  1871,  Pres.  Brig- 
ham Young  appointed  him  traveling 
Bishop  in  Utah,  Juab,  Millard,  Sevier, 
Sanpete  and  Tooele  counties.  He  also 
accompanied  Pres.  Young  and  others 
on  a  visit  to  Bear  Lake  valley,  Soda 
Springs  and  other  parts  of  the  northern 
country.  In  August,  1871,  he  was  ap- 
pointed to  take  charge  of  all  the 
Church  stock  and  sheep  and  also  of 
the  Church  pastures,  in  place  of  Briant 
Stringham,  who  had  died.  He  filled 
that  position  over  sixteeen  years.  In 
1872  he  accompanied-  Pres.  Brigham 
Young  on  a  mission  to  St.  George,  and 
at  the  general  conference  of  the  Church 
held  April  8,  1873,  he  was  chosen  and 
sustained  as  an  assistant  trustee-in- 
trust of  the  Church.  He  occupied  that 
position  as  long  as  Pres.  George  A. 
Smith  acted  as  trustee-in-trust.  Hav- 
ing yielded  obedience  to  the  principle 
of  plural  marriage  at  an  early  day  he, 
among  many  others,  became  a  prisoner 
for  conscience  sake  in  1888.  On  the 
13th  of  October  of  that  year  he  was 
sentenced  by  Judge  Sanford  to  eighty 
days'  imprisonment  in  the  Utah  peni- 
tentiary and  to  pay  a  fine  of  $150  and 
costs  of  court.  Having  served  his  term 
and  paid  his  fine,  he  was  released  Dec. 
31,  1888.  On  the  occasion  of  his  release 
the  Saints  of  the  Eighth  Ward  turnet? 
out  en  masse  and  gave  a  grand  eva- 
sion in  his  honor.  Prior  to  his  im- 
I)ri.sonment  he  had  been  an  exile  for 
four  years,  being  hunted  by  U.  S.  depu- 
ty marshals.  Since  the  dedication  of 
the   Salt    I.,Hke   Temple,    in    189:5.   Bishop 


616 


LATTER-DAY    SAINT 


Sheets  has  been  one  of  the  leading 
workers  in  that  sacred  edifice,  and  hav- 
ing now  attained  the  ripe  age  of  eighty 
years  he  is  remarkably  bright  and 
strong,  both  physically  and  mentally. 
As  a  missionary  abroad,  a  pioneer  of 
the  west,  a  presiding  Church  officer,  a 
Temple  worker  and  a  business  man,  his 
noble  characteristics  and  unflinching 
integrity  has  become  thoroughly  es- 
tablished and  universally  known,  and 
there  are  but  few  men  in  the  Church 
who  are  more  extensively  and  favor- 
ably known  among  the  Saints  of  God 
than  Bishop  Sheets.  Having  now  pre- 
sided over  the  Eighth  Ward  about  for- 
ty-five years,  he  is  the  oldest  acting 
I'.ishop  in  the  Church.  For  some  time 
he  has  been  a  widower,  his  four  wives 
having  all  passed  away.  Of  his  28 
children,  21,  namely  11  sons  and  10 
daughters,  are  yet  alive.  On  the  occa- 
sion of  the  celebrating  of  the  eightieth 
anniversary  of  his  birthday  his  grand- 
children numbered  49;  and  he  had  one 
great   grandchild. 

WEST,  JabezW,.  fifth  Bishop  of  the 
Ninth  Ward,  Salt  Lake  City,  Utah,  is 
the  son  of  Chas.  H.  J.  West  and  Eliza 
Dangerfield,   and   was  born   in   London, 


England,  May  22.  1858.  As  an  infant 
he  was  blessed  in  the  Goswell  Road 
branch.  London.  Together  with  his 
parents  he  emigrated  to  America  in 
1863.  crossing  the  Atlantic  ocean  on  the 
ship  •Amazon."  They  arrived  in  Salt 
Lake  City  Oct.   3.   186.3.   where  they  lo- 


cated.      .Jabez  was  ordained  a   Deacon 
by  Joseph   H.   Felt,  and  later   (Jan.   14, 
1881),   he   was   ordained   an     Elder     by 
John   Coulam.       Jan.   20,   1881,   he  mar- 
ried Jessie  Hoggan,   daughter  of  Wal- 
ler and  Agnes  Hoggan.       From  1897  to 
1899   he  performed   a  mission   to   Great 
Jiritain,  where  he  labored  successfully 
in  the  Manchester  and  London  confer- 
ences,   presiding   over   the    latter.       He 
baptized  a  number  of  people,  including 
some  of  his   relatives,   and  enoyed   hia 
missionai-y    labors    very   much.       April 
16,  1900,  he  was  ordained  a  Bishop  and 
a  High  Priest  and  set  apart  to  preside 
over  the  9th  Ward,   Salt  Lake     Stake, 
by  Pres.  Jos.  F.  Smith,  which  position 
he  at  present  fills.      Bro.  West  has  seen 
the  power  of  God  made  manifest  many 
times   in   his   life.       Once,    when   but  a 
small  child,  he  had  his  arm  broken,  and 
in  crossing  the  plains,  his  leg  was  run 
over  by  one  of  the  wagons,  and  to  all 
appearances   his   leg   was   broken;    but 
in   both  instances,   by  the   blessings  of 
the  Lord,  he  was  healed.      In  civil  life 
Elder   West   is   a   prosperous   business 
man,   being  a  member  of     the   firm   of 
Knight  and  Company,     wholesale  meat 
merchants. 

WOODRUFF,     Wilford,   Junior,     a 

prominent  Elder  in  the  9th  Ward,  Salt 
Lake  City,  is  the  eldest  son  of  Wilford 
W^oodruff   and   Phebe   W.    Carter,     and 
was    born    in    Montrose,      Lee    county, 
Iowa.   March  22,  1840.     His  early  child- 
hood was  spent  in  and  about  the  beau- 
tiful and  historic  city  of  Nauvoo.     The 
associations    formed      here      filled     his 
mind    with    impressions      and      scenes 
which   all   time   can   never  erase.       Al- 
though but  a  child  at  the  martyrdom 
of    the   Prophet   Joseph   Smith,   he    re- 
members  well   the  terrible   scenes     en- 
acted   at    that   time,    and    no    less  does 
he   remember   the   kindness   and   affec- 
tion  shown   him   by  the  Prophet  while 
his  father  was  fulfilling  a  series  of  mis- 
sions   in    the    Eastern    States.       In    his 
journal  he  writes:     "The  Prophet  called 
often   at     our     home,     and     I   remem- 
ber well,   how  he  used   to   play  games 
with    me;    and    although     his    life   was 
filled  with  so  many  cares,  he  never  for- 
got a  kind  word  for  the  children."  Dur- 
ing the  first  ten  years  of  Wilford's  life 
his   father  was   almost   constantly   ab- 
sent from  home  doing  missionary  work 
for  the  Church,  which  of  necessity  left 
the  care  and   training  of   himself  and 


BIOGRAPHICAL    ENCYCLOPEDIA. 


617 


four  other  little  ones  to  the  untiring 
devotion  of  their  mother.  In  the  spring 
of  1846  he,  together  with  his  parents, 
left  Nauvoo,  performing  the  toilsome 
journey  to  Winter  Quarters.  Here  he 
remained  with  his  mother  while  his 
father,  Avith  the  notable  band  of  pio- 
neers under  the  leadership  of  Pres. 
Brigham  Young,  wended  their  way  to 
the  valley  of  the  Great  Salt  Lake,  ar- 
riving on  July  24,  1847.  In  the  spring 
of  184S  his  father  was  called  again  on 
a  mission  to  the  Eastern  States.  He 
took  his  family  with  him  and  left  them 
at    Cambridgeport,    Mass.,    where    Wil- 


ford  attended  school.  In  1849,  his 
father  and  mother,  with  their  little 
ones,  again  started  for  Utah,  where 
they  arrived  Oct.  14,  1850.  After  their 
arrival  in  the  Valley  he  spent  most  of 
his  time  until  the  spring  of  1863  under 
the  direction  of  his  father,  building 
bridges,  roads  and  fences,  clearing 
land  or  assisting  in  whatever  enterprise 
he  was  needed,  to  improve  or  build  up 
his  valley  home.  March  28,  1848,  he 
was  baptized  and  confirmed  at  Winter 
Quarters.  He  was  also  ordained  a 
Priest  the  same  day  under  the  hands 
of  his  father  and  Elder  John  Benbow. 
March  18,  1856,  he  received  his  endow- 
ments and  was  ordained  an  Elder  at 
Salt  Lake  City.  He  was  ordained  a 
Seventy  April  9,  1863,  and  in  March, 
1863,  he  left  Salt  Lake  City  on  a  mis- 
sion to  England,  returning  in  the  fall 
of  1866.  In  October.  1867,  with  his 
young  wife,Emily  Jane  Smith, whom  he 
married  Oct.  12,  1867,  he  went  on  a  colo- 


nizing mission  to  St.  Thomas,  Ariz., 
returning  to  Salt  Lake  City  in  January, 
1871.  In  October,  1871,  he  and  his  wife, 
Emily,  went  on  a  colonizing  mission  to 
Randolph, Rich  county,  Utah,  returning 
to  Salt  Lake  City  in  March,  1877.  Since 
the  dedication  of  the  Salt  Lake  Temple 
he  has  been  constantly  employed  with- 
in its  walls.  The  seeds  sown  by  his 
parents  during  his  childhood  have 
borne  fruit  in  the  son,  who  during  his 
whole  life  has  been  an  ardent  advocate 
of  the  principles  of  the  gospel  of  Jesus 
Christ.  In  Utah  he  has  been  permitted 
to  see  happy  homes  and  thrifty  farms, 
where  sagebrush  once  held  sway;  in 
place  of  hunger  and  discouragement 
he  has  witnessed  abundance  and  con- 
tentment: the  little  log  cabin  in  the 
lane  he  has  seen  replaced  with  commo- 
dious houses;  he  has  watched  the  busy 
hum  of  wheels  and  the  shrill  sound  of 
the  locomotive  blot  out  the  warwhoop 
of  the  Indian  and  the  howl  of  the 
coyote,  and  he  has  seen  the  scarred  and 
forbidding  face  of  nature  blossom  like 
the  rose.  His  wife  Emily,  after  bear- 
ing him  four  children  (Lucy  E.,  Wil- 
ford,  Elias  S.  and  Asahel),  died  M&y  8, 
1878.  Subsequently  (May  25,  1879),  he 
married  Julia  Spencer,  with  whom  he 
had  five  children  (Geo.  W.,  Leo  E., 
Phebe  W.  Carter,  Emily  Pearl  and  Ju- 
lia Ellice).  After  her  death  (Feb.  1, 
1895),  he  married  Marie  L.  Erickson 
(April  24,  1896), who  has.  borne  him  three 
children  (Marie,  Ezra  M.  and  Ruth). 
Of  his  twelve  children,  eight  are  alive 
at  the  present  time,  besides  an  adopted 
son  (Frank  Carter). 

TOBIASON,  Theodore,  a  prominent 
Elder  in  the  Ninth  Ward,  Salt  Lake 
City,  was  born  March  2,  1864,  in  Malmo, 
Sweden.  With  his  mother  he  emigrat- 
ed to  Utah,  where  he  was  baptized  into 
the  Church  in  1873.  He  was  ordained 
an  Elder  in  October,  1885,  and  married 
Laura  B.  Woolley  Oct.  21,  1885.  From 
October.  1887,  to  September,  1889,  he  la- 
bored as  a  missionary  in  the  North- 
western States.  On  his  return  home 
he  was  called  to  labor  as  a  home  mis- 
sionary in  the  Salt  Lake  Stake,  and  in 
1891  he  was  called  to  labor  as  a  Sun- 
day school  missionary  in  the  Tooele 
Stake.  He  was  ordained  a  Seventy  in 
1890,  and  in  1895-97  he  filled  a  mission 
to  Sweden,  where  he  labored  in  the 
Gothenburg  conference,  first  as  a  trav- 
eling  Elder   and    later    as    president   of 


618 


LATTER-DAY    SAINT 


the  conference.  He  returned  home  in 
May,  1897.  At  home  Kkler  Tobiason  is 
an  active  worker  in  the  Sunday  school, 
mutual  improvement  associations,  and 
other  organizations  of  the  Church. 

PETTEGREW,  David,'  first  Bishop 
of  the  Tenth  Ward.  Salt  Lake  City, 
Utah,  was  born  July  29,  1791,  in  Weath- 
ersfield,  Windsor  county,  Vermont,  and 
received  his  diploma  from  Harmony 
Lodge,  No.  2,  Cincinnati,  Ohio,  as  a 
master  mason,  Oct.  4,  1820.  He  was 
baptized  by  Elder  Isaac  Higbee  in  18.32, 
and  in  the  following  November  went 
with  his  family  to  Jackson  county,  Mo., 


where  he  bought  160  acres  of  land  and 
settled  on  the  HIg  Blue  river,  six  miles 
west  of  Independence.  Nov.  8,  1833,  he 
was  driven  from  his  home,  which  was 
burned  by  an  armed  mob,  led  by  Gen. 
Moses    Wilson    and    Hugh    Brazeille,    a 


lawyer.  Together  with  six  other  men, 
who  were  not  sick,  and  84  women,  chil- 
dren and  sick  men,  he  went  south  to 
Van  Buren  county,  and  took  shelter 
from  a  severe  snow  storm  in  a  cave, 
from  which  retreat  they  were  driven 
on  the  18th  of  that  month.  He  lived  in 
Clay  county  three  years  and  then  re- 
moved to  Caldwell  county,  where  he 
bought  more  government  land  and 
ag.iin  built  a  house.  In  the  fall  of  1838, 
he,  with  about  sixty  others,  was  in- 
carcerated in  Richmond  jail  for  several 
weeks,  and  in  January,  1839,  was  ex- 
l>elled  from  the  State  of  Missouri,  under 
the  exterminating  order  of  Gov.  Lil- 
burn  W.  Boggs.  He  removed  to  Com- 
merce (afterwards  Nauvoo)  in  1839, 
where  he  acted  as  a  member  of  the 
High  Council.     He  left  Nauvoo  May  20, 

1846,  and  arrived  at  Council  Bluffs  on 
July  1st.  A  few  days  later  he  enlisted 
in  the  Mormon  Battalion,  and  marched 
to  Santa  Pe,  New  Mexico,  where  he 
was  appointed  commissary-sergeant, 
and  continued  in  that  office  until  the 
command  arrived  in  California.  In  July, 

1847,  he  received  an  honorable  discharge 
and  came  to  Great  Salt  Lake  valley 
in  the  following  September.  He  was  a 
senator  in  the  Provisional  State  of 
Deseret,  commencing  Dec.  8,  1849;  chap- 
lain in  the  lower  house  of  the  Utah 
legislature  during  the  sessions  of  1857- 
-58  and  1860-61;  presided  over  the  High 
Priests  quorum  from  Oct.  8,  185:},  ta 
Apiil  7,  1856,  and  acted  as  Bishop  of  the 
10th  Ward,  Salt  Lake  City,  from  April, 
lS4y,  to  his  death,  which  occurred  in 
said  city  Dec.  31,  1863.  He  lived  and 
died  a  good  man,  firm  in  the  faith,  and 
beloved  by  all  who  knew  him. 

SPElRS,A<laiii, Bishop  of  the  Tenth 
Ward,  Salt  Lake  City,  since  1877,  was 
born  in  Beavertown,  Beaver  county, 
Penn.,  July  7,  18:^4.  While  yet  an  in- 
fant his  ))arents  embraced  the  gospel 
through  the  administration  of  Orson 
Pratt  and  others,  who  raised  up  a 
branch  of  the  Church  in  Beavertown. 
In  18.39  his  ))a rents  removed  to  Com- 
merce, Hancock  county,  III.,  where 
Ad.Mm  Si)eirs  was  baptized  in  the  Mis- 
sissippi river  when  about  eight  years 
old.  He  passed  through  the  scenes  of 
persecution  in  Nauvoo  until  the  exodus 
In  1846.  when  the  family  removed  west- 
ward; remained  one  year  In  Montrose, 
Iowa,  and  another  at  Winter  Quarters: 
came  to  Great  Salt  T>ake  valley  in  1848, 


BIOGRAPHICAI.    ENCYCLOPEDIA. 


619 


He  located  in  the  Tenth  Ward,  Salt 
Lake  City.  April  6,  1853,  he  was  or- 
dained to  the  oftlce  of  a  Teacher  and 
set  apart  to  act  as  counselor  to  McGee 


Harris,  president  of  all  the  Teachers  in 
the  Church.  On  the  same  day  he 
helped  the  lesser  Priesthood  to  lay  the 
corner  stones  of  the  Temple  in  Salt 
Lake  Cit5%  being-  the  youngest  member 
of  the  Priesthood  who  took  part  in 
these  ceremonies.  In  1863  he  succeed- 
ed McGee  Harris  as  president  of  the 
Teachers'  quorum,  and  occupied  that 
position  until  the  reorganization  of  the 
Stakes  in  1877.  Agreeable  to  call  from 
the  authorities  of  the  Church,  he  went 
on  a  mission  to  the  Green  River  coun- 
try in  November,  1853,  and  thus  be- 
came one  of  the  founders  of  Fort  Sup- 
ply. In  December  of  that  year  he  was 
married.  In  the  Avinter  of  1857-58  he 
participated  in  the  Echo  Canyon  ex- 
pedition. Elder  Speirs  was  one  of  the 
first  settlers  of  the  Tenth  Ward,  and 
has  taken  an  active  part  in  its  local 
affairs  from  the  beginning  until  the 
present  time.  For  many  years  he  la- 
bored as  a  Ward  teacher,  was  a  mem- 
ber of  the  25th  quorum  of  Seventy, 
acted  as  counselor  to  Bishop  Pette- 
grew,  and  finally,  June  20,  1877,  was 
ordained  and  set  apart  to  his  present 
position  as  Bishop  of  the  Tenth  Ward. 
He  has  also  served  as  alderman  from 
the  1st  precinct,  acted  as  justice  of  the 
peace,  police  judge,  etc.  In  early  Utah 
days  he  filled  the  position  of  a  captain 
in  the  Nauvoo  Legion  and  took  an  ac- 
tive part  in  the  military  affairs  of  the 
Territory. 


PAUL,  Joshua  Hughes,  president 
of  the  Latter-day  Saints  L^niversity, 
Salt  Lake  City,  Utah,  was  born  in 
Salt  Lake  City,  Jan.  20.  1863.  When  a 
boy  he  herded  cows,  at  one  time  having 
charge  of  the  dairy  herd  belonging  to 
Pres.  Brigham  Young.  He  also  worked 
as  a  carpenter's  apprentice  to  his 
father,  and  later  at  the  Salt  Lake  brew- 
ery under  the  firm  of  Keysor  &  Moritz. 
At  the  age  of  eighteen  he  entered  the 
University  under  Dr.  John  R.  Park,  and 
in  the  course  of  three  years  graduated 
in  the  normal,  the  natural  science,  and 
the  political  science  course,  courses  of- 
fered at  that  time  by  that  institution. 
He  was  then  made  a  teacher  in  the  Uni- 
versity, and  in  the  same  year  married 
Annie  M.Pettegrew,a  daughter  of  Bish- 
op David  Pettegrew.  Prof.  Paul  taught 
for  nine  years  in  the  University,  was 
associate  editor  of  the  "Salt  Lake 
Herald"  for  one  year,  president  of  the 
Brigham  Young  College  at  Logan  for 
three  years,  president  of  the  Agricul- 
tural College  of  Utah  for  two  years,  etc. 
For  a  short  time  hp  was    an    associate 


editor  of  the  "Deseret  News,"  and  has 
been  the  president  of  the  Latter-day 
Saints  College,  now  the  Latter-day 
Saints  LTniversity,  for  more  than  two 
years.  In  addition  to  the  certificates 
of  grraduation  already  mentioned  from 
the  University  of  Utah,  Prof.  Paul 
holds  a  high  school  life  certificate  from 
the  State  Board  of  Education,  the  de- 
grees B.  S.  D.  and  D.  L.  D.  from  the 
General    Church    Board    of    Education, 


620 


LATTER-DAY    SAINT 


and  the  degrees  Ph.  B.,  M.  A.,  and  Ph. 
D.  from  the  Illinois  Wesleyan  Univer- 
sity. His  professorship  in  the  Latter- 
day  Saints  University  is  that  of  philo- 
sophy. His  post  graduate  studies  have 
been  political  and  social  science  and 
philosophy.  The  Latter-day  Saints 
University  has  advanced  rapidly  under 
his  administration  and  is  now  one  of 
the  foremost  educational  institutions  in 
this  State.  President  Paul,  when  a 
boy,  was  a  member  of  an  efliclent  quo- 
rum of  Deacons  in  the  10th  Ward, which 
for  yeais  enjoyed  the  distinction  of  sup- 
plying the  meeting  house  with  all  cur- 
rent expenditures,  sometimes  to  the 
amount  of  $300  in  one  year.  He  was 
secretary  of  an  Elders'  quorum  in  the 
same  AVard  and  is  now  a  president  in 
the  16th  quorum  of  Seventy.  He  has 
always  been  a  student  or  teacher  in  the 
Sunday  schools.  In  September,  1896, 
he  went  on  a  mission  to  Great  Britain 
and  labored  for  two  years,  mostly  in 
Edinburgh  and  Rirming-ham. 

McRAE.  Alexander,  second  Bish- 
<ip  of  the  Eleventh  Ward,  Salt  Lake 
City,  was  born  in  Anson  county,  North 
Carolina.  Sept.  7,  1807;  removed  with  his 
parents  to  South  Carolina,  and  after 
wards  to  Iredell  county,  in  his  native 
State,  where  he  learned  the  trade  of  a 
tailor.  When  about  twenty  years  old 
he  left  home,  and  in  March,  1829,  en- 
listed in  the  U.  S.  Army  in  South  Caro- 
lina: he  served  five  years.  After  his  dis- 
charge in  1834,  he  removed  to  Louisville, 
Kentucky,  and  subsequently,  Oct.  2, 
1834.  married  Eunice  Fitzgerald,  at  New 
Castle.  Hinry  county,  Ky.  From  there 
he  removed  to  Ripley  county,  Indiana, 
where  he  embraced  the  fullness  of  the 
gospel  and  was  baptized  in  June,  1837, 
together  with  his  wife.  In  September 
following  he  removed  to  Far  West,  Mo., 
where  he  was  elected  a  captain  in  the 
23rd  regiment  of  the  Missouri  militia. 
During  the  persecutions  and  mobbings 
in  1838  he  took  a  very  active  part  in  the 
defense  of  his  people  until  he  was  be- 
trayed into  the  hands  of  the  enemy  by 
Geo.  M.  Hinkle,  together  with  the  Pro- 
phet and  other  brethren,  Oct.  31,  1838. 
With  them  he  passed  through  all  the 
hardships  and  mock  trials  to  which 
they  were  subjected  and  finally  was  in- 
carcerated in  Liberty  jail.  There  he  re- 
mained until  the  spring  of  1839,  when 
he   .together  with   his  fellow-pri.soners, 


succeeded  in  getting  away  from  the 
guard  and  escape  to  Illinois.  At  Quin- 
cy,  where  he  remained  for  a  short  time, 
he  was  ordained  to  the  office  of  a  Sev- 
enty.     Subsequently,      he      removed    to 


Ripley  county,  Indiana,  and  later  estab- 
lished himself  as  a  tailor  in  Nauvoo, 
111.,  and  also  assisted  in  various  ways 
to  build  up  that  city.  In  1844  he  filled  a 
mission  to  North  Carolina,  and  re- 
turned to  Indiana  after  the  Prophet's 
death.  In  the  spring  of  1845  he  returned 
to  his  home  in  Nauvoo,  where  he 
passed  through  all  the  persecutions  and 
hardships  which  the  Saints  had  to  en- 
dure in  those  days.  As  a  captain  of 
the  Nauvoo  Legion,  he  took  an  active 
part  in  the  defense  of  Nauvoo,  and  ren- 
dered efficient  service  in  the  famous 
battle  fought  in  September,  1846.  Pre- 
vious to  this  he  had  served  as  an  aide- 
de-camp  to  General  Don  Carlos  Smith. 
After  the  capitulation  of  Nauvoo  he 
went  to  Winter  Quarters,  and,  later, 
located  temporarily  at  Kanesville,  Iowa. 
While  residing  in  the  latter  place  he 
was  elected  sheriff  of  Pottawattamie 
county.  Finally,  he  came  to  Great  Salt 
Lake  valley,  with  his  family,  in  1852. 
Jan.  19,  1857,  he  was  ordained  Bishop 
of  the  Eleventh  Ward,  Salt  Lake  City,  a 
position  M'hich  he  occupied  until  his 
death.  In  1869-70  he  filled  a  mission  to 
the  States,  laboring  principally  in  Mis- 
sissippi and  Alabama,  together  with  his 
son  Daniel.  After  a  long  and  eventful 
career.  Bishop  McRae  died  at  his  resi- 
dence in  Salt  Lake  City,  June  20,  1891. 


BIOGRAPHICAL    ENCYCLOPEDIA. 


621 


MORRIS,    R   ■      '        third   Bishop   of 
the    Eleventh    Ward,    Salt    Lake    City, 
Utah,  was  born  at  Barrowden,  Rutland- 
shire, England,  Sept.  13,  1843.  His  moth- 
er being  already  in  the  Church,  he  was 
baptized  Nov.  28,  1852,  and  when  four- 
teen years  of  age  was  ordained  to  the 
office  of  a  Priest  and  appointed  secre- 
tary and  treasurer  of     the  Barrowden 
branch  of  the  Church.  He  emigrated  to 
the  United  States  in  1860,   crossing  the 
Atlantic    in  the  ship  "Wm.     Tapscott," 
which  sailed  from  Liverpool,  England, 
May  11th  of  that  year.     He  resided  in 
the   city  of  Cincinnati   one     year     and 
came  to  Utah  Territory  in  1861;  located 
in  the  Eleventh  Ward,  Salt  Lake  City. 
In   1864   he   went  back  to   the   Missouri 
river  after  the  poor,  making  the  round 
trip  as  a  Church  teamster  in  Capt.  Wm. 
Hyde's  company.    In  1867  he  participat- 
ed in  an  Indian  expedition  to  Sanpete 
county,   during  which   he   was   exposed 
to   great   danger  on  various   occasions. 
When  John  Hay  was  killed  at  Fayette, 
Sept.   4,   1867,   Elder  Morris  was  sitting 
by  his  side  and  afterwards  assisted  in 
carrying  the  dead  body  to  a  neighbor- 
ing house.     At  home  he  has  filled  many 
responsible     positions       of     honor     and 
trust;  for  many  years  he  acted  as  Ward 
teacher,    has   been     assistant     superin- 
tendent of  the    Ward     Sunday    school, 
presided  over  the  Y.  M.  M.  I.  A.  several 
terms,    served    as    school    trustee,    vice- 
president  and  president  of  the  ecclesias- 
tical Ward   organization,   etc.     Dec.   21, 
1867,    he   was   ordained    to   the   office   of 
an  Elder  and  married  Janette  Watson. 
Subsequently  he  became   a  member   of 
the  18th  Quorum  of  Seventy,  and  in  Au- 
gust 1877,  he  was  ordained  to  the  office 
of  a  High  Priest  and  set  apart  to  act 
as    second    counselor    in    the     Eleventh 
Ward  Bishopric.  Nov.  1,  1891,  he  was  or- 
dained a  Bishop  and  set  apart  to  pre- 
side over  the  11th     Ward     by     Apostle 
Abraham  H.  Cannon,  which  position  he 
is   at   present   filling.     July,   8,    1885,    he 
was  arrested  on  a  charge  of  unlawful 
cohabitation    and    placed    under    $1,500 
bonds,    and    when   his   case   was   called 
in      the      Third      District      court,    Feb. 
10,      1886,      he      pleaded      guilty,      and 
on      the      15th      day      of      that      month 
he     was     sentenced     by     Judge     Zane 
to  six  months'  imprisonment  and  to  pay 
a  fine  of  $150  and  costs.     After  serving 
his  term  in  the  Utah  penitentiary,  and 
paying  his  fine    and  costs,    he    was  re- 
leased July  18,  1886.     He  was  elected  a 


member  of  the  city  council,  in  1897  and 
served  with  credit  and  ability.  Bishop 
Morris  is  a  tanner  by  trade,  being  a 
member  of  a  thrifty  firm  (Rowe,  Morris. 
Summerhays  Co.)  doing  business  in  that 
line.  He  is  of  slender  build,  but  large 
of  stature,  his  height  being  6  feet  2  in- 
ches. His  complexion  is  fair  and  fea- 
tures unusually  prominent,  and  his  eyes 
are  full,  kindly  and  expressive.  He  is 
universally  respected  and  known  as  a 
faithful  Elder  in  the  Church. 

CROW,  Charles  Henry,  a  promi- 
nent Elder  in  the  Eleventh  Ward,  Salt 
Lake  City,  was  born  Aug.  18,  1830,  in 
Alvechurch,  Worcestershire,  England. 
His  father  dying  when  he  was  a  boy, 
necessitated  his  starting  to  work  at  an 
early  age.      At  seventeen  he  was     ap- 


prenticed to  a  harness  and  collar  mak- 
er, and  he  followed  that  business 
through  life.  Dec.  26,  1853,  he  mar- 
ried Mary  Sharp.  Three  weeks  later 
(Jan.  16,  1854)  he  was  baptized  a  mem- 
ber of  the  Church  of  Jesus  Christ  of 
Latter-day  Saints,  the  doctrines  there- 
of having  been  taught  to  him  by  a  fel- 
low-workman— the  late  Thomas  Lloyd, 
of  Wellsville,  Cache  county.  Shortly 
after  this  his  wife  also  was  baptized; 
Ihey  belonged  to  the  Birmingham  con- 
ference. He  was  ordained  a  Priest  and 
labored  as  a  local  missionary.  Feb.  14. 
1856,  together  with  his  wife,  he  sailed 
from  Liverpool  in  the  ship  "Caravan," 
their  destination  being  Utah,  but  they 
remained  in  Brooklyn  and  New  York 
city  about  three  years.      While  here  he 


622 


LATTER-DAY    SAINT 


was  ordained  an  Elder,  and  labored  as 
a  teacher  among  the  Saints  in  the  New 
York  branch  of  the  Church.  In  May, 
1859,  he  left  New  York  city  for  Utah, 
and  arrived  in  Salt  Lake  City  Sept.  1, 
1859,  after  driving  one  of  the  late  Judge 
Alexander  Pyper's  ox-teams  across  the 
plains.  This  company  was  in  charge 
of  Bishop  Frederick  Kesler.  In  1864  he 
opened  a  harness  shop  in  Salt  Lake 
City,  and  subsequently  he  entered  into 
partnership  with  Daniel  Seegmlller, 
whom  he  had  baptized  in  New  York 
and  who  had  been  his  fellow-workman 
in  a  harness  establishment  in  that  city. 
Later,  he  went  into  business  with  Hen- 
ry Bowring.  Soon  after  his  arrival  in 
Utah  he  located  in  the  Eleventh  Ward, 
Salt  Lake  City,  which  was  his  home 
until  his  death.  Soldiers  who  were 
located  at  Fort  Douglas  frequently  were 
guilty  of  disturbing  the  peace  and  rob- 
bing the  gardens  of  vegetables  and 
fruits.  The  people  and  their  posses- 
sions needed  piotection,  and  for  many 
years  special  police  were  on  guard.  For 
a  great  many  years  he  was  captain  of 
the  Eleventh  Ward  Special  Police,  a 
body  of  men  who  i-isked  many  dangers 
at  the  hands  of  reckless  characters,  and 
who  did  service  for  many  years  without 
thought  of  monetary  reward.  In  1866 
he  went  to  Sanpete  county  as  a 
lieutenant  under  Captain  Andrew  Burt 
in  the  expedition  against  the  Indians. 
Afterwards  he  served  as  captain  of  the 
second  company,  third  regiment  of  in- 
fantry, of  the  Nauvoo  Legion.  In  a 
civil  capacity  he  was  constable  in  Salt 
Lake  City  for  sixteen  years;  as  a 
special  policeman  he  was  active  in 
raids  against  liquor  and  gambling 
houses  and  houses  of  prostitution,  and 
also  served  as  a  member  of  the  city 
<ouncil  from  the  fifth  precinct,  being 
appointed  to  the  position  made  vacant 
by  the  death  of  Judge  Alexander  Py- 
per.  He  had  the  confidence  of  the  lead- 
ers of  the  Church,  and  was  a  trusted 
guard  to  Pres.  Brigham  Young  and 
John  Taylor.  He  was  a  president  of 
the  22nd  quorum  of  Seventy  for  a 
number  of  years,  and  later  he  acted  in 
the  same  capacity  in  the  57th  quorum. 
This  position  he  held  until  the  time  of 
his  death,  which  occurrred  at  his  home 
in  Salt  Lake  City.  Dec.  27,  1900.  Elder 
Crow  was  the  father  of  twelve  children, 
six  of  whom  died  in  early  youth,  two 
Leing  l)uried  in  England,  two  in  Brook- 


lyn,  and   two  in   Salt  Lake   City.       His 
wife  and  six  sons  survived  him. 

DUNCAN,    Homer,    senior  president 
of  the  Third  Quorum  of  Seventy  and  a 
veteran   Elder  of   the   Eleventh   Ward, 
Salt    Lake    City,    is    the    son    of    John 
Duncan  and  Betsy  Taylor  Putnam,   (a 
granddaughter  of  General   Israel   Put- 
nam,   of    Revolutionary    war    renown), 
and  was  born  at  Barnet,  Vermont,  Jan. 
19,  1815.      Elder  Duncan  writes:   "When 
I  was  fifteen  years  of  age,  I  first  heard 
a  portion  of  the  Book  of  Mormon  read, 
and  also  the  testimony  of  the  witnesses. 
I  was  at  once  convinced  of  its  truthful- 
ness.      In  the  later  part  of  July,  1831, 
I   had   a  vision.       Between   twelve   and 
one    o'clock,    noon,    while    in    my    bed- 
room, my  eyes  were  opened  so  that  I 
could  see  far  away  to  the  west.    As  I 
looked,  I  saw  two  Elders  coming  to  our 
place,    who,    when    they   arrived,     said, 
'We    have    new    manna    from    heaven, 
just    sent    down.'       They    further    said 
that      they    were    sowing    it    broadcast 
over  the  earth,   and  every  person   who 
paitook  of  it,  and  who  continued  to  do 
so,    would    be    saved,    while    those    that 
rejected    it   would   be   damned.       Many 
partook  of  it,  some  liking  it  and  others 
turning  away  from  it.       Of  those  that 
partook    were    my    father,    who    was    a 
Congregationalist     deacon,    Hazen    Al- 
drich,  a  Methodist  class  leader,  Daniel 
S.   Miles,  a  Universalist,       and      Orson 
Johnson,  an  atheist.      I  saw  them  bap- 
tized on  the  15th  day  of  May,  1832,  and 
I  saw  that  I  would  be  plowing  in  the 
field  that  day.      T  also  saw  that  Hazen 
Aldrich   would   apostatize,    and   that     I 
would   join   the   Church   after   that.       I 
likewise  saw  my  brother  Chapman  go 
to    the   western   States   to   be    baptized. 
This  was  the  end  of  the  vision.       The 
Elders    that    I   saw    were   Orson    Pratt 
and    Lyman   E.  John.son.   and   they  did 
baptize   the  four  men  on   the  15th   day 
of  May,  1832,  and  I  was  also  ploughing 
in  the  fields  on  that  day,  as  I  had  seen 
in  the  vision.  My  brother  was  baptized 
in   1832,   in     Jackson     county,   Missouri. 
Hazen  Aldrich  apostatized  during     the 
winter  of  1837-38,  and  I  was  baptized  in 
Grand        river,    at    Adam-ondi-Ahman, 
Missouri,    in   1838.       In   1839    T    was  or- 
dained a  Seventy  in  Far  West,  Mo.,  un- 
der the  hands  of  Heber  C.  Kimball  and 
Amasa   M.    layman.     Heber  C.    Kimball 


BIOGRAPHICAL  ENCYCLOPEDIA. 


623 


beins  iiiouth.  Before  I  left  Quincy,  111., 
the  Prophet  Joseph  Smith'.s  father, 
who  was  then  Patriarch  to  the  Church, 
grave  me  a  patriarchal  ble.ssing.  Among 
other  things  he  told  me  in  that  blessing 
that  I  was  a  descendant  of  Ephraim 
and  one  of  the  hundred  and  forty-four 
thousand  spoken  of  in  the  Bible,  and 
that  I  should  have  visions  both  by  day 
and  by  night  until  I  should  say:  'Oh 
Lord.  God,  Almighty,  I  am  satisfied 
with  Thy  goodness.'  The  Patriarch's 
words  have  been  fulfilled  to  the  very 
letter.  In  the  spring  of  1839  I  left 
Quincy,  111.,  on  my  first  mission.  I 
traveled  through  Illinois,  Indiana  and 
Ohio  to  Buffalo,  N.  Y.;  thence  I  went 
to  Toronto,  Canada,  where  I  was  ar- 
rested on  the  charge  of  being  a  spy. 
I  was  acquitted,  however,  and  received 
a  pass  which  was  good  throughout 
Canada.  After  this  I  preached  as  I 
journeyed  along,  until  I  reached  Co- 
burg.  Canada,  Avhere  I  remained  a  short 
time,  and  then  traveled  back  into  the 
country.  There  I  met  a  man  by  th^ 
name  of  Luntz,  who  had  joined  the 
Church  and  who  welcomed  us  to  his 
house.  My  traveling  companion  was 
Elder  Amos  Hodges,  and  we  agreid  to 
hold  a  meeting  on  the  following  day, 
which  was  Sunday.  I  had  a  dream 
that  Saturday  night,  in  which  it  w-as 
shown  me  that  we  would  baptize  three 
people  after  our  next  meeting.  All 
this  happened  just  as  I  had  seen  it. 
After  attending  to  the  confirmation, 
we  went  home  with  Jonathan  Newman 
and  his  wife,  two  of  the  parties  who 
had  just  been  baptized.  After  talking 
about  the  gifts  of  the  gospel,  they 
wished  us  to  administer  to  their  ten- 
year-old  daughter  who  was  covered 
with  .scabs  from  head  to  foot.  We  did 
so.  and  in  thi-ee  days  the  scabs  began 
to  fall  off,  and  in  six  days  she  w-as 
entirely  well,  her  skin  having  become 
perfectly  smooth.  In  the  fall  of  1839 
we  went  east,  crossing  the  Trent  river, 
neither  of  us  having  purse  or  scrip. 
"\Ve  cf'me  to  a  farmer's  house,  whose 
name  was  Jehiel  Hoard,  where  we 
asked  for  something  to  eat  and  a  place 
to  skeji.  Our  request  was  granted, 
and  we  stayed  in  that  neighborhood 
about  ten  days,  holding  meetings  which 
were  well  attended.  The  night  before 
leaving  for  Coburg.  I  asked  Mrs.  Hoard 
if  we  might  bless  her.  She  answered 
in  the  affirinative,  after  which  I  asked 


her  husband,  if  he  had  any  objection; 
h-?  said  he  had  none.  Then  we  laid 
oiu-  hardi-  on  her  head  and  blessed 
her.  piomising  her  perfect  health,  in 
the  name  of  Jesas  Christ,  even  to  the 
reiiovatmg  of  her  whole  system.  She 
had  a  very  lage  neck  which  protruded 
beyond  her  chin— a  disease  commonly 
known  as  goitre.  In  the  morning  she 
was  entirely  well,  all  signs  of  the  goitre 
having  disappered.  We  left  that 
morning  and  had  gone  four  miles  on 
our  way  when  we  were  overtaken  by 
a  messenger,  and  asked  to  return,  as 
Mrs.  Hoard  desired  to  be  baptized;  so 
we  returned.  After  holding  a  meeting, 
w-e  went  to  a  place  where  there  was 
water  and  baptized  Mrs.  Hoard.  Her 
husband's  brother  wished  to  be  bap- 
tized also;  but  he  had  cut  his  foot 
with  an  ax  and  was  compelled  to  walk 
on  crutches.  He  disliked  going  in  the 
water,  for  fear  it  would  injure  his  f03t. 
I  tolc'  h;m  that  the  Lord  did  not  insti- 
tute ordinances  in  his  Church  that 
would  injure  anyone,  so  he  w^alked  in- 
to the  water  on  his  crutches  and  was 
baptized.  He  came  out  of  the  water 
and  walked  about  half  a  mile  to  his 
home  without  his  crutches,  and  his  foot 
trouble"!  him  no  more.  By  this  time 
certain  sectarian  ministers  began  to 
say  that  tiiese  miracles  were  done  by 
the  jiower  of  the  devil,  etc.  In  the 
me.inTjnie,  another  Elder  arrived, 
whom  wfc  left  to  finish  the  work  in 
thai  nc-ighborhood,  and  I,  with  my 
companion,  returned  to  Coburg.  We 
remrired  in  that  vicinity  until  the 
spring  of  1840,  when  we  crossed  over 
the  line  to  the  state  of  New  York.  Af- 
ter holding  a  few  meetings  there,  we 
went  eas^  through  northern  New  York 
by  way  of  Canton,  Potsdam  and  Wat- 
ertown,  holding  meetings  all  along  the 
road,  and  it  was  with  tired  and  blister- 
ed feet  that  we  reached  Chautauqua. 
Here  we  asked  a  Catholic  by  the  name 
of  John  McArthur,  if  we  might  stay  in 
his  house  that  night,  telline  him  our 
business.  He  refused  us,  but  he  said 
that  Samuel  Smith,  a  man  living  one 
mile  away,  might  take  us  in.  We  reach- 
ed Mr.  Smith's  house  at  dusk,  end  he 
said  we  might  stay  with  him  as  long 
as  we  desired.  A  similar  offer  was 
made  me  once  before  at  Vincennes,  In- 
diana, but  I  did  not  accept  it.  I- de- 
cided, however,  not  to  decline  such  an 
offer    thi     next    time.        We    stayed    in 


624 


LATTER-DAY    SAINT 


that  vicinity  a  lonp  time,  holding 
meetings  much  to  the  annoyance  of  ev- 
ery sectarian  minister  in  the  place. 
A  spirit  of  opposition  filled  them,  and 
one  minister  by  the  name  of  Miles  sent 
word  to  all  his  congregation  to  be  sure 
and  come  to  meeting,  as  they  were  go- 
ing to  blow  the  "Mormons"  sky  high; 
but  the  people  did  not  think  their  min- 
ister manifested  a  Christianlike  dis- 
position m  making  such  a  remark.  We 
continued  holding  well-attended  meet- 
ings in  that  place  for  about  two  months 
but  so  far  none  had  come  forward  to 
be  baptized.  Consequently  we  began 
to  feel  Cfuite  discouraged  and  thought 
of  leaving  the  place.  I  said  to  my 
companioTi.  'L,et  us  ask  the  Lord.'  We 
did  so  and  retired  for  the  night.  We 
had  not  been  in  bed  an  hour  when  the 
answer  came  in  the  shape  of  a  figure 
which  we  both  understood  to  mean 
that  we  were  to  remain  there.  A  few 
Sundays  later  a  woman  asked  to  be 
baptized;  and  from  that  time  requests 
of  that  kind  came  frequently  until  we 
had  baptized  seventy-six  persons.  One 
morning  ir.  1S41,  I  had  a  vision  in  which 
I  saw  Piatt  N.  Banker,  who  was  then 
four  miles  away,  riding  his  horse  to 
water  and  carrying  his  22-month-o'd 
.son  in  his  arms.  He  returned  to  the 
stable,  left  his  son  outside,  while  he 
tied  the  horse  and  fed  the  animals.  The 
child  who  followed  his  father  unnotic- 
ed into  the  stable,  went  close  up  to  one 
of  the  horses,  who  kicked  him  in  the 
forehead  and  broke  his  skull.  I  saw 
a  party  come  where  I  was  and  notify 
his  df'Ught^r  who  was  teaching  school 
in  that  place.  In  the  vision  I  also 
saw  myself  go  to  Mr.  Banker's  and 
stay  with  the  child  while  it  lived.  I 
saw  myself  preach  its  funeral  sermon 
and  go  to  the  grave  and  there  thank 
the  neighbors  for  the  kindness  and 
sympa'ihy  for  and  in  behalf  of  the 
bereaved  The  vision  was  all  fulfilled 
to  the  very  letter.  A  Baptist  woman 
livin-T:  in  that  neighborhood  offered  to 
furnish  the  feathers,  if  the  neighbors 
would  tar  and  feather  us.  This  wo- 
man was  in  the  room  a  few  hours  be- 
fore the  child  died.  The  father  asked 
me.  if  anything  could  be  done  for  the 
child,  to  which  I  answered,  'No,'  but 
I  said  that  I  would  pray  for  and  bless 
the  child  that  it  might  have  no  more 
pain.  I  did  so,  in  the  pre.sence  of  Mrs. 
Smith,   the  woman  who  had  offered  to 


furnish  the  feathers,  after  which  the 
child  had  no  more  pain.  When  Mrs. 
Smith  left  the  house,  she  stated  that 
she  had  seen  the  power  of  God  made 
manifest  through  me,  and  that  she 
wouid  never  say  anything  ill  against 
any  one  of  the  'Mormon'  Elders  again. 
She  kept  her  word,  but  never  joined 
the  Church.  The  next  time  I  was 
blesed  with  the  miraculous  display  of 
the  power  of  the  Highest  was  in  a 
night  vision.  I  saw,  four  miles  away, 
a  man  by  the  name  of  Armstrong  way- 
lay one  of  our  'Mormon"  sisters,  and 
a.ssault  her;  she  fought  desperately; 
he  knocked  her  down,  giving  her  a 
black  eye,  but  she  raised  up  again,  and, 
clearing  herself  from  him,  ran  away, 
so  that  he  did  not  accomplish  his  hell- 
ish purpose.  The  vision  continuing, 
I  saw  that  George  Grover  would  come 
for  me  the  next  day  to  go  and  admin- 
ister to  that  siter;  that  I  would  be 
standing  in  a  certain  place  and  see  him 
coming;  that  Platte  N.  Banker  wou'.d 
be  with  me,  and  that  I  would  ask  him 
who  that  man  was  coming;  that  I 
would  tell  him  that  it  was  George  Gro- 
ver coming  for  me  to  go  and  see  Hen- 
rietta, the  name  of  the  young  lady  in 
question,  who  was  very  sick,  etc.  All 
this  was  literally  furfilled.  Mr.  Grover 
came  as  I  had  seen  in  the  vision;  and 
as  soon  as  he  had  delivered  his  message 
I  saddled  my  horse  and  went  to  her 
house,  four  miles  away.  When  I  ar- 
rived there,  I  found  her  in  a  precarious 
condition  from  the  effects  of  the  pre- 
vious night's  encounter.  I  blessed  her; 
the  pain  left  her,  and  in  a  few  day.s 
she  was  all  right  again.  I  counseled 
her  not  to  commence  legal  proceedings, 
as  'Mormons'  did  not  have  any  frien-Js 
near  by,  except  God  and  his  son  Jesus 
Christ.  I  also  told  her  that  I  saw 
the  whole  encounter  with  Armstrong 
in  a  vision  the  night  before.  The  next 
miraculous  manifestation  of  the  power 
of  God  through  me  was  upon  Allison 
Grover,  a  young  man  (not  then  a  mem- 
ber of  the  Church),  who  lived  in  Chau- 
tauqua, in  1842.  He  was  taken  sick 
with  the  measles,  and  his  parents  sent 
for  a  doctor.  The  lad  got  along  fairly 
well  for  a  while;  but  after  a  few  days 
he  contracted  a  severe  cold  and  had  a 
relapse.  The  doctor,  who  again  was 
sent  for,  said  that  the  young  man  could 
not  live,  and,  speaking  jeeringly  of  the 
Saints,  he  said  'If  your  Mormon  Elders 


BIOGRAPHICAL    ENCYCLOPEDIA. 


625 


can  cure  him,  I  shall  believe  they  have 
some  power."  They  sent  for  us.  When 
we  arrived  the  lad  could  only  whisper, 
and  was  actually  dying.  I  asked  him, 
if  he  would  join  the  Church,  if  the 
Lord  would  heal  him,  and  make  a  cov- 
enant to  that  effect;  he  whispered, 
'Ye?.'  Then  we  administered  the  holy 
ordinance  to  him  in  the  name  of  Jesus 
Christ.  In  less  than  five  minutes  he 
called  to  his  mother,  who  was  in  the 
third  room  from  us,  and  she  came  run- 
ning in  to  see  what  was  the  matter. 
She  was  astonished  to  hear  him  speak 
and  asked  him  what  he  wanted.  He 
answered,  speaking  in  a  full,  round 
voice,  'I  want  something  to  eat;  I  am 
hungry  '  His  mother,  much  surprised, 
asked  me,  if  it  would  do  to  give  him 
something  to  eat,  I  answered  'Yes;  it 
will  not  hurt  him;  he  is  made  whole, 
and  in  a  few  days,  as  soon  as  he  gains 
a  little  strength,  he  will  be  about 
again.'  The  lad  kept  his  promise,  and 
in  a  few  days  he  was  baptized.  His 
father  and  mother  already  belonged  to 
the  Church.  At  this  place  (Chautau- 
qua, New  York)  we  built  up  a  branch 
of  seventy-six  members.  In  the  spring 
of  1P43  I  left  that  place  for  Nauvoo, 
111.,  with  my  wife  Asenath  Melvina 
Danker,  whom  I  had  married  in  Chau- 
tauqua in  the  fall  of  1841.  We  reached 
Nauvoo  in  the  early  part  of  July,  1843. 
I  crossed  over  the  Mississippi  river  to 
Montrose,  Iowa,  where  there  was  much 
sickness,  and  I  was  often  called  upon 
to  visit  the  sick.  Among  others  I  vis- 
ited Abr.T-liam  Hunsaker,  who  was  very 
sick  with  a  billious  fever,  and  after 
praying,  I  laid  my  hands  on  his 
head  and  rebuked  the  fever  in 
the  name  of  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ. 
He  said,  'I  am  healed;'  and  he  wanted 
lo  get  up  and  dress;  but  his  friends 
prevailed  upon  him  not  to  do  so.  The 
next  day,  however,  he  was  up  and  out 
of  doors.  I  saw  him  afterwards  in  Keo- 
Jiuk,  twelve  miles  from  Montros^  on 
a  certain  occasion,  when  he  was  in 
great  pain  from  inflammation  of  the 
bowels.  I  administered  to  him,  and  he 
was  healed  instantly.  A  bi'other  A^an- 
ausdale  and  his  wife  had  been  sick  with 
bilious  fever  for  some  time,  and  my 
father  and  I  were  called  upon  to  ad- 
minister to  them.  I  desired  my  father 
to  be  mouth  in  the  administration,  but 
he  told  me  to  attend  to  that  j>art, 
which  I  did,  and  I  blessed  them  in  the 

V'ol.   1.   No.   40. 


name  of  Jesus  Christ.  After  we  went 
out  of  the  house,  I  asked  my  father,  if 
they  would  live  or  die.  He  told  me 
that  he  had  no  testimony  in  that  re- 
gard. I  told-  him  that  Bro.  Vanausdale 
would  be  out  soon,  but  that  his  wife 
would  die.  After  this  I  baptized  my 
brother's  child  for  her  health,  she  hav- 
ing a  high  fever,  and  I  blessed  her;  she 
was  made  whole,  and  lived  to  come 
to  the  Valley.  At  the  special  meeting 
held  at  Nauvoo,  after  Joseph  Smith's 
death — at  the  time  that  the  mantle  of 
the  Prophet  of  the  Lord  fell  upon  Brig- 
ham  Young — I  sat  listening  to  some- 
one speaking,  with  my  head  down,  my 
face  hid  in  the  palms  of  my  hands 
and  my  elbows  resting  on  my  knees. 
While  in  this  position  Brigham 
Young  came  to  the  stand  and  com- 
menced to  speak  with  the  voice  of  Jo- 
seph the  Prophet.  Being  so  well  ac- 
quainted with  the  Prophet's  voice,  I 
nearly  sprang  from  my  seat,  through 
astonishment;  but  I  sat  and  heard  the 
Prophet  Joseph's  voice  as  long  as  Brig- 
ham  Young  was  speaking.  Not  only 
did  the  voice  of  Brigham  sound  like 
that  of  Joseph,  but  the  very  gestures  of 
his  right  hand,  when  he  was  saying 
anything  very  positive,  reminded  me 
of  Joseph.  My  decision  was  then  made 
as  to  who  should  lead  the  Church;  for 
surely  the  mantle  of  Joseph  had  fallen 
upon  Brigham.  In  the  spring  of  1848 
I  was  taken  sick.  I  wrote  to  my  broth- 
er, Chapman  Duncan,  who  was  then  at 
Council  Bluffs,  to  come  and  attend  to 
my  business,  and  help  me  to  move,- so 
that  I  could  start  in  May  for  the,*noun- 
tains.  He  came  with  an  ox-team,  and 
attended  to  the  necessary  work  for  me. 
He  loaded  thi-ee  wagons;  the  first  one 
was  driven  by  Chapman  Duncan;  I,  my 
wife  and  three  children  were  in  the  sec- 
ond, and  Henry  Mecham  occupied  the 
third  wagon,  until  we  reached  Council 
Bluffs.  In  crossing  the  Missouri  river 
to  Florence,  Neb.,  being  very  thirsty. 
I  drank  all  the  muddy  Missouri  river 
water  that  I  could,  and  from  that  tim.' 
my  health  was  good.  We  stopped  Tt 
Florence  about  ten  days,  when  we  left 
for  the  Elkhorn,  and  remained  there 
until  July  7,  1848,  when  we  started  for 
the  Valley,  with  Barney  Adams  as  cap- 
tain of  fifty,  and  Chapman  Duncan  as 
captain  of  ten.  Nothing  of  interest  oc- 
curred until  we  reached  Deer  creek. 
Camping  one  night  on  the  Platte  river, 
we    drove    our    cattle    over    the    bluff.s 

Oct.  .-.,   1901. 


626 


LATTER-DAY    SAINT 


eastward,  on  to  Deer  Creek,  to  feed. 
The  next  morning,  when  we  went  for 
our  cattle,  Sidney  Tanner's  little  white 
cur  dog  followed  me  a  thin?  which 
he  never  had  done  before  nor  did  after- 
wards. When  we  got  to  the  timber, 
some  one  cried  out,  'Bear.'  I  was 
alone,  except  for  the  dog.  I  soon  saw 
a  grizzly  bear,  which  at  once  started 
for  me.  I  ran  as  fast  as  I  could,  while 
the  dog  remained  where  he  was.  After 
running  a  few  rods,  I  had  to  stoop  in 
order  to  get  under  a  leaning  tree,  and 
as  I  bent  down,  I  looked  back  to  see 
where  the  bear  was.  In  doing  so,  I  saw 
the  little  dog  cat.h  the  grizzly  by  the 
ham,  and  run  away  in  an  opposite  di- 
rection, followed  by  the  bear.  This  was 
the  last  I  knew  for  a  long  time. for  when 
1  attempted  to  pass  under  the  leaning 
tree.  I  struck  my  head  against  it  with 
great  force,  and  fell  to  the  ground, 
stunned.  When  I  caujc  too,  I  got  up 
and  went  out  of  the  timber,  and  met 
two  negroes,  who  belonged  to  the  com- 
pany. I  borrowed  a  gun  from  them  and 
went  back  to  the  place  v*here  I  first 
saw  the  bear.  Here  I  found  both  the 
little  dog  and  the  bear  standing  about 
ten  rods  from  me.  I  raised  the  gun.  an 
old  flint  lock,  waist  high,  leveled  it 
at  the  grizzly  and  pressed  the  trigger, 
intending  to  run,  if  I  did  not  hit  the 
animal.  The  instant  I  shot,  the  bear 
jumped  into  the  air,  I  think  all  of  six 
feet,  and  then  ran  around  in  a  circle 
about  ten  or  fifteen  rods  till  it  fell  d?ad. 
I  have  always  considered  this  an  act 
of  Providence,  as  the  bear  certainly 
would  have  killed  me,  if  the  dog  had 
not  turned  it  in  another  direction.  We 
reached  Great  Salt  Lake  valley  through 
the  mouth  of  Emigration  canyon,  Oct. 
16,  1848.  I  brought  with  me  one  bushel 
of  wheat  from  Iowa  for  seed.  This  I 
sowed  in  February.  1489.  on  a  piece  of 
land  lying  between  Big  and  Little  Cot- 
tonwood creeks — on  what  was  then 
known  as  Amasa  Lyman's  survey, 
where  I  first  settled.  When  the  grain 
was  up  about  six  inches,  the  crickets 
came  and  ate  it  up  so  clean  that  not 
one  stubble  could  be  seen.  Next,  I 
witnessed  flocks  of  gulls  come  from  the 
lake  and  destroy  the  crickets.  Now, 
what  shall  I  do  for  bread  next  year? 
was  my  next  thought,  being  one  thou- 
sand mile  from  supplies.  I  watered 
the  ground  where  the  wheat  had  been 
eaten  up  by  the  crickets.  Subsequent- 
ly,   I    watered   it    twice.     It   grew,    and 


I  cut  eighteen  bu.shels  of  grain,  and 
still  the  stool  did  not  die.  I  watered 
it  again,  and  cut  twelve  bushels.  I 
watered  it  a  third  time  and  cut  six 
bushels,  and  the  stool  did  not  die  yet; 
but  as  the  frost  came,  I  turned  my 
cows  upon  it  to  eat.  I  never  saw  the 
like  before  or  since,  and  I  have  always 
acknowledged  the  hand  of  the  Lord  in 
thus  giving  me  bread  for  myself  and 
family.  In  the  fall  of  185C  1  moved  to 
Salt  Lake  City,  and  in  1855  I  went  to 
Texas  on  a  mission,  returning  to  the 
Valley  in  May,  1857,  with  a  company 
of  Saints  of  which  I  was  captain.  We 
brought  with  us  over  thirteen  hundred 
head  of  cattle,  besides  the  animals  used 
for  drawing  wagons.  A  number  of  in- 
cidents happened  on  this  journey  which 
are  of  much  interest.  When  we  reached 
Fort  Leavenworth,  on  the  Missouri 
river,  Mrs.  Elizabeth  Whitmore  ex- 
pressed a  desire  to  return  to  Texas  to 
sell  her  farm,  gather  up  the  remainder 
of  her  cattle,  sell  them  and  came  on  to 
Utah  the  next  year.  She  had  already 
sold  the  cattle  she  had  brought  with 
her  to  Fort  Leavenworth,  when  she 
came  to  me  and  told  me  her  desires. 
She  also  wanted  the  word  of  the  Lord 
for  her  through  me,  as  to  whether  she 
should  go  back  or  continue  the  jour- 
ney. After  talking  over  the  matter 
with  her,  I  finally  told  her  that  the 
word  of  the  Lord  had  come  to  me  as 
follows:  'Tell  Elizabeth  Whitmore,  that 
she  will  arrive  in  Great  Salt  Lake  valley 
the  loth  day  of  Septemoer,  and  that 
she  will  get  there  before  her  captain.' 
She  was  much  surprised  and  the  first 
words  she  uttered  were:  'You  don't 
know  that;  you  don't  know  that  I  shall 
live  till  tomorrow  morning.  Why,  it  is 
a  guarantee  of  my  life  until  that  time.' 
I  told  her  I  did  not  know  it  of  my- 
self, but  the  Lord  had  made  it  known 
to  me.  Then  she  said,  'You  cannot 
know  that  of  yourself.  I  will  go  on, 
and  if  I  land  in  Salt  Lake  City  on  fhe 
15th  of  September,  then  I  shall  know 
that  the  word  of  the  Lord  to  me  is 
true;  and  shall  also  know  that  'Mor- 
monism,'  is  true,  and  you  are  God's  ser- 
vant.' She  did  land  in  Salt  Lake  City 
Sept.  15,  1857;  and  she  got  there  ten 
days  before  I  did.  From  the  time  of 
my  return  from  this  mission  until  1860 
I  attended  to  my  cattle  in  Rush  valley, 
Tooele  county,  I'tah.  In  the  spring  of 
1860  I  left  on  a  mission  to  England; 
during  this  mission  I  had  many  mani- 


BIOGRAPHICAL    ENCYCLOPEDIA. 


627 


testations    of    the    power    of    the    Lord. 
I  returned   home  in  1S61,  as  captain  of 
an  independent  company  with  which  I 
arrived  in  Salt  Lake  City  Sept.  13.  1861. 
In   ]8f.2   I    was   captain   of  a    train    that 
Avent  to  Florence,   Neb.,   to  bring^in,  a 
company  of  emigrants.    I  returned  with 
them    to   Salt   Lake   City   Sept.   24,  1862. 
In  the  summer  of  1866  I  went  to  Pitts- 
burg-.   Penn..    to   bring   my   father.   John 
Duncan,   to   I'tah.     I  also   brought   out 
my   nephew.    Louis   Fisher.     From   1866 
to  1869  I  was  engaged  in  the  cattle  busi- 
ness.    In    the  summer  of  1869  I  moved 
my   family    to   Cedar   City,    Iron    coun- 
ty. Utah,    While  out  on  my  ranch,  ten 
miles  from  Cedar  City,  I  was  taken  one 
morning  with  a  very  severe  pain  in  my 
left  leg.   which  swelled  up  to  an  enor- 
mous size;  nearly  all  of  the  blood  in  my 
body  passed  into  that  limb  in  eighteen 
hours,  and  gangrene  set  in.     I  sent  to 
Cedar  City  for  the  Elders  and  some  oil. 
They  reached  the  ranch  at  12  o'clock  at 
night,  bringing  a  doctor  with  them.     I 
reqested    them    to    anoint    my    left    leg, 
which  by  this  time  was  so  large  that  I 
could    not    move    it;    they   anointed  .me 
from  my  hip  to  my  foot;  and  they  also 
poured  some  oil  on  my  head,  and  then 
placed  their  hands  on  my  head  and  con- 
firmed "the  anointing.  Before  they  took 
their    hands    off    my   head,    I    was    free 
from   all   pain.     By  this   time  so  much 
blood   had   gone  into   the   leg  that     the 
doctor    would    not    allow    me    to    go    to 
sleep,   a  PC    watchers  were  kept   by  rr\v 
side  right  and  day  for  about  ten  days, 
until  reaction  took  place.     Dec.  18.  1895, 
as   I    was   going   down    the   back   steps 
of  a  house  in  Salt  Lake  City,   (whither 
I    had    removed    from    Iron    county),    I 
saw  some  ice  at  the  foot  of  the  steps, 
and  so  I  took  hold  of  a  post  that  held 
up    the    porch,    lest    I    should    slip    and 
fall;  but  when  I  steoped  on  the  ice,  my 
feet  went  high  in  the  air,  the  jerk  and 
my  weight  made  my  arm  let  go  of  the 
post,    and   I    fell   on    the   doorstep     and 
broke   some   of  my   ribs.     I   sent   for  a 
doctor,   who,   after  examining  me,   said 
that  the  ribs  were  broken  off  li/^  inches 
from  the  spinal  column.     He  bandaged 
me  up  and  said  that  was  all  he  could 
do  for  me.     I  suffered  the  most  excru- 
tiating  pain  for  three  nights  and  three 
days;    the    bones    were    grating    every 
time    I    coughed,     (I    had    a    very    bad 
cough,    too),    and    dropsy    set    in,    until 
my  body  or  chest  was  so  full  of  water 


that  the  bandage  had  to  be  cut,  in  or- 
der to  enable  me  to  breathe.  On  the 
third  day,  at  night.  Bishop  Robert  Mor- 
ris came  in  and  said  he  wanted  to  bless 
me.  I  told  him  I  needed  a  blessing  very 
much,  and  could  not  live  much  longer 
in  such  a  condftion.  The  Bishop  then 
knelt  by  my  bed  side,  laid  his  hands  on 
my  head  and  said,  'Bones  come  togeth- 
er, cough  stop,  and  you  have  a  good 
sleep."  The  pain  stopped,  the  cough 
ceased,  the  bones  came  together,  and  I 
slept  nearly  21  hours;  the  water  all 
went  away."  Elder  Duncan,  who  for 
several  years,  has  been  the  senior  pres- 
iden  of  the  third  quorum  of  Seventy, 
is  now  eighty-seven  years  old,  and  Is 
a  most  remarkable  man.  His  memory- 
is  excellent,  his  general  intellect  un- 
usually bright,  and  his  physical  condi- 
tion good  for  one  of  his  years,  and  for 
one  who  ha.s  passed  through  so  many  of 
those  hardships  and  trials  which  all 
to  the  lot  of  most  mortals. 

PYPER,      Alexander      Crookshan, 

third   Bishop   of    the     Twelfth     Ward! 
Salt  Lake   City,     Utah,     was    born    at 
Largs,    Ayershire,      Scotland,      May   18, 
1828.        He  embraced  the  gospel  in  his 
boyhood;  at  the  early  age  of  seventeen 
he   was   appointed    a   traveling     Elder 
and  spent  some  time  preaching  in  his 
native  country  in  that  capacity,  under- 
going many   hardships  for  the  truth's 
sake.      In  his  early  youth  he  emigrated 
to  the  United  States  and  settled  in  St. 
Louis,  Mo.,  where  he  remained  several 
years  and   removed   from   that  city  to 
Council  Bluffs,  Iowa,  in  1853,  at  which 
place  and  at  Florence,    Nebraska,     he 
conducted     a       successful     mercantile 
business.       While  on   the  frontiers,   he 
aided  Gen.  Horace  S.  Eldredge  for  four 
years  in  the  conduct  of  the  emigration 
business  of  the  Church.      He  arrived  in 
Salt   Lake   City   in   1859,    bringing  with 
him  over  the  great  plains  several  wa- 
gon loads  of  general  merchandise, with 
which   he  commenced   business.       Sub- 
sequently,   he    established    a    chemical 
manufacturing      laboratory,  in     Sugar 
House  Ward,  and  engaged  in  the  pro- 
duction   of    white     lead,      sulphur    and 
other  articles.       The  building  in  which 
this  business  was  conducted,  at  a  later 
date   was   transformed    into   a    flouring 
mill,   the  next  occupation   in  which  he 
engaged  being  that  of  a  miller.  He  was 
subsequently  employed     by       the     late 


628 


LATTER-DAY    SAINT 


Pres.  Brigham  Young  to  conduct  his 
outside  private  business.  He  after- 
wards entered  again  in  the  line  of  a 
general  merchant,  and  giving  that  up 
occupied  the  position  of  superintendent 
of  the  grocery  department  of  Z.  C.  M. 
I.,  when  that  branch  of  th3  institution 
was  conducted  in  the  Old  Constitution 
Building.  His  next  occupation  was  of 
an  official  character,  being  installed  at 
the  City  Hall  as  police  justice,  a  posi- 
tion he  occupied  from  August,  1874,  till 
the  time  of  his  demise.  As  a  rule  the 
duties  of  this  position  are  anything 
but  pleasant,  and  it  is  one  which  is 
open  to  much  abuse,  and  one  which  can 
be  greatly  abused.  But  Judge  Pyper 
combined  those  rare  characteristics 
which  enabled  him  always  to  acquit 
himself  with  dignity  and  to  maintain 
his  self-respect.  So  fair  and  impar- 
tial   had   been    his  course,    so   great     a 


friend  had  he  been  to  right,  and  so 
anxious  to  be  just  to  all,  that  despite 
the  disagreeable  character  of  the  office 
he  won  for  himself  in  its  administra- 
tion, the  respect  of  every  person,  and 
was  admired  and  feared  alike  by  those 
of  his  own  faith  and  those  whose  re- 
ligious views  were  diametrically  op- 
liosed  to  his  own.  For  sixteen  years 
he  served  as  a  member  of  the  city 
council  of  Salt  Lake  City,  having  been 
first  elected  from  Sugar  House  in  1866, 
when  that  section  constituted  the  Fifth 
municipal  Ward  of  Salt  Lake  City.  Af- 


tei-  his  removal  from  Sugar  House,   to 
reside  in  Salt  Lake  City,  he  was  elected 
alderman  from  the  Fourth  precinct.  In 
these  positions,  as  in  all  other  spheres, 
he   distinguished   himself  for  his  good, 
sound  judgment,  his  zeal  in  the  public 
welfare,  and  his  integrity  to  the  trusts 
leposed   in  him.       In  June,  1877,  at  the 
time    of   the    general     organization     of 
Stakes  and  Wards,  by  direction  of  Pres. 
Brigham   Young,    Brother   Pyper      was 
ordained    a    Bishop    and    set    apart    to 
preside     in      that     capacity     over    the 
Twelfth    Ward,    of    Salt    Lake    City— a 
position  which  he  filled  up  to  the  time 
of  his  death.  Probably  no  man  in  Utah 
did  more  toward  the  silk  producing  and 
manufacturing  interests   in  Utah   than 
Bishop    Pyper.        He    was    one    of    the 
most  successful  producers  in  the  west, 
and  took  a  deep  interest  in  the  indus- 
try,  even   during   the   first   part  of  the 
illness  that   carried   him   off.       His  en- 
terpri.«e  generally  was  exhibited  by  the 
number   and    nature    of   the    undertak- 
ings with  which  he  was  connected, and 
in  which  he  was  largely  successful.  Af- 
ter a  most  eventful  and  successful  ca- 
reei-  Bishop  Pyper  died  at  his  home  in 
Salt  Lake  City  July28,  1882.  On  the  even- 
ing of  his  demise  the  city  council  met 
in  a  special  session  to  draft  resolutions 
of  respect  to  his  memory.  Mayor  Wil- 
liam Jennings,  and  the  members  of  the 
council    generally,      spoke      with    great 
feeling  on  that  occasion.       Bishop  Py- 
per's    life    was    one     round    of   unceas- 
ing activity.       In  appearance  he     was 
of  average  height,  of  spare  build,  wiry 
and    quick,    but    precise     in    his   move- 
ments.     He  was  thorough  and  method- 
ical with  a  philosophical  turn  of  mind. 
He   had    an    unswerving       faith   in    the 
overruling  providence  of  the  Deity.   In 
the  interest    of    the  public  he  displayed 
especial   assiduity.       Possessed       of     a 
clear  and  far-reaching  mind,  his  judg- 
ment was  necessarilv  '^  lund,    and    was 
highly  valued  by  all  who  knew  him.  He 
was  free,  fair  and  liberal,  and  his  mind 
was  so  constituted  that  his  perceptions 
of  right  and  wrong  were  always  clear. 
He  had  also  a  faculty  of  being  on  the 
right  side,  and  of  being  a  fearless  and 
consistent  defender  of  what  he  believed 
to  be  just.  He  was  homely  in  his  man- 
ner, good-natured  and  generous;  and  in 
his  death  the  Church  and  the  communi- 
ty at  large  sustained  an   unmistakable 
loss. 


BIOGRAPHICAL,    ENCYCLOPEDIA. 


629 


CLAWSON,  Hiram  B.,  fourth  Bishop 
of  the  Twelfth  Ward.  Salt  Lake  City, 
was  born  Nov.  7,  1826,  in  Utica,  Oneida 
county,  New  York.  He  was  educated 
at  the  L^tica  Academy.  Through  the 
loss  of  his  father  he  was  very  early 
thrown  upon  his  own  inherent  re- 
sources; and,  thus  left  to  battle  with 
life,  he  became  master  of  three  or  four 
trades,  and  in  youth  laid  the  founda- 
tion of  a  self-made  man.  After  the 
death  of  his  father,  his  mother  joined 
the  Church  of  Jesus  Christ  of  Latter- 
day  Saints  in  the  year  1838,  and  in  1841 
the  family,  consisting-  of  Mrs.  Clawson 
and  her  two  sons,  Hiram  and  John,  and 
two  daughters,  removed  from  Utica  to 
Nauvoo,    111.       There     a     circumstance 


worthy  of  note  in  his  life  occurred, 
which  indirectly  led  to  his  connection 
with  the  dramatic  profession,  in  which 
both  he  and  several  members  of  his 
family  have  made  quite  a  distinguished 
mark  in  the  social  and  artistic  culture 
of  Utah.  Hiram,  in  Nauvoo,  wanted 
to  join  the  Debating  Society,  which  was 
held  in  a  room  over  Joseph's  store;  but 
some  of  the  principal  members  opposed 
his  admission  on  account  of  his  youth. 
The  Prophet,  who  was  always  a  warm 
admirer  of  lofty  aspirations  in  the 
young  men  of  his  people,  stood  as  Hi- 
ram's advocpt  •  and  would  have  pro- 
moted his  admission;  but,  with  a  be- 
coming sense  of  self-respect,  young 
Clawson  withdrew  his  application.  This 
event  led  to  his  connection  with  the 
stage;  for  at  that  time  Thomas  A. 
Lyne.  then  in  the  prime  of  his  dramatic 


power,  was  at  Nauvoo  giving  perform- 
ances. In  the  year  1848.  when  the  Pio- 
neers made  their  second  journey  to  the 
Rocky  Mountains,  bringing  up  the 
body  of  the  Church  under  the  leader- 
ship of  Erigham  Young,  who  had  al- 
ready been  elected  as  President.  Hiram 
B.  Clawson  came  with  them.  He  was. 
therefore,  one  of  the  pioneers  and 
founders  of  Utah.  At  that  time  he 
was  twenty-two  years  of  age,  was 
looked  upon  as  a  man  of  mark,  and  it 
was  soon  understood  by  the  whole 
Church,  both  at  home  and  abroad,  that 
Hiram  B.  Clawson  had  won  the  heart 
of  Brigham  Young.  He  had  charge  of 
the  first  building  work  that  was  done 
in  the  Valley  by  the  Church.  The  flcst 
adobe  building,  a  little  office  adjoining 
the  Council  House  on  the  south,  was 
built  by  him.  The  Council  House  it- 
self was  built  by  him,  he  having  charge 
of  the  masons,  and  Truman  O.  Angell 
being  the  architect.  Hiram  B.  Claw- 
son was  called  into  the  President's  of- 
fice as  clerk,  and  he  was  soon  put  ift 
charge  of  the  President's  entire  pri- 
vate business,  which  he  managed  for 
many  years.  During  this  period  he  as- 
sisted in  the  erection  and  afterwards 
in  the  management  of  the  Salt  Lake 
•  Theater.  At  the  time  of  the  Indian 
wars  in  southern  Utah,  in  1850,  he  took 
an  active  part  in  suppressing  the  diffi- 
culties. He  was  aide-de-camp  to  Gen- 
eral Daniel  H.  Wells  and  subsequently, 
at  the  death  of  James  Ferguson,  he 
became  adjutant-general  of  the  Terri- 
tory, which  office  he  still  holds.  In 
the  spring  of  1865.  Wm.  H.  Hoop«r.  of 
the  firm  of  Hooper  &  Eldredge,  sold  out 
his  interest  to  Hiram  B.  Clawson,  and 
the  firm  name  was  changed  to  Eldredge 
&  Clawson.  The  latter  immediately 
went  to  New  York  to  purchase  goods, 
contracting  with  the  Butterfield  Com- 
pany for  the  freighting  from  the  Mis- 
souri river  to  Salt  Lake  City,  but  the 
trains,  starting  late,  were  snowed  in 
and  they  did  not  receive  their  goods 
until  twelve  months  after  they  were 
purchased.  The  firm,  however,  was  not 
discouraged,  for  in  the  spring  of  1856 
Mr.  Clawson  went  east  again  and  pur- 
chased a  fine  stock  of  goods  and  ef- 
fected settlement  with  the  Butterfield 
Company  for  the  freight  of  the  pre- 
vious year.  Elder  Clawson  thus  con- 
tinued yearly  to  go  east  for  the  pur- 
chase of  goods,  and  was  thus  person- 
ally   brought   into   relations   with     the 


630 


LATTER-DAY    SAINT 


principal  coniinerclal  houses  ot  the 
great  mercantile  cities,  so  that  he  was 
well  prepared  for  his  subsequent  man- 
agement of  Z.  C.  M.  I.;  and  on  the  in- 
stitution commencing  business,  Hiram 
U.  Clawson  was  appointed  by  the  direc- 
tors the  superintendent.  The  design, 
from  the  onset,  was  to  arrange  the 
business  of  the  Z.  C.  M.  I.  upon  the 
best  known  commercial  metnods,  and 
the  superintendent  adopted  them.  All 
the  internal  arrangements  were  left  to 
Mr.Clawson.and  also  the  choosing  of  the 
heads  of  departments  and  clerKs.  The 
business  went  on  and  increasea  sceadi- 
ly,  until  the  time  of  the  panic  in  18/3, 
v/hen  the  yearly  sales  amounted  to  $4,- 
500,000.  When  the  panic  of  18V3  burst 
upon  the  country,  it  was  tnougnt  wis- 
dom for  Z.  C.  M.  I.  to  ask  an  extension 
of  credit  to  provide  against  the  result 
that  was  sure  to  follow  the  panic  in 
the  east,  and  Horace  S.  Eldredge  and 
Hiram  B.  Clawson  were  accordingly 
sent  down  east  for  this  purpose.  They 
were  very  successtul  in  this  mission 
and  within  eight  months  Z.  C.  M.  I.  re- 
deemed its  paper,  arnouncing  to  $1,100,- 
000.  Previous  to  going  east  to  adjust 
these  matters,  it  was  deemed  advisable 
to  change  the  management  for  a  time: 
and  the  Hon.  Wm.  H.  Hooper  assumed 
the  superintendency.  Mr.  Hooper  re- 
mained eighteen  months  in  this  posi- 
tion, during  which  time  the  institution 
met  all  its  liabilities.  He  then  resigned 
and  Hiram  B.  Clawson  was  again 
appointed  superintendent.  During  El- 
der Clawson's  second  superintendency, 
the  institution  built  its  colossal  new 
store  and  removed  from  their  old  loca- 
tion into  it.  Superintendent  Clawson 
designing  the  internal  arrangements. 
In  consequence  of  the  large  increase  of 
their  regular  departments,  and  wishing 
to  consolidate  all  their  business  in  this 
mammoth  store,  the  directors  deemed  it 
advisable  to  retire  from  the  agricul- 
tural, hide  and  wool  departments,  and 
Hiram  B.  Clawson  made  a  proposition 
to  buy  these  departments  out.  His  of- 
fer was  accepted,  and,  on  Oct.  4,  1875. 
he  resigned  the  superintendency  and 
Horace  S.  Eldredge  was  appointed  in 
his  stead.  Mr.  Clawson  claims  that 
.luring  his  management  of  the  institu- 
tion, his  losses  on  the  yearly  sales  did 
not  exceed  a  <iuarter  of  one  per  cent. 
After  resigning  the  superintendency  of 
Z.  C.  M.  I..  Elder  Clawson  went  into 
business    for   himself,    in    which   he   re- 


mained until  thi-'  indictment  for  so- 
called  unlawful  cohabitation  with  his 
wives  caused  his  retirement.  In  1882 
he  succeeded  the  late  Alexander  C.  Py- 
per  as  Bishop  of  the  Twelfth  Ward, 
which  position  he  still  holds.  Having 
been  convicted  of  unlawful  cohabita- 
tion, he  served  a  term  in  the  Utah  peni- 
tentiary, commencing  Sept.  29,  1885,  and 
ending  March  2,  1886. 

WOOLLEY,  Edwin  Dilwurth,  sec- 
ond Bishop  of  the  Thirteenth  Ward, Salt 
Lake  City,  was  the  son  of  John  Wool- 
ley  and  Rachel  Dilworth,  and  was  born 
at  West  Chester,  Chester  county,  Peiin., 
June  28,  1807.  He  passed  his  early  boy- 
hood at  New  Lynn,  Chester  county, 
Penn.  His  father  was  a  well-to-do 
farmer,  and  Edwin  was  raised  to  that 
occupation.  He  usually  worked  on  the 
farm  during  the  summer,  and  received 
the  most  of  his  schooling  during     the 


winter  season;  but  he  acquired  a  good 
common  school  education,  and  being 
naturally  of  a  practical  nature  he  could 
apply  what  knowledge  he  acquired  in  a 
way  to  be  useful.  His  mother  died  in 
1826,  and  his  father  followed  six  years 
later  (in  1832),  leaving  a  family  of  seven 
children.  Edwin  being  the  eldest  child, 
the  care  and  responsibility  of  the  family 
now  fell  upon  him,  and  he  assumed  the 
trust  with  the  faithfulness  and  willing- 
ness characteristic  of  his  nature;  al- 
though the  youngest  child  was  but 
seven  years  of  age,  Edwin  performed 
the  part  of  a  father  to  all,  until  they 
were  capable  of  caring  for  themselves, 
and  he  had  the  warmest  affection  and 


BIOGRAPHICAL    ENCYCLOPfiDIA. 


631 


esteem  of  all  his  brothers  and  sisters; 
they  always  i^garded  him  more  as  a 
father  than  a  brother.  A  year  after  his 
father's  death  he  removed  with  his 
family  to  East  Rochester,  Columbia 
county,  Ohio.  Before  moving-  to  Ohio 
he  had  become  acquainted  with  a 
young  girl  (Mary  Wickersham),  and  an 
attachment  had  been  formed  between 
them,  but  Mary's  family  moved  from 
Pennsylvania  to  Ohio,  causing  a  separa- 
tion for  some  time;  their  courtship, 
however,  was  carried  on  by  letter,  and 
finally  Edwin  D.  made  the  long  jour- 
ney over  the  Allegheny  Mountains  to 
East  Rochester,  Ohio,  where  he  was 
united  in  marriage  to  the  woman  of 
his  choice  March  24,  1831;  he  made  the 
return  journey  with  his  wife  as  com- 
pany. He  remained  about  a  year  at 
his  old  home  in  West  Chester,  Penn., 
after  his  marriage,  and  then  removed  to 
Ohio  with  his  wife  and  brothers  and 
sisters,  settling  in  the  neighborhood 
where  his  wife's  family  resided.  While 
living  at  East  Rochester,  he  heard  of 
the  Prophet  Joseph  Smith,  who  was 
then  living  at  Kirtland,  Ohio,  about 
ninety  miles  from  East  Rochester;  and 
during  the  year  1837  he  visited  Kirt- 
land for  the  purpose  of  seeing  and  con- 
versing with  the  Prophet,  but  it  being 
a  time  of  trouble  and  persecution  of 
the  Latter-day  Saints,  Joseph  had  been 
forced  to  leave  home  for  a  season,  and 
Edwin  had  not  then  the  opportunity  of 
meeting  him.  He,  however,  found  the 
Prophet's  father  (Joseph  Smith,  senior, 
the  Patriarch  of  the  Church),  who  was 
affectionately  called  "Father  Smith." 
Edwin  invited  Father  Smith  to  go  'lome 
with  him.  which  he  did,  and  remained 
with  him  during  the  winter.  From  his 
honored  guest  Edwin  received  valuable 
instruction  in  matters  relating  to  the 
gospel  as  revealed  through  the 
Prophet  Joseph,  and  on  Dec.  24,  1837,  he 
was  baptized  and  confirmed  a  member 
of  the  Church  by  Elder  Lorenzo  D. 
Barnes.  He  was  ordained  a  High 
Priest  the  day  following  his  baptism, 
and  set  apart  to  preside  over  the  branch 
of  the  Church  at  East  Rochester.  He 
officiated  in  this  position  until  his  re- 
moval from  East  Rochester.  Among 
others  to  whom  he  preached  was  Ed- 
ward Hunter,  who  afterwards  became 
the  presiding  Bishop  of  the  Church.  In 
1839  he  removed  with  his  family  to 
Quincy,  111.,  wht^re  he  first  met  the 
Prophet   Joseph    Smith   and    the    Patri- 


arch Hyrum,  and  began  an  acquaint- 
ance which  ripened  into  the  closest 
friendship  and  love,  continuing  until 
the  death  of  the  martyred  Prophet  and 
Patriarch.  In  the  spring  of  1840,  by 
the  advice  of  the  Prophet,  he  removed 
to  Commerce,  afterwards  named  Nau- 
voo,  and  in  the  fall  of  that  same  year 
went  on  a  mission  to  Pennsylvania, 
where  he  labored  for  a  year,  converting 
and  baptizing  a  considerable  number  of 
people.  While  on  this  mission,  which 
he  was  performing  in  the  good  old  way 
by  traveling  w-ithout  money  to  pay  for 
the  necessaries  of  life,  the  following  in- 
teresting incident  occurred.  While 
walking  through  the  country  one  day 
he  reached  a  toll  gate  (common  in  those 
times)  at  Strasburg,  Lancaster  county, 
Pennsylvania.  It  was  customary  to  al- 
low ministers  or  preachers  to  pass 
through  free  of  charge,  and  when  Bro. 
Woolley  stated  that  he  was  a  preacher 
of  the  gospel,  the  gate  keeper  allowed 
him  to  pass.  He  had  gone  about  three 
miles  farther  on  his  journey,  when  he 
heard  the  clatter  of  horses'  hoofs  on  the 
road  behind  him;  turning,  he  saw  two 
horsemen  coming  down  the  road  at  a 
hard  gallop.  He  was  soon  overtaken 
and  one  of  the  men,  placing  his  hand 
on  the  Elder's  shoulder,  with  an  oath 
claimed  him  as  a  prisoner,  saying,  "You 
are  no  d— d  preacher,  and  you  have  got 
to  go  back  with  us,  and  not  only  pay 
your  fare,  but  a  fine  as  well."  Elder 
Woolley  remarked  that  if  they  would 
procure  a  hall  and  furnish  an  audience, 
he  would  show  them  whether  or  not  he 
was  a  preacher.  This  seemed  to  suit 
the  men,  who  at  once  decided  lo  put 
him  to  the  test;  they  provided  a  hall 
and  gave  out  notices  of  the  meeting  to 
be  held,  holding  the  assumed  preacher 
in  custody  meanwhile.  A  large  con- 
gregation gathered,  attracted,  no  doubt, 
by  the  novelty  of  the  occasion,  more 
than  from  any  real  desire  to  learn  the 
truth.  The  Elder  must  have  had  the 
assistance  the  Lord  usually  gives  to 
those  who  trust  in  Him,  for  the  men 
who  had  him  in  charge  were  thoroughly 
convinced  that  he  was  a  preacher  and 
released  him  from  custody  without  toll 
or  fine  being  paid.  He  was  so  well 
satisfied  with  the  i-eception  he  met  at 
this  meeting  that  he  remained  in  that 
neighborhood  for  .some  time,  preaching 
and  making  converts.  Or.  his  return 
to  Nauvoo  from  this  mission  he  en- 
ga.ged  in  the  mercantile  business.  While 


632 


LATTER-DAY    SAINT 


thus  engaged  the  Prophet  railed  upon 
him  one  day  and  paid,  'Krother  Wool- 
ley,  we  want  all  your  goods  for  the 
building  up  of  the  Kingdom  of  God;" 
or  words  to  that  effect.  Elder  WooUey 
went  to  work  at  once  and  packed  up 
ready  for  removal  all  the  good.s  in  his 
store,  with  the  exception  of  some  which 
v>-ere  held  on  commip.'^jon  from  different 
mercantile  firms;  he  then  went  to  Jo- 
seph and  said,  "Hrother  Joseph,  I  wish 
to  know,  if  you  also  want  the  goods  I 
hold  on  commission,  and  will  pay  the 
houses  in  St.  Louis  and  other  places 
from  where  I  obtained  them;  and  also 
whether  you  will  send  teams  to  take 
the  goods  away,  or  wish  me  to  deliver 
them."  The  Pro))het  answered  by 
asking,  "And  you  have  packed  all  your 
goods  except  those  you  hold  on  commis- 
sion and  are  i-eady  to  deliver  them,  or 

haul    them    over? Yes,"      was    the 

answer.        "Then,"    said      the    Prophet, 
with  deep  feeling,  at  the  same  time  put- 
ting   his    hand    affectionately    on    Bro. 
WooUey's  shoulder,   "Take  your  goods, 
replace   them   on    your   shelves   and   go 
on  with  your  business."       The  Prophet 
had    probably    only    been      testing    him 
and  found  that  he  was  willing  to  make 
any  sacrifice  necessary  for  the  cause  he 
had    espoused,    and    that    the    property 
was   doing   as   well   in   his   hands   as   it 
would  in  some  other  way,  and  that  any- 
thing needed  could  be  had  at  any  time 
it   might   be  called   for.       He   furnished 
the  Prophet  money  frequently,  as  loans 
or  otherwise,   and   on   one  occasion   (as 
it     is     remembered     by     his     youngest 
brother),   he   gave  the   Prophet   $500   to 
pay   a  lawyer   for   securing   his   release 
from   Joseph    H.    Reynolds,    a    Missouri 
sheriff,    who   had    kidnapped   Joseph   at 
Dixon,    111.,   for   the   purpose   of   taking 
him    to    Missouri,    where     his     enemies 
were    waiting    to   injure,    if   not   to   kill 
him.  Joseph  had  tried  to  get  the  money 
needed  from  several  of  his  friends,  but 
had    failed,    until   he   applied    to   Edwiii 
D.   Woolley.       In  the  year  1842  he  was 
sent  on  a  mission  to  Massachusetts  and 
Connecticut,    from    which    he    returned 
the   following  year.       During  the  year 
184.;  a  copy  of  the  revelation  on  celestial 
marriage    was    taken    to    his    house    by 
Patriarch    Hyrum    Smith,    and    read    to 
him.       Elder   Woolley    was   among   the 
first  who  adopted  the  principle  of  plural 
marriage  in  practice,  and  before  the  ex- 
odus from   Nauvoo  he  had  received   by 
the  authority  of  the  Prophet  two  plural 


wives.      He  participated  in  the  joys  and 
also  in  the  troubles  of  the  Church  while 
in  Nauvoo,  and  was  at  home  when  the 
Prophet  and  Patriarch  rendered  them- 
selves up  to  the  officers  to  be  taken  to 
Carthage  in  June,  1844.       Just     as     the 
martyrs    were      leaving    Nauvoo,    they 
called  at  the  house  of  Edwin  D.  Wool- 
ley,  and  on  leaving  the  Prophet  uttered 
those   memorable  words  which  will   be 
remembered  while  time  lasts:       "I  am 
going  like  a  lamb  to  the  slaughter;  but 
1   am   calm   as  a  summer's  morning;    I 
have  a  conscience  void  of  offence     to- 
wards God  and  towards  all  men.  I  shall 
die  innocent,  and  it  shall  be  said  of  me, 
'he  was  murdered  in  cold  blood!'  "  Ed- 
win D.  Woolley,  suffering  the  continued 
Pt^-rsecutions  with   the  Saints,  was  fin- 
ally driven  from  his  home  in  Nauvoo. 
June   5,    1846,   he   left   the   city  with   his 
lamilj^  and  journeyed  to  Winter  Quar- 
ters,   on    the    Missouri    river.       At    this 
time    he    had    three    wives    and      seven 
children,  the  names  of  his  wives  being 
Mary     Wickersham,       Louisa     Chapin 
Gordon  and  Ellen  Wilding.  In  Septem- 
ber, 1846,  he  was  called  to  go  East  and 
attend   to   some  Church   business.     The 
time  having  come  for  him  to  make  the 
final    move    to    the    west,    he    prepared 
himself   for   the   journey   by   fitting   up 
four  wagons  Avith   the  necessary  teams 
and    outfits,    and    in     the    year   1848   he 
crossed    the    plains    to    Salt    Lake    City 
with  his  family,  going  in  Pres.  Brigham 
Young's  company,   and   arriving  in  the 
Valley  Sept.  20,  184S.      He  camped  for  a 
few  days  outside  the  "Old  Fort,"  in  the 
western  part  of  the  city,   and  then  lo- 
cated on  a  lot  situated  on  the  corner  of 
Third    South   street,     and   at   once  pro- 
ceeded  to   build   a  small   adobie   house, 
making   the   adobies   from   the   clay   on 
the  lot.       Procuring  land   in   the     fields 
south  of  the  city,   he  went  to  work  at 
farming  and  doing  such  other  work  as 
was  incidental   to  a  pioneer's  life.       In 
the  fall  of  1849  he  was  called  by  Pres. 
Brigham    Young    to    go    east    to    assist 
Bishop   Edward   Hunter  with   the  emi- 
gration and  also  to  buy  goods  for  the 
Church-  this  mission  occupied  a  year  or 
more  of  time.       While   in   the   East  he 
went  to  Massachusetts,   where  his   son 
Edwin    Gordon,    then    about    five   years 
of  age,  was  living  with  his  grandmoth- 
er, and  arranged  to  take  the  child  back 
with  him   to  the  Valley,  which  he  did, 
and    after    completing    his    mercantile 
business   in    the   eastern    cities,    he   re- 


BIOGRAPHICAL  ENCYCLOPEDIA. 


633 


returned  to  Salt  Lake  City  in  ttie  fall 
of  1850.  Nov.  10,  1850,  he  married  his 
third  plural  wife,  Mary  Ann  Alpin,  and 
he  subs-equently  had  three  other  wives 
?ealed  to  him.  He  was  elected  a  mem- 
ber of  the  first  legislative  assembly  of 
Utah  Territory,  being^  a  member  of  the 
house  of  i-epresentatives.  Subsequently 
he  served  in  several  sessions  of  the  Ter- 
ritorial legislature.  In  1853  he  was 
commissioned  by  Pres.  Brigham  Young 
to  take  a  herd  of  pattle  to  California 
and  dispose  of  them.  After  his  return 
from  California  he  was  ordained  to  the 
oflice  of  a  Bishop  and  set  apart  to  pre- 
side over  the  13th  Ward,  Salt  Lake  City, 
succeeding  Bishop  Edward  Hunter, who 
had  been  called  to  be  the  Presiding 
Bishop  of  the  Church.  He  occupied  this 
position  until  his  death.  About  the 
time  of  his  return  from  California  he 
was  employed  by  Pres.  Brigham  Young 
to  take  the  superintendency  of  his  pri- 
vate business,  which  was  very  exten- 
sive,and  consisted  of  different  branches 
of  business.  He  attended  to  this 
business  for  several  years.  After  leav- 
ing the  employ  of  Pres.  Young,  and 
some  time  before  the  "move"  in  1858,  he 
engaged  in  merchandising  in  the  "Des- 
eret  News,"  or  Tithing  Store  building, 
and  during  the  "move"  he  went  to  Pro- 
ve, having  prepared,  as  many  of  the 
people  had,  for  a  journey  into  the  coun- 
try south.  He  took  merchandise  along, 
and  continued  his  business  at  Provo 
until  his  return  to  Salt  Lake  City  after 
*he  "war"  was  over.  Elder  Woolley 
was  a  member  of  the  first  High  Council 
organized  in  Utah;  he  was  one  of  the 
incorporators  of  the  Deseret  Telegraph 
Company,  and  was  elected  and  served 
several  terms  as  recorder  of  Salt  Lake 
county.  He  was  very  conscientious  in 
the  discharge  of  his  public  duties, 
whether  of  a  civil  or  an  ecclesiastical 
nature.  While  his  was  a  practical  na- 
ture he  was  deeply  interested  in  mat- 
ters of  religion  and  was  well  versed  in 
the  Scriptures,  both  ancient  and  mod- 
ern, and  was  a  sincere  and  firm  be- 
liever in  the  divinity  of  the  mission  of 
the  Prophet  Joseph  Smith,  whose  mem- 
ory he  revered  till  the  last.  Bishop 
Woolley  died  in  Salt  Lake  City,  Oct.  14, 
1881.  The  following  extract  from  an 
obituary  published  in  the  "Deseret 
News"  on  the  day  of  his  demise,  ex- 
presses in  brief  something  of  his  char- 
acter: "Bishop  Edwin  D.  Woolley  was 
a  good  and  useful  man.       It  is  doubt- 


ful if  one  more  industrious  could  be 
found  anywhere.  His  life  was  one  con- 
tinuous scene  of  endeavor.  He  was 
exceedingly  outspoken,  uttering  his  sen- 
timents sometimes  without  much  re- 
gard to  consequences.  He  was  what 
might  be  termed  a  plain,  honest  man, 
whose  integrity  to  the  cause  of  the 
Kingdom  of  God  was  beyond  question. 
Under  his  unusual  frankness  of  speech 
he  carried  a  kind  and  manly  heart,  and 
he  goes  to  the  beyond  with  an  excellent 
record.  He  was  a  man  who  hfeartily 
disliked  every  species  of  sham,  and  was 
greatly  esteemed  and  respected  in  the 
community.  Bishop  Woolley  was  short 
of  stature,  squarely  built  and  had  a 
good  sized  head,  the  forehead  being  full- 
and  broad."  Bishop  Woolley  was  the 
father  of  26  children.  At  the  time  of 
his  demise,  he  had  152  grandhildren  and 
156  great  grandchildren,  making  a  total 
of  334  descendants. 

ATWOOD,  Millen,  third  Bishop  of 
the  Thirteenth  Ward,  Salt  I-ake  City. 
Utah,  is  the  third  son  of  Dan  Atwood 
?nd  Polly  Sawyei.  and  was  born  in 
the  town  of  Wellington,  Tolland  coun- 
ty. Conn.,  May  24,  1817.  He  received 
a  common  school  education  and  learned 
the  trade  of  a  mason.  Having  been  con- 
vinced of  the  truth  of  "Mormonism," 
he  emigrated  to  Nauvoo,  Hancock 
county.  111.,  in  1841;  there  he  became 
ricquainted  with  the  Prophet  Joseph 
iind  other  leading  men  of  the  Church 
and  was  baptized  in  the  Mississippi 
river  in  August  uf  that  year.  After 
lecovering  from  a  severe  attack  of 
sickness  he  was  ordained  to  the  office 
of  an  Elder,  April  7,  1842,  and  soon 
rfterwards  called  on  a  mission  to 
]  reach  the  gospel.  He  left  Nauvoo,  in 
( ompany  with  James  W.  Cummings, 
July  7,  1842,  traveled  extensively  in  the 
States  of  Illinois,  Wisconsin,  New  York 
;)nd  Connecticut,  and  returned  to  Nau- 
->  oo  after  hearing  of  the  martyrdom  of 
the  Prophet.  In  the  fall  of  1844  he  was 
ordained  into  the  10th  quorum  of 
Seventy.  He  labored  considerably  on  the 
Temple  and  came  west  in  February, 
:846,  at  the  time  of  the  general  exodus. 
He  suffered  severely  from  the  extreme 
cold  while  camping  on  Lyon  creek, 
Iowa,  and  spent  part  of  the  winter  of 
1846-47  At  Winter  Quarters.  From  the 
latter  place  he  made  two  trips  to  Mls- 
.'-ouri  after  provisions  and  also  one  trip 
to  Mount  Pisgah.     In  1847  he  came   to 


634 


LATTER-DAY    SAINT 


Great  Salt  Lake  valley  as  one  of  the 
pioneers  under  the  direction  of  Pres. 
Brighani  Young,  and  returned  to  Win- 
ter Quarters  the  same  year.  Early  in 
1848  he  made  a  trip  back  to  Nauvoo  to 
bring  away  the  Temple  tools.  After 
his  return  to  the  Missouri  river,  he 
jnarried  Relief  Cram  and  immediately 
commenced  to  make  preparations  for 
emigrating  to  the  Valley.  He  crossed 
the  plains  that  year  in  Pres.  Brigham 
Young's  company,  driving  one  of  the 
President's  teams  all  the  way.  After 
he  arrived  in  the  Valley  he  built  a 
?mall  house,  into  which  he  moved  his 
wife  Dec.  23,  1848,  the  weather  at  that 
time  being  very  cold.  This  house  was 
built  on  the  spot  where  the  Bishop 
<  ontinued  to  reside  till  the  time  of  his 
death,  on  the  corner  of  First  East  and 
Second  South  streets.  In  the  winter  of 
1849-50  Elder  Atwood  participated  in 
the  expedition  against  the  Indians  at 
Provo.  He  was  absent  nineteen  days, 
during  which  time  he  suffered  extreme- 
ly from  cold,  and  was  also  exposed  to 
areat  danger  from  the  savages.  March 
9,  1851,  he  was  set  apart  as  one  of  the 
presidents  of  the  14th  quorum  of  Seventy 
by  Joseph  Young,  sen.  About  the  same 
lime  he  was  enrolled  as  one  of  the  Salt 
Lake  City  policemen,  and  acted  in  that 
capacity  for  a  number  of  years.  Being 
called  on  a  mission  to  Europe,  he  left 
his  mountain  home  Sept.  16,  1852,  and 
arrived  in  Liverpool,  England,  Jan.  5, 
1S53.  His  first  appointment  was  to  la- 
bor in  Scotlaml.  Subsequently  he  was 
appointed  to  take  charge  of  the  Car- 
lisle conference,  and  later,  he  presided 
over  the  Bradford  conference.  Finally, 
he  filled  the  position  of  pastor  over  the 
South,  Wiltshire  and  Lands-End  con- 
ference.-:, until  he  returned  home  with  a 
tompany  of  Saints,  which  sailed  from 
Liverpool,  England,  in  the  ship  "Thorn- 
ton," May  4,  1856.  From  Iowa  City  to 
Great  Salt  Lake  valley  he  traveled 
with  Cajjt.  James  G.  Willies  hand-cart 
company,  which  suffered  almost  beyond 
human  enduitince  before  reaching  the 
Valley.  In  the  time  of  the  move  (1858) 
Elder  Atwood  journeyed  south,  but  re- 
turned as  soon  as  peace  was  estab- 
lished. For  many  years  he  acted  as  a 
Ward  teacher,  and  always  took  an  active 
part  in  local  matters  generally;  he  also 
labored  many  years  as  a  home  mis- 
sionary in  the  Salt  Lake  Stake  and  was 
a  member  of  the  High  Council  from 
May    9,    1873    until    Dec.    25,    1881,    when 


be  was  oidained  to  the  office  of  a 
Bishop  and  ajipointed  to  succeed  the 
late  Bishop  Edwin  D.  Woolley  as 
Bishop  of  the  Thirteenth  Ward,  which 
position  he  held  till  Dec.  17,  1890,  when 
he  died  at  his  home  in  Salt  Lake  City. 

TAYLOK,  Georj-e  Maiiiiltun,  fourth 
Bishop  of  the  Fourteenth  Ward,  Salt 
Lake  City,  is  the  son  of  Samuel  Taylor, 
and  Lydia  Osborn,  and  was  born  in 
West  Bloomfield  (now  Montclair)  Es- 
sex county,  New  Jersey.  His  ancestors 
came  to  this  country  from  England  in 
1639,  and  he  has  a  complete  record  of 
i^enealogy  on  his  motner's  side  from 
that  time  down  to  1880.  His  parents 
being  in  humble  circumstances,  his 
srchooling  was  very  limited.     At  eleven 


years  of  age  he  left  home  to  work  on  a 
farm  for  two  years;  then  he  worked  in 
.1  factory,  and  later  he  worked  at  clerk- 
ing in  stores  in  Jersey  City,  and  New 
York  City.  At  the  age  of  sixteen  he 
vas  bound  an  aPP'cntice  to  learn  calico 
engraving  at  Haverstraw,  New  York, 
where  he  served  his  time  and  worked 
till  he  was  26  years  of  age.  There  he 
became  acquainted  witn  Elder  John 
Druce,  a  fellow  workman,  and  rei:eived 
his  first  introduction  to  "Mormonism." 
He  was  baptized  Sept.  22,  1849.  by  El- 
der John  Druce.  A  small  branch  of  the 
Church  was  organized  in  that  place  by 
brother  Druce,  and  as  all  the  Saints 
were  receiving  good  wages  they  were 
made  very  useful  to  Apostle  John  Tay- 
lor in  helping  to  sustain  the  "Mormon." 


BIOGRAPHICAL.   ENC  TCLOPEDIA. 


635 


a  periodical  publislied  in  New  York 
City  at  that  time.  Aug.  31,  1856,  Bro. 
Taylor  married  Elmina  Shepard,  who 
if  now  president  of  the  Y.  L.  M.  I.  A. 
of  the  Church.  In  the  spring  of  1859  he 
£;tarted  with  his  wife  for  Salt  Lake 
City;  they  crossed  the  plains  with  their 
own  ox-tea,m,  in  the  company  led  by 
Edward  Stevenson,  arriving  in  the  Val- 
ley Sept.  16,  1859,  with  25  cents  in  his 
f'ocket.  He  had  always  been  used  to 
light  work,  but  not  expecting  to  find 
anything  to  do  at  his  trade,  he  decid- 
ed to  take  the  first  offer  of  work  that 
he  received.  Consequently,  when  he,  on 
the  day  of  his  arrival,  was  olfered  a  job 
to  tend  the  tail  of  a  circular  saw  in  Big 
Cottonwood  canyon,  he  accepted  it.  His 
larticular  work  consisted  in  carry mg 
off  the  wet  slabs  from  the  mill.  His 
slim  body  and  delicate  hands  received 
a  sore  trial  during  the  two  following 
months.  He  continued  this  labor  till 
the  snow  closed  the  mill.  The  taking 
up  of  the  first  offer  of  v/ork  at  sawing 
lumber  was  the  foundation  of  his  fu- 
ture business,  for  he  has  now  been  in 
the  lumber  business  nearly  forty  years. 
At  thirty  years  of  age  he  started  to 
learn  the  carpenter  trade,  and  after 
working  as  a  journeyman  carpenter  for 
a  short  time,  he  went  into  partnership 
and  branched  out  under  the  firm  name 
of  Latimer  and  Taylor,  sash  and  door 
makers.  Later,  seeing  the  need  of  ma- 
chinery to  meet  the  wants  of  the  pub- 
lic, he,  in  connection  with  two  others, 
borrowed  $5,000  (part  of  it  at  3  per  cent, 
.ind  part  at  5  per  cent  per  month),  and 
sent  east  for  a  complete  set  of  wood 
Avorking  machines.  They  had  them 
freighted  across  the  plains  at  the  rate 
of  20  cents  per  pound,  and  set  them  up 
on  the  corner  of  the  block  opposite  the 
southeast  corner  ot  the  present  city  and 
county  building.  There  Bro.  Taylor 
blew  the  first  steam  whistle  ever  heard 
in  the  city,  and  planed  the  first  board 
ever  planed  by  machine  in  Utah.  After 
a  very  successful  run  of  nine  months 
the  building  caught  fire,  and  in  just 
twelve  minutes  it  was  leveled  to  the 
ground.  There  was  no  insurance; 
everything  was  ruined,  even  the  own- 
ers' coats  and  hats  were  burned.  The 
only  redeeming  feature,  and  one  that 
Elder  Taylor  often  speaks  of,  was  that 
after  he  arrived  home  tired,  dirty,  and 
f oie  at  heart,  a  poor  good  sister  came 
all  the  way  from  the  Tenth  Ward  and 
told  him  not  to  be  discouraged,  for  the 


mill  had  burned  down  in  the  right  time 
of  the  moon.  His  next  venture  was  in 
partnership  with  William  H.  Folsom, 
George  Romney,  and  a  Mr.  Latimer, 
under  the  name  of  Latimer,  Taylor  & 
Co.  For  a  number  of  years  this  firm 
added  largely  to  the  growth  of  the  city 
and  county.  After  the  death  of  Mr. 
Latimer  and  the  selling  of  Brother  Fol- 
som's  interest  to  Prank  Armstrong, 
the  firm  was  changed  in  1881  to  Taylor, 
Romney,  Armstrong  Co.,  and  Bro.  Tay- 
lor was  made  president  of  the  com- 
pany, which  is  the  oldest  and  one  of  the 
most  solid  lumber  companies  in  Utah. 
FJlder  Taylor  was  ordained  a  Teacher 
by  John  Druce;  an  Elder  by  Jeter  Clin- 
ton; a  Seventy,  June  15,  1860,  by  Ed- 
ward Stevenson,  and  a  High  Priest 
April  20,  1876,  by  Robert  T.  Burton.  He 
was  chosen  to  be  second  counselor  in 
the  Fourteenth  Ward  Bishopric  April 
20,  1876,  and  was  set  apart  as  first  coun- 
selor in  that  Bishopric  Dec.  18,  1884. 
He  was  ordained  a  Bishop  and  set  apart 
to  preside  over  the  P'ourteenth  Ward 
Oct.  11,  1886.  This  position  he  holds  at 
present.  During  1879  and  1880  he  filled 
a  successful  mission  to  England,  where 
he  presided  over  the  London  confer- 
ence. July  4,  1877,  he  married  Lois 
Foote,  who  bore  him  six  children,  all  of 
whom  are  living.  He  married  Nellie 
Colebrook  Oct.  9,  1885,  with  whom  he 
has  had  one  son.  By  his  wife  Elmina 
he  has  had  seven  children,  four  of 
whom  are  living.  Having  been  con- 
victed of  "unlawful  cohabitation," 
Bishop  Taylor  served  a  term  in  the 
Utah  penitentiary  (from  March  4,  1886, 
to  Aug.  4,  1886)  and  paid  a  fine  of  $300. 

POLIjAKD,  Joseph,  sixth  Bishop  of 
the  Fifteenth  Ward,  Salt  Lake  City, 
was  born  at  Corfe  Castle,  Dorsetshire. 
England,  Nov.  23,  1819.  When  fourteen 
years  old-  he  commenced  to  work  as  an 
apprentice  at  the  shipyards  at  Poole. 
Dorsetshire.  After  having  served  his 
time  he  went  to  sea  as  a  ship  carpen- 
ter, and  made  several  voyages  to  Amer- 
ica and  the  West  Indies.  In  1844  he 
joined  the  Queen's  government  ser- 
vice and  worked  at  shipbuilding  at  the 
government  docks  at  Deptford,  county 
of  Kent.  Sept.  22,  1845,  he  married 
Mary  Ann  Bailey.  In  1848  he  first 
heard  "Mormonism"  and  was  baptized 
by  John  Griffith  April  10,  1849.  Soon  af- 
terwards he  was  ordained  to  the  office 
of  a  Deacon,  advanced  through  the  va- 


636 


LATTER-DAY    SAINT 


riovjs  prades  of  the  Priesthood  until  he 
was  ordained  an  Elder  and  sent  out  on 
Sunday  missions  to  scatter  tracts  in 
Bedford  and  Aicinity.  In  1852  he  suc- 
ceeded Eider  Griffith  as  president  of 
the  Deptford  branch,  which  position  he 
occupied  until  he  emigrated  to  Ameri- 
ca with  his  wife  and  three  children  in 
1854.  They  crossed  the  Atlantic  in  the 
ship  •"Clara  AVheeler,"  which  sailed 
from  Liverpool,  England,  Nov.  27,  1854. 
On  the  voyage  considerable  sickness 
prevailed  among  the  emigrants  and  a 
number  of  them  died.  Having  arrived 
at  St.  Louis,  Mo.,  in  January,  1855,  he 
found  employment  as  a  ship  carpenter, 


working  on  steamboats  and  other  ves- 
sels, in  the  employ  of  the  famous  Cap- 
tain James  Eades.  While  thus  employ- 
ed he  was  ordained  to  the  office  of  a 
High  Priest  by  Apostle  Erastus  Snow, 
ond  set  apart  to  act  as  a  member  of 
the  High  Council  in  the  St.  Louis  Stake 
of  Zion.  His  house  was  always  open 
to  the  missionaries,  and  among  the 
ntany  "Valley"  Elders  who  shared  in 
his  hospitality  Avas  Apostle  Parley  P. 
Pratt,  who  stayed  at  his  home  about 
a  month  immediately  before  going  to 
Arkansas,  where  he  was  murdered.  In 
June,  18.o7.  Elder  Pollard  continued  his 
journey  Zion-ward,  joined  the  emigra- 
tion at  Florence,  Nebraska,  and  cross- 
ed the  plains  in  Capt.  Jacob  Hoffines' 
company.  Several  stampedes  occurred 
on  the  plains;  in  one  of  these  46  head 
of  cattle  were  lost.  On  one  occasion 
the  cattle  stampeded  when  hitched  to 
the   wagons.     During   the  affair     Elder 


Pollard  and  wife,  together  with  a  num- 
ber of  others,  were  severely  hurt,  be- 
ing run  over  by  several  wagons. 
Through  administrations  and  prayer 
Elder  Pollard  was  healed  in  a  most  mir- 
aculous manner,  and  the  following  day 
was  able  to  get  around  again.  The  com- 
pany arrived  in  the  Valley  Sept.  22,  1857, 
having  camped  several  times  In  close 
proximity  to  the  baggage  trains  be- 
longing to  Johnston's  army.  Elder 
Pollard  located  in  the  Fifteenth  Ward, 
Salt  Lake  City,  where  he  resided  till  the 
time  of  his  death.  He  found  employ- 
ment as  a  carpenter  for  Pres.  Brigham 
Young,  continuing  in  his  employ  until 
1869,  when  he  comenced  work  for  the 
Utah  Central  railway  company.  Short- 
ly after  his  arrival  in  the  Valley,  be 
\\;iS  chosen  as  a  Ward  teacher,  and  in 
]8;>1  was  appointed  to  act  as  second 
counselor  to  Bishop  Andrew  Cunning- 
ham. He  subsequently  served  as  second 
counselor  to  Bishop  Robert  T.  Burton, 
whom  he  finally  succeeded  as  Bishop  of 
th-,i  Ward  June  27,  1877.  In  1862  he 
yielded  obedience  to  the  principle  of 
1  iural  mariage  by  marrying  Ruth  Al- 
len, who  died  about  twenty  years  after- 
wards. Bishop  Pollard  died  in  Salt 
Lake-  City,  Feb.  21,  1890.  He  was  the 
father  of  seven  children,  and  was  uni- 
VLrs^ally  known  as  a  humble,  upright 
man  and  a  faithful  Latter-day  Saint. 

MORRIS,  Elias,  seventh  Bishop  of 
the  Fifteenth  Ward,  Salt  Lake  City, 
T'tah,  was  born  June  30,  1825,  at  Llan- 
fair,  Talhairne,  Denbigshire,  Wales,  son 
of  John  Morris  and  Barbara  Thomas. 
His  parents  were  both  natives  of  North 
Wales,  and  had  seven  sons  and  three 
daughters.  His  father  was  a  builder 
and  contractor.and  was  for  many  years 
engaged  in  building  bridges  and  prisons 
for  the  counties  of  North  Wales.  Elias 
served  his  time  under  his  father,  and 
then,  at  the  age  of  nineteen,  he  went  to 
England  to  get  more  experience  in  the 
bricklaying  line  and  furnace  building. 
March  17,  1849,  he  joined  the  "Mormon" 
Church.  He  was  the  first  man  bap- 
tized in  the  town  of  Abergele,  in  his 
native  county,  by  John  Parry,  who 
years  afterwards  had  charge  of  build- 
ing the  Logan  Temple.  The  same  sum- 
mei-  his  father,  mother,  his  brother 
Hugh  and  sister  Barbara,  also  joined 
the  Church;  and  in  less  than  a  year 
he,  in  connection  with  others,  raised  up 
a  branch  of  about  sixty  members, among 


BIOGRAPHICAL,    ENCYCLOPEDIA. 


637 


whom  was  his  brother  Richard  V.  Mor- 
ris, the  late  Bishop  of  the  Nineteenth 
Ward.  The  following  spring  he  went 
to  Manchester  to  visit  his  brother  Price, 
and  to  Liverpool  to  visit  his  brothers 
William  V.  ana  John,  all  three  of  whom 
were  baptized.  In  the  year  1850  ht  was 
called  to  travel  through  the  Flintshire 
conference  as  a  traveling  Elder,  and 
was  also  appointed  first  counselor  to 
William  Parry,  president  of  that  con- 
ference. There  he  labored  till  the  fall 
of  1851,  when  Apostle  John  Taylor  vis- 
ited that  conference,  having  in  view  the 
organization   of   the  sugar  company  to 


send  to  Utah.  Elias  Morris  was  called 
as  one  of  its  mechanics,  and  at  a  con- 
ference, held  at  Holywell,  Sept.  28,  1851, 
he  was  released  to  emigrate  with  the 
sugar  company  in  the  spring.  Mean- 
time he  returned  to  his  trade  to  pro- 
vide an  outfit;  and,  while  thus  engaged 
as  a  mason,  on  a  three-story  building 
at  Abergale,  Nov.  20,  1851,  pointing  the 
front  of  a  building  on  a  hanging  scaf- 
fold, on  the  third  story  window,  the 
scaffold  gave  way  and  he  fell  down  into 
the  street,  alighting  on  his  thigh;  with 
presence  of  mind,  as  he  touched  the 
ground,  he  put  his  hand  on  a  course  of 
rock,  under  the  large  shop  window, and 
leaped  inside  of  the  building,  barely 
escaping  death  from  the  scaffold,  which 
was  falling  after  him.  Strange  to  say, 
he  was  uninjured  by  the  fall;  and,  after 
he  got  over  the  fright,  he  assisted  in 
putting  up  a  new  scaffold.  In  the  spring 
of  1852,  Elder  Morris  met  the  sugar 
company  at  Liverpool,  and  was  put  in 
charge  of  it.      There  were  among  them 


experts  in  the  manufacturing  of  .sugar, 
several  of  whom  were  selected  in  Liver- 
pool.      While   waiting   in   that  city    for 
sugar  machinery.  Elder  Morris  sent  on 
his  betrothed  wife,  Mary  Parry    of  New 
Market,     on     board     the     ship     "Ellen 
Maria."     On  the  28th  of  March  his  own 
company     sailed      from     Liverpool,    on 
board  the  ship  "Rockaway;"  and,  after 
a  tedious  voyage  of  eight  weeks,   they 
arrived   at   New   Orleans,    where     Pres. 
John  Taylor  met  the  company.    Having 
discharged   the   machinery   at   Leaven- 
worth,   the    president    requested    Elder 
Morris    to   accompany     him   to   Council 
Bluffs,   to  fetch  the  wagons  down.     At 
Council    Bluffs    he    met    his    betrothed, 
and  they  were  married  there  by  Apostle 
Orson  Hyde,  at  the  house  of  the  bride's 
uncle,  Joseph  Parry,  May  23,  1852.       In 
due  time  the  sugar  company  proceeded 
on  their  journey,  and  reached  Salt  Lake 
City    in    the    latter    part    of    November. 
Elder  Morris  immediately  proceeded  to 
Provo,   and   there   the   company   turned 
over  the     sugar       machinery       to     the 
Church,   the  enterprise  having  resulted 
in   a   failure.       He   remained   at    Provo 
during  the  winter;  and,  in  the  spring  of 
1853    he    walked    to    Salt    Lake    City    to 
attend  the  April  conference,  to  see  the 
laying   of   the   foundation   stone   of   the 
Salt    Lake    Temple.        While      at      thi.s 
conference  he  was  requcbced  by  the  au- 
thorities of  the  Church  to  go  to  Cedar 
City,    Iron    county,    to    take    chaige    of 
the   masonry   and   the    iron   works   and 
blast  furnaces.       There  he   labored    for 
seven  years,  off  and  on,  till  the  failure 
of   those    works,    when    he    returned    to 
Salt  Lake  City  in  the  spring  of  1860.  Af- 
ter  his    return    from    the    south.    Elder 
Morris    went    to    work    on    the    Temple 
block.      He  took  a  contract  with  Henry 
Eccles  to  cut  the  flagging,  of  the  foun- 
dation  of   the   Temple.       Feb.      7,    1864. 
Elias   Morris   and   his   men   commenced 
work  on  the  Eagle  Emporium;   in  June 
he   commenced     Wm.     S.    Godbe's    Ex- 
change Buildings,  and  in  July    Ransa- 
hoff's  store,  south  of  Jennings".     It  was 
at  this  date  that  Main  street  began  to 
assume  fully  the  imposing  appearance 
of  a  merchant  street.      On  these  build- 
ings Elder  Morris   paid   to   his   masons 
from  five  to  seven  dollars  per  day;  but. 
at  that   time,   flour  was  selling  in  Salt 
Lake  City  at  from  $25  to  $30  per  hun- 
dred.      At   the   April   conference.     1865. 
Elias  Morris  was  called  to  take  a  mis- 
sion  to  Wales.       There  he  stayed    four 


638 


LATTER-DAY    SAINT 


years  and  one  month, during  which  time 
he  was  a  conference  president  and  the 
last   year  was   president   of  the   Welsh 
mission.   He  again  left  his  native  land 
in   May,  1869.   in  charge  of  a  company 
of  Saints  (365  souls),  who  were  mostly 
helped  by  the  Church  and  their  friends 
in  Utah.       This  was  the  first  company 
that  came  through  after  the  completion 
of  the  railroad  in  the  year  1869.    After 
his    return     from     this     mission,   Elias 
Morris,   in   the   spring  of  1870,     entered 
into  partnership  with  Samuel  L.  Evans. 
This  pa,rtnership,     which     existed     for 
eleven   years,    was   of   a   very   peculiar 
and   unique    kind.       They   entered    into 
an    agreement    that    all    their   earnings 
should    be   left   in    their  business,    each 
family  being^  allowed  to  draw  out  what 
they  severally  needed.      Donations,  etc., 
were  paid  in  lilce  manner  by  the  firm, 
neither  of  the  partners  questioning  the 
doings  of  the  other.       Thus  they  went 
on  for  eleven  years,  in  the  conduct  of 
their   business,    in    their   private   build- 
ings and  improvements  for  their  fami- 
lies; in  the  supplies  and  money  for  their 
families;    in  pocket     money     for  them- 
selves;  in  donation,  taxes,  etc.,  indeed, 
in   every  other   private  or   public   draw 
on  their  united  finances.      This  they  did 
to   the   last,    when    death     ended    their 
partnership,    without    disagreement    or 
a  question  ever  being  raised  as  to  which 
family    had    received    the    least    or    the 
most.      In  this  respect  they  never  even 
so  much  as  investigated  their  accounts. 
Their    method    from    first    to    last    was 
upon  the  pure  United  Order  principle — 
each  partner  simply  drawing  or  build- 
ing according  to  his  personal  or  family 
needs.  Samuel  L.  Evans  was  the  book- 
keeper   and    cashier   of   the   firm;      and 
Elias  Morris  the  superintendent  of  the 
practical    work   and   of   their   men    em- 
ployed.      Elder    Evans   died    March    12, 
1881.       Administrators    were    appointed 
to  appraise    the   property   belonging   to 
the   firm,    which   paid   all    the   debts   of 
the    deceased.       Mr.    Morris    offered    to 
buy  or  sell  the  half  of  the  business  and 
property, and  the  family  of  the  deceased 
partner  very  properly  sold  out.  Brother 
Morris  purchasing  for  $10,000  in  money 
and   pi-operty,  Evans'    family  being  al- 
lowed their  choice  of  property.      Of  the 
history  of  their  business  it  may  be  thus 
summarized:       Morris  &  Evans  opened 
up  the  first  marble  monumental  yard  in 
Salt  Lake.      Soon  after  this  the  mining 
operations  opened  throughout  the  Ter- 


ritory,   and    from    Elder    Morris'      past 
experience    in    furnace    building    their 
firm   obtained   the   run   of   the   business 
in  building     nearly       all     the  furnaces 
throughout  Utah  and  the  adja.cent  Ter- 
ritories. At  about  this  time  they  bought 
a  fire  clay  mine  in  Bingham,  and  com- 
menced the  manufacture  of  fire     brick 
of  every   kind,   and     supplied   Nevada, 
Montana,    Idaho,    Wyoming  and    Utah, 
giving    great    satisfaction.        The    firm 
took  a  contract  for  the   Ontario     mill, 
and    Elder    Morris     did    all    the   mason 
work   of   that   company,    including   the 
Cornish    pump    in   No.    3   shaft,     which 
was  considered  by  experts  to  be  equal 
to  anything  in  the  Comstock  mine,  Ne- 
vada.     He  built  two  Stetefeldt  fyrnaces 
at  the  Ontario,  another  for  the  Marsac 
on  an   improved  plan,   and  another  for 
the  Bullionville  Smelting  Company;also 
two  of  the  same  kind  at   Butte,   Mon- 
tana, and  the  two  White  &  Howell  at 
the  Alice  mill,  and  one  at  the  Moulton 
mill,      After  the  death  of  Elder  Evans, 
Elias  Morris  carried  on  the  former  firm 
business    in    his    own    name     and    also 
took   a  great   interest      in   establishing 
other  industries,  among  which  may  be 
mentioned   the    Nineteenth   Ward   Tan- 
nery, the  Salt  Lake  Foundry,     a    soap 
factory,  a  slate  quarry,  the  Utah  Sugar 
Factory,   etc.       In  1891,   in   partnership 
with     Houlahan     &     Griffith,     he     con- 
tracted to  lay  the  cut  stone  and  brick 
work  of  the  City  and  County  Building, 
also  to  build  the  gravity  sewer  of  Salt 
Lake  City.      He  served  as  a  city  coun- 
cilor for  four  years  and  was  a  director 
in  the  Salt  Lake  Chamber  of  Commerce 
one  term.       Elder  Morris  filled  the  po- 
sition of  a  High  Councilor  in  the  Salt 
Lake  Stake  of  Zion  for  nearly  twenty 
years,    being   set   apart   for   that   office 
April  17,  1878.      After  the  death  of  Elias 
Smith,  he  was  chosen  president  of  the 
High  Priests'  quorum  in  the  Salt  Lake 
Stake.        To    this    position    he    was    set 
apart   Sept.   12,   1888,   and   filled   it  until 
the   time   of   his  death.       On   the   reor- 
ganization   of    the    15th    Ward    Bishop- 
ric, May  11,  1890,  he  was  chosen  to  suc- 
ceed Joseph  Pollard  as  Bishop  of  said 
Ward,  which  office  he  held  the  remain- 
der of  his  days.      In  1895  he  was  elected 
a    member   of    the   constitutional     con- 
vention which  drafted  the  organic  law 
of  the  State  of  Utah.      On  the  organi- 
zation of  the  Utah  Sugar  Company,  in 
1889,    he   was   made   president     of     the 
same   and   held   that  office   till   his   de- 


BIOGRAPHICAL  ENCYCLOPEDIA. 


639 


mise.  He  was  greatly  interested  in 
the  Welsh  population  in  Utah  and  was 
treasurer  and  director  in  the  Eistedd- 
fod organization.  He  had  been  attend- 
ing a  business  meeting  on  Monday, 
March  14,  1898,  when  he  accidenta-Hy 
fell  down  a  shaft  in  the  Co-operative 
Furniture  Company's  building,  on  Main 
Street.  Salt  Lake  City,  and  was  fatally 
hurt.  From  the  effects  of  that  acci- 
dent he  died  three  days  later  (March 
17,  1898).  At  the  time  of  his  death  the 
"Deseret  News"  said  of  him  editorial- 
ly: "He  was  a  man  of  great  ability 
and  resource,  while  his  philanthropy 
^\•as  a  proverb.  "Was  there  a  scheme  on 
foot  to  benefit  the  people?  He  was  one 
of  the  leaders  in  it.  Was  there  a  strug- 
gling enterprise  that  promised  to  de- 
velop a  home  resouice,  or  furnish  em- 
ployment for  home  labor?  'Go  to 
Elias  Morris,  he  will  take  stock  in  it 
and  give  it  the  benefit  of  his  advice 
and  influence,'  was  the  encouraging 
assurance.  Was  there  a  poor  man  out 
of  work  with  a  large  and  suffering 
family?  Go  to  Elias  Morris,  he  will 
give  you  something  to  do,'  is  what  the 
poor  man  heard.  Aside  from  large  cor- 
]iorate  enterprises,  probably  not  a  man 
has  operated  in  this  State  during  the 
liast  two  decades  who  has  furnished 
more  employment  to  poor  men  than 
has  Elias  Morris.  Probably  no  other 
could  be  named  who  has  been  more 
prominently  identified  with  the  devel- 
opment of  home  i-esources  and  the  es- 
tablishment of  home,  enterprises  than 
has  he.  He  was  a  man  of  tireless  ener- 
gy, unceasing  industry,  unbounded 
sympathy  and  incorruptible  integrity, 
nnd  he  enjoyed  the  esteem  and  confi- 
dence of  all  classes  of  the  community. 
Men  who  differed  with  him  in  respect 
to  religion  and  politics  did  not  hesitate 
to  acknowledge  his  high  merits  as  a 
man  and  a  citizen.  To  any  community 
such  a  member  as  he  is  ever  worth  a 
thousand  of  those  who  by  their  'wits' 
or  their  wealth  seek  profit  out  of  other 
people's  distresses,  ignorance  and  cu- 
liidity.  As  a  Latter-day  Saint,  the 
life  of  Elias  Morris  was  the  practical 
application  and  living  elucidation  of 
the  principles  he  professed.  The  mem- 
bers of  the  Fifteenth  Ward,  over  which 
he  presided  as  Bishop,  weep  at  the  news 
of  his  death  as  they  would  at  being 
told  that  their  own  father  was  dead; 
and  like  brethren  of  the  fiesh  with  his 
associates  in  the  Priesthood  mourn  his 


departure.  He  lived  by  a  standard  of 
righteousness  that  was  revealed  from 
heaven,  and  he  died  with  the  absolute 
assurance  that  his  works  were  pleasing 
unto  God,  and  entitled  him  to  a  resur- 
rection with  the  just." 

MOllGAN, Joseph  Kehoboaiii, eighth 
Bishop  of  the  Fifteenth  Ward, Salt  Lake 
City,  Utah,  is  the  son  of  Samuel  Mor- 
gan and  Elizabeth  Beddes,  and  was 
born  April  26,  1835,  at  Little  Deanshill, 
Gloucestershire,  England.  His  boy- 
hood days  were  spent  working  in  the 
coai  mines.  March  13,  1845,  he  wa^' 
baptized  by  Elder  Thos.  Morgan,  and 
confirmed  a  member  of  the  Church  the 
day  following  by  Thos.  Sprague  He 
was  ordained  a  Deacon  March  27  1854 
by  William  Fowler,  ordained  a  Priest' 
June  6,  1854,  by  Thos.  Morgan,  and  or: 
darned  an  Elder  Feb.  8,  1855.  by  John 
Phi  hps.  April  10,  1856,  he  was  called 
to  labor  as  a  local  missionary,  being 
appointed  a  traveling  Elder  in  the 
Cheltenham  conference,  where  he  la- 
bored till  Feb.  12,  I860,  when  his  field  of 
operation  was  changed  to  the  Hereford- 
shire conference.  He  was  honorably 
released  With  permission  to  emigrate 
to  Zion  April  23,  1862.  May  6th,  of  that 
year,  he  married  Mary  Margaret  Jane 
Turner,  and,  together  with  his  young 
wife,    he   emigrated      to   Utah,    sailing 

T^Znfr^Z'''''  °"  ''''  *hip  "William 
Tapscott"  May  14,  1862.  After  his  ar- 
rival in  Utah,  Bro.  Morgan  was  or- 
dained a  Seventy  by  Robert  Neslen  Jan. 

i&.  1890,  he  was  ordained  a  HighPr'est 
and  set  apart  to  act  as  first  counselor 
to   Bishop    Elias     Morris,     of   the   15th 

mT  H  "^  "^"'"''^  E.  Taylor.  April  3. 
189S,  he  was  ordained  a  Bishop  and 
".ppointed  to  preside  over  the  15th  Ward 
by  Pres.  Geo.  Q.  Cannon,  and  he  is 
stil  faithfully  fulfilling  the  duties  of 
hat  calling.  He  has  taken  much  in- 
terest in  music,  and  for  twenty  years 
he  was  a  member  of  the  15th  Ward  and 
the  Tabernacle  choirs.  He  is  also  a 
member  of  the  "Old  Folks'  choir"  of 
Salt  Lake  City.  Bishop  Morgan  writes- 
"I  am  still  a  believer  in  the  divinitv 
of  the  great  latter-day  work,  and  am 
fully  .satisfied  that  it  will  overcome  all 
obstacles  and  triumph  on  the  earth." 

MORRIS,  Nephi  Lowell,  second 
counselor  to  Bishop  Jos.  R.  Morgan  of 
the  15th  Ward,   Salt   Lake   City,   is   the 


640 


LATTER-DAY    SAINT 


son  of  Elias  Mollis  and  Mary  L. 
Walker  and  was  born  in  Salt  Lake  City, 
Utah,  Oct.  2,  1870.  During  his  youth  he 
attended  the  common  schools  and  was 
put  to  work  during  the  summer  vaca- 
tions on  the  contracting  works  con- 
ducted by  his  father.  His  education 
was  finished  at  the  Brigham  Young 
Academy  and  State  University.  When 
in  his  twentieth  year  he  was  taken  out 
of  school  by  his  father  to  engage  in  the 
roller  mills  business.  In  1891, he  was  sent 


out  as  rt  mutual  impiovement  mi.ssion- 
ary.  visiting,  with  his  companion,  every 
Ward  in  Cache.  Oneida  and  Malad 
Stakes.  Dec.  2,  1892,  he  departed  for 
(^ireat  Britain  as  a  missionary.  For  one 
year  he  labored  in  the  Manchester  con- 
ference, after  which  time  he  was  called 
by  Apostle  Anthon  H.  Lund  to  the 
presidency  of  the  London  conference; 
this  position  he  occupied  for  about  one 
year  and  a  half,  returning  home  in  Au- 
gust, 1S95.  Soon  after  his  arrival  home 
he  became  actively  engaged  in  mu- 
tual improvement  work.  For  a  short 
time  he  was  second  assistant  to  Joseph 
H.  Felt,  superintendent  of  the  Salt 
Lake  Stake  Y.  M.  M.  I.  A.  In  October, 
1S96,  Pres.  Wilford  Woodruff  called  him 
to  act  as  one  of  the  General  Board  of 
Y.  M.  M.  I.  A.  His  father's  death  in 
1898  brought  Xephi  into  a  new  calling. 
The  Fifteenth  Ward,  over  which  his 
father  had  presided  as  Bishop,  was  re- 
organized April  3,  189S.  and  Nephi  was 
called  to  act  as  second  counselor  to 
Bishop  Jos.  11.  Morgan,  being  ordained 
a  High  Priest  and  set  apart  to  that 
calling    under   the   hands   of   George   Q. 


Cannon,  John  Henry  Smith  and  Heber 
J.  Grant,  Apostle  Grant  being  mouth. 
He  succeeded  his  father  as  director  and 
treasurer  of  the  Cambrian  Association, 
was  elected  president  of  the  Elias  Mor- 
ris &  Sons  Co.,  a  corporation,  and  sub- 
sequently became  its  manager,  which 
position  he  still  occupies.  He  is  also 
associated  with  other  business  enter- 
prises, being  one  of  the  organizers  of 
the  Ashton  Fire  Brick  and  Tile  Co. 
He  served  in  the  fourth  session  of  the 
[^tah  legislature. 

BINDER, William  Lawrence  Spicer, 

a  prominent  Elder  of  the  Fifteenth 
Ward,  Salt  Lake  City,  Utah,  is  the  son 
of  John  Binder  and  Mary  Spicer,  and 
«as  born  July  10,  1832,  in  London,  Eng- 
land. In  a  short  autobiography  Elder 
Binder  writes:  "When  I  was  about 
four  years  old  my  parents,  with  their 
family,  moved  to  the  parish  of  Totten- 
ham, a  distance  of  about  four  miles 
from  the  place  of  my  birth.  At  the  age 
of  10  years  I  obtained  employment  with 
a  Mr.  Barrett  of  Clerkenwell,  a  pastry 
cook  and  confectioner;  from  this  on  I 
was  employed  at  various  places  in  Lon- 
don, until  I  was  16  years  old,  when  my 
parents  apprenticed  me  for  a  term  of 
seven  years  to  learn  the  trade  of  a 
bread  and  biscuit  baker.  While  serv- 
ing my  apprenticeship  my  attention 
was  called  to  the  faith  and  doctrines  of 
the  Church  of  Jesus  Christ  of  Latter- 
day  Saints,  and  being  much  impressed 
with  the  testimonies  of  the  Elders,  I 
sought  the  Lord  diligently  to  direct  my 
mind  in  my  investigations  of  the  truth. 
Following  my  impressions,  I  presented 
myself  for  membership,  and  according- 
ly, on  Nov.  13,  1849,  I  was  baptized,  and 
the  following  Sunday,  Nov.  18,  1849.  I 
was  confirmed  a  member  of  the  Church 
in  the  Theobald's  Road  branch.  In 
March,  1S50,  a  branch  of  the  Church 
v,as  organized  in  Finsbury,  with  David 
Shorton  as  its  president.  I  was  one  of 
the  original  members  of  this  organiza- 
tion, and  for  about  two  years  continued 
my  labors  in  the  local  Priesthood  of 
said  branch,  being  ordained  to  the  office 
of  Teacher  in  the  early  part  of  1851,  and 
to  the  office  of  a  Priest  in  November  of 
the  same  year.  April  26,  1852,  I  was 
ordained  an  Elder  and  set  apart  for  a 
local  mission  to  Hoxton,  to  labor  in  con- 
junction with  Elders  George  Derry  and 
others,  and  endeavor  to  establish  a 
branch    in    that    locality.        Our    labors 


BIOGRAPHICAL    ENCYCLOPEDIA. 


641 


proved  quite  successful  and  in  a  few 
months  a  branch  called  the  Hoxton 
branch  was  built  up,  containing  28 
members.  Early  iii  1855  I  was  called 
to  preside  over  the  Lambeth  branch,  of 
the  London  conference,  in  which  capa- 
city I  acted  until  released  to  emigrate 
to  Zion  in  May.  1856.  Dec.  25,  1853,  I 
married  Eliza  Camp,  whose  labors  were 
a  great  assistance  to  the  ministry  in 
distributing    tracts      and      visiting    the 


Saints  at  their  homes  in  the  Finsbury 
and  Lambeth  branches.  May  23,  1856, 
together  with  my  wife  Eliza,  I  bid 
farewell  to  our  kindred  connections  at 
Euston  Square  station,  London,  and 
left  for  Liverpool  to  sail  from  that  port 
for  America.  May  25,  1856,  we  sailed 
from  Liverpool  in  the  sailing  vessel 
"Horizon,"  Capt.  Wm.  Read  command- 
ing. After  about  six  weeks'  voyage  on 
the  Atlantic  ocean,  we  arrived  at  Bos- 
ton, Mass.  July  1,  1856,  we  commenced 
our  overland  journey  by  rail  and  ferry- 
boat to  Iowa  City.  Upon  our  arrival 
there  we  moved  up  to  the  rendezvous 
camp,  situated  about  three  miles  from 
the  city.  Here  we  awaited  the  ar- 
rival and  fitting  up  of  the  hand-carts, 
the  vehicles  with  which  we  were  to  haul 
cur  luggage  1,300  miles.  We  were  de- 
tained at  this  outfitting  point  about 
three  weeks.  While  the  company  was 
waiting  at  Iowa  City,  Bro.  John  Wat- 
kins  and  I  hired  out  to  work  for  a 
farmer,  about  four  miles  away.  July 
28,  1856,   we     brolce     camp  and     started 

Vol.   1,   No.   41. 


westward   for  Zion   under   the  captain- 
ship  of  Edward     Martin,     assisted   by 
Daniel  Tyler:   we  traveled  under  much 
difficulty  and  endured  many  privations, 
finally  arriving  at  Salt  Lake  City,  Nov. 
30,    1856,    having   occupied   18    weeks     in 
making    the   journey    from    Iowa    City. 
Upon   our   arrival    in   Utah   I     and    my 
wife   Eliza   were   escorted    to   Provo   by 
Bro.  Geo.  W.  Bean,  it  being  the  wish  of 
Pres.  Brigham  Young  that  the  belated 
emigrants  should  be  distributed  among 
the  settlements  to  be  comfortably  cared 
for  by   those   who   could   make  a   home 
for   them.       Bishon  Jonathan   O.    Duke 
of  the  First  Ward,  Provo,   took  charge 
of  us,  and  after  spending  a  night  at  his 
house  he  located     us     at     Bro.   George 
Ekins'  home,  where  we  remained  until 
the   spring  of  1857.       Upon   the   receipt 
of   the    information     that     government 
troops    were    approaching    the    Valley, 
under  command  of  Gen.  Johnston,  Gov- 
ernor Young  placed  the  Territory  under 
martial   law,   and   by  virtue  of  his  au- 
thority  as    commander-in-chief   of   the 
military    forces    he    ordered      out    that 
branch  of  the  service  for  reorganization 
and  drill,  to  which  call  I  also  respond- 
ed,   and,    under   the     command   of   Col. 
Wm.  B.  Pace,  I  served  in  the  expedition 
to  Echo  canyon  during  the  months  of 
October,  November  and  December,  1857, 
acting  as  mess  cook  and   adjutant     to 
Captain  Wm.  Haws.       In  the  spring  of 
1858  I  was  detailed  to  take  a  small  com- 
pany of  16  men  to  "guard  quarters"  in 
Provo  canyon,   to  watch  the  mountain 
passes  in  that  region  of  country:   after 
three  weeks'  service  here,     we  were  re- 
leased by  another  platoon  of  men.       In 
May,  1857,  I  was  ordained  a  Seventy  by 
Pres.    Joseph    Young     and     became     a 
member  and  secretary  of  the  45th  quo- 
rum.      In  July,  1859,  I  moved  with  my 
family  to  Salt  Lake  City,  there  being  a 
better  opportunity  for  me  to  obtain  i-e- 
munerative  employment   there   than   at 
Provo.      While  residing  at  Provo  I  was 
engaged  at  a  variety  of  labor,   princi- 
pally   guarding,    farming,    and    adobie- 
making.       In   1860   the   mass   quorum   of 
Seventies   was  organized   in   Salt   Lake 
City,  and  I  was  called   to  be  its  clerk 
and  continued  to  labor  in  that  capacity 
until  it  was  disorganized.      Locating  in 
the  15th  Ward,  Salt  Lake  City,   I  soon 
became  identified  with  the  local  Priest- 
hood and  re.«umed  the  duties  of  an  act- 

Oct.  12,   1901. 


642 


LATTER-DAY    SAINT 


ing  teacher.  1  was  also  recognized  in 
the  rank  and  file  of  the  2nd  regiment  of 
infantry  of  the  Nauvoo  Legion,  and 
served  as  first  lieutenant  and  captain 
until  the  disorganization  of  the  militia 
by  Gov.  Schaffer  in  1870.  In  1862  I  was 
called  to  take  a  mission  to  the  Missou- 
ri river  to  assist  in  bringing  in  the 
Church  emigration,  I  drove  a  team  of 
four  yoke  of  cattle  to  the  frontiers  and 
back.  On  our  return  trip,  I  filled  the 
))ositions  of  company  clerk,  chaplain 
and  commissary,  distributing  rations 
twice  a  week,  to  a  company  of  five 
hundred  souls.  In  the  spring  of  1863 
1  was  called  by  Bishop  Edward  Hunter 
to  take  a  second  trip  to  the  frontiers, 
this  time  to  be  assistant  captain  to 
Horton  D.  Haight.  Upon  arriving  at 
Florence,  Neb.,  Feramorz  Little,  the 
Church  agent  at  Winter  Quarters  (the 
outfitting  point)  detained  me  to  assist 
in  organizing  and  fitting  out  the  several 
emigrant  companies.  In  this  depart- 
ment I  labored  until  the  close  of  the 
emigration  season,  when  I  returned  to 
Utah  with  the  outfitting  corps,  by  mule 
team,  making  the  1.000  mile  trip  in  20 
days.  In  April.  1865,  I  was  set  apart 
by  Bishop  Andrew  Cunningham  of  the 
iDth  Ward.  Salt  Lake  City,  as  super- 
intendent of  the  Ward  Sunday  school. 
In  1866  I  was  appointed  president  of  the 
acting  teachers  of  the  15th  Ward  by 
Bishop  Robert  T.  Burton.  In  June,  1867, 
by  appointment  of  Gen.  Daniel  H. 
Wells.  I  took  charge  of  a  company  of 
infantry  and  proceeded  to  the  scene  of 
the  Indian  wars,  in  Sanpete  county,  lo- 
cating at  Gunnison,  the  frontier  settle- 
ment of  that  county,  to  guard  and  pro- 
tect the  settlers  from  Blackhawk's  band 
(>{  hostile  Indians.  We  continued  in 
this  service  until  October  of  the  same 
year.  Immediately  after  my  return 
from  the  Sanpete  expedition.  I  was  de- 
tailed for  home  guard  and  special  po- 
lice service  by  the  city  council  of  Salt 
Lake  City,  acting  also  as  captain  of  the 
Ward  police.  I  served  in  this  capacity 
until  1874,  when  my  mission  to  England 
released  me.  During  my  service  as 
special  policeman,  a  volunteer  fire  de- 
partment was  organized  in  1871  by  the 
city,  and  I  became  a  member  of  the 
hook  and  ladder  company,  serving  as 
its  foreman  a  part  of  the  time.  On  my 
return  from  the  Sanpete  expedition  I 
resumed  my  labors  in  the  Sunday 
school,  taking  charge  of  the  theological 
class.  In  September,  1869.  I  was  elected 


adjutant  in  the  2nd  regiment  of  infan- 
try. Utah  militia,  with  the  governor's 
commission,  ranking  as  captain.  In 
December,  1874,  I  was  called  to  fill  a 
mission  to  England,  and  in  company 
with  Elders  Edward  Snelgrove,  Robert 
Hoag  and  Geo.  L.  Farrell,  I  left  Salt 
Lake  City  Dec.  9,  1874,  for  Europe. 
I^pon  arriving  at  Liverpool  I  received 
an  appointment  from  Pres.  Joseph  F. 
Smith  to  labor  in  the  London  confer- 
ence as  traveling  Elder.  In  September, 
1875,  I  was  appointed  to  preside  over 
the  London  conference  and  continued 
in  that  capacity  until  released  to  re- 
turn to  Zion,  in  September,  1876.  In 
returning  to  Zion,  by  appointment  of 
Pres.  Albert  Carrington.I  took  charge  of 
a  company  of  emigrating  Saints,  num- 
bering about  three  hundred  and  fifty 
souls.  In  1878,  I  was  selected  to  act 
on  the  Old  Folks'  committee  in  Salt 
Lake  City  and  am  still  acting  on  said 
committee.  June  27,  1877,  I  was  or- 
dained a  High  Priest  by  Apostle  John 
Taylor  and  set  apart  to  fill  the  position 
of  first  counselor  to  Bishop  Joseph  Pol- 
lard, of  the  15th  Ward.  Salt  Lake  City, 
which  position  I  held  for  thirteen  years 
or  until  the  death  of  Bishop  Joseph 
Pollard,  in  1890.  I  acted  as  presiding 
Elder  of  the  Ward  a  few  months  im- 
mediately following  the  death  of  Bish- 
op Pollard.  In  1890  I  was  called  and 
set  apart  to  perform  the  duties  of  a 
home  missionary  in  the  Salt  Lake 
Stake  of  Zion.  which  position  I  re- 
tained for  nearly  six  years.  In  1898 
I  filled  a  short  mission  to  England  to 
collect  genealogical  data,  being  set 
apart  by  Apostle  Francis  M.  Lyman.  I 
ipturned  home  Aug.  31,  1898." 

ROUNDY.  Shadrach,  first  Bishop 
of  the  Sixteenth  Ward,  Salt  Lake  City, 
Utah  (from  1849  to  1856),  was  born  Jan. 
1,  1789,  in  Rockingham.  Windham  coun- 
ty. Vermont.  When  about  twenty-five 
years  old  he  married  Betsy  Quimby.  of 
Essex  county,  Vermont,  who  bore  him 
ten  children — four  sons  and  six  daugh- 
ters. He  moved  with  his  family  to 
Onondago  county.  New  York,  and  there 
heard  of  the  gospel  being  revealed  to 
Joseph  Smith.  In  the  winter  of  1830- 
31  he  left  his  home  and  traveled  on 
horseback  to  see  the  Prophet  Joseph, 
who  then  resided  at  Fayette,  Seneca 
county.  New  York.  After  having  an 
interview  with  the  Prophet,  he  was  bap- 
tized and  became  an  honorable  member 


BIOGRAPHICAL    ENCYCLOPEDIA. 


643 


of  tht  Church.  His  wife  and  those  of  his 
children  who  were  old  enough  also  em- 
braced the  gospel  about  the  same  time. 
April  16,  1836,  in  Kirtland.  Ohio,  where 
the  main  body  of  the  Church  was  then 
in  conference  assembled,  he  received  a 
license  to  preach  the  gospel,  having 
previously  been  ordained  an  Elder.  Sub- 
sequently, he  removed  to  Missouri, 
where  he  shared  with  the  Saints  in 
their  persecutions,  and  afterward  lo- 
cated temporarily  in  Warsaw,  111.  About 
the  year  1840  he  removed  to  Nauvoo, 
where  he  served  as  captain  of  police. 
In  times  of  imminent  danger  and  per- 
secutions he  acted  as  special  guard 
around  the  person  of  the  Prophet  Jo- 
seph.      On    several    occasions    he    was 


on  duty  without  intermission,  for  many 
days  and  nights,  without  sleep  or  rest. 
His  love  for  the  Prophet  was  so  great 
that  he  would  have  given  his  own  life 
freely  in  defense  of  his  beloved  friend 
and  brother.  On  one  occasion,  when 
the  Prophet  had  been  forewarned  that 
he  was  in  danger,  he  sent  for  Bro. 
Roundy  and  told  him  to  pick  a  trusty 
man  to  be  on  guard  with  him  at  his 
house,  as  a  party  was  coming  that 
night  by  water  to  kidnap  him.  Bro. 
Roundy  selected  Josiah  Arnold  and 
placed  him  on  guard  at  the  gate,  with 
orders  to  admit  no  one,  while  he  him- 
self took  his  beat  by  the  river,  but  on 
hearing  a  noise  he  hastily  repaired  to 
the  gate  and  found  William  Law  inside 
the  gate  and  others  in  the  act  of  enter- 
ing. Bro.  Roundy,  who  had  a  hickory 
\valking  cane  in  his  hand,  quickly  took 


hold  of  it  at  each  end,  and  pressing  it 
against  the  men  forced  them  back  out- 
side, and  then  fastened  the  gate.  Wil- 
liam Law  endeavored  to  explain  that 
the  men  who  were  with  him  were  gen- 
tlemen merchants,  who  wanted  to  see 
the  mummies.  Bro.  Roundy  replied 
that  if  they  were  gentlemen  they  should 
come  at  gentlemen's  hours.  William 
Law  insisted  that  Brother  Joseph 
would  admit  them,  as  they  would  pay 
$10  in  pocket  money,  there  being  about 
forty  of  them;  the  admission  fee  was 
25  cents  for  each.  On  their  agreeing 
not  to  try  to  enter  while  he  was  gone, 
Bro.  Roundy  went  to  Joseph's  room. 
The  Prophet,  who  had  overheard  .the 
conversation,  told  Elder  Roundy  to  go 
back  and  tell  the  strangers  as  a  mess- 
age from  him  what  he  (Roundy)  had 
already  told  them  himself.  Thus  was 
the  Prophet's  life  and  property  pre- 
sers'ed  by  the  courage  and  fidelity  of 
Elder  Roundy  and  his  associate.  Elder 
Roundy  came  to  Great  Salt  Lake  valley 
as  one  of  the  pioneers  of  1847,  and  was 
one  of  the  three  men  who  plowed  the 
first  furrow  in  Great  Salt  Lake  valley. 
He  was  a  member  of  the  first  High 
Council  in  the  Salt  Lake  Stake  of  Zion, 
and  also  a  member  of  the  first  Territo- 
i-ial  degislature.  He  crossed  the  plains 
five  times  to  bring  poor  emigrants  to 
the  Valley,  was  a  captain  of  the  "Sil- 
ver Greys,"  and  one  of  the  first  settlers 
in  the  Sixteenth  Ward,  where  he  pre- 
sided as  Bishop  from  April  14,  1849,  un- 
til 1856.  He  had  previously  been  called 
to  the  Bishopric  by  revelation  (Doc.  & 
Cov.,  Sec.  124,  verse  141).  Bishop  Roundy 
died  in  Salt  Lake  City,  July  4,  1872,  as 
a  true  and  faithful  member  of  the 
Church. 

KESL.ER,  Frederick,  second  Bish- 
op of  the  Sixteenth  Ward,  Salt  Lake 
City,  Utah,  was  the  son  of  Frederick 
Kesler  and  Mary  Lindsay,  and  was 
born  Jan.  20,  1816,  at  Meadville,  Craw- 
ford county,  Penn.,  and  was  of  German 
descent.  He  was  left  an  orphan  at  the 
age  of  five  years,  and  when  fifteen  he 
went  to  work  at  millbuilding,  with 
Abraham  Clark,  in  the  State  of  Ohio. 
After  serving  as  an  apprentice  for  five 
years  in  the  building  of  mills,  he  went 
in  the  business  for  himself.  He  built 
his  first  flouring  mill  in  Iowa  in  1835, 
which  was  also  the  first  mill  built  in 
that  Territory.  In  Vicksburg,  Miss., 
he  built  a  large  double  saw  mill  in  1836. 


644 


LATTER-DAY    SAINT 


During  the  same  year  he  also  built  a 
corn  mill,  a  cotton  press  and  a  cotton 
jin.  In  1839  he  lirst  heard  of  "Mor- 
monism,"  and  met  the  Prophet  Joseph 
Smith   at  Commerce.   111.       In   1840      he 


joined    the   Church,    being     baptized    in 
the  Mississippi  river  by  Freeman  Nick- 
orson.       Bro.    Kesler  became   well     ac- 
quainted   with    the    Prophet,    and     also 
with    his    father    and    mother,    and     he 
received    a    patriarchal    blessing     from 
the  Patriarch  Hyrum  Smith.       He  was 
ordained  an  Elder  in  1842,  and  sent  on 
a  mission  to  the  Eastern  States,  where 
he   labored    till   1844.    when   he   returned 
home    to    N.auvoo.       He    was    with    the 
Prophet   several   days   before   the   mar- 
tyrdom.      Elder  Kesler  was  present  at 
the   laying  of   the  corner   stone  of  the 
Nauvoo    Temple,    and    woiked    on    the 
same    till    its    completion,    and    in      the 
winter  of  1845-46  he  received  his  endow- 
ments in  that  Temple.       In  April,  1846, 
he  started   for  the  west  in   Pres.   Brig- 
ham    Young's   company.       On   reaching 
Council    Bluffs    he    was     instructed    by 
Pres.   Young   to   construct   a   large   and 
substantial    ferry-boat,    which    he    did, 
and  remained  there  in  chaige  of  trans- 
ferring   the    Saints    with    their    wagons 
and  animals  across  the  Missouri  river. 
He  was  engaged  in  this  work  when  the 
nation  called  for  500  volunteers  to  go  to 
Mexico,  and  he  wns  among  the  first  to 
respond    to    the   call,    hut    was    kept    at 
Winter    Quaiters    »)y    Pres.    Young      to 
build  a  flouring  mill  for  him.  which  he 
did.      The  mill  worked  well,  and     gave 
perfect   satisfaction;    it    was    the     first 


flouring  mill  built  in  the  Territoiy  of 
Nebraska.  Bro.  Kesler  also  constructed 
the  first  flour  mill  in  Kansas,  which 
was  built  one  hundred  miles  west  of 
Kansas  City.  Mo.  This  mill  was  built 
under  contract  of  the  government  for 
the  Pottawattamie  Indians  in  1849  and 
1850.  Elder  Kesler  reached  Salt  Lake 
City  in  October,  1851,  crossing  the 
plains  in  company  with  Apostle  Orson 
Pratt.  He  brought  three  wagons,  six 
yoke  of  oxen,  one  span  of  horses,  and 
one  cow  to  the  Valley.  In  the  spring 
of  1852  he  was  engaged  by  Pres.  Young 
to  superintend  the  mill  building  for  the 
Church,  and  in  the  same  year  he  built 
the  old  mill  that  now  stands  in  Liberty 
Park,  Salt  Lake  City.  He  built  five 
saw  mills  in  Big  Cottonwood  canyon. 
In  company  with  Horace  S.  Eldredge 
he  performed  two  business  missions  to 
the  east  to  purchase  machinery,  taking 
about  seventy-five  wagons  and  three 
hundred  oxen  each  trip.  He  was  or 
dained  a  Bishop  April  7.  1856,  and  pre 
sided  over  the  Sixteenth  War^  in  that 
capacity  for  43  years,  or  until  his  death, 
which  occurred  June  12,  1899,  in  Salt 
Lake  City,  making  him  S3  years  old 
when  he  died.  Bishop  Kesler  had 
three  wives,  15  sons  and  15  daughters, 
and  his  i>osterity  now  number  in  the 
neighboihood  of  two  hundred  souls. 

EMERY,  George  Rhodes,  third 
Bishop  of  the  Sixteenth  Ward,  Salt 
Lake  City,  Utah,  is  the  son  of  Henry 
Emery  and  Elizabeth  Brewerton,  and 
was  born  June  21.  1855,  in  Salt  Lake 
City,  Utah.  He  was  baptized  Aug.  16, 
1863,  by  Henry  Emery,  and  in  March, 
1872,  he  was  ordained  an  Elder  by  Abin- 
adi  Pratt.  May  9,  1876,  he  was  or- 
dained a  Seventy  by  Henry  Emery  and 
became  a  member  of  the  30th  quoium 
From  1878  to  1880  he  filled  a  mission  to 
Great  Britain,  laboring  successfully  in 
the  Welsh,  Manchester  and  Sheffield 
conferences;  he  presided  over  the  Shef- 
field conference  during  the  latter  part 
of  his  mission.  After  i-eturning  home 
he  was  called  to  labor  as  a  home  mis- 
sionary in  the  Salt  Lake  Stake,  which 
labor  he  performed  foi"  a  number  of 
years.  Having  become  a  meinoer  of 
the  24th  fjuoium  of  Seventy,  he  was 
chosen  one  of  its  presidents.  June  20, 
1889.  He  was  ordained  a  High  Priest 
and  set  apart  to  act  as  second  coun- 
selor to  Bishop  Frederick  Kesler,  of 
the  16th  Ward,  June  21,  1891,  by  Angus 


BIOGRAPHICAL    ENCYCLOPEDIA. 


645 


M.  Cannon.  June  26,  1899,  he  was 
ordained  a  Bishop  by  Pres.  Joseph  F. 
Smith  and  set  apart  to  preside  over  the 
i6th  Ward,  which  high  and  important 
position    he    is    still    filling-    with    much 


zeal  and  integrity.  Since  his  adminis- 
tration began,  the  Saints  of  that  Ward 
have  completed  one  of  the  best  and 
most  substantial  Ward  meeting  houses 
in  the  Church. 

PARRY,  Kdwin  Francis,  second 
«!Ounselor  to  Bishop  Geo.  R.  Emery  of 
the  16th  Ward,  Salt  Lake  City,  was  born 
in  Salt  Lake  City,  June  11,  1860.  His 
father,  John  Parry,  sen.,  a  poet  and 
musician  of  considerable  talent,  was 
one  of  the  pioneer  choir  leaders  of 
Utah,  who,  as  early  as  the  year  1850,  led 
the  choir  which  sang  at  the  regular 
Sunday  services  held  In  the  old  bowery 
in  Salt  Lake  City  at  that  period.  His 
mother,  Harriet  Parry,  was  a  woman 
of  strong  character,  and,  being  of  a 
very  industrious  disposition,  sought  to 
impress  upon  her  children  by  precept 
and  example  the  virtues  of  industry  and 
economy.  But  force  of  circumstances 
as  well  as  training  compelled  the  fami- 
ly to  refrain  from  idleness  and  to  cul- 
tivate habits  of  thrift.  When  Edwin 
was  less  than  eight  years  old  his  father 
died,  leaving  his  mother  and  four  small 
children  without  any  resources  except 
their  own  hands  and  the  city  lot  on 
which  they  dwelt.  The  boy  was  of  a 
.studious  and  observing  disposition,  and 
possessed  a  desire  and  aptitude  for 
learning.       He    attended      the     district 


schools  during  the  winter  months  from 
his  eighth  to  his  tenth  year.  He  then 
entered  the  Morgan  Commercial  Col- 
lege. At  the  age  of  13  he  left  school 
and  in  the  fall  of  1874  a  position  was 
secured  for  him  as  an  apprentice  in  the 
office  of  the  "Juvenile  Instructor."  Oct. 
12,  1874,  he  was  ordained  an  Elder  by 
Elias  Smith  and  was  shortly  called  to 
act  in  the  capacity  of  a  Deacon  in  the 
16th  Ward,  where  he  resided.  When 
the  6th  quorum  of  Elders  was  organized 
he  was  appointed  its  secretary,  and  in 
1878  he  became  second  counselor,  and 
in  1880  first  counselor  to  the  president 
of  said  quorum.  Later,  he  was  chosen 
clerk  of  the  Ward  and  secretary  of  the 
Sunday  school,  and  of  the  Y.  M.  M.  I. 
A.,  holding  these  positions  with  credit 
for  a  number  of  years.  From  Decem- 
ber, 1886,  to  March,  1896,  he  was  a  Sab- 
bath school  missionary  in  the  Salt  Lake 
Stake  of  Zion,  and  from  Jan.  1,  1888,  to 
March,  1896,  he  was  treasurer  and  as- 
sistant secretary  of  the  Stake  Sunday 
school  organization.  He  has  been  a 
member  of  the  Y.  M.  M.  I.  A.,  and  most 
of  the  time  a  regular  attendant,  since 
the  time  of  its  first  organization,  and 
in    succession    has    filled    every    official 


jiosition  in  the  association— having  act- 
ed as  assistant  secretary,  librarian,  or- 
ganist, musical  director,  counselor  and 
president.  The  printing  office  of  the 
■Juvenile    Instructor"— of     later    years 


646 


LATTER-DAY    SAINT 


known  as  the  George  Q.  Cannon  &  Sons 
Co.— had  only  been  established  a  short 
time  when  Elder  Parry  began  to  work 
in  it  as  a  boy,  and  he  grew  up  with  the 
business  almost  from  the  beginning. 
Commencing  as  an  errand  lad,  he 
learned  to  set  the  type,  impose  the 
foi-ms,  read  the  proof,  run  the  press, 
mall  the  papers,  keep  the  books,  and  in 
the  absence  of  the  manager  look  after 
the  business.  This  latter  responsibility 
fell  upon  him  only  six  months  after  be- 
ginning to  work  at  the  office.  But  his 
tastes  ran  more  in  a  literary  direction, 
and  he  began  to  write  for  the  magazine 
at  the  age  of  seventeen.  Since  then  he 
has  been  a  regular  contributor  to  its 
columns.  His  contributions  have  been 
in  prose,  poetry  and  music.  For  years 
he  assisted  in  editing  the  "Instructor," 
and  frequently,  in  the  absence  of  the 
editor,  he  conducted  the  editorial  work 
entirely.  Dec.  22,  1881,  he  married  Mar- 
garet Smith,  daughter  of  the  late  Pres. 
Geo.  A.  Smith.  He  was  set  apart  for  a 
mission  to  Great  Britain  on  March  27, 
1896.  While  on  this  mission  he  labored 
as  assistant  editor  of  the  "Millennial 
Star,"  and  as  second  counselor  in  the 
presidency  of  the  European  mission.  He 
also  wrote  a  number  of  articles  on 
•Mormonism,"  which  appeared  in  vari- 
ous periodicals  of  Great  Britain,  and 
wrote  a  series  of  five  tracts  which  are 
havmg  an  extensive  circulation  in  that 
land.  He  has  written  and  edited  sev- 
eral volumes  of  our  home  publications. 
After  his  return  home  he  served  one 
year  as  a  Sunday  school  missionary  He 
was  chosen  as  a  president  of  the  24th 
quorum  of  Seventy  in  1899,  and  on  Aug 
13th  of  that  year  he  was  called  to  act 
as    second    counselor   in    the    Bishopric 

he  Im.    L"',?"'^  '^^'■^'   ^^'^'^h  P°«'tion 
he  still   holds. 

HEYWOOD.  Joseph  Lela.ul.  first 
Bishop  of  the  Seventeenth  Ward,  Salt 
Lake  City,  is  the  son  of  Benjamin  Hey- 
wood  and  Hannah  Rawson  and  was 
born  in  Grafton,  Worcester  county. 
Mass.,  Aug.  1.  18,5.  Elder  Heywood 
writes:  "My  early  days  were  spent  on 
my  fathers  farm,  with  intervals  of 
about  two  months  in  the  winter  time 
m  attending  the  common  schools  which 
the  law  of  the  State  provided.  Early 
in  life  I  cho.se  the  occupation  of  a  mer- 
chant. I  left  my  native  State  in  the 
spring  of  1838  and  became  a  citizen 
of  Illinois;   I  spent  some  time  in  Alton 


and  Springfield,  111.,  and  moved  to 
Quincy,  Adams  county,  111.,  in  the  fall 
of  1839.  Engaging  in  the  mercantile 
business  in  partnership  with  my  broth- 
er-in-law, Oliver  Kimball,  I  remained 
there  until  the  fall  of  1845,  when  I 
moved  with  my  family  to  the  city  of 
Nauvoo,  Hancock  county.  111.  In  De- 
cember, 1842,  I  visited  the  Prophet  Jo- 
seph Smith  in  Nauvoo,  and  after  lis- 
tening to  his  preaching  by  the  gift  and 
power  of  the  Holy  Ghost.  I  was  con- 
verted and  asked  for  baptism  the  same 
hour.  I  was  baptized  by  Elder  Orson 
Hyde,  in  the  Mississippi  river,  the 
Prophet  Joseph  assisting  in  cutting  the 
ice.  I  was  then  confirmed  a  member 
of  the  Church  of  Jesus  Christ  of  Lat- 
ter-day Saints  under  the  hands  of  El- 
ders   Orson    Hyde,    Joseph    Smith      and 


Jedediah  M.  Grant.  I  was  ordained 
an  Elder  by  Elder  Orson  Hyde,  in 
March,  1844,  and  ordained  a  High  Priest 
and  also  a  Bishop  under  the  hands  of 
Elders  Heber  C.  Kimball,  Brigham 
Young  and  Parley  P.  Pratt  Oct.  8.  1844. 
In  1846,  when  the  Church  commenced 
its  exodus  to  the  west,  I,  in  connection 
with  Almon  W.  Babbitt  and  John  S. 
Fullmer,  was  chosen  one  of  the  trustees 
of  the  Church,  for  the  care  and  dis- 
posal of  the  Church  property  at  Nau- 
voo. I  bore  arms  in  defense  of  the 
lives  and  property  of  the  people  of 
Nauvoo,  when  attacked  by  the  mob 
Sept.  12,  1846.  at  which  time  Brother 
Wm.  Anderson  with  his  fourteen-year- 


BIOGRAPHICAL    ENCYCLOPEDIA. 


ail 


old  son  and  a  Brother  Norris  were  slain. 
I  remained  in  Nauvoo  until  the  spring 
of  1848,  when  I  journeyed  to  Winter 
Quarters,  in  time  to  join  the  last  com- 
pany of  that  season's  emigration  which 
was  presided  over  by  Pres.  Willard 
Richards,  with  Elder  Franklin  D.  Rich- 
ards as  captain  of  fifty,  and  Elder 
John  S.  Fullmer  as  captain  of  ten. 
We  made  the  journey  from  Nauvoo  to 
Great  Salt  Lake  valley  with  ox-teams, 
arriving  Oct.  19,  1848.  I  was  appointed 
(by  the  government  at  Washington,  D. 
C.)  postmaster  of  Salt  Lake  City  in  the 
spring  of  1849,  and  in  the  fall  of  that 
year  I  was  appointed,  in  connection 
with  Elder  Edwin  D.  Woolley,  on  a 
mission  to  the  Eastern  States,  to  pur- 
chase merchandise  for  the  Church.  I 
also  visited  Washington,  D.  C,  and  as- 
sisted Delegate  John  M.  Bernhisel  in 
obtaining  a  Territorial  government  for 
Utah.  In  the  winter  of  1855-56  I  was 
instrumental  in  getting  a  petition 
signed  by  Colonel  Steptoe  and  his  offi- 
cers, by  which  Gov.  Brigham  Young 
was  retained  in  office  several  years 
longer.  In  February,  1849,  I  was  or- 
dained and  set  apart  as  the  first  Bishop 
of  the  17th  Ward,  Salt  Lake  City,  and 
filled  this  position  for  six  years.  In 
the  spring  of  1851  I  accompanied  Pres. 
Brigham  Zoung  and  Heber  C.  Kimball 
and  Apostle  Ezra  T.  Benson  on  their 
visit  to  Parowan,  and  was  appointed  to 
form  a  settlement  on  Salt  Creek  (now 
Nephi,  Juab  county).  I  assisted  the 
Territorial  surveyor,  Jesse  W.  Fox,  in 
laying  out  the  city  of  Nephi,  where  I 
presided  for  three  years.  In  the  spring 
of  1855  I  accompanied  Apostle  Orson 
Hyde  with  a  company  of  Elders  to  form 
a  settlement  in  Carson  valley  (Nev.), 
acting  at  the  same  time  as  a  guard  for 
the  Hon.  George  P.  Stiles,  who  was  go- 
ing to  Carson  valley  to  hold  a  session 
of  the  District  Court.  In  the  spring  of 
1856,  in  company  with  Apostles  Orson 
Pratt  and  Ezra  T.  Benson     (who  were 

enroute  for  a  mission  to  Europe)  and 
Geo.  A.  Smith,  as  delegate  from  the 
people  of  Utah,  to  petition  Congress  for 
a  State  government,  I  again  crossed  the 
plains,  my  destination  being  Washing- 
ton, D.  C,  to  arrange  my  business  with 
the  government  as  U.  S.  Marshal  for 
Utah,  which  office  I  then  held.  I  had 
been  appointed  to  that  office  by  Pres. 
Millard  Fillmore  in  1851,  and  reappoint- 
ed by  Pres.  Franklin  Pierce  in  1855.  On 
my  return    I    spent    one  week  in  Inde- 


pendence (Mo.).  Leaving  Indepen- 
dence Nov,  7,  1856,  I  was  winterbound 
at  the  Devil's  Gate,  on  Sweetwater, 
and,  in  connection  with  about  twenty 
Saints,  presided  over  by  Elders  Daniel 
W.  Jones,  Benjamin  Hampton  and 
Thomas  M.  Alexander,  lived  for  about 
six  weeks  mostly  on  cooked  rawhide.  I 
arrived  in  Salt  Lake  City  in  time  for  the 
general  conference  held  in  April,  1857. 
In  the  spring  of  1857  I  accompanied 
Pres.  Brigham  Young,  Heber  C.  Kim- 
ball and  Daniel  H.  Wells,  Apostle  Or- 
son Hyde  and  a  large  company  of 
brethren  and  sisters  on  a  visit  to  Fort 
Limhi,  on  Salmon  river.  At  the  Oc- 
tober, conference,  in  1855,  I  was  sus- 
tained as  a  home  missionary  and  la- 
bored in  all  the  settlements  in  Utah 
as  far  south  as  Fort  Harmony,  Wash- 
ington county,  until  the  fall  of  1861, 
when  I  was  called  to  locate  in  the 
"Dixie  country."  I  settled  in  Wash- 
ington, Washington  county.  In  the 
spring  of  1863  I  moved  to  New  Harmo- 
ny, Washington  county,  and  resided 
there  until  February,  1872,  when  I 
moved  to  Panguitch,  Iron  county  (now 
Garfield  county.  I  was  ordained  a  Pa- 
triarch Feb.  3,  1874,  at  St.  George,  un- 
der the  hands  of  Pres.  Brigham  Young, 
George  A.  Smith  and  Erastus  Snow, 
and  have  labored  in  that  calling  in  Pan- 
guitch and  surrounding  Stakes.  At  the 
organization  of  the  Panguitch  Stake 
of  Zion  in  April,  1877,  I  was  appointed 
to  preside  over  the  High  Priests  quo- 
rum of  the  Stake,  and  served  in  that 
capacity  until  honorably  released  by 
Apostle  Francis  M.  Lyman  at  the  quar- 
terly Stake  conference  held  in  Septem- 
ber, 1898.  My  first  wife  was  Sarepta 
M.  Blodgett;  later  I  took  as  plural 
wives  Sarah  Symonds,  Martha  Spence 
and  Mary  Bell;  the  latter  is  still  ali%'e. 
I  am  the  father  of  twenty  children, 
twelve  of  whom  are  living,  and  also  for- 
ty grandchildren,  thirty-two  of  whom 
are  now  alive." 

DAVIS,  Nathan,  third  Bishoi)  of  the 
Seventeenth  Ward, Salt  Lake  City, Utah, 
was  born  in  Hannover  township.  Co- 
lumbiana county,  Ohio,  Oct.  2.  1814.  was 
raised  as  a  farmer  and  miller  and 
married  Sarah  Woolley  March  31,  1836. 
Shortly  after  his  marriage,  his  father 
died,  leaving  Nathan,  who  was  his 
eldest  son,  in  charge  of  the  estate.  Be- 
ing raised  a  Quaker  he  was  a  zealous 
member    of    that    denomination,      until 


648 


i^ATTER-DAY    SAINT 


April  2,  1S50,  when  he  was  baptized  in- 
to the  Church  of  Jesus  Christ  of  Lat- 
ter-day   Saints    by    his    brother-in-law, 


the  late  Bishop  Edwin  D.  Woolley.  The 
following  year  (1851)  he  emigrated  to 
Utah,  having  previously  lost  most  of 
his  property  through  hard  times  and 
under  circumstances  over  which  he  had 
no  control.  The  family  crossed  the 
l)lains  in  Isaac  Allred's  cmpany,  which 
arrived  in  Salt  Lake  City,  Oct.  3,  1851. 
He  located  in  that  city  on  the  very  lot 
where  he  resided  till  his  death.  Dec. 
18,  1852,  he  was  ordained  a  High  Priest, 
having  pi-eviously  been  ordained  an  El- 
der, and  had  also  received  his  endow- 
ments, together  with  his  wife.  Feb.  7, 
1853,  he  was  appointed  by  Pres.  Brig- 
ham  Young  to  take  charge  of  the  ma- 
chine shops  of  the  public  works,  a  po- 
sition which  he  occupied  for  a  number 
of  years.  Aug.  26,  1856,  he  was  set 
apart  to  act  as  first  counselor  to  Bishop 
Thos.  Callister  of  the  Seventeenth 
Ward,  filling  that  position  until  Dec. 
15,  1861,  when  he  succeeded  Elder  Cal- 
lister as  Bishop  of  the  Ward.  He  pre- 
sided in  that  capacity  until  Jan.  1,  1876. 
In  his  younger  days  he  sustained  a 
high  reputation  as  a  mechanic  and 
business  man.  In  February,  1867,  he 
was  sent  to  the  States  by  Pres.Brigham 
Young  to  purchase  machinery  for  the 
manufacture   of   woolen     goods     in   the 


Valley.  On  that  occasion  he  bought 
machinery  to  the  value  of  $30,000,  which 
he  shipped  by  rail  to  Julesburg  and 
rom  thence  to  the  Valley  by  ox-train. 
Part  of  this  machinery  was  later  used 
in  the  Deseret  and  Wasatch  Woolen 
Mills  on  Canyon  creek.  Salt  Lake  coun- 
ty, and  another  part  in  the  woolen  mills 
at  Ogden.  In  1869  he  went  east  again 
ia  the  interest  of  the  Provo  Woolen 
Mills,  getting  out  specifications,  and 
selected  the  kind  of  machinery  after- 
v.ards  used  in  that  establishment. 
From  1869-72  he  was  employed  as  mas- 
ifr-mechanic  of  the  U.  C.  Ry.  shops, 
and  in  1873  he  established  an  iron 
loundry  in  Salt  Lake  City  under  the 
firm  name  of  Nathan  Davis  &  Sons 
(now  Davis  Howe,  &  Co.).  Subsequent- 
ly he  sold  out  his  entire  interest  in  the 
oame.  Elder  Davis  served  as  Terri- 
torial sealer  of  weights  and  measures 
from  1858  to  1869,  and  again  from  1886 
until  his  death.  At  an  early  day  he 
served  several  terms  in  the  Salt  Lake 
City  council,  part  of  the  time  as  alder- 
man. He  also  served  as  school  trus- 
tee and  filled  numerous  other  positions 
of  honor  and  trust.  From  the  time  he 
first  cast  his  lot  with  the  Latter-day 
i^aints  he  was  ever  known  for  his 
faithfulness  and  integrity  to  the  cause 
of  truth.  Bishop  Davis  died  at  his 
home  in  Salt  Lake  City  Dec.  29,  1894. 

TIXGEY,  John,  fifth  Bishop  of  the 
Seventeenth  Ward,  Salt  Lake  City,  and 
now  a  Patriarch  in  the  Salt  Lake  Stake 
of  Zion,  is  the  son  of  George  Tingey 
and  Charlotte  Judd,  and  was  born  at 
Colmworth,  Bedfordshire,  England, De- 
cember 27,  1821.  While  a  child,  his 
father  went  to  Australia,  where  he  is 
supposed  to  have  been  killed  by  na- 
tives; his  mother  returned  to  her  form- 
er home  in  Northamptonshire,  where 
John  learned  the  shoemaker's  trade.  He 
was  baptized  at  Irchester,  Northamp- 
tonshire, March  11,  1845,  by  Peter  Shef- 
field: w-as  ordained  to  the  office  of  a 
Priest  July  12,  1846,  and  to  that  of  an 
Elder  Nov.  2,  1847;  lab<5red  as  an  Elder 
in  the  Irchester  branch  of  the  Bedford- 
shire conference  until  he  was  called  to 
preside  over  the  same,  March  11,  1849. 
He  acted  in  the  latter  capacity  until 
he  emigrated  to  Utah  with  his  wife, 
Phebe  Stafford,  of  Sutton-Bassett. 
Northamptonshire  (whom  he  had  mar- 
ried June  27,  1847,  at  Wellingborough. 
Northamptonshire),     and       one      child; 


BIOGRAPHICAL    ENCYCLOPEDIA 


649 


crossed  the  Atlantic  in  the  ship  "Jo- 
seph Badger,"  which  sailed  from  Liver- 
pool Oct.  17,  1850:  i^mained  in  St. 
Louis,  Missouri,  about  seventeen 
months;  crossed  the  plains  in  1852,  ar- 
riving in  Salt  Lake  City  Sept.  1st  of 
that   year,    where   he   has   resided   ever 


since.  He  passed  through  all  the 
hardships  incident  to  early  days  in 
Utah,  and  participated  in  the  Echo 
canyon  expedition  in  1857.  He  acted  as 
a  Ward  teacher  for  about  twenty 
years;  was  ordained  a  Seventy  by  Ly- 
sander  Gee,  Feb.  16,  1853,  and  joined 
the  17th  quorum;  was  set  apart  as  one 
of  the  council  of  said  quorum  Nov.  1, 
J  874.  April  20,  1876,  he  was  ordained 
a  High  Priest  by  Presiding  Bishop  Ed- 
ward Hunter,  and  set  apart  to  act  as 
^irst  counselor  to  Bishop  John  Henry 
Smith,  of  the  Seventeenth  Ward,  occu- 
pying that  position  until  Nov.  6,  1880, 
when  he  was  ordained  and  set  apart 
hy  Presiding  Bishop  Edward  Hunter  as 
Bishop  of  that  Ward.  He  was  or- 
dained a  Patriarch  Sept.  13,  1896,-  by 
Pres.  Wilford  Woodruff,  and  was  hon- 
orably released  from  his  labors  as  a 
Bishop.  His  wife  died  Oct.  23,  1890.  In 
1893  he  made  a  visit  of  a  few  months' 
duration  to  his  native  country.  He  is 
the  father  of  eight  children,  of  whom 
five  are  now  alive.  All  of  his  children 
fare  faithful  members  of  the  Church. 

BKATIK,  Walter  Josiah,  sixth 
Bishop  of  the  Seventeenth  Ward,  Salt 
Lake  City,  Utah,  is  the  son  of  Hamp- 
l*^»n  Sidney  Beatie  and  Marion  T.  Mum- 


ford,  and  was  born  Dec.  31,  1849,  in  Salt 
Lake  City,  Utah.  He  was  baptized 
Feb.  11,  1861,  by  Samuel  Broadhurst; 
ordained  a  Seventy  May  5,  1877,  and  or- 
dained a  High  Priest  and  set  apart  as 
first  counselor  to  Bishop  John  Tingey 
of  the  Seventeenth  Ward,  Dec.  13,  1891, 
by  Pres.  Geo.  Q.  Cannon.  He  was  or- 
dained a  Bishop  by  Apostle  John  Henry 
Smith  and  set  apart  to  preside  over  the 
17th  Ward  Sept.  27,  1896,  in  which  posi- 
tion he  is  at  present  diligently  laboring. 
Bro.  Beatie  filled  a  two  years'  mission 
to  England  in  1877-79,  laboring  mostly 
in  the  Leeds  conference,  and  also  in 
the  Liverpool  office,  where  he  assisted 
in  the  emigration  Avork.  He  has  al- 
ways taken  an  active  interest  in 
Church  work,  having  labored  as  a  home 
missionary  in  the  Salt  Lake  Stake  for 
many  years;  and  also  as  a  Ward  teach- 
er. Sabbath  school  superintendent,  and 
secretary  of  the  Y.  M.  M.  I.  A.  In 
civil  life  Elder  Beatie  has  been  a  suc- 
cessful business  man;  for  20  years  he 
worked  in  the  Z.  C.  M.  I.,  rising  fin- 
ally to  the  position  of  cashier  of  that 
institution.  He  acted  as  secretary  of 
the  Bullion-Beck  and  Champion  Min- 
ing Co.  for  a  period  of  ten  years,  and 
is  at  present  filling  the  responsible  po- 
fc-ition  of  State  Bank  Examiner  of  Utah, 


holding  this  oflfice  by  appointment  of 
Governor  Heber  M.  Wells.  Jan.  7, 
1872,  he  married  Phebe  Louisa  Young, 
daughter  of  Pres.  Brigham  Young,  the 
issue  of  which  union  is  seven  children, 
four  of  whom  are  living. 


650 


LATTER-DAY    SAINT 


TINGEY,  Franklin  Stafford,  first 
counselor  to  Bishop  Walter  J.  Beatle 
of  the  17th  Ward,  Salt  Lake  City,  is 
the  son  of  John  Tingey  an  Phebe 
Stafford  and  was  born  May  29,  1862,  in 
Salt    Lake   City,    Utah.       He   was   bap- 


tized June  6.  1S72,  by  Thos.  Higgs  and 
confirmed  a  member  of  the  Church  by 
Bishop  Nathan  Davis.  April  30,  1877, 
he  was  ordained  a  Deacon  by  Bishop 
John  Henry  Smith,  and  later  became  a 
counselor  in  the  presidency  of  the  Dea- 
cons' quorum.  He  was  ordained  a 
Teacher  Aug-  18,  1884,  by  Bishop  John 
Tingey,  and  was  soon  afterwards  ap- 
I)ointed  to  act  as  president  of  the 
Teachers'  quorum,  which  position  he 
held  till  June  4,  1887,  when  he  was  or- 
dained an  Elder  by  Edward  W.  Davis. 
He  was  ordained  a  Seventy  by  Homer 
Duncan,  Dec.  8,  1890,  and  became  iden- 
tified with  the  3rd  quorum.  Sept.  27, 
1896,  he  was  ordained  a  High  Priest  and 
set  apai  t  as  first  counselor  to  Bishop 
Walter  J.  Beatie  of  the  17th  Ward,  Salt 
Lake  City,  by  Apostle  Heber  J.  Grant. 
In  this  [losition  he  has  continued  to 
labor  efficiently  and  energetically  up  to 
the  present  time.  Elder  Tingey  has  al- 
ways resided  in  the  17th  Ward  and  has 
ever  taken  an  active  part  in  local  af- 
fairs there.  For  twelve  years  he  la- 
bored as  a  Ward  teacher;  for  about 
seventeen  years  he  acted  as  a  member 
of  the  Sunday  school  superintendency, 
and  for  many  yeais  he  was  a  counsel- 
or in  the  Ward  Y.  M.  M.  J.  A.  He 
married  Sarah  A.  Bywater  June  '\^<,  1887, 


and  is  the  father  of  a  large  family.  Bre. 
Tingey  has  been  employed  for,  23  years 
in  Ihe  Z.  C.  M.  I.,  and  has  risen  from 
one  position  to  another  until  at  pres- 
ent he  is  the  manager  of  the  hardware 
department  of  that  institution.  By  his 
strict  probity  and  straightforward  man- 
ner of  dealing  with  men,  Bro.  Tingey 
has  won  the  confidence  and  respect  ot 
all  who  know  him. — P.  P.  J. 

BARNES,  Arthur  Franklin,  sec- 
ond counselor  to  Bishop  Walter  J.  Bea- 
tie of  the  17th  Ward,  Salt  Lake  City, 
is  the  son  of  John  R.  Barnes  and  Emily 
Shelton,  and  was  born  at  Kaysville,  Da- 
vis county,  Utah,  Oct.  3,  1861.  He  was 
baptized  when  about  eight  years  of  age. 
and  his  early  life  was  spent  on.  his 
father's  farm.  At  the  age  of  eighteen 
he  became  a  student  at  the  Deseret 
University,  and  on  leaving  that  institu- 
tion he  entered  the  employ  of  Day  & 
Co.,  one  of  the  leading  mercantilp 
houses  of  Salt  Lake  City;  he  worked 
as  a  bookkeeper  for  that  firm  about 
ten  years,  when  together  with  John  S. 
Lewis  and  others  he  formed  the  co- 
partnership of  Barnes,  Lewis  and  Co., 
which  was  sticceeded  by  the  Barnes. 
Hardy    Company,    general     merchants. 


Bro.  Barnes  is  now  the  treasurer  and 
manager  of  that  establishment.  In  No- 
vember, 1897,  he  was  elected  to  the 
city  council  of  Salt  Lake  City,  and  was 
made  the  president  of  that  body,  a  po- 
sition which  he  filled  with  signal  abili- 
ty.      He  was  the  candidate  of  his   p^r- 


BIOGRAPHICAL    ENCYCLOPEDIA. 


651 


ty  for  mayor  of  Salt  Lake  City,  in  1899, 
but  failed   in   being  elected   by   a  very 
close  margin.      At  the  age  of  fourteen 
he  was  ordained  a  Teacher  and  in  Feb- 
ruary,  1884,   he  was  ordained  an  Elder 
by  Joseph  Barton,  and,  later,  a  Seven- 
ty,   becoming    identified    with    the      3rd 
quorum    of    Seventy.       He   was    chosen 
clerk  of   that   quorum   and   afterwards 
made   one    of    its    presidents,      both    of 
which   positions     he     filled   with   much 
credit.       At   the   reorganization   of   the 
17th  Ward  Bishopric,   Sept.  27,  1896,   he 
was    ordained    a    High    Priest    and    set 
apart   to   act   as    second     counselor    to 
Bishop     Walter     J.     Beatie,     by     Pres. 
Angus    M.    Cannon,    in   which    capacity 
he  is  laboring  at  present.      He  has  al- 
ways taken  a  lively  interest  in  mutual 
improvement  and  Sunday  school  work, 
having   held    various    responsible    posi- 
tions   in    both    of    these    organizations. 
For  many  years  he   labored   faithfully 
as  a  Ward  teacher.     In  1895-96  he  filled 
a  mission  to  the  Eastern  States,  labor- 
ing successfully  in  Rhode  Island,   New 
York,  and  New  Jersey.      After  his  re- 
turn home  he  was  called  by  Pres.  Lo- 
renzo Snow  to  be  one  of  the  workers  in 
the   Salt    Lake    Temple,    to   officiate    as 
one  of  the  baptizers;  and  while  laboring 
in  that  position  he  has  baptized  many 
thousands.  Elder  Barnes  married  Eliza- 
beth   H.    Sansom,   daughter   of   Charles 
Sansom  and  Mary  A.  Lewis,   the  issue 
of  which  union  is  five  children,  four  of 
whom   are   living.       Bro.   Barnes   is   an 
earnest  and  diligent  worker,   in   what- 
ever duty  or  labor  he  is  assigned,  but 
is  naturally  of  a  retiring  and  unassum- 
ing disposition. — P.  P.  J. 

McAllister, DuncanMcXeil,  clerk 
of  the  17th  Ward,  Salt  Lake  City,  was 
born  April  18,  1842,  in  Glasgow,  Scot- 
land. His  ancestors  were  natives  of 
the  West  Highlands.  In  childhood  he 
^experienced  the  hardships  of  extreme 
poverty,  being  insufficiently  fed  and 
clothed,  and  seldom  having  covering  for 
his  feet,  even  in  winter.  His  mother 
became  a  convert  to  "Mormonism" 
when  he  was  about  six  years  of  age, 
and  remained  devoted  to  her  religion 
until  her  death,  Feb.  23,  1861.  His 
father  was  intemperate,  and  a  rabid 
anti-Mormon;  he  died  Nov.  10,  1875. 
Duncan's  schooling  was  limited  to 
about  two  years  in  all,  but,  by  unaided 
efforts,    he    gradually    acquired    a     fair 


education,  in  time  becoming  a  good  ac- 
countant. At  eleven  years  of  age  he 
commenced  working  for  wages, in  a  drug 
store.  At  thirteen  he  was  apprenticed 
for  six  years,  to  learn  the  upholstery 
trade.  He  was  baptized,  in  the  river 
Clyde,  by  Elder  John  Scurrie,  Oct.  25, 
1857,  and  confirmed  the  same  day  by 
Elder  Jacob  Gibson;  ordained  a  Teach- 
er, by  Elder  John  Reid,  April  22,  1860; 
and  ordained  to  the  office  of  Priest,  by 
Elder  John  Tobin,  December  9,  1860.  He 
served  as  a  rifieman  for  three  years,  in 
the  first  regiment  of  Lanarkshire  vol- 
unteers (1858  to  1861).  At  the  end  of 
his  apprenticeship,  immediately  follow- 
ing the  death  of  his  mother,  he  offered 


his  services  to  travel  and  preach  the 
gospel;  President  George  Q.  Cannon  ac- 
cepted his  offer  by  calling  him  to 
labor  in  the  Liverpool  office.  He  ar- 
rived thei-e  June  5,  1861.  and  remained 
until  April  30,  1863,  when,  having  con- 
tracted lung  disease,  he  was  sent  to 
Utah,  arriving  in  Salt  Lake  City  Oct. 
22,  1863,  after  an  eventful  journey.  The 
winter  of  1863-64  was  si>ent  in  Salt  Lake 
City,  working  as  an  upholsterer  and 
"property"  maker  in  the  Theatre,  and 
as  a  compositor  in  the  "Deseret  News" 
office;  the  latter  occupation  he  had 
learned  in  the  Liverpool  office.  In  the 
spring  of  1864  he  walked  to  Brigham 
City,  Box  Elder  county,  where  he  was 
employed  by  Judge  Samuel  Smith  to 
take  charge  of  the  postoffice  and  store. 
He  was  ordained  an  Elder  by  Apostle 
Lorenzo  Snow,  July  27,  1S64.  The  same 


652 


LATTER-DAY    SAINT 


year  he  was  appointed,  by  Gen.  Chaun- 
cey  W.  West,  to  the  office  of  adjutant 
of   the    Box    Elder   county   battalion   of 
cavalry  of  the  Nauvoo  Lefrion.     He  le- 
moved   to  Salt  Lake  City  Oct.   22,  1865. 
and   accepted   a  clerkship   in    the   post- 
office,  a  position  he  retained  four  years. 
Oct.   20,  1866,   he  married  Catherine     E. 
Perkes.  and  in  1869  he  entered  upon  the 
<luties  of  invoice  clerk  in  Z.  C.  M.  I.    He 
was  ordained  a   Seventy  by  Joseph  H. 
Tibbets.  and  enrolled  as  a  member  of 
the  17th  quorum,  Aug-.  7,  1870.       In  1870 
be  became  the  assistant  manager    and 
bookkeeper   in    the    retail    shoe   depart- 
ment and  factory  of  Z.  C.  M.  I.      That 
department,    and     all    other     retail   de- 
partments of  the  institution, were  closed 
down    in    March,    1874.       The    workmen 
employed    in    the   factory   organized     a 
co-operative  association  to  continue  the 
irianufacture   and   sale     of     boots     and 
•shoes,  and   they  elected  Brother  McAl- 
lister secretary  and  treasurer;  later,  he 
was   appointed     superintendent.       This 
business  was  purchased  from  the  work- 
ingmen    by   Wm.    H.    Rowe     in   March, 
1877.       In   October,   1878,    Brother  Rowe 
sold    out    to    the    Deseret    Tanning   and 
Manufacturing  As.sociation,  and  a  few 
months       afterwards       that     company 
transferred   the  amalgamated   business 
to  Z.  C.  M.  I.      In  each  of  these  changes 
Brother   McAllister     was     retained     by 
Manager  Rowe  in  the  position  of  fore- 
man, and  when  Z.  C.  M.  I.  entered  ex- 
tensively into  the  manufacture  of  boots 
and   shoes,   and   tanning,   he   continued 
to  be  associated  with  Brother  Rowe  in 
the  conduct  of  those  two  important  en- 
terprises,  to   which     was   subsequently 
added  the  manufacture  of  overalls,  etc. 
During  the  year  1885   Elder  McAllister 
wrote  a  number  of  articles  on  the  sub- 
ject of  storing  wheat,  which  were  pub- 
lished  by     the     "Deseret     News"     and 
strongly     endorsed     in     the   editorials. 
These  articles  elicited  considerable  cor- 
respondence on  the  same  subject,  from 
other  contributors  to  the  "News,"  and 
it    was    made    clearly   apparent    that    it 


j^ieat    deal    of    attention,      and    accom- 
llished  much  good,  because  of  the  lucid 
explanations  imparted   concerning-     the 
laws  of  health,   including  the   subjects 
if  hygiene,  physiology,  sanitation,  food, 
and    the   Word    of     Wisdom.       Oct.    12, 
1S85,  Elder  McAllister  received  a  trans- 
ler  to  the  third  quorum  of  Seventy.  On 
his  45th  birthday  (April  18,  1887)  he  was 
notified,  by  Pres.  John  Taylor,  that  he 
had    been   selected   to   act   as   manager 
of  business  affairs  at  the  Church  Office 
in    Liverpool,    under     the     direction    of 
Apostle   George  Teasdale,   then   presid- 
ing over  the  European     mission.      Al- 
though not   in   g-ood     financial   circum- 
stances,   he   accepted    the   call   without 
hesitancy.       Money  came  to  him  from 
unexpected   sources,   and   he   left  home 
May     9,     1887,     with     the       comforting 
thought  that  he  was  going-  to  assist  in 
the   Lord's   work,    and   that  his   family 
would  not  lack  the  necessaries  of  life. 
He  spent     two     weeks     in  Boston  and 
vicinity.visiting  shoe  factories  and  tan- 
neries,   securing    information    of    value 
to   Z.    C.    M.    I.,    especially   relating^   to 
plans  and  machinery  for  the  new  fac- 
tory.     After  completing  this  investiga- 
tion, and  writing  the  results,  he  joined 
a  company  of  Elders  going  to  Europe, 
and    sailed    from    New    York,    May    31, 
1887.      It  was  a  coincidence  that  the  fif- 
ty  Elders     composing     that     cornpany 
stalled  three  days  before  the  fiftieth  an- 
niversary of  the  sailing  of  Apostle  He- 
ber  C.  Kimball  and  his  fellow  laborers, 
from   the   same   port,    to   Introduce   the 
gospel  in  Great  Britain,  and  that  they 
arrived  in  Liverpool  a  few  days  before 
the  fiftieth  anniversary  of  the  crowning 
of   Great    Britain's    greatest     monarch. 
Queen  Victoria.  Elder  McAllister  spent 
two  and  one-half  years  on  this  mission 
and   was  occupied   nearly  all   the   time 
with  the  duties  devolving  upon  him  in 
the   office,   oc'casionally   attending  con- 
ference meetings,  by  appointment.     He 
also,  visited  Scotland,  Wales,  Denmark, 
Sweden,  Norway,  France,  etc.       In  ad- 
dition   to   performing   the   usual    labors 


18  the  duty  of  the  head  of  each  house-  connected  with  emigration  affairs,  and 

hold,  of  Latter-day  Saints,  to  constant-  bookkeeping,  he  wrote  a  number  of  ar- 

ly  have  at   his  command   a   supply     of  tides  for  the  "Millennial  Star,"  and  as- 

wheat    sufficient    for    the    needs    of    his  ,i«ted  sometimes  in  the  editorial  work, 

lamily  for  several  years.   From  March,  m    one    direction    especially    his    labors 

1X8.-,,  until  April,  1887,   Brother  McAllis-  proved     profitable;      that     was     in   the 

ler  contributed  an  average  of  one  col-  changes  he  effected  in  the  printing  de- 

umn   of  reading  matter  weekly    to   the  partment  of  the  office,  with  the  consent 

Deseret  News,"  on  health.  These  orig-  of     Pres.     Teasdale.       Bro.     McAllister 

inal    notes  and   compilations  aroused   a  having  some   knowledge  of  machinery 


BIOGRAPHICAL    ENCYCLOPEDIA. 


()53 


and  being  a  practical  pressman,  as  well 
as  compositor,  personally  directed  the 
work;  and  theieafter  all  printing  was 
done  on  the  premises,  with  a  conse- 
quent large  reduction  in  price  of  books 
and  tracts,  resulting  in  a  considerably 
increased  sale,  to  the  great  advantage 
of  the  missionaries.  He  left  Liverpool 
Nov.  2,  1889,  and  arrived  at  home  on 
the  16th  of  the  same  month,  thankful 
to  find  wife  and  family  well,  and  feel- 
ing that,  under  God's  blessing,  his  sec- 
ond mission  had  been  successfully  ac- 
complished. Within  a  few  days  after 
his  return  he  was  given  employment  as 
a  bookkeeper  in  the  general  office  of  Z. 
C.  M.  I.  At  that  time  what  is  known 
as  "The  Boom"  was  at  its  height  in 
Utah,  and  Brother  McAllister,  unfor- 
tunately, was  persuaded  to  mortgage 
his  home  and  invest,  with  others,  in  the 
purchase  of  a  mercantile  business 
which  then  presented  flattering  pros- 
pects of  being  a  profitable  investment. 
This  soon  proved  disastrous.  The  busi- 
ness thus  embarked  in  brought  anxie- 
ty, care,  and  financial  difficulties,  cul- 
minating in  bankruptcy,  loss  of  home, 
and  a  burden  of  debt  that  is  still  likely 
to  take  years  of  rigid  economy  to  can- 
cel. There  was  a  silver  lining  to  this 
cloud,  however.  Elder  John  Nicholson, 
who  had  been  appointed  to  the  office  of 
recorder  for  the  Salt  Lake  Temple, 
selected  Brother  McAllister  as  his  first 
assistant,  and  Pres.  Lorenzo  Snow,  and 
the  First  Presidency,  readily  consented 
to  his  appointment.  He  was  set  apart 
accordingly,  and  entered  upon  the  im- 
portant and  sacred  duties  of  that  call- 
ing when  the  Temple  was  opened  in 
1893.  It  was  after  he  had  begun  this 
most  congenial  occupation,  and  had  re- 
tired from  active  management  of  the 
business  above  referred  to,  that  the 
financial  crash  occurred.  June  13,  1898, 
he  was  ordained  a  president  of  Seven- 
ty and  was  set  apart  as  one  of  the 
council  of  the  third  quorum,  under  the 
hands  of  Pres.  Christian  D.  Fjeldsted. 
Hrother  McAllister  has  taken  an  active 
interest  in  Sunday  school  work.  He  has 
been  for  the  past  ten  years  senior 
teacher  of  the  advanced  theological 
class  in  the  Seventeenth  Ward,  where 
he  resides;  and  is  the  senior  principal 
in  the  First  Intermediate  Department 
of  the  Salt  Lake  Stake  Sunday  School 
ITnion.  He  has  always  been  associated 
with  choirs,  glee  clubs,  and  choral  so- 


cieties: and  though  not  i)rominently 
gifted  as  a  singer,  takes  great  delight 
therein  and  has  made  himself  useful  in 
that  direction.  He  has  been  identified 
with  the  Tabernacle  choir  since  Novem- 
ber, 1863.  He  assisted  in  organizing 
the  Hayden  and  Handel  Society  of 
Utah,  and  has  been  secretary  of  Zion's 
Musical  Society,  the  Union  Glee  Club, 
and  Zion's  Choral  Union.  He  has  some 
dramatic  ability  also,  appearing  occa- 
sionally on  the  stage  of  the  Salt  Lake 
Theatre,  and  elsewhere.  He  has,  for 
several  years,  held  the  office  of  presi- 
dent of  the  Association  of  Veteran  Ar- 
tillerymen of  the  Nauvoo  Legion,  an  or- 
ganization established,  with  the  ap- 
proval of  the  First  Presidency,  in  the 
year  of  the  Pioneer  Jubilee.  Notwith- 
standing that  Brother  McAllister  is  un- 
obtrusive in  character,  his  life  has  been 
well  filled  with  peculiar  experiences.  At 
this  writing  he  is  earnestly  engaged  in 
the  congenial  duties,  before  referred  to, 
in  the  Salt  Lake  Temple,  and  therein  he 
has  proven  a  valued  and  efficient  help. 
In  the  varied  occupations  and  positions 
he  has  been  placed,  he  has  generally 
shown  above  the  average  ability,  and 
in  all  circumstances  the  desire  to  do  all 
the  good  he  can  has  ever  been  promi- 
nent. 

BULiIj,  Joseph,  a  veteran  Elder  of 
the  Church  and  the  oldest  pioneer 
pressman,  book,  job  and  copper-plate 
printer  in  Utah,  was  born  Jan.  25,  1832, 
in  Leicester,  Leicestershire,  England, 
and  was  the  only  son  of  Daniel  Bull 
and  Elizabeth  Burdette.  At  the  age  of 
fourteen  he  was  apprenticed  in  the 
printing  business.  In  1847  he  heard  a 
gospel  discourse,  delivered  by  Elder 
Crandall  Dunn. a  missionary  from  Nau- 
voo, Ills.  Occasionally  he  attended 
the  Mormon  meetings  until  Feb.  ir.. 
1848,  when  he  was  baptized  and  be- 
came a  member  of  the  Church  of 
Jesus  Christ  of  Latter-day  Saints. 
He  was  the  only  one  of  his  fami- 
ly who  accepted  the  gospel.  Jan. 
6,  1851,  he  left  Liverpool  for  New 
Orleans  on  the  sailing  ship  "Ellen,"  his 
final  destination  being  Salt  Lake  City. 
The  company  consisted  of  466  souls  un- 
der the  presidency  of  Elders  James  W. 
Cummings,  Crandall  Dunn  and  William 
Moss.  In  the  Irish  Channel  the  ship 
collided  with  a  schooner,  was  disabled 
and    put    into     Cardigan     Bay.     North 


654 


LATTER-DAY    SAINT 


Wales,  for  repairs.  It  was  laid  up 
there  for  three  weeks.  After  a  pleasant 
voyage,  the  company  arrived  at  New 
Orleans  March  14,  1851.  Early  in  April, 
1851,  the  subject  of  this  sketch  arrived 
nt  Kanesville,  Iowa,  where  he  worked 
for  Apostle  Orson  Hyde  in  the  office  of 
the  "Frontier  Guardian."  In  May  he  ac- 
cepted an  offer  from  Mr.  David  Wilken 
to  take  him  to  Utah  in  consideration  of 
his  drivingr  a  herd  of  cattle.  This  neces- 
sitated his  walking  the  entire  distance 
across  the  plains.  The  Wilken  outfit 
consisted  of  ten  wagons  of  merchaji- 
dise  and  about  200  head  of  stock,  and 
was  organized  in  Luman  A.  Shurtliff's 
fifty.  When  the  Elkhorn  was  reached, 
the  river  was  about  four  miles  wide, 
it  being  an  unusually  rainy  season.  Or- 
dinary seasons  the  Elkhorn  is  a  stream 
about  nine  roads  wide.  W'agons  were 
unable  to  ford  the  river,  and  it  was  de- 
cided to  take  an  entirely  new  route  and 
endeavor  to  strike  the  pioneer  road,  on 
the  north  side  of  the  Platte,  near  Chim- 
ney Rock.  Several  companies,  after 
traveling  nearly  four  hundred  miles, 
took  the  pioneer  road  neai-  Fort  Kear- 
ney, thus  gaining  about  two  hundred 
and  fifty  miles.  At  this  point  Mr.  Wil- 
ken left  the  Shurtliff  company,  and 
arrived  at  Salt  Lake  City  Sept.  15,  1851. 
In  the  fall  of  1851  Bro.  Bull  worked  in 
the  canyons  and  at  various  other  kinds 
of  outdoor  work.  Jan.  15,  1852,  Apostle 
Wjllard  Richards  engaged  him  on  the 
printing  staff  of  the  "Deseret  News." 
In  February  he  printed  the  first  ball 
invitation  card  for  the  first  typographi- 
cal festival  held  in  Salt  Lake  City. 
The  cards  were  printed  in  colored  inks, 
which  he  made  from  dry  colors  he  had 
brought  with  him.  He  printed  the  first 
book  of  Laws  passed  by  the  Territorial 
legislature.  In  February  he  was  or- 
dained a  Seventy  and  became  identified 
with  the  30th  quorum,  of  which  he  was 
<  lerk  for  several  years.  Oct.  28,  1854, 
he  married  Miss  Emma  Green,  formerly 
of  Birmingham,  Warwickshire,  Eng- 
land. She  was  a  member  of  the  early 
•  iramatic  association  and  was  a  pioneer 
professional  dress  maker  of  Utah.  At 
the  April  conference,  1855,  Elder  Bull 
was  appointed  on  a  mission  to  Califor- 
nia, with  Elders  George  Q.  Cannon  and 
Matthew  F.  Wilkie,  to  print  the  Book  of 
Mormon  in  the  Hawaiian  language,  and 
afterwards  to  publish  the  "Western 
Standard."  a  weekly  newspaper.  On 
the  10th  of  May,  1855,  in  company  with 


Apostle  Charles  C.  Rich,  he  left  home 
together  with  his  associates,  traveling 
by  mule  teams  to  San  Bernardino.  At 
San  Pedro  they  took  steamer  and  ar- 
rived at  San  Francisco  in  the  latter  part 
of  June.  Here  Elder  Bull  commenced 
setting  the  type,  and  printing  on  a 
Washington   hand  press,   an  edition  of 


.JOSEPH    JiULT,  IN    18.57. 

2,000  copies  of  the  Book  of  Mormon  in 
the  Hawaiian  language,  which  was 
completed  early  in  January,  1856.  Feb. 
2.3,  1856,  the  first  number  of  the  "West- 
ern Standard"  was  issued.  Elder  Bull 
doing  most  of  the  mechanical  work. 
April  6,  1856,  he  was  appointed  by  Pres. 
Geo.  Q.  Cannon  to  preside  over  the  San 
Francisco  conference,  which  position  he 
held  until  July,  1857,  when  he  was  re- 
leased from  this  appointment  and  from 
his  labors  in  the  "Standard"  ofl^ce.  At 
a  conference  held  July  18th  and  19th, 
1857,  at  San  Francisco,  he  was  appoint- 
ed by  Elder  Geo.  Q.  Cannon  on  a  mis- 
sion to  the  Sandwich  Islands,  to  publish 
a  semi-monthly  paper  at  Honolulu,  in 
the  interest  of  the  Church.  He  had 
completed  his  arrangements  and  en- 
gaged his  passage  on  the  ship  "Yan- 
kee," when  a  call  came  from   Pres.  Brig- 


BIOGRAPHICAL  ENCYCLOPEDIA 


655 


ham  Young  for  the  Elders  to  return  to 
Utah,  in  consequence  of  the  "Buchanan 
War."  This  broke  up  the  western  mis- 
sions. In  December,  1857,  he  left  San 
Francisco  for  Utah,via  San  Bernardino, 
traveling  with  Apostles  Orson  Pratt, 
Ezra  T.  Benson,  Elder  Geo.  Q.  Cannon 
and  others,  and  arrived  at  Salt  Lake 
City  about  the  middle  of  January,  1858. 
He  found  his  wife  in  good  health,  and 
for  the  first  time  saw  his  first  born  son, 
Joseph,  who  was  two  and  a  half  years 
old.  He  resumed  his  labors  in  the 
"Deseret  News"  office.  Shortly  after- 
wards he  was  engaged  by  Pres.  Brig- 
ham  Young  to  do  the  first  copper-plate 
jninting  done  in  the  West,  for  the  Des- 
eret Currency  Association,  which  con- 
sisted of  bank  bills  of  different  denomi- 
nations. He  made  the  ink  from  the 
raw  material.  The  plates  were  engraved 
by  Elder  David  McKenzie,  in  a  very 
artistic  manner.  He  was  engaged  in 
this  work  during  the  summer,  and  at 
the  general  "move"  went  to  Provo  and 
took  the  press  and  material  there.  In 
the  fall  he  resumed  work  in  the  "Des- 
eret News"  office.  Owing  to  the  war 
status  of  the  Territory,  the  "News"  had 
been  unable  to  obtain  its  usual  supply 
of  )jrinting  materials  from  the  east, 
and  Bro.  Bull  was  dispatched  by  Judge 
lOlias  Smith,  the  business  manager 
of  the  "Deseret  News,"  to  San  Fran- 
cisco to  purchase  a  supply.  He 
left  home  Feb.  21,  1859,  performed  the 
trip  by  stage  and  mule  teams  to  San 
Bernardino,  and  thence  traveled  by 
private  conveyance  to  San  Pedro,where 
he  took  steamer  for  San  Francisco,  ar- 
riving on  the  26th  of  March.  He  was 
successful  in  purchasing  and  shipping 
the  supplies.  On  his  homeward  jour- 
ney from  San  Pedro  he  assisted  in  driv- 
ing one  of  the  eight-mule  teams  until 
he  reached  Santa  Clara,  Utah,  from 
which  place  he  traveled  day  and  night 
by  stage  with  a  supply  of  paper,  there- 
by preventing  a  suspension  of  the  pub- 
lication of  the  "News."  He  reached 
Salt  Lake  City,  May  27,  1859,  making  an 
unprecedentedly  rapid  trip,  having 
traveled  nearly  three  thousand  miles 
•luring  an  absence  of  a  little  over  three 
months.  After  his  return  home  he  be- 
i  ame  a  member  of  the  "Mechanics  Dra- 
matic Association"  of  which  Mr.  Philip 
Margetts  was  president.  While  a  mem- 
ber he  appeared  as  Old  Mike  in  "Luke 
the  Laborer,"  Duke  Aranza  in  "The 
Honeymoon,"  and  lago  in  "Othello."  In 
the    fall    of    1859    he    was    appointed     a 


special  agent  to  make  a  business  trip 
through  the  Territory  in  the  interest  of 
the  "News."  He  was  thus  engaged  un- 
til the  following  April,  1860,  and  did  his 
traveling  on  horseback.  In  August  he 
was  appointed  foreman  of  the  printing 
department,  but  on  Sept.  25,  1860,  with 
but  48  hours'  notice,  he  was  called  by 
Pres.  Brigham  Young  to  go  on  a  mis- 
sion to  Europe,  with  Apostle  George  Q 
Cannon.  He  left  Salt  Lake  City,  Sept 
27,  1860,  in  company  with  Apostles  Or- 
son Pratt,  Erastus  Snow,  George  Q 
Cannon  and  other  missionaries,  travel- 
ing by  mule  teams  to  the  Missouri 
river.  He  arrived  in  Liverpool  Dec. 
12,  1860.  In  January,  1861,  he  was 
appointed  president  of  the  Bedfordshire 
conference;  and  in  1863  he  succeeded 
Elder  Joseph  F.  Smith  in  the  presiden- 
cy of  the  Sheffield  district,  comprising 
the  Sheffield,  Leeds  and  Hull  confer- 
ences. During  this  mission  he  also  la- 
bored in  the  publishing  department  of 
the  "Millennial  Star"  office  from  Jan- 
uary to  June,  1862,  from  March  to  June, 
1863,  and  from  March  to  May,  1864,  and 
under  direction  of  Pres.  George  Q.  Can- 
non he  superintended  the  publication  of 
several  of  the  standard  works  of  the 
Church.  He  left  Liverpool  for  home  May 
21,  1864,  on  board  the  ship  "General  Mc- 
Clellan,"  \yith  a  company  of  802  Saints, 
under  the  presidency  of  Thomas  "E. 
Jeremy,  Joseph  Bull  and  George  G.  By- 
water.  He  crossed  the  plains  in  Cap- 
tain Joseph  Rawlins'  train,  in  whch  he 
acted  as  chaplin,  arriving  home  Septem- 
ber 15,  1864.  He  was  absent  on  this 
mission  four  years,  lacking  twelve  days. 
On  his  return  he  resumed  work  in  the 
"News"  office  and  for  three  months  had 
charge  of  the  first  Hoe  Steam  Cylinder 
Press  brought  to  Utah,  which  had  been 
recently  purchased  in  New  York,  by  El- 
der Hiram  B.  Clawson  and  shipped 
across  the  plains  on  wagons  especially 
fitted  up  for  the  purpose,  for  the  "Des- 
eret News."  In  the  summer  of  1865,  he 
was  sent  south  as  far  as  St.  George, 
on  special  business,  and  in  October  he 
was  sent  to  San  Francisco  by  Hon. 
Albert  Carrington,  editor  of  the 
"News,"  to  purchase  a  year's  supply 
of  printing  materials,  traveling  by  stage 
to  Sacramento,  and  thence  by  steamer 
to  San  Francisco  Having  made  his 
purchase  he  left  San  Francisco,  Jan.  5, 
1865,  per  steamer  with  the  materials 
and  arrived  at  San  Pedro  on  the  8th, 
where  he  found  the  teams  which  he  had 
engaged  awaiting  him.       He  also   pur- 


656 


LATTER-DAY    SAINT 


chased  and  freighted  a  years  supply 
of  papt-r  for  Apostle  Georpre  Q.  Cannon 
on  which  to  print  the  first  volume  of 
the  "Juvenile  Instructor."  On  his  re- 
turn in  February.  1866,  he  resumed  la- 
bor in  the  office  until  the  fall  of  that 
year,  when  he  was  released  by  Pres. 
Brigham  Young,  to  take  charge  of  the 
publication  and  business  of  the  "Juve- 
nile Instructor,"  for  Apostle  George  Q. 
Cannon,  and  on  Jan.  1.  1867,  the  "In- 
structor" appealed  in  its  new  dress,  en- 
larged to  eight  pages.  In  December, 
1866.  he  and  Edward  L.  Sloan  issued 
the  "Curtain."  for  the  Salt  Lake  The- 
atre, it  being  the  first  theatrical  pro- 
gramme printed  in  the  Territory.  When 
Apostle  George  Q.  Cannon,  who  had 
succeeded  Albert  Carrington,  started 
the  daily  "Deseret  Evening  News,"  he 
was  released  from  the  "Instructor"  and 
appointed  foreman  of  the  "Deseret 
News"  printing  establishment,  and  in 
February,  1868,  Editor  Cannon  sent  him 
on  a  special  business  trip  to  the  East- 
ern States,  to  purchase  materials  and 
solicit  advertisements  and  subscrip- 
tions for  the  "News."  He  visited  many 
of  the  manufacturing  and  commercial 
cities  where  Salt  Lake  merchants  had 
been  purchasing  supplies  for  the  Salt 
Lake  market  and  set  before  them  the 
advantages  of  advertising  in  the 
"News,"  as  a  new  era  in  mercantile 
matters  was  about  to  begin  on  the 
completion  of  the  Union  Pacific  Rail- 
road, which  was  then  built  as  far  west 
as  Cheyenne.  At  that  time  only  three 
business  firms  of  Chicago  had  been  do- 
ing business  with  Utah.  Having  a  letter 
of  introduction  from  Pres.  Brigham 
Young,  he  soon  formed  the  acquaint- 
ance of  several  members  of  the  Chica- 
go Board  of  Trade  and  influential  busi- 
ness men  in  other  cities,  who  used  an 
influence  with  many  leading  firms  to 
seek  for  the  Utah  trade.  He  remainel 
for  a  time  in  St.  Louis  and  Chicago, 
and  obtained  advertisements  for  the 
daily,  semi-weekly  and  weekly  "Deseret 
News;"  and  visited  other  cities  as  far 
as  New  York  with  like  success.  He 
also  purchased  presses,  type,  book- 
binding materials  and  supplies  for  the 
paper  mill.  He  returned  after  an  ab- 
sence of  seven  months.  Eiitor  Cannon 
was  well  satisfied  with  his  financial 
success.  The  same  year  Apostle  Can- 
non again  sent  him  on  similar  business 
with  like  results;  and,  with  the  exc-ep- 
tion   of   three   trijis  m;ulf>   by   others,   he 


(ontinued  every  year  to  go  East,  and 
occasionally  to  California  for  the 
"News'"  until  the  fall  of  1877,  i^esuming 
charge  of  the  printing  departments  ov 
his  return  hoine.  At  the  October  con  - 
ference,  1877.  he  was  called  a  secom* 
time  on  a  mission  to  Great  Britain;  his 
wife  accompanied  him  on  a  visit  to  hei 
relations.  They  arrived  in  Liverpool 
Nov.  15th.  He  labored  during  the  first 
year  of  this  mission,  portions  of  th*- 
time,  in  the  Liverpool  office  and  Bir- 
mingham conference,  until  October, 
1878,  when  he  was  appointed  by  Pres 
William  Budge  to  labor  exclusively  in 
the  printing  department  of  the  Liver- 
pool oflfice.  His  wife,  after  having 
spent  a  very  pleasant  year  with  her 
lelatives,  left  on  her  return  to  Utah. 
Oct.  19.  1878,  on  the  steamer  "Wyo- 
ming" and  arrived  in  Salt  Lake  City. 
Nov.  6,  1878.  In  the  fall  of  1878  Eldei 
Bull  was  appointed  by  the  First  Presi- 
dency to  assist  Apostle  Orson  Pratt  to 
get  the  Book  of  Mormon  electrotypes! 
with  foot  notes.  They  proceeded  t'l 
London,  England,  and  completed  th*- 
book  in  about  three  months,  when  he 
resumed  his  labors  in  the  Liverpool 
office.  In  June,  1878,  they  went  a  sec- 
ond time  to  London  and  obtained  elec- 
trotyped  plates  for  the  Doctrine  and 
Covenants,  which  enterprise  was  com- 
pleted August  15th,  when  he  returned 
to  the  Liverpool  office.  During  thi.s 
period,  while  he  superintended  the  gen- 
eral printing  of  the  British  Mission, 
there  were  issued  from  the  press  edi- 
tions of  the  Book  of  Mormon,  Doctrine 
and  Covenants,  Spencer's  Letters,  Pearl 
of  Great  Price  and  Orson  Pratt's  Key 
to  the  Universe,  also  about  250.000 
tracts.  Oct.  18,  1879.  Elder  Bull  left 
England  to  return  to  Utah  on  the 
steamship  "Arizona,"  with  224  Saints, 
in  charge  of  Elders  William  Bramall. 
Joseph  Bull  and  Andrew  Watson,  and 
arrived  home  Nov.  12,  1879.  After  his 
leturn  he  labored  as  a  home  mission- 
ary in  the  Salt  Lake  Stake  of  Zion  foi 
several  years.  He  also  resumed  his 
labors  in  the  "News"  office  newspaper 
and  job  departments.  In  February. 
1880,  he  went  on  his  usual  eastern  and 
western  trips.  In  1887  he  was  appoint- 
ed superintendent  of  the  "News"  news- 
I'aper.  book,  job  and  press  departments. 
In  1S90,  while  on  one  of  his  eastern 
trips,  he  bought  and  shipped  a  first 
class  Chicago  Bullock  Perfecting  Press, 
with   latest   improvements,   and  a  com- 


BIOGRAPHICAL    ENCYCLOPEDIA. 


657 


plete  stereotyping-  outfit.  This  pur- 
chase has  given  unqualified  satisfac- 
tion; for  many  years  he  purchased 
type,  presses,  bookbinding  materials 
and  paper  mill  supplies  for  the  estab- 
lishment. Being  a  practical  printer  as 
well  as  pressman,  he  was  enabled  to 
buy  to  the  satisfaction  of  the  company. 
He  purchased  and  shipped  to  Utah  the 
first  lithog-raphic  printing  plant  and 
strereotyping  outfit.  He  assisted  in 
commencing  the  News  Type  Foundry. 
As  an  advertising  solicitor  he  was  a 
financial  success.  From  the  Atlantic 
to   the    Pacific   he   was     known    as    the 


JOSEPH   BULL  IN   189.5. 

"Mormon  Newspaper  Man,"  and,  by  his 
straightforward  course  he  gained  the 
confidence  and  respect  of  those  with 
whom  he  had  business  relations.  Sept. 
30,  1892,  the  "News"  management  un- 
derwent an  entire  change,  and  on  that 
date  he,  with  several  others  who  had 
held  leading  positions  for  years,  retired. 
In  January,  1893,  he  made  a  successful 
business  trip  to  the  Eastern  States  in 
the  interest  of  the  Salt  Lake  "Herald," 
replenishing  its  columns  with  first  class 
business  advertisements.  On  his  return 

Vol.  1,  No.  42. 


from  this  business  trip  he  accepted  a 
Iiosition  on  the  "News."  Shortly  after 
the  opening  of  the  Salt  Lake  Temple, 
which  occurred  May  23,  1893,  he  was  en- 
gaged to  labor  in  that  building  as  one 
of  its  attaches,  and  continued  there  un- 
til March  31,  1898.  Oct.  24,  1895,  his  wife 
Emma  died  of  pneumonia  after  an  ill- 
ness of  five  days.  When  the  Salt  Lake 
Temple  was  opened  she  was  chosen  and 
set  apart  as  one  of  its  workers  and  held 
that  position  until  five  days  before  her 
death.  Jan.  8,  1897,  Elder  Bull  married 
Miss  Zina  V.  Hyde,  daughter  of  the 
late  Apostle  Orson  Hyde  and  his  wife 
Marinda,  the  ceremony  being  performed 
in  the  Salt  Lake  Temple  by  the  late 
Pres.  Lorenzo  Snow.  Miss  Hyde,  prior 
to  her  marriage,  had  been  a  Temple 
worker  for  five  years.  After  his  retire- 
ment from  the  Temple,  he  was  engaged 
to  work  in  the  book  and  job  depart- 
ments of  the  "News"  for  a  time  and  af- 
terwards in  the  newspaper  department, 
where  he  is  at  present  employed.  Dur- 
ing his  association  with  the  "News"  he 
had  several  opportunities  to  engage  In 
other  printing  enterprises  and  mercan- 
tile pursuits,  but  preferi'ed  to  remain 
with  the  pioneer  establishment.  With 
the  exception  of  his  absence  on  foreign 
missions,  his  labors  in  the  Salt  Lake 
Temple  and  a  few  weeks  spent  with  the 
"Herald,"  he  has  been  continually  with 
the  "News"  since  Jan.  15,  1852,  a  period 
of  fifty  years,  making  him  its  oldest 
employee.  During  this  period  he  has  had 
the  pleasure  of  aiding  the  development 
of  the  small  printing  plant  brought  to 
Utah  by  the  Pioneers  of  1847,  until  it 
has  become  one  of  the  best  equipped 
newspaper  plants  and  publishing  estab- 
lishments In  the  West.  He  has  been  a 
resident  of  the  17th  Ward  since  Octo- 
ber, 1854. 

AVIL.L.IAMS,    WiJliani    Xewjent,    a 

prominent  Elder  of  the  Seventeenth 
Ward,  Salt  Lake  City,  Utah,  was  born 
March  17,  1851,  near  Brechfa,  Car- 
marthenshire, South  Wales.  He  left 
his  native  home  for  Utah,  to- 
gether with  his  parents,  April  9,  1861, 
arriving  in  Salt  Lake  City,  Sept.  23rd, 
of  the  same  year.  At  Florence,  Nebras- 
ka, on  his  way  to  Utah,  he  was  baptized 
into  the  Church  of  Jesus  Christ  of 
Latter-day  Saints,  June  10,  1861,  by  El- 
der George  Teasdale.  His  education 
was   obtained   in   the   public   schools   of 


October  19,  1901. 


658 


LATTER-DAY    SAINT 


Salt  Lake  City  and  in  the  Deseret 
University.  He  was  ordained  an 
Elder  Feb.  21,  1875,  by  Elder  George 
(\  Reiser,  and  was  ordained  a  Seventy 
March  11,  1876,   by  Elder  William  Rob- 


son;  he  joined  the  21st  quorum  of  Sev- 
enty. In  1877-79  he  filled  a  two  years' 
mission  to  South  Wales,  his  native 
country.  He  left  home  July  18,  1877, 
just  thirty-six  hours  after  receiving  the 
first  intimation  of  the  call.  He  labored 
in  the  Welsh  conference  during  the 
whole  of  his  mission,  and  during  the 
latter  part  of  the  time  he  presided  over 
the  conference;  he  returned  home  after 
filling  a  faithful  mission,  in  charge  of 
a  company  of  emigrants  numbering  622 
souls,  arriving  in  Salt  Lake  City,  July 
16,  1879.  He  presided  over  the  mass 
Seventies  in  the  17th  Ward,  prior  to  the 
general  organization  of  the  Seventies' 
Huorums  in  1884,  when  he  became  a  mem- 
ber of  the  3rd  quorum  of  Seventy.  He 
married  Clarissa  W.  Smith,  daughter  of 
the  late  George  A.  Smith  and  Susan  E. 
AVest,  July  17,  1877.  Her  father  was  an 
own  cousin  to  the  Prophet  Joseph 
Smith.  Elder  Williams  was  one  of  the 
organizers  of  the  Co-operative  Furni- 
ture Company  in  1883,  and  acted  as  sec- 
letary  and  treasurer  of  the  company 
for  five  years,  since  which  time  he  has 
l)een  its  successful  manager;  it  is  now 
one  of  the  leading  and  most  substan- 
tial business  houses  of  the  State  of 
Utah.  Elder  Williams  is  interested  in 
mining,  agriculture,  and  other  business 
enterprises,  and  is  a  member  of  the 
Salt   Lake  Commercial  Club.       He  was 


one  of  tne  promoters  and  organizers  of 
the  Cambrian  Association,  and  Is  a 
vice  president  in  the  State  organization 
und  a  director  In  the  local  organization. 
He  was  one  of  the  directors  who  con- 
ducted the  great  Eisteddfod  which  was 
held  in  the  Tabernacle,  Salt  Lake  City, 
Oct.  3rd  and  4th,  1895.  This  Eistedd- 
fod exceeded  in  scope  and  attendance 
any  musical  and  literary  event  of  its 
kind  ever  held  in  the  United  States, 
with  the  exception  of  the  Eisteddfod 
held  during  the  World's  Fair  in  Chica- 
go. In  1900  Elder  Williams  was  elected 
a  representative  from  the  Eighth  Dis- 
trict to  the  fourth  session  of  the  Utah 
legislature.  Elder  Williams  is  one  of 
the  most  successful  business  men  in 
Utah;  he  is  a  hard  worker,  and  does 
not  know  what  it  is  to  give  up  any- 
thing he  undertakes  to  accomplish  un- 
til he  succeeds  in  his  object,  no  matter 
what  obstacles  may  confront  him.  This 
persistency  has  been  the  key  note  to  his 
success  in  life.  His  wife  has  always 
been  an  active  Church  worker  in  vari- 
ous official  capacities.  She  is  at  pres- 
ent, and  for  the  past  five  years  has 
been,  president  of  the  17th  Ward  Re- 
lief Society,  and  is  also  the  general 
treasurer  of  the  National  Woman's  Re- 
lief Society. 

WHITNEY,  Orson  Ferguson,  Bish- 
op of  the  Eighteenth  Ward,  Salt  Lake 
City,  Utah,  was  born  in  Salt  Lake  City, 
Sunday,  July  1,  1855.  His  father,  Horace 
Kimball  Whitney,  one  of  the  Utah  pio- 
neers, was  the  eldest  son  of  Newel  Kim- 
ball Whitney,  the  second  Presiding 
Bishop  of  the  Church.  His  mother, 
Helen  Mar  Wlwtney,  was  the  eldest 
daughter  of  Heber  Chase  Kimball,  one 
of  the  original  Twelve  Apostles,  and  for 
many  years  a  member  of  the  First 
Presidency.  He  was  named  for  his 
uncle,  Orson  K.  Whitney,  another  of  the 
Pioneers,  and  for  his  father's  friend, 
James  Ferguson.  "My  earliest  recol- 
lection," says  the  Bishop,  "is  the  move 
in  the  spring  of  1858,  just  before  John- 
ston's army  passed  through  Salt  Lake 
City.  I  was  not  then  three  years  old, 
but  I  distinctly  remember  incidents  of 
the  journey  to  and  the  sojourn  at  Pro- 
vo,  where  my  father's  family  resided 
until  the  general  return  north  in  the 
summer."  /feishop  Whitney  was  edu- 
cated in  the  common  schools  of  his  na- 
tive town  and  in  the  University  of  Des- 
eret, now  University  of  Utah.      Always 


BIOGRAPHICAL    ENCYCLOPEDIA. 


659 


fond  of  books,  as  a  child  he  showed  re- 
markable powers  of  memory  and  of 
studious  concentration.  He  excelled  in 
reading-,  spelling-,  penmanship,  gram- 
mar and  elocution,  and  at  the  Univer- 
sity was  considered  the  best  declaimer 
in  the  school.  His  artistic  tempera- 
ment prevented  him  from  taking  kindly 
to  mathematics,  and  his  progress  in 
figures  was  only  fair.  As  a  lad  of 
thirteen  he  worked  on  the  construction 
of  the  Union  Pacific  railroad,  then  be- 
ing built  from  Green  river  west.  He 
was  in  the  employ  of  his  uncle  David 
P.    Kimball,   a     sub-contractor,     whose 


camp  was  successively  on  Sulphur 
creek,  Yellow  creek  and  Bear  river. 
There  for  the  first  time  young  Whitney 
saw  rough  life,  but  had  no  taste  for 
it,  and  passed  through  scenes  of  peril 
and  wickedness  unscathed.  This  was 
in  the  summer  and  fall  of  1868.  He  was 
from  home  three  months  and  returned 
-with  $150,  the  first  money  he  had  ever 
earned.  A  year  or  two  later  he  entered 
the  University,  but  at  the  close  of  the 
school  year  in  1871  temporarily  quit  the 
life  of  a  student  and  sought  business 
employement.  He  was  successively  an 
express  driver,  a  clerk  in  a  music  store, 
and  a  sewing  machine  agent  in  south- 
ern Utah  and  other  parts.  Then  came 
a  final  year  at  the  University  (1873-4), 
and  a  winter  in  Bingham  canyon  (1875- 
6),  working  for  a  mercantile  firm.  While 
at  the  University,  he  with  others  or- 
ganized the  Wasatch  Literary  Associa- 


tion, which  had  a  very  successful    ca- 
reer.     He  was  its  first,  and  four  years 
later,  its  last  president.      He  was  also 
connected  with  the  Delta  Phi  and  Zeta 
Gama   Debating   societies,    adjuncts   of 
the  University.      He  was  not  much  of  a 
speaker  at  that  time,  however,  nor  had 
he  developed  as  a  writer,  though  both 
gifts  were  latent  within  him.      Says  the 
Bishop:        "I    was     musically   inclined, 
having  inherited  that  talent  from  both 
father  and  mother,  and  from  the  latter 
also  a  poetic  tendency.  From  my  father 
came  memory  and  love  of  books,   also 
strong  predilections  for  the   drama,   of 
which    he   was   one    of   Utah's   earliest 
representatives.  I  was  always  sin^ng-, 
whistling  and    declaiming;      and    as  a 
youth  I  mastered  the  flute,  my  father's 
instrument,  without  a  teacher.      I  also 
taught  myself  the  guitar.     This,   how- 
ever, as  well  as  my  flute  practice,  was 
after  learning-  the  notes  and  taking  a 
few  lessons  upon  the^rgan  from  Sister 
Lucy    B.    Young.       1    made    my    debut 
upon  the  dramatic  stage  about  the  year 
1872,  though  I  had  figured  in  many  ama- 
teur  performances   prior   to    that   time. 
I   was   at   once   offered   a   place   in   the 
regular  stock  company  of  the  Salt  Lake 
Theatre,   but  declined   it  out   of  defer- 
ence to  the  wishes  of  my  parents.  Sev- 
eral years   later     I     was   preparing    to 
follow  the  dramatic  profession  when  an 
event   occurred   that   changed   the   cur- 
rent  of   my   thoughts   and   altered   the 
whole  course  of  my  life.      I  was  called 
upon   a   mission   to   the   United   States. 
Up    to   this   time   I   had   bent   most   of 
my  energies  in   the  direction  of  music 
and  the  drama,  which  I  dearly  loved.    I 
had  no  desire  to  be  a  writer  or  a  pub- 
lic speaker,  and  did  not.  dream  that  I 
could  make  any  mark  either  in  litera- 
ture   or    in    oratory.        Still    less    did    I 
imagine  that  I  was  destined  to  become 
a  preacher  of  the  gospel.       As  a  child 
I  was  religiously  inclined,  though  I  re- 
volted to  some  extent  against  religious 
discipline.      I  believed  in  God  and  the 
hereafter,  and  would  pray  more  or  less 
regularly,   especially  if  in   trouble;    but 
as  a  youth  I  became  indifferent  to  spir- 
itual things,  thoug-h  at  the  same  time  I 
led   a   moral   life.       I   had   a   horror  of 
unchastity,  which  I  had  been  taught  to 
believe    was    next    in    heinousness    to 
murder.      Humorously  inclined,  fond  of 
fun   and   amusement,   still   I   was   gen- 
erally   serious,    and    sometimes   melan- 
choly.     At     the    age  of    eleven  I  was 


660 


LATTER-DAY    SAINT 


baptized  and  confirmed  a  member  of  the 
Church;  my  uncle  David  P.  Kimball  of- 
ficiating; but  I  held  no  office  in  the 
Priesthood  until  the  spring  of  1873, when 
I  was  ordained  an  Elder  by  the  late 
William  J.  Smith,  afterwards  a  Patri- 
arch in  the  Salt  Lake  Stake  of  Zion. 
This  was  preliminary  to  passing 
through  the  Endowment  House.  I  had 
attained  my  twenty-first  year,  when,  in 
October,  1876,  I  was  called  upon  my 
first  mission — the  one  mentioned. 
Though  poorly  prepared  to  preach,  I 
had  faith  enough  to  accept  the  call,  and 
having  been  ordained  a  Seventy,  I  de- 
parted for  my  field  of  labor.y  As  an  in- 
stance of  the  overruling  providence  of 
God,  I  will  state  that  my  mother,  find- 
ing it  impossible  to  dissuade  me  from 
going  upon  the  stage,  had  promised  me 
that  if  she  could  sell  a  certain  piece  of 
land,  she  would  let  me  have  enough 
money  to  take  me  to  the  city  of  New 
York,  where  I  hoped  to  begin  my  the- 
atrical career.  Every  effort  was  made 
to  dispose  of  the  property,  without 
avail;  but  no  sooner  had  I  signified  my 
intention  to  accept  the  call  for  a  mis- 
sion, than  the  land  was  sold,  and  out 
of  the  proceeds  my  expenses  were  paid 
to  the  State  of  Pennsylvania,  my  first 
ministerial  field."  In  Luzern  and  Lan- 
caster counties  Elder  Whitney  labored 
for  several  months,  most  of  the  time 
in  company  with  Elder  A.  Milton  Mus- 
ser,  who  was  a  native  of  the  Keystone 
State.  During  that  period  he  visited 
the  city  of  Washington,  at  the  invita- 
tion of  Mr.  James  A.  McKnight,  an  old 
Salt  Lake  friend  then  residing  at  the 
nation's  capital.  He  visited  Mount 
Vernon  and  other  interesting  points, 
which  he  afterwards  described  in  let- 
ters to  the  Salt  Lake  "Herald,"  spent  an 
afternoon  in  the  House  of  Representa- 
tives by  courtesy  of  Hon.  George  Q. 
Cannon,  Utah's  delegate;  and  at  the  ex- 
piration of  two  weeks  returned  to 
Pennsylvania,  just  before  tlje  inaugura- 
tion of  President  Hayes,  'ui'he  spirit  of 
his  mission  was  not  yet  thoroughly 
upon  him,  and  he  candidly  confesses 
that  he  was  then  more  interested  in 
his  newspaper  correspondence  than  in 
the  labors  of  the  ministry.  About  this 
time  he  had  a  remarkable  dream,  which 
he  thus  relates:  "I  thought  I  was  in 
the  garden  of  Gethsemane,  a  witness 
of  the  Savior's  agony.  I  seemed  to  be 
standing  behind  a  tree  in  the  fore- 
ground of  the  picture,  from  which  point 


I  could  see  without  being  seen.  The 
Savior,  with  the  Apostles  Peter,  James 
and  John,  entered  the  garden  through 
a  little  wicket  gate  at  my  right,  where 
he  stationed  them  in  a  group,  telling 
them  to  pray.  He  then  passed  over  to 
my  left,  but  still  in  front  of  me,  where 
he  knelt  and  prayed  also.  His  face, 
which  was  towards  me,  streamed  with 
tears,  as  he  besought  the  Father  to  let 
the  cup  pass,  and  added,  'not  my  will 
but  thine  be  done.'  Having  finished 
his  prayer,  he  arose  and  crossed  to 
where  the  Apostles  were  kneeling  fast 
asleep.  He  shook  them  gently,  they 
awoke  and  he  reproved  them  for  their 
apathy.  Again  he  bade  them  pray, 
and  again  crossed  to  his  place  and 
prayed, returning  as  before  to  find  them 
sleeping.  This  happened  three  times, 
until  I  was  perfectly  familiar  with  his 
face,  form  and  movements.  He  was 
much  taller  than  ordinary  men,  and 
though  meek,  far  more  dignified  than 
any  being  I  had  ever  beheld;  and  he 
wore  a  look  of  ineffable  tenderness  and 
compassion,  even  while  reproving  His 
disciples.  My  heart  went  out  to  him 
as  never  before  to  anybody  or  to  any- 
thing; I  loved  him  with  all  my  sorul.  I 
wept  at  seeing  him  weep,  and  felt  for 
him  the  deepest  sympathy.  Then  of  a 
sudden  the  circumstances  changed, 
though  the  scene  remained  the  same. 
Instead  of  before  the  crucifixion,  it  was 
after.  The  Savior  and  the  three  Apos- 
tles, whom  he  had  beckoned  to  him, 
now  stood  in  a  group  at  the  left,  and 
were  about  to  take  their  departure, 
ascending  into  heaven.  I  could  endure 
it  no  longer,  but  rushed  out  from  be- 
hind the  tree,  fell  at  his  feet,  clasped 
him  around  the  knees  and  begged  him 
to  take  me  also.  With  a  look  of  in- 
finite tenderness,  as  of  a  father  or  an 
elder  brother,  he  stooped,  lifted  me  up 
and  embraced  me,  saying  as  he  did  so 
in  the  kindest  and  gentlest  manner  pos- 
sible, while  slowly  shaking  his  head 
and  sweetly  smiling,  'No,  my  son,  these 
can  go  with  me;  for  they  have  finished 
their  work;  but  you  must  stay  and  fin- 
ish yours!'  Still  I  clung  to  him,  and 
the  contact  was  so  real  that  I  felt  the 
warmth  of  his  bosom  as  I  rested  upon 
it.  Gazing  up  into  his  face,  I  once 
more  besought  him,  'Well,  promise  me 
that  I  will  come  to  you  at  the  last.' 
Again  he  smiled  sweetly,  and  there  was 
a  look  as  if  he  would  have  gladly  grant- 
ed my  request  had  It  been  wise  to  do  so. 


BIOGRAPHICAL    ENCYCLOPEDIA, 


661 


He  then  said,  'That  will  depend  entire- 
ly upon  yourself.'       I  awoke     with     a 
sob,  and  it  was  morning-.      This  dream 
made  a  wonderful  impression  upon  me, 
paving-  the  way  to  my  thorough  conver- 
sion, which  soon  followed.      Among-  the 
thing-s  it  taught  me  was  not  to  sleep  at 
my  post,  and  to  regard  first  the  duties 
of  my  mission,  and  not  allow  anything 
to  Interfere  with  them."      In  the  spring 
of  1877  Elder  Whitney  went  alone     td 
northern  Ohio,  where  he  spent  a  year, 
preaching,  baptizing,  studying  the  gos- 
pel and  writing  for  the  press.    Though 
feeling  weak,  he  put  his  trust  in  God, 
and   developed   far   more   rapidly,    now 
that  he  was  alone,  than  he  did  or  could 
while  having  an  experienced  missionary 
as  his  companion.      He  made     marked 
improvement  as  a  speaker  and  writer, 
grew  in  faith  and  knowledge  daily,  and 
ere  long  the  fulness  of  the  gospel  testi- 
mony  came  like   a  burst     of   sunshine 
upon  his  soul.       He  knew  he  was  en- 
gaged in  the  work  of  God,  and  rejoiced 
exceedingly   in   that   knowledge,   which 
has  never  left  him.      A  succession     of 
miraculous  incidents  attended  his  min- 
istry, and"  he  was  instrumental  in  con- 
verting a  number  of  souls.      At  proper 
intervals  he  kept  up  his  correspondence 
begun   in   Pennsylvania     to     the   "Salt 
Lake  Herald"  (his  letters  signed  "lago" 
being  very  popular  with  the  readers  of 
that  journal)  and  he  contributed  signed 
articles  to  the  "Deseret  News,"     being 
invited    to     do     so   by    Pres.    Brigham 
Young,   who  wrote   to     him   repeatedly 
and  gave  him  kind  and  fatherly  coun- 
sel.y-  From  the  suburbs  of  Elyria,  Lo- 
rain county,  Ohio,  where  he  made     his 
home  at  the  hospitable  farm-house     of 
Brother   Truman     Frink,     whose   wife, 
Sister  Angeline   Gleason  Frink,   was   a 
second   mother  to  him,  he  made  visits 
into   the   neighboring     parts,    including 
Cleveland,  Kirtland,  Painesville.  Akron 
and  other  towns.      Kirtland,     once  the 
headquarters   of  the   Church,     was  his 
father's  birth-place,  and  in  that  vicini- 
ty he  found  relatives,  who,  though  not 
"Mormons"   nor  lovers  of   "Mormons," 
received  and  treated  their  Utah  cousin 
with  great  kinf^n-^ss,  seeking   earnestly, 
though  vainly    to  convert  him  to  their 
faith— Methodism— and    shedding    tears 
of  genuine  regret  when  he  left  them  to 
return  no  more.      Honorably     released 
from  his  mission,  he  returned  to  Utah 
in  the  spring  of  1878,  arriving  home  on 
the  first  day  of  April.      He  was  at  once 


offered   a   position   on   the   staff   of   the 
"Salt  Lake  Herald,"   but     declined     it, 
partly  because  it  involved  night  work, 
which  he  feared  his  health,     somewhat 
delicate  at  the  time,  would  not  permit, 
but  mainly  because  it  would  monopolize 
his   Sabbaths,   which  he  wished   to   de- 
vote entirely  to  the  service  of  God.  His 
days   of   indifference     to   religion   were 
over.   /  He  had  prayed  fervently    while 
away  that  he  might  never  throw  off  the 
gospel   harness,    as   many   missionaries 
had   done,   and   as   some   predicted     he 
would  do;  but  he  had  also  prayed  that 
he  might  never  again  be  out     of    em- 
ployment, which  had  been  the  bane  of 
some  of  his  youthful  years.       It  was  a 
sacrifice,   therefore,   to  refuse   the   first 
offer  of  a  situation  that  came  to  him 
after  his  return,  but  he  made  that  sac- 
rifice for  the  gospel's  sake,  and  about 
two    weeks    later     found    himself    em- 
ployed in     the     business     office     of  the 
"Deseret   News,"    being     placed     there 
through  the  influence  of  Apostle  Brig- 
ham  Young,   one  of  the  editors  of  the 
paper.      Pres.  Angus  M.  Cannon,  of  the 
Salt  Lake  Stake,  also  kindly  interested 
himself  in  his  behalf.    In  August  he  be- 
came city  editor  of  the  "News,"     suc- 
ceeding Elder  John  Nicholson,  who  was 
called  to  Europe  on  a  mission.     Mean- 
time Elder  Whitney  was  made  Bishop 
of    the    Eighteenth    Ward,    over    which 
Elder  Nicholson  had  presided  during  an 
interim    between     the      resignation    of 
Bishop  Lorenzo  D.  Young  and  the  ap- 
pointment of  a  regular  successor.  Prior 
to  that,  he  had  served  a  short  while  as 
a  Ward  teacher  and  as  secretary  of  the 
Central  Committee  of  Y.  M.  M.  I.  A.  His 
appointment  to  the  Bishopric,     on  the 
evening  of  July  14,  1878,  came  as  a  com- 
plete surprise.      He  was  on  his  way  to 
the  Ward   meeting,   then  held   in  Pres. 
Brigham  Young's  old  school  house.  In- 
side  the  Eagle   Gate,   when  he  met     a 
friend,    who    invited    him    to    go    else- 
where.     "No,"  said  Whitney,  jocularly, 
"I  must  go  to  meeting;   they  are  going 
to  put  me  in  Bishop  to-night;"  and  went 
on,   little  dreaming   that   such  was   in- 
deed the  case.      He  had  been  told  that 
a  Bishop  would  be  chosen   that  night, 
but  had  no  Idea  upon  whom  the  choice 
would  fall.       He   was  astounded  when 
the  president  of  the  Stake,  addressing 
the   people,   said,    "It   is   proposed   that 
Orson  P.  Whitney  be  the  Bishop  of  the 
Eighteeenth  Ward."      He     was  unani- 
mously sustained,  and  after  expressing 


662 


LATTER-DAY    SAINT 


his  willingness  to  accept  the  call,  was 
ordained  a  High  Priest  and  set  apart 
by  Pres.  Daniel  H.  Wells,  then  acting 
as  a  counselor  to  the  Twelve  Apostles; 
Apostles  George  Q.  Cannon  and  Brig- 
ham  Young  assisting  in  the  ordination. 
Bishop  Whitney  was  but  twenty-three 
years  of  age  and  unmarried  (an  un- 
heard of  thing  in  a  "Mormon"  Bishop) 
and  as  a  parting  shot  the  president  of 
the  Stake  said  humorously  to  the  con- 
gregation: "Paul  says  that  a  Bishop 
must  be  the  husband  of  one  wife;  it  is 
to  be  hoped  that  Bishop  Whitney  will 
soon  qualify."  He  was  given  as  coun- 
selors Elders  Robert  Patrick  and  Wil- 
liam B.  Barton,  men  of  ability  and  ex- 
perience, who  have  worked  faithfully 
with  him  for  the  good  of  the  Ward, 
which  has  grown,  during  this  adminis- 
tration, from  one  of  the  weakest  and 
smallest  to  be  one  of  the  wealthiest  and 
most  populous  Wards  of  the  Stake.  In 
the  winter  of  1878-79  Bishop  Whitney 
went  on  a  preaching  tour  through 
Cache  valley;  his  first  visit  to  that 
part;  and  at  Hyrum  received  his  first 
patriarchal  blessing  under  the  hands  of 
Father  O.  N.  Liljenqulst,  then  Bishop  of 
that  place.  He  also  made  a  very  suc- 
cessful canvass  in  the  Interests  of  the 
"Deseret  News."  Bishop  Whitney  mar- 
ried, on  Dec.  18,  1879.  Miss  Zina  Beal 
Smoot,  a  native  of  Salt  Lake  City,  but 
from  childhood  a  resident  of  Provo.  She 
was  a  daughter  of  Pres.  Abraham  O. 
Smoot  of  Utah  Stake.  The  marriage 
ceremony  was  performed  by  Pres.  Dan- 
iel H.  Wells  at  the  Endowment  House 
in  Salt  Lake  City.  Here  the  young 
couple  took  up  their  residence,  and 
here  their  first  child,  a  son,  was  borny 
Oct.  27,  1880.  In  February  of  that 
year  the  Bishop  was  elected  to  the  city 
council,  representing  the  Fourth  Pre- 
cinct, composed  of  the  Eighteenth, 
Twentieth  and  Twenty-first  ecclesiast- 
ical Wards.  He  was  nominated  with- 
out his  knowledge:  the  first  he  knew  of 
it  being  when  he  read  in  the  morning 
paper  the  proceedings  of  the  Municipal 
Convention  of  the  People's  Party,  held 
the  evening  before.  'In  April  of  this 
year  was  organized  the  Home  Dramatic 
Club,  an  association  of  young  people 
who  spent  their  leisure  hours  rehears- 
ing plays  and  presenting  them  upon  the 
local  stage.  Bishop  Whitney  was  presi- 
dent of  the  club,  and  in  the  pieces  pre- 
sented by  it,  mostly  at  the  Salt  Lake 
Theatre,    sustained    such    leading    roles 


as  Frank  Hawthorne  in  "Extremes;" 
John  Strebelow  In  the"Banker's  Daugh- 
ter," and  Matthew  Standish  in  "Pique." 
His  first  appearance  with  the  club  was 
in  April,  1880,  when  he  Impersonated 
Dr.  Desmarets  in  "The  Romance  of  a 
Poor  Young  Man."  His  last  appear- 
ance with  them  and  upon  any  stage 
was  in  Octoger,  1883,  when  he  played 
Martin  Wheatstone,  in  "The  Green 
Lanes  of  England.")  He  was  very 
popular  with  the  club  and  with  the 
public,  and  when  at  last  he  decided  to 
retire,  they  parted  from  him  with  many 
regrets.  His  reasons  for  retiring  were 
that  he  found  his  dramatic  engage- 
ments interfering  more  or  less  with  his 
religious  duties,  and  he  feared  that  his 
example  might  induce  other  young  peo- 
ple to  embrace  the  stage  as  a  prof*""- 
slon.  In  October,  1881,  he  was  called 
upon  a  mission  to  Europe,  to  labor  In 
the  editorial  department  of  the  "Mil- 
lennial Star,"  at  the  headquarters  of 
the  European  Mission,  42  Islington, 
Liverpool.  He  was  given  a  farewell 
benefit  by  his  colleagues  of  the  Home 
Dramatic  Club,  and  left  home  on  the 
24th  of  October,  sailing  from  New  York 
on  the  S.  S.  "Arizona,"  November  1st, 
and  landing  at  Liverpool  on  the  10th. 
It  being  desirable  that  he  should  have 
some  acquaintance  with  the  mission  be- 
fore entering  upon  his  editorial  duties, 
he  was  assigned  to  the  London  confer- 
ence as  a  traveling  Elder.  In  that 
great  city  he  labored  zealously  until  the 
spring  of  1882,  preaching,  baptizing, 
writing  for  the  "Star,"  and  correspond- 
ing with  the  home  papers.  He  was 
then  summoned  to  Liverpool,  where  he 
continued  in  the  ministry,  while  carry- 
ing on  his  regular  work  upon  the  "Star" 
and  "Journal  of  Discourses.'^  He  was 
at  "42"  for  about  a  year— during  the 
closing  part  of  Pres.  Albert  Carring- 
ton's  last  administration  and  the  fore- 
part of  the  administration  of  his  suc- 
cessor. President  John  Henry  Smith. 
The  latter,  early  in  1883,  finding  that 
the  Bishop's  health  was  failing,  through 
close  confinement  to  the  office,  gave 
him  permission  to  travel  at  will 
through  the  British  Mission,  and  to 
begin  his  itinerary  by  presiding  over 
the  London  conference  during  the  tem- 
porary absence  of  Pres.  Joseph  A. 
West,  upon  the  continent.  While  in 
London  he  saw  and  heard  the  great 
Gladstone  in  the  House  of  Commons, 
and   caught   glimpses  of   other   celebri- 


BIOGRAPHICAL    ENCYCLOPEDIA. 


663 


ties,  such  as  General  Lord  Wolseley, 
Admiral  Seymour  and  Henry  Irving. 
While  still  there  he  was  apprised  of  the 
death  of  his  second  child,  Heber  Kim- 
ball Whitney,  whom  he  had  never  seen, 
the  little  one  being  borit  after  he  left 
home.  Soon  after  this  ^he  was  honor- 
ably released  to  return.  He  had  pre- 
viously visited  Wales  and  various  parts 
of  England,  attending  conferences  and 
holding  indoor  and  outdoor  meetings. 
Two  of  his  jaunts,  "without  purse  or 
scrip,"  were  with  Elder  Joseph  A. 
West,  through  the  counties  around 
London.  He  now  made  flying  trips  to 
Scotland  and  France,  Elder  George  C. 
Parkinson  being  his  companion  upon 
the  latter  journey.  They  spent  a 
week  in  the  eity  of  Paris,  and  on  June 
20,  1883,  sailed  from  Liverpool  on  the 
S.  S.  "Wyoming,"  landing  at  New 
York  Sunday,  July  1st,/ the  very  day 
and  date  of  the  Bishop's  birth,  twenty- 
eight  years  before.  "Then,"  says  he, 
"I  was  from  another  sphere;  now  from 
another  hemisphere."  He  reached  home 
on  the  7th  of  July.  In  October  he  re- 
sumed his  former  position  on  the  "Des- 
eret  News,"  and  his  reportorial  duties, 
with  those  of  the  Bishopric,  besides  lec- 
tures and  miscellaneous  writings,  kept 
him  very  busy.  In  December,  1884,  he 
severed  his  connection  with  the 
"News,"  accepting  an  appointment  by 
the  city  council  to  the  ofiice  of  city 
treasurer,  to  serve  the  unexpired  term 
of  Paul  A.  Schettler.  deceased/'  At  the 
next  municipal  election  he  was  chosen 
to  the  same  office,  and  was  regularly 
re-elected  every  two  years  until  1890, 
when  he  declined  re-nomination.  In 
the  city  election  of  that  year  the  Peo- 
ple's ticket  was  defeated,  the  Liberals 
coming  into  power.  Treasurer  Whit- 
ney's final  report  showed  upw'ards  of  a 
quarter  of  a  million  dollars  in  the 
treasury.  At  the  opening  of  the  twen- 
ty-eighth session  of  the  Territorial 
legislature  (1888)  he  was  minute  clerk 
of  the  House  of  Representatives,  but  in 
the  midst  of  the  session,  in  order  to  fill 
a  vacancy  caused  by  a  resignation,  he 
was  chosen  chief  clerk  of  that  body.  In 
the  summer  of  the  same  year  he  went 
with  his  wife  and  little  daughter  Helen 
on  a  trip  to  Colonia  Diaz,  Mexico,  re- 
turning by  way  of  Denver,  Colorado, 
where  they  spent  a  week  or  more.  (Dur- 
ing the  same  period  that  he  was  treas- 
urer for  Salt  Lake  City,  Bishop  Whit- 
ney  was   chancellor   of    the    L'^niversity 


of  Deseret,  having  previously  been  a 
regent  of  that  institution.  In  Novem- 
ber, 1888,  he  completed  his  first  book, 
"The  Life  of  Heber  C.  Kimball,"  pub- 
lished by  the  Kimball  family.  Its  suc- 
cess was  instantaneous  and  the  sale 
large.  His  second  book,  "Poetical  Writ- 
ings," appeared  in  the  winter  of  1889- 
90.  It  is  a  collection  of  poems  and  po- 
etic prose,  written  at  sundry  times  since 
the  year  1873,  when  he  began  to  make 
verses.  He  also  prepared,  about  the 
year  1889,  "Later  Leaves  from  the  Life 
of  Lorenzo  Snow,"  a  biography  yet  re- 
maining in  manuscript.  An  Intimate 
acquaintance  and  warm  friendship  be- 
tween President  Snow  and  Bishop 
Whitney  began  a  short  time  before  the 
writing  of  this  work,  while  the  former 
was  a  prisoner  for  conscience  sake  in 
the  Utah  penitentiary,  where  the  latter 
visited  him  and  predicted  that  he  would 
not  seive  out  his  sentence;  a  prediction 
that  was  fulfilled.  During  the  heat  of 
the  crusade,  when  most  of  the  leading 
brethren  were  in  prison  or  "on  the 
underground,"  a  great  deal  of  public 
preaching  devolved  upon  the  Bishop, 
who  was  the  first  Elder  appointed  to 
hold  a  "Mormon"  service  at  the  peni- 
tentiary. It  was  about  this  time  that 
the  town  of  Whitney, Idaho,  was  named 
for  him  by  the  people  of  that  place. 
In  the  spring  of  1890  he  began  his  most 
extensive  literary  work,  the  History  of 
Utah,  in  four  large  volumeSj/three  of 
which  have  been  issued,  while  the 
fourth,  a  biographical  volume,  awaits 
publication.  He  was  appointed  to  this 
work  by  Pres.  Wilford  Woodruff,  but 
was  paid  for  it  by  Dr.  John  O.  Wil- 
liams, of  Colorado,  the  inaugurator  of 
the  enterprise,  who  subsequently  sold 
the  business  to  Cannon  &  Sons  of  Salt 
Lake  City,  by  whom  the  history  was 
published.  The  work  has  received  much 
commendation,  and  has  been  placed  in 
the  leading  libraries  of  the  land. ^  The 
Bishop  has  written  many  poems  since 
his  first  poetic  volume  passed  through 
the  press,  two  of  the  more  notable  ones 
being  "Columbus"  and  "Napoleon^"  Tii 
the  fall  of  1893  he  accompanied  the  Fir.^t 
Presidency  and  the  Tabernacle  Choir 
to  the  World's  Fair,  at  Chicago,  visit- 
ing en  route  Denver,  Kansas  City,  In- 
dependence, and  St.  Louis.  At  the  Fair 
he  made  the  presentation  speech  ac- 
companying the  gift  of  a  cane  from  the 
Choir  to  Director  General  Davis.  (  In 
politics  he  was  a  member  of  the   Peo- 


6G4 


LATTER-DAY    SAINT 


pies  party  up  to  the  time  of  its  dis- 
solution. He  then  stood  aloof  from 
party  affiliation  until  the  fall  of  1894, 
when  he  declared  himself  a  Democrat, 
and  by  request  of  his  party  leaders  be- 
came a  candidate  for  delegate  to  the 
Constitutional  Convention,  the  body 
that  was  destined  to  frame  for  Utah  her 
State  Constitution.  During  the  cam- 
jiaign  preceding  the  election  he  had  his 
first  experience  as  a  political  speaker, 
addressing  meetings  in  Sanpete  and 
Summit  counties,  also  in  Salt  Lake  City 
and  Provo.  He  was  elected  November 
6th,  receiving  the  highest  number  of 
votes  cast  for  any  delegate  in  the 
fourth  precinct.  In  the  Convention, 
which  met  in  March,  1895,  he  served 
upon  some  of  the  principal  committees, 
and  took  a  leading  part  in  the  great 
woman  suffrage  debate,  one  of  the  main 
features  of  the  proceedings.  His  speech- 
es in  that  cause  were  published  in 
pamphlet  form  by  the  Utah  Woman 
Suffrage  Association.  His  side  was 
victorious, woman  suffrage  being  placed 
in  the  Constitution.  He  was  one  of  the 
committee  that  revised  the  entire  in- 
strument prior  to  its  transmission  to 
"Washington.  In  January,  1896,  he  ac- 
cepted the  chair  of  philosophy  created 
for  him  in  the  Brigham  Young  College 
at  Logan,  where  he  resided  until  July, 
1897.  There  being  no  applicants  for 
philosophical  studies,  he  taught  theolo- 
gy and  English  instead.  Prior  to  ac- 
cepting this  position  he  was  offered  the 
chair  of  history  in  the  Agricultural  Col- 
lege, also  at  Logan,  but  accepted  the 
other  tender,  because  of  his  preference 
for  the  atmosphere  of  a  religious  in- 
stitution. His  services  as  an  instruc- 
tor had  al.so  been  solicited  by  the  Brig- 
ham  Young  Academy  at  ProvoJ  He 
was  the  recipient  of  a  gold  watch  pre- 
sentation by  the  members  of  his  Ward, 
prior  to  his  departure  for  the  north, 
and  was  warmly  received  at  Logan, 
where  he  made  many  friends,  the  wo- 
man suffragists  giving  him  a  public 
ovation  on  his  arrival  there.  With  his 
students  he  was  equally  popular.  He 
spent  the  summer  vacation  of  1896  in 
lecturing,  with  other  professors, through 
Bear  Lake,  Box  Elder  and  Weber  coun- 
ties. He  was  appointed  one  of  the 
regular  lecturers  at  the  Logan  Temple, 
and  delivered  .special  lectures  at  Logan, 
Salt  Lake,  Ogden,  Provo  a.nd  other 
points.  '  In  June  of  that  year'  he  was 
the  guest  of  honor  at  a  banquet  given 


by  the  Sons  of  the  American  Revolu- 
tion at  Salt  Lake  City,  on  the  anniver- 
sary of  the  battle  of  Bunker  Hill,  and 
made  a  speech  on  "The  Genius  of 
Americanism,"  which  drew  marked  at- 
tention. He  had  previously  addressed 
the  University  Club  on  "The  Origin  of 
Mormonism"  and  "Early  Utah."  At 
the  close  of  the  collegiate  year  in  June, 
1897,  he  resigned  his  professorship, hav- 
ing better  financial  prospects,  and  re- 
turned to  his  native  city  in  time  to 
take  part  in  the  Utah  Pioneer  Jubilee. 
At  the  unveiling  of  the  Pioneer  Monu- 
ment, July  20th,  he  read  the  dedicatory 
prayer  for  Pres.  Wilford  Woodruff, 
whose  feeble  health  barely  permitted 
him  to  be  present  and  perform  the  act 
of  unveiling.  The  Bishop's  contribu- 
tion to  the  literature  of  the  Jubilee  was 
a  poem  entitled  "The  Lily  and  the  Bee," 
an  allegory  descriptive  of  the  founding 
of  Utah.  It  was  pronounced  by  the 
official  critics  the  most  artistic  poem 
among  the  many  written  for  that  mem- 
orable occasion.  His  were  also  the 
words  of  the  Pioneer  ode,  sung  during 
the  Jubilee  by  the  Tabernacle  Choir, 
whose  leader,  Prof.  Evan  Stephens,  had 
won  the  prize  for  the  best  musical  set- 
ting to  those  words.  He  also  acted  as 
historian  for  the  Jubilee  Commission, 
preparing  the  Book  of  the  Pioneers  for 
the  State  archives.  He  then  resumed 
work  upon  the  History  of  Utah — work 
temporarily  suspended  owing  to  the 
financial  stringency  of  the  times.  In 
the  fall  of  1898  he  was  elected  a  State 
senator,  being  chosen  from  the  sixth 
senatorial  district,  and  took  his  seat  in 
the  upper  house  of  the  legislature  in 
January  following.  The  principal  event 
of  the  session  was  the  vain  attempt  to 
elect  a  United  States  senator,  a  con- 
summation thwarted  by  disunion 
among  the  Democratic  members  of  the 
joint  assembly.  In  May,  1900,  a  heavy 
sorrow  befell  the  Bishop  in  the  death  of 
his  wife,  Zina  Beal  Smoot  Whitney, 
who  expired  on  the  20th  of  that  month, 
leaving  to  his  care  eight  children,  four 
boys  and  four  girls,  most  of  them  of 
tender  years,  and  the  youngest  a  twin 
boy  and  girl  a  little  over  one  year  old. 
He  was  nobly  assisted  in  his  trouble 
by  his  other  wife,  May  Wells  Whitney, 
a  daughter  of  Pres.  Daniel  H.  Wells, 
whom  he  had  married  in  July,  1888,  in 
the  midst  of  the  anti-polygamy 
crusade;  Apostle  Moses  Thatcher  per- 
forming the  ceremony.       Though   hav- 


BIOGRAPHICAL    ENCYCLOPEDIA. 


665 


ing  two  little  boys  of  her  own,  she  as- 
sumed charge  of  the  motherless  chil- 
dren as  well,  and  has  been  a  staff  and 
stay  to  the  entire  household.  The  names 
of  his  children  in  the  order  of  their 
births  are  as  follows:  Horace  Newel, 
Heber  Kimball,  Emily,  Helen  Mar,  Mar- 
garet, Charles  Byron,  Murray  Wells, 
Albert  Owen,  Wendell  Webb,  Paul  Van 
Cott  and  Virginia  Clayton.  ''Senator 
Whitney  also  sat  in  the  legislature  of 
1901,  and  made  strong  speeches  in  favor 
of  the  Evans  Bill,  a  measure  designed, 
not  for  the  restoration  of  plural  mar- 
riage.as  many  supposed, but  for  the  pro- 
tection of  aged  polygamists  from  petty 
persecution  by  the  methods  of  the  no- 
torious Charles  Mostyn  Owen  and  his 
ilk.  He  also  supported  the  McMillan 
Bill,  abolishing  compulsory  vaccination! 
By  request  of  the  senate  and  house  he 
delivered  before  the  joint  assembly  a 
memorial  address  on  the  life  and  char- 
acter of  his  old  University  tutor,  Dr. 
John  R.  Park,  late  Superintendent  of 
Public  Instruction.  During  the  ses- 
sion he  went  with  the  legislature  to 
Boise,  where  they  were  the  guests  of 
the  Idaho  law-makers.  At  the  grand 
ball  given  at  the  Sanitarium  in  honor 
of  the  Utah  visitors,  he  made,  by  re- 
quest, a  farewell  speech,  thanking  the 
State  and  city  officials  and  the  people 
of  Boise  for  their  kindness  and  hospit- 
ality. The  legislative  train,  before  re- 
turning, ran  up  as  far  as  Huntington, 
Oregon.  His  next  trip,  taken  in  March 
of  the  same  year,  was  to  the  Pacific 
Coast,  in  company  with  his  son  Horace 
("Race")  and  Mr.  Alan  Lovey,  both  of 
the  Salt  Lake  Herald  staff.  After  see- 
ing the  sights  of  San  Francisco  and  its 
environs,  and  meeting  twice  with  the 
Saints  of  that  branch,  he  ran  down 
to  Monterey  and  had  a  last  interview 
with  Pres.  George  Q.  Cannon,  who  was 
there  in  a  dying  condition.  At  Pa- 
cific Grove,  the  Bishop  and  his  son  met 
Harry  Culmer,  the  Utah  artist,  and 
took  the  famous  "Seventeen  Mile  Drive" 
in  his  company  and  by  his  courtesy. 
Since  the  opening  of  the  year  1899 
Bishop  Whitney  has  been  regularly  em- 
ployed at  the  Church  Historian's  Office, 
where  he  succeeded  to  the  labors  of 
Elder  Charles  W.  Penrose,  the  latter 
resuming  his  former  position  as  editor- 
in-chief  of  the  "Deseret  News."  His  du- 
ties comprise  the  keeping  of  the  Church 
journal,  the  answering  of  correspond- 
ence, the  writing  of  special  articles  for 


the  press  and  such  other  service  as 
may  be  necessary.  In  literary  work, 
discourses,  lectures,  orations,  funeral 
sermons  and  miscellaneous  addresses, 
along  with  his  ecclesiastical  labors,  his 
mind,  tongue  and  pen  are  kept  con- 
stantly busy.  Among  his  leading  lec- 
tures may  be  mentioned  "What  is 
Education?",  "Oratory,  Poesy  and 
Prophecy,"  "Born  Again,"  "The  Disper- 
sion and  Gathering  of  Israel,"  "Zlon 
and  Her  Redemption"  and  "What  Mor- 
monism  Has  Accomplished."  His  bac- 
calaureate address  at  the  Agricultural 
College  in  1895  is  also  well  remembered. 
Among  his  most  recent  addresses  were 
two  delivered  at  the  Tabernacle — one  on 
McKinley  day  (Sept.  19,  1901),  and  the 
other  on  the  22nd  of  December  follow- 
ing, at  the  general  memorial  service  in 
honor  of  the  Prophet  Joseph  Smith. 
Bishop  Whitney  is  now  (March,  1902)  in 
the  forty-seventh  year  of  his  age,  and 
has  served  more  than  half  of  his  life 
in  the  Bishopric. 

PATRICK,  Robert,  first  counselor 
to  Bishop  Orson  F.  Whitney  of  the 
Eighteenth  Ward,  Salt  Lake  City,  was 
born  Jan.  20,  1833,  In  Glasgow,  Scotland, 
son  of  Robert  Patrick  and  Elizabeth 
McArthur.  His  education  was  limited, 
as  he  left  school  at  the  age  of  twelve 
years,  and  went  to  work  for  a  wood- 
turner. For  about  two  years  before 
hearing  testimony  borne  to  the  restora- 
tion of  the  gospel  in  this  age,  he  had 
been  considerably  exercised  on  religious 
matters,  but  could  get  no  satisfaction 
from  the  teachings  of  any  of  the  sects. 
He  had  been  listeniiig  for  some  time 
to  the  preaching  of  an  old  Baptist  who 
held  forth  on  Glasgow  Green,  a  place 
of  common  resort  for  purposes  of  relig- 
ious and  political  discussion.  He  be- 
came convinced  of  the  necessity  of  bap- 
tism by  immersion,  and  his  mind  was 
gradually  prepared  for  the  reception 
of  the  gospel.  One  day  the  Baptist 
failed  to  fill  his  appointment  and  the 
youthful  enqtiirer  was  attracted  to  an- 
other place,  where  a  crowd  had  col- 
lected. As  he  reached  the  spot,  Rob- 
ert Kirkwood,  a  "Mormon"  Elder,  had 
just  concluded  a  discourse,  and  Ralph 
Roily,  another  Elder,  was  bearing  tes- 
timony that  the  gospel  had  been  re- 
stored in  all  its  ancient  power  by  the 
ministration  of  holy  angels  and  through 
the  instrumentality  of  a  Prophet  named 
Joseph  Smith.  The  words  of  the  speaker 


666 


LATTER-DAY    SAINT 


electrified  the  young  man  and  he  felt 
certain  they  were  true.  The  crowd 
pressed  hard  upon  the  Elders  and 
threatened  to  throw  them  Into  the  river. 
Robert  Patrick  buttoned  his  coat, 
stepped  forward,  and  shouted  with  de- 
termination In  every  tone  and  gesture, 
"You  shall  not  harm  these  men,"  feel- 
ing at  the  same  time  that  he  would 
have  fought  for  them  to  the  death.  A 
man  named  James  Steele  Joined  with 
him  in  protecting  the  Elders,  and  the 
two  kept  the  crowd  back  until  the  mis- 
sionaries could  retire  from  the  scene. 
On  going  home  that  night  Robert  was 
asked  by  his  mother  where  he  had  been. 
"To  hear  the  Mormons,"  he  replied. 
"Who  are  they?"  "They  believe  in  Joe 
Smith,"  he  answered  tactfully,  hoping 
to  forestall  any  trouble.  As  soon  as  he 
uttered  the  last  sentence  he  was  seized 
with  a  sudden  pang  of  remorse.  He 
felt  that  he  had  done  wrong  in  speak- 
ing disrespectfully  of  the  Prophet  and 
was  humbled,  sorrowful  and  ashamed. 
Soon  afterwards  he  went  to  the  house  of 
a  blind  man  named  William  Eccles  to 
get  something  turned  on  his  lathe.  Ec- 
cles, in  broad  dialect,  said:  "Man, 
Robert,  come  and  sit  doon,  and  I'll  tell 
ye  something  far  mair  to  your  guid 
than  a'  the  turnin'  in  the  world."  This 
man  preached  the  gospel  to  him  night 
after  night  for  three  weeks,  and  in 
three  months  from  the  time  of  hearing 
Brother  Rolly's  testimony,  Robert  was 
baptized.  That  event  occurrred  March 
24.  1852,  Wm.  Semple  officiating.  He  suf- 
fered great  persecution  at  home,  from 
his  mother  and  brothers;  his  father 
having  died  when  he  was  seven  years 
of  age.  They  tried  every  conceivable 
method  to  induce  him  to  renounce  his 
religion,  but  all  to  no  purpose.  They 
even  resorted  to  force  to  prevent  him 
from  going  to  his  meetings,  but  being 
strong  and  active  he  generally  came 
out  be.'^t  in  these  struggles:  yet  often 
with  torn  clothing.  They  finally  or- 
dered him  to  leave  home  and  never  re- 
turn, and  although  little  more  than 
a  lad  at  the  time,  earning  vefy  small 
wages,  after  enduring  the  harsh  treat- 
ment for  two  years,  he  concluded  to 
leave  and  shift  for  himself.  His  ward- 
robe consisted  of  little  more  than  the 
clothes  he  wore  daily.  Robert  was  or- 
dained to  the  office  of  Teacher  in  1853. 
by  Elder  Edward  Martin,  and  some 
time  afterwards  to  the  office  of  Priest 
by  Elder  William  Low.       He  was  bap- 


tized at  the  reformation  in  1857.  and 
while  being  re-confirmed  by  Elder  Ja- 
cob Gibson,  the  latter  prophesied  over 
his  head  several  events  in  his  subse- 
quent life;  the  prediction  being  literal- 
ly fulfilled.  He  was  married  to  Rachel 
Baird  Dec.  29,  1859,  and  in  1860  was  or- 
dained an  Elder  by  Elder  George  Teas  • 
dale,  then  presiding  over  the  Scottish 
mission.  In  April  of  the  latter  year  he 
was  set  apart  to  preside  over  the  Glas- 
gow branch  of  the  Chtirch.  Brother 
Patrick  emigrated  from  Glasgow  in 
1863.  crossing  the  Atlantic  in  the  ship 
"Cynosure,"  and  the  plains  by  the 
usual  ox-team  method,  arriving  in 
Salt  Lake  City  on  Oct.  4th  of  the  same 
year.  During  the  whole  journey  he- 
made  himself  generally  useful  to  the 
Saints  composing  the  company,  whose 
chaplain  was  Pres.  Joseph  F.  Smith, 
then  a  young  Elder  returning  from  his 
first  mission  to  Europe.  In  1864  Robert 
was  ordained  a  Seventy  and  set  apart 
as  a  member  of  the  24th  quorum  of 
Seventy,  by  Elder  Edward  Martin;  in 
1878  he  was  set  apart  as  a  member  of 
the  council  of  the  same  quorum.  He 
acted  for  many  years  as  a  teacher  in 
the  20th  Ward,  Salt  Lake  Cityt  where 
he  resided,  but  at  the  reorganization  of 
the  18th  Ward  Bishopric,  Sunday,  July 
14,  1878,  when  Orson  F.  Whitney  was 
chosen  Bishop  of  that  Ward,  Brother 
Patrick  was  ordained  a  High  Priest 
and  set  apart  as  first  counselor  to 
Bishop  Whitney.  He  was  ordained  by 
Apostle  George  Q.  Cannon,  assisted  by 
others.  From  Oct.  24,  1881,  until  July 
7,  1883,  Brother  Patrick  occupied  the 
position  of  Acting  Bishop,  Brother 
Whitney  being  absent  during  that  time 
on  a  mission  in  Europe.  It  was 
during  this  period  that  the  handsome 
brick  chapel  of  the  18th  Ward  was 
completed,  paid  for  and  dedicated,  the 
burden  of  the  construction  and  general 
management  of  the  work  resting  upon 
the  Acting  Bishop.  He  subsequently 
superintended  the  erection  of  the  In- 
dependent School  house  belonging  to 
the  Ward.  On  the  15th  of  March.  1882, 
he  was  elected  by  the  city  council  of 
Salt  Lake  City  to  the  office  of  alder- 
man from  the  fourth  precinct,  to  fill  a 
vacancy  caused  by  the  resignation  of 
David  O.  Calder.  Feb.  11,  1884.  he  was 
re-elected,  by  the  popular  vote,  to  the 
same  office,  and  was  again  elected  in 
February,  1886.  In  March,  1888,  he  was 
appointed  by  the  city  council  to  the  of- 


BIOGRAPHICAL,   ENCYCLOPEDIA. 


667 


flee  of  city  sexton,  and  while  holding 
that  position  made  many  improvements 
in  the  city  cemetery,  putting  in  a  sys- 
tem of  water-works  and  planting  700 
sliade  trees.  His  latest  term  in  the  city 
council  was  from  January,  1898,  to  Jan- 
uary, 1900,  he  having  been  elected  on 
the  non-partizan  ticket  headed  by 
Mayor  John  Clark.  Though  never 
apprenticed  to  any  trade.  Brother  Pat- 
rick followed  for  many  years,  after  his 
arrival  in  Utah,  the  vocation  of  car- 
penter and  builder,  having  a  natural 
aptitude  in  that  direction,  with  strong 
leanings  towards  architecture.  Since 
the  year  1888  he  has  been  engaged  ex- 
clusively in  merchandising.  During  the 
whole  of  his  experience  as  Bishop's 
counselor  he  has  rendered  valuable  ser- 
vice in  caring  for  the  Ward  poor.  His 
latest  public  work  was  as  chairman  of 
the  building  committee  having  immedi- 
ate charge  of  the  splendid  improvement 
recently  made  to  the  Ward  chapel,  a 
work  reflecting  great  credit  upon  him 
and  all  connected  with  it.  During  the 
entire  time  of  his  residence  in  Utah 
Brother  Patrick  has  been  absent  from 
home  but  once,  in  the  sense  of  taking 
an  extended  journey.  This  was  in 
May,  1891,  when,  accompanied  by  his 
daughter  Mary  Ellen,  he  took  a  trip  to 
Europe,  visiting  his  native  Scotland 
and  securing  genealogical  data  for  sub- 
sequent labors  in  the  Temple.  He  re- 
turned in  September  of  the  same  year. 
Brother  Patrick  Is  the  father  of  ten 
children,  six  of  whom  are  living;  these 
are  named  as  follows:  Robert,  Rachel, 
William  G..  Laura  (Mrs.  Silas  E.  Co- 
rey), Joseph  H.  and  Eliza  Maud.  Those 
dead  are  his  eldest  child,  Elizabeth 
(Mrs.  Alexander  Pringle),  Sarah, 
Martha  and  Mary  Ellen  (Mrs.  Orvin 
Morris).  Robert  Patrick  is  above  the 
ordinary  height,  stoutly  built,  of  medi- 
um complexion,  and  with  darkish  grey 
eyes.  The  original  color  of  his  hair 
was  brown.  He  has  clear  perceptions, 
arrives  quickly  at  conclusions,  Is  en- 
ergetic, active  and  progressive.  He  is 
open,  fearless  and  frank,  even  to 
bluntness,  moderated,  however,  by  the 
most  kindly  Impulses. — O.  F  .W. 

BARTON,  William  Bell,  second 
counselor  to  Bishop  Orson  F.  Whitney 
of  the  18th  Ward,  Salt  Lake  City,  was 
born  July  21,  1836,  at  Sutton  Mill,  on 
the  Douglas  river,  near  Wigan,  Lanca- 
.shire,  England,  son  of  John  Barton  and 


Elizabeth  Bell.  He  was  the  first-born 
of  his  father's  family  and  a  twin 
brother  of  James  Barton,  now  a  resi- 
dent of  the  Twenty-first  Ward,  Salt 
Lake  City.  William's  mother  became 
acquainted  with  the  Latter-day  Saints 
In  1840,  and  he  began  going  to  their 
meetings  as  early  as  1841.  His  first 
serious  impressions  regarding  the  Lat- 
ter-day Work  were  experienced  in  1844. 
when  he  was  a  little  over  eight  years 
old.  They  were  caused  by  the  recital 
by  a  Sister  Charlson  (who  had  lived  in 
Nauvoo,  III.)  of  her  experiences  in 
America,    and    her    description    of    the 


martyrdom  of  the  Prophet  Joseph 
Smith.  He  was  baptized  by  Elder 
Samuel  Sharrett,  Dec.  11,  1848,  at  St. 
Helens,  in  Lancashire;  was  ordained  a 
Deacon  May  25,  1852,  and  ordained  a 
Priest  Sept.  26,  1853,  when  he  also  was 
called  into  active  service,  and  acted  as 
clerk  of  the  branch.  Aug.  13,  1856.  he 
was  ordained  to  the  office  of  an  Elder 
by  James  Marsden.  Soon  after  this 
latter  ordination  he  was  called  to  labor 
as  presiding  Elder  In  the  Newton 
branch  of  the  Liverpool  conference.  He 
was  successful  in  his  labors,  and  by 
the  blessings  of  the  Lord  he  enjoyed 
the  privilege  of  adding  some  members 
to  the  Church.  He  hired  a  hall  in  the 
village   of   Haydock.    in   which    to   hold 


668 


LATTER-DAY    SAINT 


meetings,  but  after  fitting  the  place  up 
for   worship   the   Saints   were    only   al- 
lowed   to   use   it   three     Sabbath   days, 
when  they  were  informed  that  the  hall 
could  not  be  used  any  longer  for  reli- 
gious  purposes,    as   the     owner   of   the 
building  had   received   a   notice   to   the 
effect    that    if    he    allowed    any    more 
meetings   to   be   held    there,     the   lease 
would  be  cancelled     and    the  property 
taken  from  him.      On  reading  the  lease 
Brother  Barton  found  that  one  of  the 
conditions  read  as  follows:       "No  land- 
lord  shall  be  permitted   to   let  or  rent 
any  room,  house  or  cottage,  to  any  dis- 
senters from  the  Protestant  church  un- 
der penalty  of     confiscation."       March 
13,  1860,  he  married  Miss  Ellen  Birchall, 
of  St.   Helens,   and   sailed   from   Liver- 
pool on  the  ship  "Underwriter,"  with  a 
company  of  Saints,  March  30,  1860,  and 
arrived  in  New   York  May  1st.       Pro- 
ceeding  on    their     way     they    reached 
Florence,  Neb.,  whence,  after  a  stay  of 
five  weeks,     the     company  commenced 
the  journey  across  the  plains  June  17, 
1860,  in  an  ox-train  under  the  captaincy 
of  James  D.  Ross,  which  arrived  in  Salt 
Lake  City  Sept.  3,  1860.  Brother  Barton 
was  ordained   a  Seventy  Feb.   16,   1861, 
by  Francis  Piatt  and  became  identified 
with  the  62nd  quorum  of  Seventy.    He 
was  appointed  first  lieutenant  In  com- 
pany G,  4th  battalion,  33rd  regiment  of 
infantry,  Nauvoo  Legion,  Sept.  23.  1867. 
In  the  spring  of  1873,  he  was  called  to 
fill  a  mission     to     the     San   Francisco 
Mountains,  in  Arizona.     He  made  con- 
siderable  preparation    for   the   journey, 
but,,  in  consequence  of  the  unusual  high 
water  In  the  Colorado  river  that  year, 
the  whole  company  was  released  for  the 
time  being.      In  the  latter  part  of  May, 
1874,  he  was  called  to  go  on  a  mission 
to   Great   Britain.       He   left   Salt   Lake 
City  for  that  country,  June  10,  1874,  and 
arrived  in  Liverpool  June  28,  1874.      He 
was  appointed  to  labor  as  a  traveling 
Elder  in  the  Liverpool  conference,  and 
later   was   called    to   preside   over   said 
conference,   which   position  he  success- 
fully filled  till  he  was  released  from  his 
mission.       He  returned  home  Sept.     10, 
1876.      The  following  year  (July  3,  1877) 
Brother  Barton  was  ordained  a     High 
Priest   under   the   hands   of   Daniel     H. 
Wells,   and   set   apart  as   second   coun- 
selor to   Bishop   Lorenzo   D.   Young,   of 
the  18th  Ward,  Salt  Lake  City.      About 
one  year  afterwards  Bishop  Young  re- 


signed, and  on  July  14,  1878,  the  Ward 
was  reorganized,  Orson  F.  Whitney  be- 
ing ordained  Bishop  and  Brother  Bar- 
ton set  apart  as  his  second  counselor, 
under  the  hands  of  Apostle  Brigham 
Young.  Elder  Barton  is  still  faithfully 
laboring  in  that  capacity.  From  1877 
to  1893  he  was  employed  as  book-keeper 
in  the  mercantile  house  of  the  late 
Samuel  P.  Teasdel,  and  since  June,  1900, 
he  has  served  as  a  clerk  in  the  Presid- 
ing Bishop's  Office,  Salt  Lake  City. 

PARK  Hamilton  Gray,  second  coun- 
selor in  the  presidency  of  the  High 
Priests'  quorum  of  the  Salt  Lake  Stake 
of  Zion,  is  a  son  of  Samuel  Park  and 
Isabella  Gray,  and  was  born  Ndv.  25, 
1826.       He   received   the  fulness  of     the 


gospel  at  Kilbirnie,  Ayrshire,  Scotland, 
where  he  was  baptized  in  November, 
1840.  Soon  after  his  baptism  he  was 
ordained  to  the  oflUce  of  a  Teacher,three 
months  later  to  that  of  a  Priest  and 
afterwards  to  that  of  an  Elder.  He 
was  also  appointed  to  preside  over  the 
Klbirnle  branch  of  the  Church,  a  posi- 
tion which  he  occupied  until  he  emigrat- 
ed to  Utah,  together  with  a  company 
of  Saints,  which  sailed  from  Liverpool, 
England,  In  the  ship  "North  Atlantic," 
Sept.  4,  1854.  On  the  voyage  he  had 
actual  charge  of  the  Saints  on  board, 
as  the  president  appointed  over  the 
company,  David  Sudworth,  was  serious- 
ly ill.  Two  years  after  his  arrival  In 
Utah  Elder  Park  entered  the  service 
of  Pres.   Brigham   Young  and   was   his 


BIOGRAPHICAL,    ENCYCLOPEDIA. 


669 


business   manager     most     of   the   time 
from  1852  till  May,  1869,  during    which 
time  he  was     closely     connected     with 
most  of  the  enterprises  of  that  master 
mind  in  developing-  the  resources  of  the 
country.      Thus  he  assisted  in  opening 
up  canyons  north,  east  and  west  of  the 
city,    building    flouring   and    saw-mills, 
constructing   the   first     overland     tele- 
graph line  spanning  the  continent  from 
the  Atlantic  to  the  Pacific,  etc.      In  the 
spring  of  1869    he  was  called  on  a  mis- 
sion to  Great  Britain;   he  left  home  in 
May  and  arrived  in  Liverpool,  England, 
June  9th  of  that  year;   labored  a     few 
months  as   a  traveling  Elder   in   Scot- 
land and  subsequently  presided  over  the 
Glasgow     conference,       including      the 
whole  of  Scotland.      He  returned  home 
in  charge  of  a  large  company  of  Saints, 
which    sailed    from    Liverpool    July    12, 
1871,  and  arrived  in  Salt  Lake  City  Aug. 
4th   following.       Later    in   1871   he   was 
appointed  to  act  as  second  counselor  to 
Bishop  Edwin  D.  Woolley,   in  the  13th 
Ward,  which  position  he  filled  till  1876, 
when,   being   on   a   second   mission     to 
Great  Britain,  he  resigned.      At  the  re- 
quest of  Pres.   Brigham  Young  he  be- 
came business  manager  for  his  son  Jos. 
A.   Young,   in   which   position   he   com- 
bined   farming,    coal-mining,    railroad- 
ing, etc.      Being  called  on  another  mis- 
sion to  Great  Britain,  he  left  home  in 
October  and  arrived  in  Liverpool,  Eng- 
land, Nov.  12,  1875.      He  succeeded  El- 
der David  McKenzie  in  the  presidency 
of  the  Scotch     mission,     and     returned 
home  in  charge  of  another  company  of 
Saints,   which     sailed     from     Liverpool 
Sept.  19th  and  arrived  in  Salt  Lake  City 
Oct.  6,  1877.      Since  his  return  from  his 
last  mission  he  has  been  in  the  employ 
of  Z.  C.  M.   I.       In  his  missionary  ex- 
perience abroad  Elder  Park     has  wit- 
nessed many  marvelous  manifestations 
of  the  power  of  God  in  the  healing  of 
the   sick,   the   rebuking  of   evil   spirits, 
and  has  even  seen  the  dead  raised  un- 
der the  administrations  of  the  Elders. 
At  home  he  has  been  an  active  laborer 
in  the  "Ward  Y.  M.  M.  L  A.  and  Sunday 
school.      For  eight  years  he  labored  as 
a   home   missionary   in    the    Salt    Lake 
Stake,   where  he  also,   by  appointment 
of  the  late  Pres.  Joseph  Young,  labored 
for  a  number  of  years  among  the  mass 
quorums    of    Seventies    as    their   presi- 
dent.      From   1882   to  1891   he  acted   as 
clerk  of  the  Thirteenth  Ward.      When 


the  Bishopric  of  the  13th  Ward  was  re- 
organized, after  the  death  of  Bishop 
Millen  Atwood,  in  1891,  Hamilton  G. 
Park  was  ordained  a  High  Priest  by 
Pres.  Joseph  F.  Smith  and  set  apart  as 
first  counselor  to  Bishop  Nelson  A. 
Empey,  which  position  he  held  for  nine 
years,  or  until  1900,  when  he  was  called 
to  the  position  of  second  counselor  in 
the  presidency  of  the  High  Priests  quo- 
rum in  the  Salt  Lake  Stake  of  Zion, 
which  office  he  still  holds.  Elder  Park 
is  one  of  Zion's  most  faithful  and  trust- 
worthy sons;  his  zeal  and  integrity  in 
the  interest  of  God's  cause  has  been 
continuous  and  unfaltering,  and  his 
influence  for  good  has  been  felt  in 
every  locality  where  he  has  resided, 
and  on  all  his  missions  both  at  home 
and  abroad.  As  an  employee  for  many 
years  in  Z.  C.  M.  I.,  he  has  been  and 
is  at  the  present  time  entrusted  with 
some  of  the  most  responsible  duties  of 
a  financial  nature  in  that  institution.  A 
few  years  ago  he  changed  his  place  of 
residence  from  the  13th  to  the  18th 
Ward. 

PYPER,  George  Dollinger,  a  prom- 
inent Elder  of  the  Eighteenth  Ward, 
Salt  Lake  City,  is  a  son  of  the  late 
Bishop  Alexander  C.  Pyper  and  Chris- 
tiana Dollinger,  and  was  born  in  Salt 
Lake  City,  Utah,  Nov.  21,  1860.  He  was 
baptized  when  eight  years  of  age,  offi- 
ciated for  some  time  as  a  Deacon  and 
was  ordained  to  the  office  of  an  Elder 
in  1883.  In  that  year,  also,  he  was 
married  to  Miss  Emmaretta  S.  Whit- 
ney. Since  his  early  youth  he  has  taken 
an  active  part  in  public  life.  He  has 
also  labored  diligently  in  Ward  capa- 
cities, and  has  always  been  a  very  en- 
ergetic Sunday  School  worker.  He  has 
occupied  positions  as  general  secretary 
of  the  Y.  M.  M.  I.  A.,  secretary  of  the 
First  Council  of  Seventies  and  secreta- 
ry of  the  Deseret  Sunday  School  Union, 
and  he  is  still  serving  in  the  last  named 
position,  being  also  a  member  of  the 
Deseret  Sunday  School  Board  and  man- 
ager of  the  "Juvenile  Instructor."  In 
1896  he  filled  a  special  mission  to  the 
United  States  in  company  with  Elder 
Brigham  H.  Roberts.  For  some  years, 
as  a  boy,  under  the  direction  of  his 
father,  he  worked  successfully  in  the 
silk  industry.  He  was  for  some  time 
in  the  employ  of  Z.  C.  M.  I.,  and  from 
1875   to  1882     was     clerk     of  the   police 


670 


LATTER-DAY    SAINT 


court.  He  was  elected  a  justice  of  the 
peace  in  1884,  and  while  holding-  that 
oftice  found  time  to  take  a  course  of 
study  at  the  Deseret  University.  He 
held  the  office  of  alderman  and  police 
judge  from  1886  to  1890.  Among  other 
responsible  positions  in  the  community 
which  he  has  held  are  the  following: 
Manager  of  the  "Contributor"  maga- 
zine in  1890-91;  assistant  secretary  and 
later  secretary  of  the  Deseret  Agricul- 
tural and  Manufacturing  Society;  while 
holding  this  position  he  has  taken  part 
in  the  management  of  several  success- 


ful Territorial  fairs.  In  May,  1893,  he 
was  chosen  by  the  D.  A.  and  M.  Society 
to  go  to  the  World's  Fair  in  charge  of 
a  portion  of  the  Territorial  exhibit,  and 
he  remained  in  Chicago  until  the  close 
of  the  exposition.  In  1897  he  prepared 
as  special  commissioner  a  State  exhib- 
it for  the  Tennessee  centennial  exposi- 
tion and  spent  eight  months  at  Nash- 
ville. For  the  past  twenty-five  years  he 
has  taken  a  prominent  part  in  musical 
affairs, his  services  and  much  of  his  time 
having  been  given  to  the  public.  Some 
idea  of  the  extent  of  this  service  can 
be  gathered  from  the  fact  that  he  has 
sung  at  upwards  of  one  thousand  funer- 
als of  memt)ers  of  the  Church.  He 
has  Bung  the  leading  tenor  parts  in 
some  twenty  operas,  and  In  1898  he  be- 
came manager  of  the  Salt  Lake  theatre, 
which  has  prospered  under  his  manage- 
ment, and  he  still  holds  that  position. 


WEBBKR,  Thomas  George  a  promi- 
nent Elder  of  the  Eighteenth  Ward, 
Salt  Lake  City,  and  superintendent  of 
Z.  C.  M.  I.,  is  the  son  of  Thos.  B.  Web- 
ber and  Charlotte  Burgh  and  was  born 
at  Exeter,  Devonshire, England,  Sept.  17, 
1836.  He  emigrated  to  America  in  1857 
and  engaged  in  the  business  of  a  civil 
engineer.  He  served  in  the  Union 
army  through  the  Peninsular,  Mary- 
land and  Pennsylvania  campaigns,  and 
came  to  Utah  in  the  winter  of  1863, 
where  he  was  baptized  Feb.  22,  1864.  He 
assisted  in  organizing  and  publishing 
the  first  daily  newspaper  in  Salt  Lake 
City,  "The  Telegraph,"  the  first  number 
of  which  appeared  July  4,  1864.  He  was 
ordained  an  Elder  July  1,  1865,  and  In 
the  same  year  was  commissioned  by 
Gov.  Doty  lieutenant-colonel  and  adju- 
tant of  the  second  brigade  of  Utah 
militia.  In  April,  1869,  he  went  to  Og- 
ilen  and  assisted  in  publishing  the  first 
daily  paper  in  that  city  on  the  morning 
after  the  last  rail  of  the  great  transcon- 
tinental railway  was  laid  on  the  Pro- 
montory. In  June,  1869,  Pres.  Brigham 
Young  offered  him  a  position  in  Z.  C.  M. 
I.,  which  was  acepted.  In  1871  he  was 
elected  secretary  and  subsequently  sec- 
retary and  treasurer  of  that  institution, 
which  offices  he  held  until  they  were  di- 
vided, when  he  was  elected  secretary. 
In  October,  1876,  he  was  ordained  a 
Seventy  and  set  apart  for  a  mission  to 
Great  Britain.  He  returned  from  this 
mission  in  December,  1877,  being  called 
home  to  settle  up  the  estate  of  Pres. 
Brigham  Young.  In  1888.  after  the 
death  of  General  Horace  S.  Eldredge, 
he  was  elected  superintendent  or  gen- 
eral manager  of  Z.  C.  M.  I.,  which  office 
he  holds  at  the  present  time.  For  two 
years — 1884-85 — he  served  as  city  coun- 
cilor in  the  Salt  Lake  City  municipali- 
ty, and  for  four  years  (1886-89)  he 
served  as  alderman  from  the  second 
municipal  ward,  Salt  Lake  City.  In 
June,  1883,  together  with  others,  he  or- 
ganized the  Zion's  Benefit  Building  So- 
ciety and  was  elected  its  first  president, 
which  office  he  has  continued  to  hold 
ever  since.  He  has  been  a  director  In 
Zion's  Savings  Bank  and  Trust  Com- 
pany, and  the  Home  Fire  Insurance 
Company  and  president  of  the  Utah 
Jobbers  Association,  and  the  Salt  Lake 
City  Public  Library  from  their  or- 
ganization. He  is  also  second  vice 
president  of  the  Utah  Light  and  Power 


BIOGRAPHICAL    ENCYCLOPEDIA. 


671 


Company,  and  is  a  director  in  the  Utah 
Sugar  Company,  the  Postal  Telegraph 
Company  and  Z.  C.  M.  I. 

BURTON,  Charles  Samuel,  a  prom- 
inent Elder  in  the  Eighteenth  Ward, 
Salt    Lake    City,    Utah,    is    the    p  m    of 


Bank  of  Utah,  Provo  Woolen  Mills  Co., 
Salt  Lake  Livery  and  Transfer  Co.,  He- 
ber  J.  Grant  and  Co.  (Insurance),  Lehl 
Commercial  and  Savings  Bank,  Home 
Fire  Insurance  Co. .Consolidated  Wagon 
&  Machine  Co.,  Salt  Lake  Theatre,  etc., 
and  is  interested  in  a  number  of  other 
business  enterprises.  In  1896  he  was 
appointed  quartermaster-general  on 
Gov.  Heber  M.  Wells'  staff,  which  rank 
he  held  till  1898,  when  he  was  appoint- 
ed adjutant-general  of  Utah,  which 
position  he  still  holds.  His  first  wife 
died  in  England  in  November,  1889,  and 
in  June,  1893,  he  married  Josephine 
Young  Beatie,  daughter  of  Bijhop  Wal- 
ter J.  Beatie,  of  Salt  Lake  City. 

YOUNG,  Richard  Willard,  a  prom- 
inent Elder  in  the  Twentieth  Ward, 
Salt  Lake  City,  is  the  son  of  Joseph  An- 
gell  Young  and  Margaret  Whitehead, 
and  was  born  in  Salt  Lake  City,  Utah, 
April  19,  1858.  His  education  was 
gained  under  the  tuition  of  Mrs.  Mild- 
red E.  Randall,  Karl  G.  Maeser,  O.  H. 
Riggs  and  others,  and  also  at  the  Des- 
eret  University.  During  1871-73  he 
worked  in  the  ofRce  of  the  Utah  Central 
Railway,  and  in  1873-74  he  served  as 
telegraph  operator  in  Richfield,  Sevier 
county.  From  1874  to  1878  he  taught 
school,  worked  as  a  carpenter  and  was 
employed  on  railroads.      In  1878  he  was 


Robert  T.  Burton  and  Maria  Haven, 
and  was  born  in  Salt  Lake  City,  Utah, 
May  18,  1855.  He  was  educated  in  the 
public  schools  and  in  the  Deseret  Uni- 
versity. From  1875  to  1877  he  labored 
as  a  missionary  in  Australia.  In  June, 
1878,  he  married  Julia  Young,  a  daugh- 
ter of  Pres.  Brigham  Young.  He  was 
ordained  an  Elder  in  1871,  and  a  Seven- 
ty in  1875.  In  business  affairs  Bro. 
Burton  has  always  taken  an  active  in- 
terest. In  1882  he  became  a  member 
of  the  firm  of  Hardy  Bros.  &  Burton. 
In  1885  he  became  the  business  manager 
of  the  "Salt  Lake  Herald,"  which  posi- 
tion he  held  for  a  period  of  two  years, 
after  which  he  took  charge  of  the  Salt 
Lake  Theater  as  manager,  serving  suc- 
cessfully in  that  capacity  for  ten  years. 
He  became  assistant  cashier  of  the 
State  Bank  of  Utah  in  1895  and,  later, 
accepted  the  office  of  cashier  of  that 
institution,  which  position  he  Still  oc- 
lupies.  Bro.  Burton  is  a  director  in 
the  following  business  concerns 


^ 

^^^ 

■ 

-. 

; 

appointed  a  cadet  to  the  U.  S.  Military 

Academy  at  West  Point.  He  graduated 

State  in  1882,  and  for  six  years  served  as  lieu- 


672 


LATTER-DAY    SAINT 


tenant    of    the    3rd    and    5th    regiments, 
U.  S.  artillery,  and  as  captain  and  act- 
ing judge  advocate  (on  the  staff  of  Gen- 
eral W.  S.  Hancock).  In  1884  he  gradu- 
ated from  the  law  school  of  Columbia 
College,   New  York  City,   and  was  ad- 
mitted to  the  bar  of  the  State  of  New 
York.      He  wrote  a  work  on  "Mobs  and 
the  Military"    in  1887.       In   1888   he   re- 
signed from  the  army,  his  resignation 
taking  effect  April,  1889,  since  which  he 
has   been   practicing  law   in   Salt   Lake 
City.       From   1890  to  1892  he  served  as 
a  member  of  the  city  council,  and  from 
1S91  to  1895  he  was  a  member     of     the 
board  of  education,  serving  as  its  vice 
president.       In  1894  he  was  made     bri- 
gadier-general,   commanding     the   Na- 
tional   Guard    of   Utah.       He  was     the 
candidate   of   the   Democratic   party   in 
1S95  for  judge  of  the  Supreme  court  of 
Utah.      During  1894-96  he  was  manager 
of   the    "Salt   Lake   Herald,"   and     was 
chairman    of     the     code    commmission 
which    prepared    the    Revised    Statutes 
of  Utah  in  1896-97.      At  the  outbreak  of 
the      Spanish-American      war.       Elder 
Young  enlisted  as  a  volunteer,  and    he 
v/as  made  captain  of  Battery  A,  Utah 
Light     Artillery,       May     4,  1898.       Two 
months  later  (July  12,  1898),  he  was  ap- 
pointed major,  commanding  Utah  Light 
Artillery.       As   a   soldier  Major  Young 
made  an  excellent  record,  participating 
in  the  capture  of  Manila  and  in  about 
twenty-five   other   engagements   in   the 
Spanish-American  war  and  the  Philip- 
pino  Insurrection.      From  May,  1899,  to 
June,  1901,   he  served  as  associate  jus- 
tice and     president     of      the     criminal 
branch    of    the    Supreme    court    of    the 
Philippine  Islands.      All  these  positions 
he  filled  with  credit  and  fidelity.       He 
was  appointed  by  President     Theodore 
Roosevelt  to  serve  as  a  member  of  the 
board  of  visitors  to  attend  the  annual 
examination  at  the  U.  S.  Military  Aca- 
demy, West  Point,  in  1902.      In  Church 
affairs  Elder  Young  has  always     been 
active.       He   has   served   as  a  member 
of  the  general  board  of  Y.  M.  M.  I.  A., 
and  is  at  present  a  member  of  the  coun- 
cil of  the  13th  quorum  of  Seventy.  Sept. 
5,    1882,    he   married    Minerva   Richards 
and   has   a   family   of   seven   children — 
five  daughters  and  two  sons. 

RALEIGH,  Alonzo  Hazelton,  sec- 
ond Bishop  of  the  Nineteenth  "Ward, 
Salt  Lake  City,  Utah,  was  the  son  of 
James   Lane   Raleigh    and    Susan     Mc- 


Coy and  was  born  at  Francistown, 
Hillsborough  county,  New  Hampshire, 
Nov.  7,  1818.  Bro.  Raleigh  wrote  the 
following  brief  life  sketch  just  prior  to 
his  death:  "I  attended  school  for  a 
few  years  until  I  had  reached  the  age 
of  eight  years,  after  which  I  worked  on 
a  farm  until  fourteen,  when  I  went  as 
an  apprentice  to  learn  the  mason  trade, 
at  which  I  worked  from  fourteen  to  six- 
teen hours  per  day  in  the  summer,  that 
being  the  custom  of  the  country.  My 
trade  was  mostly  learned  in  Newhamp- 
shire,  but  I  finished  in  Boston,  Mass. 
I  also  worked  at  it  a  part  of  two  sum- 
mers in  New  York.  The  winter  of 
1839-40  I  spent  in  Portsmouth,  N.  H.,  in 
study.  I  returned  to  Boston  in  the 
spring  of  1840,  where  I  took  contracts 
and  carried  on^  the  mason  business  suc- 
cessfully. In  the  spring  of  1842,  I  heard 
the  gospel  preached;   I  believed  it,  and 


embraced  it,  because  it  was  true. 
Father  Freeman  Nickerson  was  the 
first  Elder  I  ever  heard,  and  the  second 
one  was  Geo.  J.  Adams,  who  baptized 
me  in  July,  1842.  Prior  to  my  bap- 
tism, I  had  investigated  Catholicism, 
together  with  many  of  the  Protestant- 
isms of  the  United  States,  without  ob- 
taining any  convictions  of  their  truth. 
Aug.  17,  1842,  I  took  Mary  Ann  Tabor, 
daughter  of  John  and  Mary  B.  Tabor, 
of  Alfred,  York  county,  Maine,  to  wife. 
I  returned  with  her  to  Boston  and  con- 
tinued in  business;  shortly  after  this,  I 
was  ordained  a  Teacher  in  the  Boston 
branch  of  the  Church.  We  started  for 
the  west  May  1,   1843,  and   traveled  by 


BIOGRAPHICAL    ENCYCLOPEDIA. 


673 


train,    canalboat    and    steamboat,    until 
we  landed  at  Nauvoo,  Hancock  county, 
111.      Here  I  purchased  a  house  and  lot, 
and  went  to  work  at  my  trade,  enjoyed 
g-ood    health,    and     worked     hard.       In 
those  days     mechanics      and     laborers 
worked  from  sun  up  to  sun  down;  one 
hour  for  breakfast  and  the  same  for  din- 
ner. I  took  stock  in  the  Music  Hall,  Ma- 
PUB  'll'BH  IPUnOO   .S8.IJU9A3S   'll^H  oiuos 
all  public  institutions  and  enterprises; 
including  the  Nauvoo  House,  the     face 
brick-work   of    which    I    superintended, 
and  laid  with  my  other  work    the  north 
half  of  the  west  front,   at  the  request 
of   Bro.    George    A.    Smith,    one   of    the 
building  committee.       I  also  built  sev- 
eral brick  houses  in  the  city  of  Nauvoo. 
About   this   time,    I   was   made  a   York 
Mason;    I  attained  to   the  master's  de- 
gree, attended  a  course  of  lectures,  and 
assisted  in  working  the  lodge  until  we 
closed  in  that  country.       I  joined     the 
Nauvoo   Legion,   and   held   a  first  lieu- 
tenant's commission  from  the  governor 
of   Illinois,    and   did    duty    under   Lieu- 
tenant-Gen. Joseph   Smith.       My     wife 
Mary  Ann  Tabor  died  at  Nauvoo,  Oct. 
27,   1843,   aged   21   years,   and   I   took   to 
wife  Caroline  Lucy  Curtis,  daughter  of 
Jacob    and    Sophronia    Curtis,    Feb.    22, 
1844;    she   bore   me   one   son   and     three 
daughters  and   died   March  26,    1853,   at 
Salt  Lake  City.       After  the  first  year, 
I  did  not  enjoy  good  health  while  liv- 
ing in  Illinois,   as  billious  fever,  chills, 
ague,   etc.,   prevailed   at   that   time.       I 
received    a    patriarchal    blessing   under 
the   hands    of   Hyrum    Smith,    at   Nau- 
voo, 111.,  Nov.  28,  1843.      I  had  made  his 
acquaintance  in  Boston,  Mass.,  and  re- 
newed  it   in   Nauvoo,    and   had   several 
interviews   and    pleasant   conversations 
with  him  in  1843  and  1844.      I  also  made 
the  acquaintance  of  Joseph  the  Prophet 
a  year  previous  to  his  martyrdom,  and 
lived   a   near  neighbor   to     him   during 
that  period.     I  know     him     to     be     a 
Prophet  of  God  by  the  same  power  and 
upon  the  same  principle  that  Peter  the 
Apostle  knew  that  Jesus  the  Christ  was 
the  Son  of  God.      And  further,  I  know, 
and  hereby  bear  my  testimony,  that  the 
Church   of   Christ    (in    its   order   of   or- 
ganization   ,and     principles)      was     re- 
vealed  to  Joseph   the   Prophet   of   God, 
by  Jesus  Christ,  and  that  the  kingdom 
of  God  is  now  in  process  of  being  es- 
tablished.      In   1844,    I  was   ordained   a 
Seventy  under  the  hands  of  Pres.   Ja- 
cobs and  became  a  member  of  the  13th 

Vol.  1,  No.  43. 


quorum.  In  the  winter  of  184.5-46,  the 
Temple  being  so  far  finished  that  ordi- 
nances could  be  performed  in  it,  my- 
self and  wife  Caroline  received  our  en- 
dowments therein,  Jan.  12,  1846.  After 
the  last  named  date,  we  commenced  in 
earnest  to  prepai-e  to  leave  for  the 
west,  and,  together  with  my  wife  and 
infant  daughter  Caroline  C,  I  started 
with  an  outfit  of  one  team,  wagon, tent, 
cow,  etc.,  May  10,  1846,  and  traveled  to 
the  Missouri  river  in  the  Pottawattamie 
nation  of  Indians,  a  distance  of  about 
250  miles,  where  we  \'intered.  In  the 
spring  of  1847,  together  with  several 
others,  I  went  to  St.  Joseph,  Mo.,  and 
worked  at  my  trade.  I  made  a  fair 
outfit  for  the  mountains,  returned  to 
camp  in  the  Pottawattamie  nation  for 
winter,  was  made  marshal  of  a  cer- 
tain district  of  country,  and  had  the 
oversight  of  the  same  while  we  re- 
mained there.  In  the  spring  of  1848, 
we  took  up  our  journey  and  traveled 
in  Pres.  Heber  C.  Kimball's  company 
across  the  plains  to  Great  Salt  Lake 
valley,  where  we  arrived  in  September, 
I  located  my  family  in  a  dugout  on  Mill 
creek,  and  immediately  went  to  work 
building  some  adobie  rows  for  Pres. 
Heber  C.  Kimball  and  Bishop  Newell 
K.  Whitney,  continuing  this  labor  until 
the  winter  stopped  me.  During  the 
winter  I  employed  my  time  in  reading, 
and  preparing  materials  for  building  a 
house  for  my  family  in  the  spring.  In 
184i<  and  1850  I  conducted  my  building 
business  successfully.  In  the  spring  oi 
1851  I  was  called  upon  by  Pres.  Brig- 
ham  Young  to  take  charge  of  the  ma- 
son department  of  the  Public  Works, 
and  consequently  closed  up  my  private 
building  matters  and  concentrated  my 
whole  energy  for  the  good  of  the  said 
works.  I  continued  this  work  till  it 
was  suspended,  during  the  so-called 
Buchanan  war  and  our  "move"  south. 
I  was  present  when  the  corner  stone  of 
the  Temple  was  laid,  April  6,  1853.  May 
7,  1851,  I  was  made  a  president  in  the 
5th  quorum  of  Seventy,  and  on  the  13th 
of  July  following,  I  was  ordained  a 
High  Priest  by  Edward  Hunter,  and  set 
apart  as  counselor  to  Bishop  James 
Hendricks,  of  the  Nineteenth  Ward. 
Salt  Lake  City.  lo  1853  I  was  made 
superintendent  of  and  trustee  for  the 
erection  of  the  19th  Ward  portion  of 
the  city  wall.  When  the  Deseret  Dra- 
matic Association  was  organized  in  1851 
by  Pres.   Brigham  Young  for  the  pur- 

Oct.  26,  1901. 


674 


LATTER-DAY    SAINT 


pose  of  providing  our  own  amusements 
in  that  line,  and  in  the  hope  of  raising 
the  drama  to  a  higher  standard,  he  ap- 
pointed me  to  preside  over  it,  which  I 
did  for  several  years.  I  was  called  to 
be  a  Bishop  at  the  April  conference, 
1856,  and  was  ordained  to  that  office 
by  Bishop  Edward  Hunter  May  6,  1856, 
and  set  apart,  to  preside  over  the  19th 
Ward.  Several  years  later  I  was  also 
called  to  preside  over  the  Brighton 
Ward.  May  24,  1874,  when  the  United 
Order  of  the  19th  Ward  was  organized 
under  th.'i  direction  of  the  First  Presi- 
dency of  the  Church,  I  was,  by  unani- 
mous vote,  made  president  of  said  or- 
der. I  was  also  elected  president  of 
the  Brighton  branch  of  the  United  Or- 
der, June  14,  1874.  I  was  appointed  al- 
derman of  the  3rd  municipal  ward,  of 
Salt  Lake  City,  Sept.  12,  1854,  and  at 
the  next  election,  March  5,  1855,  I  was 
elected  to  the  same  office,  and  re-elect- 
ed for  several  terms  theieafter,  serv- 
ing in  all  twnty-eight  years.  I  was 
elected  mayor  pro-tem  of  Salt  Lake 
City  May  29,  1857, to  act  during  the  tem- 
porary absence  of  Abraham  O.  Smoot; 
and  was  elected  justice  of  the  peace  for 
Salt  Lake  City  and  county,  when  it 
was  all  one  precinct  for  judicial  pur- 
poses; and  when  it  was  divided  into 
five  precincts,  I  was  elected  justice  of 
the  piece  several  times  in  the  3rd  pre- 
cinct, and  I  held  that  office  as  well  as 
that  of  alderman  until  February,  1884. 
I  was  made  inspector  of  buildings  for 
Salt  Lake  City,  at  the  time  the  office 
was  created.  March  17,  1860.  At  the 
October  conference  in  1869  I  was  called 
on  a  mission  to  the  New  England 
States,  from  which  I  returned  in  April, 
1870.  In  1876,  by  letter  of  Pres.  Brig- 
ham  Young,  I  was  called  to  assist  in 
opening  and  carrying  on  the  work  of 
the  Temple  at  St.  George.  I  performed 
this  labor  and  returned  to  Salt  Lake 
City  in  the  spring  of  1877.  I  was  re- 
elected to  the  city  council,  and  at  the 
August  election  in  1877,  for  members  to 
the  Territorial  legislature,  I  was  elect- 
ed to  the  legislative  council,  and  served 
a  term  of  two  years.  PYom  Jan.  5, 
1878,  to  Dec.  31.  1884.  I  labored  as  a 
home  missionary  in  the  Salt  Lake 
Stake  of  Zion.  Jan.  25,  1883,  I  was 
called  and  ordained  a  Patriarch  in  the 
Church  by  Apostles  Wilford  Woodruff. 
I  was  called  into  the  High  Council  as 
an  alternate  High  Councilor  for  the 
Salt   Lake   Stake  of  Zion,   Feb.   9,   1885. 


My  millitary  duties  commenced  in  Il- 
linois in  the  Nauvoo  Legion,  and  con- 
tinued until  we  left  for  the  west  in  the 
spring  of  1846.  When  we  commenced  to 
be  troubled  with  Indian  depredations 
in  Tooele  county,  I  made  one  march 
under  Col.  George  D.  Grant  to  Skull 
valley,  Tooele  county,  and  also  went 
further  west,  in  company  with  Officers 
Wm.  H.  Kimball,  James  Ferguson,  Or- 
rin  P.  Rockwell  and  others,  at  the  time 
of  what  was  called  the  Utah  war.  I 
had  received  the  appointment  of  adju- 
tant of  the  2nd  regiment,  2nd  brigade, 
1st  division,  of  the  Nauvoo  Legion. 
When  my  regiment  was  called  in  the 
fall  of  1857  the  command  devolved  on 
me,  having  been  elected  major,  and  af- 
ter forwarding  supplies,  etc.,  I  took 
charge  of  the  expedition  when  our  regi- 
ment performed  active  service.  Our 
services  were  confined  to  Echo  canyon 
during  the  entire  month  of  December 
of  that  year,  when  we  returned  to  Salt 
Lake  City,  except  a  small  number  of 
men  who  were  detailed  for  guard.  In 
the  spring  of  1858,  I  started  with  a 
number  of  men  for  Echo  canyon  to 
inspect  the  earth  works  and  stone  bat- 
teries. April  7,  1858.  Gov.  Alfred  Gum- 
ming and  Col.  Thos.  L.  Kane  passed 
through  our  line  for  Salt  Lake  City.  On 
the  13th  I  started  for  Lost  Creek  with 
two  battalions  of  infantry,  and  after 
exploring  in  that  region  of  country  I 
took  the  entire  force  up  the  creek 
twelve  miles  to  build  a  station,  clear 
roads,  etc.,  after  which  I  took  175  men 
four  miles  further  up  the  canyon  to 
build  batteries.  I  was  also  ordered  to 
detail  fifty  men  and  station  them  at 
the  mouth  of  the  canyon  and  send 
twenty-five  to  Echo  canyon,  and  return 
with  the  remainder  to  Salt  Lake  City, 
where  Dr.  Wm.  F.  Anderson,  our  regi- 
mental surgeon, myself  and  several  oth- 
ers, remained  until  the  U.  S.  troops  un- 
der Col.  A.  S.  Johnston  passed  through 
the  city  on  their  way  to  Camp  Floyd. 
After  this  our  families  returned  from 
the  south,  and  I  have  had  but  little  to 
do  in  military  matters  since.  In  the 
winter  of  1858-59  I  was  chosen  to  serve 
on  the  grand  jury  of  the  1st  District 
(now  the  3rd  judicial  district).  The 
jury  consisted  of  one-half  Gentiles,  so- 
called,  and  the  other  half  "Mormons," 
and  of  course  we  had  some  strange  ex- 
periences. I  remember  particularly 
one  member  who  every  little  while 
called  out,  'Now  let  us  proceed    to    in- 


BIOGRAPHICAL    ENCYCLOPEDIA. 


675 


diet  Mr.  Biigham  Young-.'  I  would 
generally  ask,  "For  what?*  and  that 
would  as  a  rule  end  the  matter  for  the 
time  being.  Judge  Sinclair  spent  most 
of  the  winter  hearing  motions  and  ar- 
guments to  disbar  Gen.  Jas.  Ferguson, 
not  forgetting  to  drink  heartily  and  of- 
ten. The  merchants  who  followed  up 
the  army  had  brought  along  a  plenti- 
ful supply  of  old  rye  and  other  mild 
beverages  and  were  fairly  liberal  with 
it,  especially  to  the  court.  In  189.5  I 
served  as  a  member  of  the  constitu- 
tional convention  which  drafted  the 
State  constitution  of  Utah.  My  Tem- 
ple work  extends  over  a  longer  period 
than  any  other  one  special  duty  or  la- 
bor of  the  holy  Priesthood.  It  reaches 
from  the  days  of  Nauvoo  up  to  the 
present  (1901).  My  life  has  been  a 
busy  one,  full  of  cares  and  anxiety;  the 
most  of  it  pleasant  and  agreeable.  I 
ascribe  my  success  in  life  largely  to  my 
early  training  in  the  habits  of  industry 
and  frugality,  the  classification  of 
business,  and  labor,  the  order  of  a 
place  for  everything  and  everything  in 
its  place,  which  seems  to  be  character- 
istic of  that  part  of  the  country  In 
which  I  was  born  and  bred.  By  such 
habits  a  man  may  find  time  to  do  much 
that  without  them  he  would  not  have 
the  spirit  or  disposition  to  perform.  I 
have  been  anxious  to  do  what  I  could 
for  the  benefit  of  humanity,  whether 
there  seemed  to  be  dollars  and  cents  in 
it  or  not,  or  any  earthly  hope  of  reward. 
In  making  this  statement  I  do  not  claim 
to  be  less  selfish  than  other  men,  but 
I  have  simply  had  an  eye  to  future  as 
well  as  present  reward;  consequently 
I  have  kept  busy,  without  exclusive 
regard  to  the  wants  of  the  present  life, 
desiring  more  particularly  to  couple 
pi-esent  and  future  rewards  together, 
and  thereby  make  reasonable  provi- 
sions for  both,  so  far  as  it  lay  in  my 
power."  Bishop  Raleigh  died  at  his 
home  in  Salt  Lake  City  May  13,  1901, 
at  the  ripe  age  of  nearly  eighty-three 
years. 

MORRIS,  Richard  Vaughan,  third 
Bishop  of  the  Nineteenth  Ward,  Salt 
Lake  City,  Utah,  was  born  Sept.  23, 
18.3Q,  in  Abergele,  Denbigshire,  Wales, 
son  of  John  and  Barbara  Morris.  Be- 
ing a  delicate  child  he  was  sent  to  Eng- 
land at  the  age  of  thirteen  and  served 
his  time  in  a  lawyer's  office  in  Liver- 
pool.      When  about  nineteen  years  old 


he  became  a  convert  to  "Mormonism," 
and  was  baptized  Sept.  4,  1849,  at  Aber- 
gele, Wales.  After  his  baptism  he  re- 
turned to  Wales,  where  he  was  or- 
dained to  the  Priesthood  and  served  in 
the  ministi-y.  He  also  acted  as  secre- 
tary to  Elder  Wm.  S.  Phillips,  who  at 
that  time  presided  over  the  Welsh  mis- 
sion. He  occupied  that  position  until 
he  emigrated  to  Utah  in  1855.  Soon  af- 
ter his  arrival  in  Salt  Lake  City  he 
became  a  member  of  the  Nauvoo  Le- 
gion cavalry,  serving  in  two  Indian 
wars  and  also  the  Morrisite  war,  hold- 
ing the  rank  of  lieutenant.  He  was  as- 
sistant government  assessor  and  collec- 
tor of  internal  revenue  under  General 
A.  L.  Chetlain,  and  held  that  position 
for  several  years.       In  March,  1870,   he 


filled  the  position  of  secretary  to  Cap- 
tain William  H.  Hooper,  delegate  to 
Congress,  accompanying  him  to  Wash- 
ington, D.  C.  In  October,  1873,  he  went 
on  a  mission  to  England,  where  he  la- 
bored diligently  in  the  ministry,  part 
of  the  time  as  president  of  the  Bir- 
mingham conference.  He  returned  home 
in  charge  of  a  company  of  three  hun- 
dred Saints  and  fourteen  returning 
misionaries,  arriving  in  Salt  Lake  Oct. 
5,  1875.  For  many  years  he  filled  the 
position  of  clerk  to  the  High  Priests' 
quorum  in  Salt  Lake  City;  was  also 
Ward  clerk,  secretary  of  the  D.  A.  & 
M.  Society,  secretary  of  the  Deseret 
Telegraph  Company,  auditor  of  the 
Utah  Central  railroad,  president  of  the 
Utah  Soap  Factory,  besides  filling  other 
responsible     positions.      He      was      or- 


676 


LATTER-DAY    SAINT 


dained  Bishop  of  the  Nineteenth  Ward 
in  July,  1877,  to  succeed  Bishop  Alonzo 
H.  Raleigh,  and  filled  the  position  with 
honor  until  his  death,  which  occurred 
March  12,  1882,  of  typhoid  pneumonia. 
He  left  seven  sons  and  four  daughters, 
one  of  the  former  being-  the  present 
City  Treasurer  R.  P.  Morris.  At  the 
time  of  his  demise  the  "Deseret  News" 
published  the  following:  "Bishop 
Morris'  integrity  to  the  work  of  the 
Lord  was  beyond  all  question.  While 
not  naturally  of  an  aggressive  disposi- 
tion, when  he  felt  he  was  right  upon 
any  matter  of  moment  he  could  not  be 
moved.  At  the  time  he  joined  the 
Church  he  was  engaged  in  a  lawyer's 
office  in  Liverpool.  He  went  on  a  visit 
from  that  town  to  Abergele,  Wales, 
where  his  brother  Elias  had  already 
embraced  the  gospel,  with  which  he 
was  at  that  time  unacquainted.  He 
stood  by  an  Elder  the  same  day,  while 
he  was  preaching;  and  when  that  El- 
der was  attacked  by  a  mob,  he  stood  by 
him  and  struggled  against  the  perse- 
cutors with  undaunted  courage.  The 
next  day  Elias  baptized  him,  and  his 
course  from  then  till  the  hour  of  his 
death  has  been  in  support  of  the  truth 
and  the  right." 

BARTON,  Isaac,  fifth  Bishop  of  the 
Nineteenth  Ward,  Salt  Lake  City,  Utah, 
was  born  Dec.  11,  1842,  in  St.  Helens, 
Lancashire,  England,  son  of  John  Bar- 
ton and  Elizabeth  Bell.  He  was  bap- 
tized when  about  eight  years  old,  and 
became  identified  with  the  St.  Helens 
branch  of  the  Liverpool  conference. 
Subsequently,  he  was  ordained  to  the 
lesser  Priesthood  and  acted  in  the  ca- 
pacity of  Deacon  and  Teacher.  He 
emigrated  to  America  in  1861,  crossing 
the  Atlantic  in  the  ship  "Underwriter," 
which  sailed  from  Liverpool  April  23, 
1861.  He  drove  an  ox-team  across  the 
plains  in  the  train  which  brought  wire 
and  other  material  for  the  construction 
of  the  overland  telegraph.  On  his  ar- 
rival in  Salt  Lake  City  he  joined  his 
three  brothers  (Wm.  B.,  James  and 
John),  who  had  emigrated  to  Utah  the 
year  previous,  and  became  a  resident  of 
the  Thirteenth  Ward,  whore  he  re- 
mained till  the  following  spring.  Soon 
after  his  arrival  in  the  Valley  he  was 
ordained  a  Seventy  and  became  a  mem- 
ber of  the  62nd  quorum.  In  1862  he 
went  to  Nevada,   and  when  volunteers 


were  called  for  in  that  State  to  tak-r 
up  arms  in  the  defense  of  the  Union, 
which  Was  at  that  time  envolved  in 
civil  war.  Bro.  Barton  enlisted  'in 
March,  1864)  in  the  first  battalion  of 
Nevada  cavalry,  expecting  to  go  to  the 
seat  of  war.  But  the  services  of  his 
company  were  needed  on  the  frontior.<«, 
the  Indians  being  hostile  at  the  time. 
After  receiving  an  honorable  discharge 
at  Fort  Douglas,  Utah,  in  July,  1866. 
as  a  sergeant,  Bro.  Barton  became  a 
resident  of  Kaysville.  Davis  county, 
whence    he    was    called    to    do    militar> 


service  in  Sanpete  and  Sevier  counties 
in  what  is  known  as  the  Blackhawk 
war.  After  this  he  engaged  in  farm- 
ing at  Kaysville.where  he  married  Mis.-* 
Agnes  E.  Park,  Dec.  26,  1870.  The  fol- 
lowing year  he  located  permanently  in 
Salt  Lake  City  and  became  a  resident 
of  the  Nineteenth  Ward,  where  he  still 
resides.  In  1879,  after  being  in  the  em- 
ploy of  the  late  Samuel  P.  Teasdel  for 
eight  years,  he  commenced  business  for 
himself  by  manufacturing  overalls,  car- 
rying on  a  merchant-tailoring  estab- 
lishment. In  1882  he  and  his  brother 
Joseph  established  a  general  mercantile 
business  in  Layton,  Davis  county.  In 
1885  he  resumed  the  management  of  the 
Salt  Lake  business  previously  men- 
tioned, which  is  still  in  existence  under 
the  firm  name  of  Barton  &  Co.  After 
the  death  of  Bishop  James  Watson,  El- 
der Isaac  Barton  was  ordained  a  High 
Priest  and  Bishop,  Feb.  16,  1890,  by 
Angus  M.  Cannon,  and  set  apart  to  pre- 


BIOGRAPHICAL    ENCYCLOPEDIA. 


677 


side  in  that  capacity  over  the  Nine- 
teenth Ward,  in  which  office  he  Is  still 
laboring. 

SHARP,  John,  Hrst  Bishop  of  the 
Twentieth  Ward,  Salt  Lake  City,  Utah, 
was  born  Nov.  8,  1820,  in  the  Devon 
ironworks.  Scotland,  and  was  sent  into 
a  coal  pit  to  work  when  but  eight  years 
of  age.  In  1847  "Mormonism"  found 
him  in  Clackmannanshire,  still  engaged 
as  a  L-oal  miner.  The  gospel  was  brought 
lo  this  quarter  by  William  Gibson,  one 
of  the  first  Scotch  Elders  sent  out  to 
preach— a  man  who  obtained  renown 
in  the  British  mission  as  an  orator  and 
an  able  disputant.  This  Elder  con- 
verted the  Sharp  brothers  (there  were 
three  of  them)  to  the  faith,  and  in  1848, 
they  left  Scotland  for  America.  They 
landed  in  New  Orleans,  came  up  the 
Mississii)pi  river  to  St.  Louis,  Mo., 
where  they  lived  until  the  spring  of 
1850.  and  then  took  up  their  line  of 
march  for  Salt  Lake  City.  The  date  of 
his  arrival,  Aug.  28,  1850,  makes  John 
Sharp  one  of  the  earlier  settlers  of 
Utah,  and  the  sphere  that  he  filled  so 
many  j'ears,  properly  classes  him 
among  the  "founders."  He  first  went 
to  work  in  the  Church  quarry,  getting 
out  stone  for  the  "Old  Tabernacle"  and 
Tithing  Oflfice,  and  next  was  made  the 
superintendent  of  the  quarry.  Under 
his  direction  the  stone  for  the  public 
works, the  foundation  of  the  Temple, and 
the  massive  wall  around  the  Temple 
block,  was  gotten  out;  and  it  must  be 
understood  that  the  quarrying  and 
hauling  of  those  huge  blocks  of  granite 
was  no  indifferent  undertaking.  The 
Church  quarry  is  eighteeen  miles  from 
the  city,  and  the  rock,  of  course,  had  to 
be  hauled  by  oxen,  and  the  men  em- 
ployed directly  or  indirectly  on  tithing 
account.  The  numerous  difficulties 
which  the  superintendents  of  the 
Church  works  had  to  grapple  with  in 
raising  teams  upon  the  tithing  offer- 
ings, the  employment  of  regular  hands 
and  the  finding  of  means  generally  to 
carry  on  the  public  works,  cannot  easi- 
ly be  imagined,  unless  one  can  fancy 
what  the  national  income  would  mean 
if  paid  in  Hour,  molasses,  potatoes, 
squashes,  and  the  like,  and  distributed 
afterwards  for  the  national  service.  In 
1854  he  was  ordained  by  Pres.  Brigham 
Young  as  the  Bishop  of  the  Twentieth 
^Vard.  This  Ward  had  been  up  to  its 
organization   coupled     with   the   Eight- 


eenth Ward  undei-  Bishop  Lorenzo 
D.  Young;  but  substantially  Bishop 
Sharp  was  the  founder  of  the  Twen- 
tieth Ward.  It  grew  up  under  him 
and  soon  became  known  as  one  of  the 
most  liberal  and  intellectual  Wards  of 
the  city.  In  1864  Bishop  Sharp  was  ap- 
pointed assistant  superintendent  of  the 
Public  Works,  and  when  Pres.  Daniel 
H.  Wells  went  to  England  to  take 
chaige  of  the  European  mission,  he  be- 
came the  acting  superintendent  until 
his  return.       In  1867  he  became  a  sub- 


Kmtractor  under  Brigham  Young  on  the 
I'nion  Pacific  railroad.  Under  this  con- 
tract. Sharp  and  Young  did  the  heavy 
stone  work  of  the  bridge  abutments, 
and  the  cutting  of  the  tunnels  of  We- 
ber canyon.  In  this  work  they  em- 
ployed from  five  to  six  hundred  men, 
and  the  contract  amounted  to  about 
a  million  dollars.  Afterwards,  during 
the  strike  between  the  Union  Pacific 
and  the  Central  Pacific,  the  Bishop  took 
another  contract  for  Sharp  and  Young, 
on  the  Union  Pacific,  on  which  he  em- 
ployed from  four  to  five  hundred  men, 
the  contract  amounting  to  $100,000.  In 
the  difficulties  of  the  settlement  be- 
tween Pres.  Y'oung  and  the  U.  P.  Co., 
John  Sharp,  John  Taylor  and  Joseph  A. 
Y'oung  were  chosen  to  go  to  Boston  to 
bring  the  business  to  an  issue.  So 
vigorously,  yet  prudently,did  they  press 
the  matter  with  Durant  and  others 
that,  in  the  lack  of  the  company's 
funds,  Brigham  got  $600,000  worth  of 
railroad  material,  iron  and  rolling  stick, 
which  was  used  in  the  construction  of 


678 


I.ATTER-DAY    SAINT 


the  Utah  Central  railway.  After  the 
building  of  that  line,  Joseph  A.  Young 
was  made  Its  superintendent,  and  he 
was  followed  by  Feramorz  Little,  but 
Bishop  Sharp  succeeded  them  in  1871, 
and  in  1873,  was  also  appointed  its  pres- 
ident as  well  as  superintendent.  In 
the  organization  of  the  Utah  Southern 
in  1870,  he  was  elected  vice-president. 
He  went  east  as  the  purchasing  agent 
for  this  company,  and  becoming  exten- 
sively associated  with  the  Union  Pa- 
cific directors,  was  finally  elected  one 
of  them,  which  office  he  held  till  his 
death.  He  was  a  man  of  pronounced 
character,  and  of  much  capacity,  par- 
ticularly of  the  practical  quality.  This 
was  shown  in  his  whole  career.  He 
had  a  very  comon-sense  type  of  mind, 
was,  in  fact,  a  "man  of  the  world,"  not- 
withstanding he  was  a  Bishop.  Com- 
ing from  a  coalpit  in  Scotland,  and  ris- 
ing to  his  position  as  a  Bishop  in  the 
Church,  a  president  and  superintendent 
of  railroads,  and  one  of  the  directors 
of  the  Union  Pacific,  John  Sharp  may 
well  be  pronounced  a  "self-made  man." 
Bishop  Sharp  died  in  Salt  Lake  City 
Dec.  23,  1891,  mourned  and  respected  by 
all  who  knew  him. 

ROMNEY,  George,  third  Bishop  of 
the  Twentieth  Ward,  Salt  Lake  City. 
Utah,  is  the  son  of  Miles  Romney  and 
Elizabeth  Ge.skell.  and  was  born  in  Dal- 
ton,  Lancashire,  England,  Aug.  14,  1831. 
When  two  years  old  he  moved  with  his 
parents  to  Preston.  In  1839  his  father 
and  mother  joined  the  Church,  and 
George  was  baptized  in  September,  1839. 
With  his  parents  he  left  England  in 
1841  for  America  to  gather  with  the 
Saints  at  Nauvoo,  111.  After  locating 
In  Nauvoo,  George  began  to  learn  the 
carpenter  trade,  working  as  an  appren- 
tice on  the  Nauvoo  Temple,  where  he 
labored  till  the  completion  of  that 
structure.  When  the  body  of  the  Church 
was  expelled  from  Illinois  and  left  for 
the  west  in  1846,  the  Romney  family, 
not  having  sufficient  means  to  purchase 
an  outfit  for  the  long  journey  to  the 
west,  went  to  Burlington,  Iowa,  and 
later  to  St.  Louis,  Mo.,  where  they  re- 
mained till  the  spring  of  1850  when  they 
started  for  the  west  with  ox-teams.  At 
Council  Bluffs,  Iowa,  they  received  re- 
inforcements and  continued  the  jour- 
ney across  the  plains,  arriving  in  Salt 
Lake  City  in  October,  18.50.  George 
Romney   married   Jane  Jamison   March 


15,  1850,  in  St.  Louis,  Mo.,  and  their  first 
child  was  born  Dec.  15,  1850,  in  a  wagon- 
box  on  what  is  now  the  Temple  Block, 
in  Salt  Lake  City,  where  Bro.  Romney 
and  his  little  family  lived  during  the 
winter  of  1850-51.  The  wagon-box  was 
the  family  home  for  sixteen  months.  He 
obtained  employment  on  the  "Public 
Works"  as  a  carpenter.  In  the  spring 
of  1852,  together  with  others,  he  was 
sent  to  Fillmore,  Millard  county,  to 
build  a  State  house,  where  he  remained 
for  several  months,  and  then  returned 
to  Salt  Lake  City.  He  was  ordained  to 
the  office  of  a  Seventy  in  1853,  and  be- 
came identified  with  the  29th  quorum 
of  Seventy.  In  1856  he  was  appointed 
foreman  of  the  carpentering  depart- 
ment of  the  "Public  Works."  During 
the  Johnston  arniy  trouble  in  1857-58,  he 
served  as  a  captain  in  a  military  capa- 
city and  did  three  months'  duty  in  the 
Echo  Canyon  campaign.     In  the  spring 


of  1858,  during  the  mo\e  south,  he  went 
to  Provo,  but  soon  returned  to  Salt 
Lake  City  and  assumed  the  position  of 
foreman  of  the  public  works,  which  po- 
sition he  held  till  1864,  when  he  formed 
a  partnership  with  the  late  Wm.  H. 
Folsom  and  erected  several  large  build- 
ings, among  them  the  City  Hall,  and 
the  Wells,  Fargo  &  Co.'s  building.  In 
the  fall  of  1868  he,  together  with  George 
H.  Taylor  and  Thos.  Latimer,  formed 
the  firm  now  known  as  Taylor,  Rom- 
ney, Armstrong  Co.,  and  went  into  the 
lumber  and  milling  business,  becoming 
the  pioneers  in  that  branch  of  indus- 
try in  Utah.      Bro.  Romney  is  still  the 


BIOGRAPHICAL    ENCYCLOPEDIA. 


679 


manager  of  that  business  and  is  classed 
as  one  of  the  soundest  and  most  suc- 
cessful business  men  in  the  State.  At 
present  he  is  vice-president  of  Z.  C.  M. 
I.,  and  of  the  Home  Fire  Insurance  Co., 
and  a  director  in  the  following  business 
concerns:  Deseret  National  Bank,  Des- 
eret  Savings  Bank,  Consolidated  Wag- 
on and  Machine  Co.,  Clark,  Eldredge 
and  Co.,  Alberta  Land  and  Cattle  Co., 
Utah  Light  and  Power  Co.,  etc.  He 
was  elected  a  member  of  the  city  coun- 
cil in  Salt  Lake  City,  in  1882,  servmg 
one  term,  and  again  in  1895,  serving 
four  years,  during  which  time  he  made 
a  splendid  record.  In  ecclesiastical  af- 
fairs Elder  Romney  has  always  taken 
great  interest,  and  has  been  a  hard 
and  energetic  worker  in  the  Church.  In 
1869-70  he  filled  a  short  mission  to  Great 
Britain,  and  he  has  also  performed 
missionary  work  in  several  States  of 
the  Union.  He  served  a  term  in  the 
penitentiary  in  1885  for  conscience  sake, 
having  previously  yielded  obedience  to 
the  principle  of  plural  marriage.  In 
August,  1886,  when  the  Twentieth  Ward 
Bishopric  was  reorganized,  Bro.  Rom- 
ney was  ordained  a  High  Priest  by 
Heber  J.  Grant  and  set  apart  to  act  as 
first  counselor  to  Bishop  Wm.  C.  Bas- 
sett.  He  served  in  that  capacity  un- 
til Aug.  31,  1888,  when  the  Ward  was 
reorganized  with  Geo.  Romney  as  Bish- 
op, the  former  Bishop  (Elder  Bassett) 
having  left  the  Ward.  In  this  high  and 
responsible  calling  Elder  Romney  is 
still  acting,  and  since  the  opening  of 
the  Salt  Lake  City  Temple  he  has  been 
a  worker  in  that  sacred  edifice. 

W^OOIjIjEY,    Marcellus    Simmons, 

Bishop  of  the  21st  Ward, Salt  Lake  City, 
is  a  son  of  the  late  Bishop  Edwin  D. 
Woolley,  and  was  born  in  Salt  Lake 
City,  Utah,  Aug.  27,  1854.  He  was  bap- 
tized by  his  father  when  eight  years 
old,  and  when  about  seventeen  years  of 
age  he  was  ordained  an  Elder  and  re- 
ceived his  endowments.  He  was  or- 
dained into  the  4th  quorum  of  Seventy 
by  Soren  P.  Neve,  April  8,  1884,  and  or- 
dained a  High  Priest  and  set  apart  as 
second  counselor  to  Bishop  Wm.  L.  N. 
Allen  of  the  21st  Ward,  by  Pres.  An- 
gus M.  Cannon  Jan.  16,  1887.  He  served 
in  that  capacity  till  Jan.  18,  1894,  when 
he  was  ordained  a  Bishop  and  set  apart 
by  Pres.  Geo.  Q.  Cannon  to  preside 
over  said  Ward,  and  is  still  laboring 
in     that     responsible       position.       Bro. 


Woolley  married  Mary  Ann  Naylor 
June  7.  1875.  In  the  business  world  he 
followed  merchandising  for  a  period  of 
seventeen  years,  being  for  a  number  of 
years  secretary,  treasurer  and  superin- 
tendent of  the  Thirteenth  Ward  store. 


At  present  he  is  engaged  in  the  real 
estate  business,  being  associated  with 
the  firm  of  Tuttle  Bros.,  Salt  Lake  City. 
In  civil  life  he  has  served  as  a  member 
of  the  board  of  education,  in  Salt  Lake 
City,  as  chief  deputy  sheriff  of  Salt 
Lake  county,  and  as  county  commis- 
sioner, in  all  of  which  offices  he  has 
exhibited  marked  ability. 

AVESON,  Kobert,  one  of  the  presi- 
dents of  the  fourth  quorum  of  Seventy, 
is  the  second  son  of  Thomas  Aveson  and 
Ann  Fawcett,  and  was  born  in  Brad- 
ford, Yorkshire,  England,  Aug.  22,  1847 
On  the  29th  of  February,  1860,  he  went 
to  reside  at  Middlesbrough,  Yorkshire, 
England,  where  he  was  bound  appren- 
tice to  Mr.  Joseph  Gould,  printer.  In 
the  summer  of  1862  he  made  prepara- 
tion to  join  a  Baptist  church,  but  re- 
ceiving a  testimony  that  "Mormonism" 
was  true,  he  became  very  desirous  to  be 
baptized.  To  this  his  parents  objected 
and  the  ordinance  was  deferred.  For 
three  years  and  a  half  he  attended  Lat- 
ter-day Saints  meetings,  whenever  op- 
portunity offered,  unawares  to  his  pa- 
rents. During  that  time,  by  dint  of 
hard  savings,  he  managed  to  procure 
money  to  pay  his  passage  to  the  fron- 
tier. From  1862  until  the  spring  of  1866 
he  gradually  grew  tired  of  the  opposl- 


680 


LATTER-DAY    SAINT 


tion  manifested  toward  him  by  his  pa- 
rents; hence,  although  a  bound  appren- 
tice, he  resolved  to  leave  home  for  Utah 
in  May,  1866;  he  was,  therefore,  bap- 
tized March  25th  of  that  year,  previous 
to  his  departure  for  Zion.  In  company 
with  his  companion,  Richard  Sedgwiclt 
(an  apprentice  to  a  picture-frame 
maker),  he  started  for  London  by  land 
and  water,  arriving  there  on  the  20th. 
Next  day  they  went  to  the  ship  "Amer- 
ican Congress,"  which  was  chartered  to 
sail  on  the  23rd  of  that  month.  On  the 
morning  of  the  24th,  just  before  the 
boat  set  sail,  they  were  much  surprised 
on  being  confronted,  while  on  deck,  by 
a  London  detective  and  Mr.  Thomas 
Carter  (Richard  Sedgwick's  employer). 
On  the  charge  of  absconding  from  their 
apprenticeship      they      were      arrested. 


Hundreds  of  the  passengers  gathered 
around,  and  one  of  the  most  sorrow- 
ful scenes  in  their  lives  was  witnessed, 
while  they  bid  sad  adieu  to  their  many 
friends.  The  boys  were  then  taken  to 
the  Thames  police  office.  For  the  first 
time  in  their  lives  they  slept  in  a  cell. 
Next  morning  they  were  handcuffed 
and  taken  to  Middlesbrough,  where 
they  spent  another  night  in  a  cell.  The 
following  day  they  were  tried  and 
discharged;  the  decision  of  the  court 
being  that  the  expenses  connected  with 
their  capture  should  be  deducted  from 
their  wages.  On  the  17th  of  the  fol- 
lowing month  (June),  the  two  boys 
made  their  second  attempt  to  leave 
their  homes.  As  they  were  about  to 
embark  on  a  steamer,  they  were  inter- 


cepted by  Brother  Aveson's  mother. 
The  next  day  (June  18th)  Robert  Ave- 
son  made  his  third  attempt  to  leave 
home;  he  went  to  Glasgow,  Scotland, 
from  there  to  Liverpool,  England,  and 
thence  to  New  York;  here  he  met  El- 
der T.  B.  H.  Stenhouse,  who  engaged 
him  to  work  in  his  printing  office  in 
Salt  Lake  City.  He  crossed  the  plains 
in  Joseph  S.  Rawlin's  ox-train,  arriving 
i'n  Salt  Lake  City,  Sept.  30,  1866.  In 
1879  he  received  the  glad  tidings  that 
his  parents  had  joined  the  Church  and 
in  1880  he  emigrated  them  to  Zion.  Since 
his  arrival  in  Utah,  Brother  Aveson  has 
taken  an  active  part  in  local  affairs, 
both  ecclesiastically,  politically  and  so- 
cially. For  eleven  years  he  acted  as 
assistant  superintendent  of  the  Twenty- 
first  "Ward  Sunday  school,  and  for  four 
years  was  superintendent  of  that 
school.  From  December,  1883,  until 
April,  1893,  he  served  as  Ward  clerk  of 
the  Twenty-first  Ward.  May  30,  1869, 
he  was  ordained  an  Elder  by  Elder 
Elias  Smith,  and  on  the  18th  of  April, 
1876,  was  ordained  a  Seventy  by  Elder 
John  Lyon  and  became  identified  with 
the  37th  quorum  of  Seventy;  he  acted 
as  clerk  of  that  quorum  for  seven  years, 
and  was  also  clerk  of  the  temporary 
organization  of  Seventies  in  the  Twen- 
ty-first Ward.  When  the  4th  quorum 
of  Seventy  was  reorganized  and  lo- 
cated in  the  Twenty-first  Ward,  in  1883, 
he  became  a  member  of  said  quorum 
and  for  about  ten  years  acted  as  its 
clerk.  Dec.  14,  1896,  he  was  ordained 
a  president  in  that  quorum.  April  15, 
1893,  he  started  on  a  mission  to  Eng- 
land. After  laboring  a  few  weeks  In 
the  Leeds  conference,  he  acted  for 
twenty-two  months  as  president  of  the 
Manchester  conference.  He  returned 
home  May  6,  1895,  after  which  he  la- 
bored as  a  home  missionary  in  the  Salt 
Lake  Stake  of  Zion  for  nearly  two 
years.  Elder  Aveson  has  officiated  for 
a  great  number  of  his  dead  relatives  In 
the  Logan  and  Salt  Lake  Temples. 
When  the  Twenty-seventh  Ward  was 
organized,  Jan.  26,  1902,  he  was  appoint- 
ed clerk  of  the  new  Ward.  He  has 
been  an  energetic  Sunday  school  worker 
for  nearly  twenty-five  years,  and  Is  now 
a  teacher  in  the  Theological  Class  of  the 
Twenty-seventh  Ward  Sunday  school. 
He  has  a  wife  and  six  children  living, 
is  a  printer  by  trade,  and  has  been  an 
employe  at  the  "Deseret  News"  office 
for  over  thirty  years.      (For  additional 


BIOGRAPHICAL    ENCYCLOPEDIA. 


681 


items  in  relation  to  Eider  Aveson's  life, 
sf^e  "Faith  Promoting  Series,"  Book  13.) 

MACFARLAXK,  Andrew  \evin,  sec- 
ond counselor  to  Bishop  Wm.  L.  N.  Al- 
len of  the  Twenty-first  Ward,  Salt  Lake 
City,  from  1883  to  1886,  was  the  son  of 
John  Macfarlane  and  Ann  Nevin,  and 
wa.s  born  Jan.  10,  1830,  in  Dundee,  For- 
farshire, Scotland.  He  was  the  young- 
est child  of  five.  At  the  age  of  sev- 
enteen he  was  baptized  into  the  Church 
by  Elder  Hugh  Findlay,  on  April  19, 
1S47.  He  was  ordained  a  Teacher  Sept. 
20,  1847;  a  Priest  Dec.  29,  1848;  an  Elder 
March  17,  1850;  a  Seventy  Oct.  19,  1869, 
and  a  High  Priest  Oct.  21,  1883.  In  the 
.summer  of  1849  he  was  called  to  labor 


I 


as  a  local  missionary  and  sent  from 
Dundee  to  preach  the  gospel  and  dis- 
tribute tracts  in  the  surrounding  vil- 
lages. In  1850  he  was  appointed  to  go 
to  Aberdeen,  Scotland,  to  preside  over 
the  branch  of  the  Church  in  that  city. 
For  upwards  of  twenty  years  he  was 
one  of  the  most  active  local  Elders  in 
the  Scottish  mission;  he  presided  over 
a  number  of  branches,  and  for  two 
years  was  president  of  the  Edinburgh 
conference.  Prior  to  his  departure  for 
Zion,  as  a  mark  of  esteem  for  his  many 
years  of  faithful  labor,  the  Priesthood 
of  the  Edinburgh  conference  presented 
him  with  a  beautiful  written  testimo- 
nial (on  parchment),  in  a  handsome 
frame.  Brother  Macfarlane  emigrated 
to  Utah  in  1868.  and  shortly  after  his 
arrival  in  Salt  Lake  City  he  became  an 


employe  of  Z.  C.  M.  I.,  and  was  engaged 
there  for  fourteen  years.  When  the 
Twenty-first  Ward  wa.s  organized  in 
1877,  he  became  one  of  the  prominent 
and  energetic  workers  in  building  up 
that  part  of  the  Lord's  vineyard.  He 
was  the  first  president  of  the  Ward  Y. 
M.  M.  I.  A.,  holding  that  office  for  five 
years.  May  26,  1878,  he  was  chosen 
first  assistant  superintendent  of  the 
Twenty-first  Ward  Sunday  school.  In 
April,  1881,  he  filled  a  mission  to  Great 
Britain,  Avhere  he  presided  over  the 
Glasgow  conference.  He  was  one  of 
the  presidents  of  the  mass  quorum  of 
Seventies  in  the  Twenty-first  Ward, and 
served  a  term  of  two  years  in  the  city 
council  in  1884-86.  After  the  death  of 
Bishop  Andrew  Burt,  he  was  set  apart 
as  second  counselor  to  Bishop  Wm.  L. 
N.  Allen,  in  the  Twenty-first  Ward, 
Oct.  21,  1883.  This  position  he  held  un- 
til his  death,  which  occurred  Sept.  20. 
1886.  The  crowded  meeting  house  at 
his  funeral  services  was  one  proof  that 
he  left  behind  a  large  host  of  friends. 
Elizabeth  J.  Macfarlane,  his  widow,  is 
now  a  resident  of  the  Twenty-first 
Ward.  For  years  she  was  an  energetic 
worker  in  the  Sabbath  school  of  that 
Ward.  The  only  living  children  of 
Elder  Macfarlane  are:  Nevin,  who  re- 
sides in  Cassia  county.  Idaho;  and  Eliz- 
abeth. Avife  of  George  Austin,  superin- 
tendent, of  the  sugar  factory,  Lehi 
Utah.  Very  truly  can  it  be  said  of  him: 
"He  has  fought  the  good  fight,  he  has 
finished  his  course  on  earth,  and  he  will 
receive  his  reward  with  the  just." — R. 
A. 

SOLOMON,  Alfred,  Bishop  of  the 
Twenty-second  Ward,  Salt  Lake  City. 
T'tah,  is  the  son  of  Wm.  Solomon  and 
Nancy  Jane  Hocking,  and  was  born 
Sept.  10.  18,36.  at  Truro.  Cornwall  coun- 
ty, England.  He  received  a  common 
school  education  in  the  school  at  Truro: 
was  baptized  into  the  Church  April  6, 
1854,  and  soon  afterward  became  an  ac- 
tive worker  in  the  Priesthood,  assist- 
ing the  missionaries  in  their  labors.  His 
i-elatives  were  opposed  to  his  becoming 
a  "Mormon"  and  also  to  his  emigrat- 
ing to  America,  but  he.  nevertheless, 
made  arrangements  for  his  departure, 
and  sailed  from  Liverpool  for  Boston 
on  the  ship  "George  Washington" 
March  27.  1857.  From  Boston  he  went 
to  Iowa  City.  Iowa,  where  he  remained 


682 


LATTER-DAY    SAINT 


a  short  time,  working:  to  earn  money 
to  continue  the  journey  across  the 
plains.  After  an  eventful  trip,  he  ar- 
rived in  the  Valley  Sept.  12,  1857,  and 
located  in  Salt  Lake  City,  where  he  has 
resided  ever  since.  During  the  John- 
ston army  affair  in  the  winter  of  1857- 
58  he  did  military  service  in  Echo  can- 
yon. At  the  time  of  the  move  south 
in  1858,  he  was  detailed  to  remain  in 
Salt  Lake  City  to  aid  in  burning  and 
destroying  the  property,  should  the 
army  prove  hostile,  after  coming  to  the 
city.  After  peace  was  restored  he  set- 
tled down  to  work  at  the  shoe  making 
business,  having  charge  of  Robert  J. 
Golding's  store.       He  acted  for  a  num- 


ber of  years  as  a  special  policeman  and 
also  as  a  constable  in  Salt  Lake  City. 
When  the  first  fire  department  was  or- 
ganized in  Salt  Lake  City,  he  became  a 
member  of  it.  He  is  also  a  veteran  ar- 
tillery man.  In  1870,  together  with  his 
brother,  James,  he  organized  the  firm 
known  as  Solomon  Bros.,  and  began  the 
manufacture  of  boots  and  shoes,  being 
the  first  importers  of  machinery  inlo 
Utah  for  shoemaking.  Elder  Solomon 
was  ordained  a  Bishop  and  set  apart  to 
preside  over  the  Twenty-second  Ward 
at  its  organization,  March  31,  1889, which 
position  he  still  holds.  In  1891  he  left 
for  a  mission  to  England  where  he  la- 
bored successively  as  president  of  the 
Newcastle  and  Cheltenham  conferences 
and  also  for  a  short  time  as  president 
of  the  European  mission.  He  returned 
home  July  4,     1893,     and     was  called  to 


labor  in  the  Salt  I>ake  Temple,  Bishop 
Solomon  has  had  three  wives  and  is  the 
father   of   twenty-three   children. 

NEBEKER,  George,  a  High  Coun- 
cilor in  the  Salt  Lake  Stake  of  Zion 
from  1859  to  1864  and  from  1873  to  1877, 
is  the  eighth  son  of  George  Nebeker  and 
Susannah  Meredith,  and  was  born  at 
Newcastle,  Delaware.  Jan.  22,  1827.  Hfe 
subsequently  moved  with  his  father  to 
Covington,  Fountain  county,  Indiana, 
where  he  remained  until  1846.  In  the 
spring  of  that  year,  in  company  with 
his  eldest  brother  John,  he  came  west 
as  far  as  Winter  Quarters.  The  fol- 
lowing spring  he  continued  his  jour- 
ney westward  in  Bro.  George  B.  Wal- 
lace's company,  in  which  his  brother 
John  was  a  captain  of  fifty,  arriving  in 
the  Valley  Sept.  26,  1847,  and  settled  in 
the  Nineteenth  Ward,  Salt  Bake  City. 
After  Brother  Nebeker's  arrival  in  the 
Valley  his  labors  for  the  building  up 
of  the  kingdom  of  God  were  signally 
conspicuous  in  his  untiring  zeal  and 
manifest  integrity  to.  the  principles  of 
the  gospel,  which  he  espoused  in  early 
manhood,  being  baptized  when  20  years 
of  age.  In  1850  he  married  Elizabeth 
Dilworth,  by  whom  he  had  eleven  chil- 
dren, four  sons  and  seven  daughters. 
Again  in  1863  he  married  Maria  L.  Dil- 
worth, who  bore  him  four  sons  and  two 
daughters.  In  connection  with  raising 
his  family,  his  life  has  been  devoted  to 
misionary  labor  most  of  the  time.  His 
first  mission  in  1854  was  to  the  remnants 
of  the  House  of  Israel  in  the  regions 
about  the  White  and  Elk  Mountains, 
and  in  the  year  1856  he  was  among  those 
who  were  called  to  colonize  what  was 
then  called  Western  Utah  but  now  Car- 
son, Nevada.  After  eighteen  months 
of  hard  labor  there  and  no  returns,  he 
was  called  home  to  join  the  Saints  in 
their  move  south  in  the  year  1858.  The 
most  notable  mission,  however,  per- 
formed by  Brother  Nebeker  was  the  one 
to  the  inhabitants  of  the  Sandwich  Is- 
lands. He  was  called,  in  connection 
with  Elder  Francis  A.  Hammond,  as 
early  as  the  fall  of  1864  to  go  to  those 
islands,  with  instructions  from  Pres. 
Brigham  Young  to  purchase  a  tract  of 
land  with  a  view  of  colonizing  it  as  a 
Stake  of  Zion  for  the  native  Saints  to 
gather  to.  After  several  unsuccessful 
efforts  it  was  decided  that  Bro.  Ham- 
mond should  return  and  inform  Pres. 
Young  of  the  result  of  their  labors  and 


BIOGRAPHICAL    ENCYCLOPEDIA. 


683 


be  advised  fui-ther  in  the  matter, 
Brother  Nebeker  to  remain  on  the  is- 
lands. Very  soon  after  Elder  Ham- 
mond's departure  for  Utah,  Elder  Ne- 
beker was  approached  by  a  Mr.  Dough- 
erty, of  Honolulu,  who  owned  a  large 
tract  of  land  about  32  miles  from  Hono- 
lulu, which  he  thought  would  meet  the 
requirements  of  the  case  and  offered 
to  sell  it  for  $14,000.  After  visiting  the 
plantation,  a  bargain  was  struck  and 
Elder  Nebeker  immediately  informed 
Pres.  Young  by  letter  of  his  action.  The 
letter  reached  Salt  Lake  City  a  few 
days  after  Elder  Hammond's  arrival. 
Elder  Nebeker  was  instructed  to  close 
the  negotiations  for  the  purchase  of  the 
land  and  return  home  at  his  earliest 
convenience.  On  Thursday,  May  18, 
1865,  a  company,  consisting  of  nine  mis- 
sionaries, eleven  women,  eighteen 
children  and  six  teamsters,  left  Salt 
Lake  City,  bound  for  the  Hawaiian  Is- 
lands. Elder  Nebeker  was  appointed, 
by  Brigham  Young,  captain  of  the  com- 
pany, which  had  ten  wagons.  This 
company  arrived  at  the  Laie  plantation 
(the  land  purchased  by  Elder  Nebeker), 
Hawaiian  Islands.  Thursday,  July  6th, 
of  the  same  year.  While  on  this  mis- 
sion, which  embraced  a  period  of  nearly 
ten  years.  Elder  Nebeker  was  enabled 
to  establish  an  important  industry, 
namely,  the  manufacturing  of  sugar, 
which  subsequently  became  the  means 
of  placing  the  mission  on  a  permanent 
financial  basis  and  of  making  a  home 
for  the  Elders  who  are  called  to  per- 
form missionary  labor  in  that  land  and 
also  of  establishing  the  natives  who 
gather  from  other  islands  of  the  group. 
In  connection  with  this  mission  Bro. 
Nebeker  was  required  by  Pres.  Young 
to  assume  not  only  the  responsibility 
of  the  conduct  of  the  mission,  but  also 
the  debt  of  $14,000  upon  the  plantation 
thus  purchased.  He  was  enabled,  how- 
ever, through  the  providence  of  the 
Lord,  to  lift  his  indebtedness,  and  at 
the  time  he  was  released  from  this  mis- 
sion he  turned  over  to  Pres.  John  Tay- 
lor the  plantation  free  of  debt,  receiv- 
ing only  from  the  Church  the  amount 
of  his  own  property  used  in  the  interest 
of  the  mission.  He  also  filled  a  mis- 
sion to  the  United  States  in  the  fall 
and  winter  of  1879-80.  He  held  the  of- 
fice of  High  Priest,  being  ordained  to 
that  office  in  1853,  and  acted  as  a  High 
Councilor   in    the    Salt    Lake    Stake     of 


Zion  from  1859  to  1864,  and  after  re- 
turning from  his  mission  to  the  Sand- 
wich Islands  he  acted  in  the  same  ca- 
pacity from  1873  to  1877.  He  was  a 
member  of  the  organization  known  as 
the  "Minute  Men"  and  in  this  capacity 
was  a  member  of  Parley  P.  Pratt's 
party,  which  was  sent  to  make  explora- 
tions in  southern  Utah  in  the  fall  of 
1849.  At  his  death,  which  occurred 
Dec.  1,  1886,  Elder  Nebeker  was  labor- 
ing as  a  district  teacher  in  the  Nine- 
teenth Ward  in  which  he  resided.  The 
funeral  services  (which  were  conducted 
in  the  Nineteenth  Ward)  were  attended 
by  a  great  many  friends  of  the  de- 
ceased, notably  quite  a  number  of 
Hawaiians  who  seemed  very  much  af- 
fected at  the  loss  of  a  man  whom  they 
loved  very  dearly. 

NEBKKER,  John  L,,  first  counselor 
to  Bishop  Alfred  Solomon  of  the  22nd 
Ward,  Salt  Lake  City,  Utah,  is  the  son 
of  George  Nebeker  and  Elizabeth  Dil- 
worth,  and  was  born  in  Salt  Lake  City 
Nov.  1,  1854.  His  early  life  ran  very 
quietly  during  the  early  years  of  Salt 
Lake  City  when  there  were  not  the 
many  contaminating  influences,  which 
abound  at  the  present  time,  to  allure 
the  youth  and  lead  them  in  paths  of 
vice  and  immorality.  His  father  was 
absent  from  home  filling  a  mission  to 
the  Sandwich  Islands  from  the  time  he 
was  ten  years  old  till  he  was  twenty, 
hence  he  did  not  get  the  benefit  of  his 
father's  advice  at  that  time  of  his  life. 
His  mother,  however,  was  signally 
blessed  in  raising  her  children;  she  was 
not  only  able  to  give  them  the  necessa- 
ries of  life,  but  to  afford  all  of  them  a 
common  school  education.  In  provid- 
ing for  the  wants  of  her  family,  she 
being  a  very  indulgent  mother,  was  not 
slow  in  giving  the  necessary  spiritual 
and  moral  instruction  to  her  children 
by  teaching  the  principles  of  truth  as 
taught  in  the  gospel  of  Christ.  At  the 
age  of  twenty-orte.  Brother  Nebeker 
was  married  to  Christina  Graham,  who 
has  born  to  him  twelve  children,  five 
of  whom  have  died.  The  first  year  of 
his  married  life  Elder  Nebeker  was  en- 
gaged in  teaching  school  at  Taylors- 
ville.  Salt  Lake  county.  In  1877  he 
was  chosen  president  of  the  Y.  M.  M.  I. 
association  in  his  Ward.  He  was  in 
attendance  at  the  first  Sunday  school 
held   in    the   Nineteenth  Ward   meeting 


684 


LATTER-DAY    SAINT 


house,  fn  September,  1866,  and  he  has 
been  a  class  teacher  for  twenty  years. 
For  four  years  he  was  a  clerk  in  the 
carpenter  department  of  the  Utah  Cen- 
tral railway  company.  March  16,  1887, 
he  accei)ted  a  position  as  deputy  re- 
corder of  Salt  Lake  county  under  Geo. 
M.  Cannon;  and  later  he  was  again 
made  deputy  county  clerk  under  John 
C.  Cutler,  a  place  he  filled  with  efficien- 
cy and  fidelity.  He  remained  in  the 
county  clerk's  office  until  October,  1890, 
when  he  was  engaged  as  bookkeeper  in 
the  film  of  Hardy,  Young  &  Co.,  and 
afterwards  became  the  secretary  and 
treasurer  of  said  company.  He  was 
also  secretary  in  the  firm  of  Barnes, 
Hardy  Co.  for  a  number  of  years.  Af- 
ter this  he  occupied  a  position  in  the 
Salt  Lake  postoffice  as  registry  clerk 
for  nearly  two  years,  when  he  accepted, 
at  the  solicitation  of  Bishop  Wm.  B. 
Preston,  a  clerk.ship  in  the  Presiding 
Bishop's  office,  where  he  has  now  been 
employed  fm-  nearly  five  years  and  has 
risen  in  the  ranks  of  the  official  force 
to  the  r>of=ition  of  Stake  tithing  clerk 
for  the  Salt  Lake  Stake  of  Zion.  While 
laboring  in  the  Presiding  Bishop's  of- 
fice he  has  acted  as  secretary  and 
treasurer  of  the  South  Jordan  Canal 
<''o.  and  also  of  the  Nevada  Land  and 
I.iive  Stock  Company,  both  corporations 
of  considerable  magnitude.  In  the 
fall  of  1892  he  was  elected  justice  of 
the  peace  for  the  third  precinct.  Salt 
Lake  City.  He  was  ordained  a  High 
Priest  and  set  apart  as  second  coun^ 
selor  to  Bishop  Alfred  Solomon  of  the 
Twenty-second  Ward..  March  31,  1889. 
Later  (Dec.  31,  1893)  he  was  chosen  as 
first  counselor  to  Bishop  Solomon, which 
position  he  still  holds. 


in  the  Valley  Sept.  4,  1859.  In  1872 
Bro.  Jones  began  business  as  a  lime 
dealer  in  Salt  Lake  City  and  has  fol- 
lowed that  avocation  for  upwards  of 
twenty-one  years,  during  which  time  he 
furnished  most  of  the  lime  for  the  Salt 
Lake  Temple.  March  4,  1861,  he  was 
ordained  an  Elder  by  John  V.  Long, 
and  in  1867  he  was  ordained  a  Seventy 


in  the  fourth  quorum  by  Nathan 
Tanner.  When  the  Twenty-third 
Ward,  Salt  Lake  City,  was  organized, 
Dec.  13,  1891,  he  was  ordained  a  High 
Priest  and  Bishop  by  Apostle  John  W. 
Taylor  and  set  apart  to  preside  over 
said  Ward,  in  which  office  he  is  still 
serving  diligently.  Bishop  Jones  per- 
formed a  mission  to  Great  Britain,  in 
1901,  in  the  interest  of  his  genealogy, 
spending  most  of  his  time  in  Cardiff, 
Wales. 


JONES, George  Richards,  first  Bish- 
op of  the  Twenty-third  Ward,  Salt 
Lake  City,  Utah,  is  the  son  of  George 
Jones  and  Ann  Richards  and  was  born 
Jan.  21,  1836,  in  the  parish  of  New 
Church,  Monmouthshire,  England.  He 
was  baptized  April  7,  1857,  by  Elder 
Henry  Reeves,  and  married  Harriet 
Bruckshaw,  daughter  of  Thos.  Bruck- 
shaw  and  Ellen  Morgan,  March  7,  1859. 
Together  with  his  wife  he  sailed  for 
America  on  board  the  ship  "William 
Tapscott,"  April  11.  1859.  On  landing  in 
New  York  they  continued  their  jour- 
ney to  Florence,  Nebraska,  where  they 
joined  Geo.  Rowley's  hand-cart  com- 
pany in  crossing  the  plains  and  arrived 


FERNSTROM,  Frans  Samuel,  first 
counselor  to  Bishop  Geo.  R.  Jones  of  the 
Twenty-third  Ward,  Salt  Lake  City, 
was  born  in  Frandefors  parish.  Dais- 
land,  Sweden,  March  26,  1852.  Leaving 
Sweden  in  1872,  he  went  to  Norway, 
where  he  became  acquainted  with  the 
"Mormon"  Elders  and  the  gospel,  and 
was  baptized  into  the  Church  Nt  ,.  12, 
1875.  He  emigrrated  to  Utah  in  1876  and 
located  in  Salt  Lake  City.  In  1889  he 
became  one  of  the  promoters  of  the 
Scandinavian  Building  Society,  which 
purchased  the  so-called  Superior  Ad- 
dition, thus  enabling  many  people  to 
obtain  for  themselves  homes.  When 
that  part   of   Salt   Lake   City   was     or- 


BIOGRAPHICAL,    ENCYCLOPEDIA. 


685 


ganized  into  the  Twenty-third  Ward, 
in  1891,  Bro.  Fernstrom  was  chosen  as 
first  counselor  to  Bishop  Geo.  R.  Jones, 
a  position  which  he  has  occupied  ever 
since.  He  was  elected  a  member  of 
the  city  council  in  1897,  and  re-elected 
in  1899  and  1901.       During  the  time  he 


has  served  as  a  councilman  he  has 
made  a  splendid  record,  and  earned  the 
respect  of  all  classes  of  the  communi- 
ty. In  contending  for  such  measures 
as  he  honestly  believed  to  be  right  he 
has  ever  exhibited  an  earnestness 
which  has  made  his  influence  felt  with 
the  other  members  of  the  council  and 
the  people.  By  avocation  Elder  Fern- 
strom at  present  is  a  tailor,  and  is  con- 
ducting a  large  tailoring  establishment 
(F.  S.  Fernstrom  &  Sons).  His  first 
w-ife,  Henrietta  Hansen,  bore  him  four 
children,  and  after  her  death,  he  mar- 
ried Selma  Carlson,  who  has  borne  him 
seven  children.  Bro.  Fernstrom  is  a 
consistent  Churchman,  a  capable  law- 
maker, and  a  straightforward  business- 
man. 

ASHTON,  Edward  Treharne,  Bish- 
op of  the  Twenty-fourth  Ward,  Salt 
Lake  City,  is  the  son  of  Edward  Ash- 
ton  and  Jane  Treharne,  and  was  born 
in  Salt  Lake  City,  Utah,  July  14,  1855. 
His  parents  came  to  Utah  for  the  gos- 
pel's sake  at  an  early  day,  and  took 
part  in  the  developing  and  upbuilding 
of  this  western  country.      The  boyhood 


days  of  Bro.  Ashton  were  spent  in  toil. 
It  was  not  his  privilege  to  enjoy  the 
blessing  of  having  a  scholastic  educa- 
tion. Early  in  life  he  entered  the  em- 
ploy of  Elias  Morris  &  Sons'  stone  and 
marble  works.  He  soon  grew  in  favor 
with  his  employers  and  was  given  a 
position  of  trust.  At  the  age  of  twen- 
ty-two he  married  Eflfie  Morris,  daugh- 
ter of  the  late  Bishop  Elias  Morris.  In 
1889  he  left  for  a  mission  to  Great  Brit- 
ain, where  he  labored  successfully  in 
Wales,  part  of  the  time  as  president  of 
the  Welsh  conference.  After  his  re- 
turn home  he  was  chosen  and  set  apart 
as  a  president  in  the  2nd  quorum  of 
Seventy,  which  position  he  held  till  the 
organization  of  the  Twenty-fourth 
Ward,  Salt  Lake  City,  April  3,  1898. 
when  he  was  ordained  a  High  Prist  and 
Bishop  and  set  apart  to  preside  over 
^aid  Ward  by  Pres.  Geo.  Q.  Cannon.  As 
X  Bishop  he  has  labored  faithfully  for 
the  progress  of  the  Church  in  his  Ward, 
and  has  succeeded  in  erecting  a  very 
fine  Ward  chapel  or  meeting  house.  In 
1883  he  yielded  obedience  to  the  law  of 
plural  marriage  by  taking  to  wife  Cora 
Lindsay.  He  is  the  father  of  17  chil- 
dren, 14  of  whom  are  living.  In  the 
busines  world  Bro.  Ashton  is  recognized 
as  a  man  of  sound  judgment.  He  has 
been  a  contractor  and  builder  for  sev- 
eral years  and  has  done  much  building 


all  through  the  west.  He  has  erected 
nearly  every  electric  power  plant  in 
Utah.  At  present  he  is  engaged  in 
contracting  and  manufacturing,  and  is 
president  of  the  Ashton  Fire  Brick  and 


686 


LATTER-DAY    SAINT 


Tile  company  and  also  of  the  Ashton, 
Whyte,  Skillicorn  Co.,  cut  stone  con- 
tractors, etc.,  etc. 

CHRISTKNSEN,  James  Miller,  sec- 
ond counselor  to  Bishop  Edward  T.Ash- 
ton   of  the  Twenty-fourth     Ward,  Salt 


elected  mayor  of  Moroni,  and  was  sub- 
sequently twice  re-elected  to  that  of- 
fice, which  he  filled  with  marked  abili- 
ty. In  1881-83  he  filled  a  mission  to 
Scandinavia,  where  he  labored  success- 
fully in  the  Aarhus  conference,  Den- 
mark, first  as  a  traveling  Elder,  and 
later  as  president  of  the  conference. 
After  his  return  home  he  engaged  in  the 
mercantile  and  live  stock  business,  in 
Sanpete  county.  In  1891,  in  order  to 
gi\e  his  children  the  best  possible  edu- 
cational advantages,  he  moved  to  Salt 
Lake  City,  where  he  established  the 
firm  of  J.  M.  Christensen  &  Co.,  whole- 
sale produce  merchants,  of  which  busi- 
ness he  is  the  manager.  At  the  or- 
ganization of  the  Twenty-fourth  Ward, 
Salt  Lake  City,  April  17,  1898,  he  was 
chosen  to  act  as  second  counselor  to 
Bishop  Edward  T.  Ashton,  being  set 
apart  to  that  position  by  Chas.  W.  Pen- 
rose. 

EK,  Carl  August,  first  Bishop  of 
the  Twenty-fifth  Ward,  Salt  Lake  City, 
is  the  son  of  Lars  V.  Ek  and  Brita 
Christina  Lundwall,  and  was  born  July 
10,  1845,  in  Skokloster,  Upsala  Ian,  Swe- 


Lake  City,  Utah,  is  the  son  of  Christen 
Andersen  and  Anna  Margrethe  Jensen 
Miller,  and  was  born  in  Kirkeby,  Hom- 
strup  parish,  Vejle  amt,  Denmark,  Jan. 
8,  1846.  He  was  baptized  into  tht- 
Church  May  31,  1863,  and  soon  after- 
wards ordained  a  Teacher  and  sent  out 
as  a  local  missionary.  April  6,  1864, 
he  was  ordained  an  Elder  and  contin- 
ued to  labor  as  a  missionary  till  1867. 
He  married  Ane  Kjerstine  Zakariasen 
Jan.  23,  1867,  and  emigrated  to  Utah 
with  his  young  wife  that  year,  crossing 
the  plains  with  ox-teams.  On  his  ar- 
rival in  Utah,  he  located  in  Moroni, 
Sanpete  county,  where  he  became  an 
active  worker  in  the  Sunday  school,  ris- 
ing from  being  a  pupil  to  the  position  of 
superintendent.  He  also  served  as  a 
counselor  in  the  Elders'  quorum.  Dur- 
ing the  existence  of  the  United  Order 
in  Moroni,  in  1875-78,  he  served  as  sec- 
retary and  director.  He  was  ordained 
a  High  Priest  by  Apostle  Orson  Hyde, 
May  28,  1874,  and  set  apart  as  a  High 
Councilor  in  the  north  end  of  Sanpete 
county,  and  he  also  served  as  a  coun- 
selor in  the  presidency  of  the  local 
High  Priests  quorum.       In  1877  he  was 


den.  He  was  baptized  April  23,  1871, 
and  on  Oct.  1,  1872,  he  was  ordained  an 
Elder  and  sent  out  to  preach  the  gos- 
pel. He  labored  as  a  local  missionary 
till  1878,  during  part  of  which  time  he 
presided  over  the  Orebro  and  the  Stock- 


BIOGRAPHICAL    ENCYCLOPEDIA. 


687 


holm  branches  of  the  Church.  la  1878 
he  emigrated  to  Utah  and  settled  In 
Log-an,  Cache  county.  In  1882-84  he 
filled  a  successful  mission  to  Scandina- 
via, laboring  in  the  Stockholm  confer- 
ence, Sweden,  first  as  a  traveling  El- 
der, and  later  as  conference  president. 
He  returned  home  in  charge  of  a  com- 
pany of  emigrating  Saints,  with  which 
he  arrived  in  Salt  Lake  City  Nov.  9, 
1884.  Soon  after  his  return  home  he 
was  ordained  a  Seventy,  and  in  1889  he 
was  chosen  to  be  a  president  in  the 
110th  Quorum  of  Seventy.  In  March, 
1894,  he  changed  his  place  of  residence 
from  Logan  to  Salt  Lake  City,  where 
he  located  in  the  Sixth  Ward.  When 
the  Twenty-fifth  ^^ard,  Salt  Lake  City, 
was  organized,  Jan.  20,  1902,  he  was  or- 
dained a  Bishop  and  a  High  Priest  and 
set  apart  to  preside  over  the  new  Ward, 
which  was  formed  out  of  a  part  of  the 
Sixth  Ward. 

MAXWELL,  James,  Bishop  of  the 
Twenty-seventh  Ward,  Salt  Lake  City, 
is  the  son  of  Gavin  Maxwell  and 
Martha  McMillan,  and  was  born  Nov. 
30.  1852,  at  Thorneybank,  Renfrewshire, 
Scotland.  He  was  baptized  May  18, 
1862.  by  Isaac  Ramsey,  and  ordained  a 
Deacon  Aug.  8,  1868,  by  Elder  John  E. 
Pace.  In  1869  he  emigrated  to  Utah 
and  located  in  E.  T.  City,  Tooele  coun- 
ty, where  he  was  ordained  a  Teacher, 
Feb.  2,  1874,  by  Bishop  AVm.  F.  Moss, 
and  an  Elder  Feb.  15,  187.5,  by  Wm.  F. 
Moss.  From  1879  to  1880  he  acted  as 
president  of  the  Y.  M.  M.  I.  A.  and  su- 
perintendent of  the  Sunday  school  in 
E.  T.  City.  In  1880  he  moved  to  Salt 
Lake  City  and  settled  in  the  Twenty- 
first  Ward.  He  was  ordained  a  Seven- 
ty April  8,  1884,  by  Apostle  Abraham  H. 
Cannon,  and  became  a  president  in  the 
council  of  the  4th  cjuorum  of  Seventy 
April  16,  1888.  After  acting  as  an  as- 
sistant superintendent  of  the  Twenty- 
first  Ward  Sunday  school  for  a  number 
of  years,  he  was  chosen  and  set  apart 
as  superintendent  of  said  school  May 
28,  1893,  which  position  he  held  till  Feb. 
IS,  1894,  when  he  was  ordained  a  High 
Priest  by  Joseph  E.  Taylor  and  set 
apart  to  act  as  second  counselor  to 
Bishop  Marcellus  S.  Woolley,  of  the 
Twenty-first  Ward.  He  served  In  that 
capacity  till  Jan.  28,  1902,  when  he  was 
ordained  a  Bishop  by  Apostle  Geo. 
Teasdale  and  set  apart  to  preside  over 


the  Twenty-seventh  Ward,  which  was 
organized  on  that  occasion  out  of  the 
eastern  part  of  the  Twenty-first  Ward. 
Elder  Maxwell  has  always  been  a  faith- 
ful worker  in  the  Church  and  has  held 
many  positions  of  honor  and  trust  in 
the  community.  In  the  quorums  of  the 
Priesthood,  as  well  as  in  the  auxiliary 
organizations,to  which  he  has  belonged, 
he  has  ever  taken  a  leading  and  effi- 
cient part,  and  his  influence  for  good 
has  been  felt  in  all  the  circles  of  his 
association. 

CANNON,  Lewis  Mousley,  Bishop 
of  Cannon  Ward,  Salt  Lake  county, 
Utah,  is  the  son  of  Angus  M.  Cannon 
and  Amanda  Mousley  and  was  born 
in  St.  George, Washington  county,  Utah, 
April  1,  1866.  Soon  after  his  birth  he 
was  stricken  with  an  illness  which 
seemed  about  to  terminate  his  life. 
However,  through  the  administrations 
of  the  Elders,  coupled  with  the  faith  of 
his  parents,  his  life  was  spared.  In  1868 
his  father  was  recalled  from  the  Dixie 
mission,  and  returning  to  Salt  Lake 
City  he  settled  in  the  Fifteenth  Ward. 
Here  Lewis'  health  improved  until  he 
became  a  strong  child.  After  complet- 
ing his  studies  in  the  district  schools, 
he  went  for  a  number  of  years  to  the 
University  of  Deseret.  In  1886  he  at- 
tended the  Brigham  Young  Academy  at 
Provo.  Here  the  teachings  of  Dr.  Karl 
G.  Maeser  so  impressed  him  that  he  has 
felt  their  influence  to  the  present  time. 
Soon  after  his  return  to  Salt  Lake  City, 
he  was  appointed  deputy  assessor  of 
Salt  Lake  county.  This  position  he  filled 
until  he  was  called  to  take  a  mission 
one  year  later.  On  this  mission  he  la- 
bored in  England,  Germany,  Switzer- 
land, and  Bohemia.  While  doing  mis- 
sionary work  in  Bohemia,  he  had  an 
unusual  experience.  A  Catholic  priest, 
who  had  joined  the  Church,  told  Bro. 
Cannon  a  plan  he  had  whereby  they 
might  preach  the  gospel  to  many  people 
who  otherwise  might  never  hear  of  it. 
Hi.s  plan  was  that  they  should  fit  them- 
selves out  with  tinkers'  utensils  and  go 
among  the  people  mending  tinware,  etc. 
While  they  were  mending,  they  were 
incidentally  to  preach  the  gospel.  The 
plan  was  carried  out  for  some  time  and 
many  people  were  baptized.  The  police, 
however,  who  were  very  vigilant,  dis- 
covered what  they  were  doing,  and  the 
brethren   were   forced   to  give   up   their 


688 


LATTER-DAY    SAINT 


plan.  On  his  return  from  the  Old 
World  he  was  appointed  deputy  recor- 
der of  Salt  Lake  county.  He  remained 
in  this  position  for  one  year,  and  then 
went  to  work  for  Zion's  Savings  Bank 
and  Trust  Co.,  filling  different  positions 
in  that  institution,  at  the  present  time 
being  assistant  cashier.  Oct.  1,  1890, 
he  was  married  and  is  now  the  father 
of  five  children.  May  31,  1896,  he  was 
ordained  a  High  Priest  and  Bishop  by 
George  Q.  Cannon  and  set  apart  to  pre- 
side as  Bishop  of  Cannon  Ward,  which 
was  at  that  time  organized.  He  is  at 
present  performing  the  duties  of  that 
office. 

BECK,  John,  a  prominent  Elder  of 
the  Eighteenth  Ward,  Salt  Lake  City, 
Utah,  was  born  in  Aichelberg.Ober  amt, 
Schomdorf,  Wurtemberg,  Germany, 
March  19,  1843.  He  left  his  native  land 
at  the  age  of  fourteen,  and  went  to  St. 
Imier,  Switzerland,  where  he  entered 
the   high    school     and    studied   Italian, 


French  and  English.  Here  he  first  be- 
came acquainted  with  the  revealed  gos- 
pel, and  in  April,  1861,  he  acepted  it  and 
was  baptized  into  the  Church  and  later 
received  the  Priesthood  and  was  sent 
into  Germany  to  labor  as  a  mission- 
ary. He  traveled  together  with  Elder 
P.  F.  Goss  in  Baden,  Germany,  where 
they  performed  very  successful  work. 
While  in  that  county  Elder  Beck  was 
arrested  and  Imprisoned,  on  bread  and 
water,  for  nine  days  for  preaching  the 
gospel.  On  being  released  he  was  for- 
bidden by  the  police  court  to  remain  in 


the  city  of  Baden,  in  consequence  ot 
which  edict  he  went  to  Wurtemberg', 
where  he  continued  his  missionary  work 
among  his  relatives  and  others,and  was 
successful  in  bringing  about  sixteen 
souls  into  the  Church  and  in  organiz- 
ing a  branch.  Elder  Beck  also  suf- 
fered arrest  and  imprisonment  in  that 
city  for  bearing  his  testimony.  He  was 
apointed  to  preside  over  the  confer- 
ence, which  position  he  held  till  May, 
1864,  when  he  started  for  Utah,  cross- 
ing the  ocean  on  the  ship  "Hudson," 
and  arrived  in  Great  Salt  Lake  valley 
in  October,  1864,  having  crossed  the 
plains  with  ox-teams.  During  the  win- 
ter of  1864-65  he  lived  in  Lehi,  Utah 
county.  In  the  spring  of  1865  he  moved 
to  Richfield,  Sevier  county,  and  while 
making  this  trip,  together  with  other 
families,  the  little  company  had  some 
thrilling  experiences  with  the  Indians, 
who  were  just  then  preparing  for  an 
uprising.  While  in  Richfield,  Bro. 
Beck  participated  in  the  fight  of  the 
Blackhawk  War.  In  1866  he  moved 
back  to  Lehi,  where  he  followed  farm- 
ing and  sheepraislng,  and  in  1870  he 
went  to  Tintic,  Juab  county,  where  he 
discovered  the  famous  Bullion-Beck 
mine,  which  he  worked  hard  to  devel- 
op. He  was  finally  successful  in  oper- 
ating it,  and  it  proved  to  be  a  very  rich 
yielding  mine.  He  now  became  a 
wealthy  man  and  was  very  prosperous 
for  a  number  of  years,  but  by  placing 
too  much  confidence  in  his  fellow-men 
he  became  the  victim  of  unscrupulous 
persons  who  ruined  him  financially. 
This  experience  was  a  bitter  one  indeed, 
but  it  brought  a  great  education  with 
it.  Elder  Beck  is  at  present  working 
on  a  plan  whereby  the  many  barren 
tracts  of  land  may  be  populated  and 
made  fruitful,  by  a  system  of  co-oper- 
ative farming.  He  is  now  a  resident 
of  the  18th  Ward,  and  is  known  as  a 
liberal  and  kindhearted  man. 

SMITH,  John  Fewson,  the  railroad 
pioneer  of  Utah,  is  the  son  of  Robert 
Smith  and  Mary  Fewson  Smith,  and 
was  born  at  Preston,  Yorkshire,  Eng- 
land, Jan.  1,  1834.  He  was  baptized 
into  the  Church  May  4,  1851,  and  or- 
dained a  Priest  by  Elder  Hugh  Findlay, 
and  later  an  Elder.  April  27,  1863,  he 
married  Christiana  Venobles  Vernon, 
eldest  daughter  of  Joseph  Venobles 
Vernon,  and  emigrated  to  Utah  in  May, 
1863.    They  crossed  the  plains  with  ox- 


BIOGRAPHICAL   ENCYCLOPEDIA. 


689 


teams,  arriving  in  Salt  Lalce  City  Oct. 
4th  of  the  same  year,  where  they  es- 
tablished their  permanent  home.  In 
the  spring  of  1864,  Elder  Smith  was 
engaged  as  assistant  engineer    on    the 


survey  of  the  Union  Pacific  railroad, 
which  position  he  filled  until  its  com- 
pletion in  1869.  He  next  took  part  in 
the  location  and  construction  of  tae 
Utah  Central  railroad,  from  Ogden  to 
Salt  Lake  City.  He  afterwards  en- 
gaged in  government  surveys  in  Utah; 
was  United  States  deputy  mineral  sur- 
veyor, and  also  conducted  several  ex- 
tensive explorations  across  the  Great 
Desert  and  mountain  ranges  lying  be- 
tween Utah  and  the  Pacific  coast  in  the 
interest  of  the  Union  Pacific  and  other 
railroads.  In  1872  he  located  a  narrow- 
guage  railroad  in  American  Fork  can- 
yon, and  in  the  following  year  was  chief 
engineer  of  the  Bingham  Canyon  rail- 
road, also  narrow  gauge,  and  in  1875 
was  chief  engineer  and  one  of  the  prin- 
cipal promoters  of  the  Utah  and  Pleas- 
ant Valley  railroad,  another  narrow- 
gauge  road  running  from  Springville 
to  the  coal  fields  in  Pleasant  valley, 
and  which  afterwards  merged  into  the 
Rio  Grande  Western  railway.  In  Feb- 
ruary, 1888,  he  was  elected  a  member  of 
the  city  council  of  Salt  Lake  City  from 
the  fourth  precinct,  and  was  re-elect- 
ed in  1890,  being  the  only  member  of 
the  old  council  to  be  returned;  and  one 
of  the  unfortunate  six,  who,  after  hav- 
ing been  duly  elected,  were  denied  their 
certificates  which  were  wrongfully 
given  to  the  Liberal  party  candidates, 

Vol.  1.     No.  44. 


but  afterwards  were  awarded  to  them 
by  the  courts.  In  1891  he  went  to  Mex- 
ico in  the  interest  of  John  W.  Young's 
railroad  speculation,  and  in  1895  ex- 
plored a  route  from  El  Paso,  Texas,  to 
the  "Mormon"  colonies  in  'Chihuahua, 
Mexico,  for  a  New  York  syndicate.  The 
road  was  built  under  the  name  of  the 
"The  Rio  Grande  Sierra  Madra  &  Pa- 
cific Ry.,"  of  which  he  was  chief  en- 
gineer and  still  holds  that  position.  El- 
der Smith  was  ordained  a  High  Priest 
April  4,  1896.  He  is  the  father  of  three 
sons,  all  now  married,  and  one  daughter 
who  died  in  her  infancy. 

FELT.  David  Pile,  an  active  El- 
der of  the  Twenty-third  Ward,  Salt 
Lake  City,  Utah,  was  born  in  Salt  Lake 
City,  Utah,  Aug.  7,  1860.  He  was  bap- 
tized when  about  eight  years  old  and 
ordained  a  Deacon  Aug.  7,  1868.  Later 
he  was  ordained  a  Teacher  and  on  Nov. 
14,  1882,  he  was  ordained  an  Elder.  Sub- 
sequently he  was  ordained  a  Seventy. 
His  education  was  obtained  in  the  dis- 
trict schools  and  in  the  University  of 
Utah.  In  1882  he  married  and  the  fol- 
lowing year  he  moved  to  Provo,  Utah 
county,  where  he  engaged  in  the  book, 
stationery  and  music  business,  which 
occupation  he  followed  till  1895,     when 


he  entered  the  newspaper  field  by  buy- 
ing the  "Springville  Independent" 
(Springville,  Utah  county),  which  en- 
terprise he  satisfactorily  conducted  till 
Aug.  19,  1897,  when  he  left  for  a  mis- 
sion   to    the    Southern    States.       While 

Nov.   2,   1901. 


690 


LATTER-DAY    SAINT 


on  this  mission  he  first  labored  in 
Georgia,  whence  he  was  called  to  Chat- 
tanooga. Tenn.,  where  he  was  appointed 
to  takL'  charge  of  the  editorial  work  on 
the  "Southern  Star."  On  his  return 
to  Utah  he  was  given  a  position  in  the 
business  department  of  the  "Deseret 
News,"  and  later,  when  the  Church  as- 
sumed control  of  the  "Juvenile  Instruc- 
tor," Bro.  Felt  accepted  the  position  of 
advertising  solicitor  for  that  magazine: 
he  is  still  engaged  in  that  capacity.  El- 
der Felt  is  the  president  of  the  "Utah 
Press  Association,"  and  is  serving  his 
second  term  in  that  position.  In  the 
23rd  Ward,  Salt  Lake  City,  where  he  re- 
sides, he  is  president  of  the  Y.  M.  M.  I. 
A.,  and  is  also  the  ^Vard  chorister. 

SMITH,  Lucy,  mother  of  Joseph 
Smith  the  Prophet,  was  born  July  8, 
1776,  at  Gilsum,  Cheshire  county.  New 
Hampshire,  the  daughter  of  Solomon 
Mack  and  Lydia  Gates.  Lucy  was  the 
youngest  of  eight  children,  four  of 
whom  were  girls.  Her  father.  Solomon 
Mack,  had  just  attamed  his  majority 
when  the  war  between  France  and  Eng- 
land, which  grew  out  of  disputed  North 
American  territory,  was  proclaimed.  He 
entered  the  British  army,  and  had  two 
teams  in  the  service  of  King  Gteorge 
II.,  employed  in  carrying  General  Aber- 
crombie's  baggage,  and  was  present  in 
1758.  at  the  engagement  on  the  west  side 
of  Lake  George.  He  was  engaged  more 
or  less  in  military  pursuits  until  1759. 
when  he  was  discharged,  and  married 
an  accomplished  school  teacher,  Lydia 
Gates,  the  mother  of  the  subject  of  this 
memoir.  She  was  the  daughter  of  Na- 
than Gates,  a  wealthy  man,  living  in 
East  Haddam,  Conn.  She  was  of  a 
truly  pious  disposition,  and  had  an  ex- 
celent  education,  which  peculiarly  fitted 
her  for  the  duties  of  a  preceptress  to  her 
children,  especially  at  a  period  when 
schools  were  rarities  In  the  half  cleared 
and  thinly  settled  districts.  Lucy 
profited  by  the  talents  and  virtues  of 
her  mother.  Jan.  24.  1796,  she  was  mar- 
ried to  Joseph  Smith,  and  received  from 
her  brother,  Stephen  Mack,  and  John 
Mudget,  his  j.artner.  In  business,  a  mar- 
riage present  of  $1,000.  Her  husband 
owned  a  good  farm  at  Tunbridge,  on 
which  they  settled.  The  fruits  of  this 
marriage  were  seven  sons— Alvin,  Hy- 
rum,  Joseph,  Samuel  H.,  Ephraim, 
William  and  Don  Carlos;  and  three 
daughters— Soj.hrona,      Catherine      and 


Lucy.  In  1802.  Lucy  Smith,  with  her 
husband,  moved  to  Randolph,  Vermont, 
where  they  opened  a  mercantile  estab- 
lishment. Mr.  Smith  here  embarked  in 
an  adventure  of  gensang,  to  China,  but 
was  robbed  of  the  proceeds,  and  was 
much  involved  thereby.  To  liquidate 
his  debts,  he  had  to  sell  his  farm  at 
Tunbridge,  to  which  he  had  then  re- 
turned, and  to  use  his  wife's  marriage 
present,  which  till  then  had  remained 
untouched.  From  Tunbridge  they  re- 
moved    to  Royalton.      They     remained 


there  u  few  months,  and  then  went  to 
reside  at  Sharon,  Windsor  county.where 
Joseph  the  Prophet  was  born.  They 
again  returned  to  Tunbridge  and  Roy- 
alton successively,  but,  in  1811,  their 
circumstances  having  much  improved, 
they  quitted  Vermont  for  Lebanon,  in 
New  Hampshire.  Here  their  children 
were  all  seized  with  the  typhus  fever, 
though  none  fatally,  and  Joseph  was 
afflicted  with  a  fever  sore.  When  health 
was  restored  to  the  family  their  circum- 
stances were  very  low,  and  they  re- 
turned to  Vermont,  and  began  to  farm 
in  Norwich.  The  first  two  years  the 
crops  failed,  and  the  third  the  frost  de- 
stroyed them,  which  determined  Mr. 
Smith  to  remove  to  the  State  of  New 
York.  His  wife  and  family  did  not  re- 
move until  he  had  made  preparations 
for  them  in  Palmyra.  Here  the  whole 
family  set  themselves  industriously  to 
repair  their  losses.  Mr.  Smith  and  his 
sons  to  farming,  and  Mrs.  Smith  to 
painting  oil  cloth  coverings  for  tables, 
and  were  so  prospered  that  in  two  years 


BIOGRAPHICAL    ENCYCLOPEDIA. 


691 


they   were  again  comfortably  situated. 
After  four  years  had  elapsed,   they  re- 
moved to  Manchester.      In  the  alternate 
scenes  of  adversity  and  prosperity,  the 
subject   of     religion       was     a   constant 
theme  with  both   Mr.   and  Mrs.   Smith, 
though  the  former  never  subscribed  to 
any  particular  sect.       Both  were  occa- 
sionally  favored     of       the     Lord     with 
dreams  or  visions  of  the     approaching 
work  which  he  was  about  to  commence 
on  the  earth,  which  prepared  them  for 
the  mission  of  their  son  Joseph,  and  the 
important   part   they   were   destined    to 
take  in  it.      Lucy  Smith  and  several  of 
her    children    joined      the    Presbyterian 
body,  in  the  year  1319,  but  after  Joseph 
had  received  the  first  visitation  of  the 
angel,  and  had  communicated  the  mat- 
ter to  his  parents,   she   manifested   in- 
tense interest  in  it,  and  from  that  time 
her  history  became  identified  with   the 
mission   of  her  son.   She  and  her  hus- 
band were  baptized  in  April,  1830,   and 
she  removed  to  Kirtland,  Ohio,  in  1831, 
with  the  first  company  of  Saints,  where 
she  rejoined  her  husband  who  had  pre- 
viously gone  there  in  company  with  his 
son   Joseph.       Bro.    Smith   was    several 
times  torn  from  his  wife  by  the  enemies 
of  the  Saints,  and  unjustly  imprisoned, 
but  she  manifested  on  all     such  occa- 
sions a  calm  assurance  that  all  would 
end   well.       In   1838,   all   the   family   set 
out  for  Far  West,   Mo.,   a  tedious   and 
unpleasant  journey,  mostly  through  an 
unsettled  country.       They  remained  in 
Missouri  until  the  extermination  of  the 
Saints  from  the  State,  participating  in 
their  numerous  trials.      On  the  occasion 
of  the  last  arrest  of  her  sons  Joseph  and 
Hyrum   in   that   State,   by   the   mob,   in 
October,  1838,  and  when  a  court  martial 
had  decided  to  shoot  them  and  others, 
she   and   her   husband    could    distinctly 
hear   the   horrid   yellings     of   the   mob, 
which   was    encamped    at    a    short    dis- 
tance from  their  house.       Several  guns 
were   fired,   and     the   heart-broken   pa- 
rents supposed  the  bloody     work     was 
accomplished.       Mother  Smith  thus  de- 
scribes  these   moments'.        "Mr.    Smith, 
folding  his  arms  tight  across  his  heart, 
cried  out,  'Oh,  my  God!   my  God!   they 
have  killed  my  son!  they  have  murdered 
him!   and  I  must  die,  for  I  cannot  live 
without  him!'       I  had  no  word  of  con- 
solation to  give  him,  for  my  heart  was 
broken  within  me;    my  agony  was  un- 
utterable.      I  assisted  him   to  the  bed, 
and  he  fell  back  upon  it  helpless  as  a 


child,  for  he  had  not  strength  to  stand 
upon  his  feet.  The  shrieking  continued; 
no  tongue  can  describe  the  sound  which 
was  conveyed  to  our  ears;  no  heart  can 
imagine  the  sensations  of  our  breasts, 
as  we  listened  to  those  awful  screams. 
Had    the    army    been    composed    of    so 
many  blood-hounds,  wolves  and  panth- 
ers, they  could  not  have  made  a  sound 
more  terrible."  Joseph  and  Hyrum  were 
not  shot  at  that  time,  but  were  carried 
to  Richmond,  by  way  of  Independence, 
and  thence  to  Liberty.      At     their    de- 
parture   from    Far   West,      the     heart- 
stricken    mother   pressed    through     the 
crowd    to    the     wagon     containing   her 
sons^  exclaiming:      "I  am  the  mother  of 
the  Prophet;   is  there  not  a  gentleman 
here,  who  will  assist  me  to  that  wagon, 
that  I  may  take  a    last    look    at    my 
children,  and  speak  to  them  once  more 
before    I     die?"       With     her   daughter 
Lucy,   she     gained       the       wagon,     and 
grasped    Joseph's      hand,     which    was 
thrust  between  the  cover  and  the  wag- 
on-bed,  but  he  spoke  not  to  her  until 
she   said:      "Joseph,     do  speak  to  your 
poor  mother  once  more,   I  cannot  bear 
to  go   till  I  hear  your  voice."     At  this 
he  sobbed  out:       "God  bless  you,  moth- 
er;"  and  while  his     sister    Lucy     was 
pressing  a  kiss  on  his  hand,    the  w'agon 
dashed  off.      Mourning  and  lamentation 
now  filled  the  old  lady's  breast,   "but," 
says   she,    "in   the   midst   of   it  I   found 
consolation   that   surpassed   all   earthly 
comfort.       I  was  filled  with   the   Spirit 
of  God."  Shortly  after  this,  Bro.  Smith 
remoyed  his  family  to  Quincy,  Illinois, 
to  which  place  most  of  the  Saints  had 
previously   fled,    and    in     common   with 
them  suffered  the  hardships  and  priva- 
tions which  characterized  the  extermi- 
nation from  Missouri.       From     Quincy 
the  family  removed  to  Commerce  (Nau- 
voo),   where  Bro.   Smith,   after  blessing 
his   children     individually,     closed     his 
earthly  career  Sept.  14,     1840.       Mother 
Smith  was  thus  left  a  widow,  worn  out 
with  toil  and  sorrow,  her  house  having 
been    filled   with    sick     like   a   hospital, 
fi-om    the   time   of  the     expulsion   from 
Missouri.      Many  of  the  sick  owed    the 
preservation  of  their  lives  to  her  moth- 
erly care,  attention  and  skill,  in  nurs- 
ing them,  which  she  did  without  pecun- 
iary   consideration    and    the    extent    of 
which  can  only  be  appreciated  by  those 
who  are  personally  acquainted  with  the 
dreadful    scenes    of    sickness   and     dis- 
tress which  followed,  in  consequence  of 


692 


LATTER-DAY    SAINT 


the  Missouri  expulsion.  Aug.  7,  1841. 
she  was  called  upon  to  part  with  her 
youngest  son,  Don  Carlos,  a  promising 
young  man  who  died  suddenly  in  Nau- 
voo.  In  1843  she  took  up  her  residence 
with  her  son  Joseph,  and  was  shortly 
afterwards  taken  very  sick,  and 
brought  nigh  to  death.  She  had  scarce- 
ly recovered  when  she  was  called  to 
surfer  almost  overwhelming  grief  for 
the  assassination  of  her  sons  Joseph 
and  Hyrum  in  June,  1844.  When  she 
was  permitted  to  see  the  corpses  of  her 
murdered  sons,  her  sorrow  knew  no 
bounds.  "I  was,"  she  says,  "swallowed 
up  in  the  depths  of  my  afflictions;  and 
though  my  soul  was  filled  with  horror 
past  imagination,  yet  I  was  dumb,  until 
I  arose  again  to  contemplate  the  spec- 
tacle before  me.  Oh!  at  that  moment 
how  my  mind  flew  through  every  scene 
of  sorrow  and  distress  which  we  had 
passed  together,  in  which  they  had 
shown  the  innocence  and  sympathy 
which  filled  their  guileless  hearts.  As 
I  looked  upon  their  peaceful,  smiling 
countenances,  I  seemed  almost  to  hear 
them  say,  'Mother,  weep  not  for  us,  we 
have  overcome  the  world  by  love;  we 
carried  to  them  the  gospel,  that  their 
souls  might  be  saved;  they  slew  us  for 
our  testimony,  and  thus  placed  us  be- 
yond their  power;  their  ascendancy  is 
for  a  moment,  ours  is  an  eternal  tri- 
umph.' "  As  if  the  blow  had  not  been 
sufficient  to  crush  a  mother's  heart, 
Samuel  Harrison  Smith,  in  escaping 
from  the  murderers  of  his  brothers, 
overheated  himself,  which  brought  on 
a  fever  that  terminated  fatally,  July  30. 
1844.  Of  the  six  sons  which  she  had 
reared  to  manhood.  Mother  Smith  now 
had  but  one  (William)  left,  and  he  was 
at  the  time  of  the  martyrdom  at  a  dis- 
tance from  Nauvoo.  But  recovering 
somewhat  from  the  effect  of  her  afflic- 
tion, she  composed  a  very  interesting 
little  work  entitled  "Biographical 
Sketches  of  Joseph  Smith  the  Prophet 
and  his  Progenetors  for  many  Genera- 
tions," which  was  published  in  Eng- 
land some  years  afterwards,  and  which 
at  the  present  time  is  being  reprinted 
in  serial  form  in  the  "Improvement 
Era."  At  the  general  conference  of  the 
Church  held  in  Nauvoo,  in  October, 
1845, Mother  Smith  addressed  the  Saints. 
She  reviewed  the  scenes  through  which 
her  son  and  the  Church  had  passed 
and  exhorted  parents  to  exercise  a 
proper  care  over     the  welfare  of  their 


children.  She  expressed  her  Intention 
to  accompany  the  Saints  into  the  wil- 
derness, and  requested  that  her  bones, 
after  her  death,  should  be  brought  back 
and  be  deposited  in  Nauvoo  with  her 
husband's,  which  Pres.  Brigham  Young, 
and  the  whole  conference,  by  vote, 
promised  should  be  done.  Mother  Smith, 
however,  never  came  to  Utah.  From 
the  time  of  the  removal  of  the  Church 
to  the  Rocky  Mountains  until  her  death, 
which  occurred  in  Nauvoo,  111.,  May  5, 
1855.  she  mostly  resided  with  her  young- 
est daughter,  Lucy  Miliken,  excepting 
the  last  two  years,  when  she  resideil 
with  her  daughter-in-law.  Mrs.  Emma 
Bidamon,  widow  of  her  son  Joseph. 

SMITH,  Emma,  the  first.  Relief  _So- 
cieiyjjresiilent  inJheJllhurch_XLf Jesus 
C-hrist—of  iatter-day  Saints^  was  born 
JulyJ^ J.8(14,  in  Harmony,  Susquehan- 
na county.  Pennsylvania.  She  was  the 
daughter  of  Isaac  Hale  and  became  ac- 
(luainled  .with  Joseph  Smith  in  1827. 
while  he  was  employed  by  Mr.  Josiah 
Stoal  (of  Chenango  county,  New  York), 


in  Harmony,  Penn.  Joseph  writes. 
"During  the  time  that  I  was  thus  em- 
ployed. I  was  put  to  board  with  a 
Mr.  Isaac  Hale,  of  that  place;  it  was 
there  I  first  saw  my  wife  (his  daugh- 
ter). Emma  Hale.  On  the  18th  of  Jan- 
uary, 1827.  we  were  married,  while  I 
was  yet  employed  in  the  service  of  Mr! 
Stpal.  Owing  to  my  continuing  to  as- 
sert that  I  had  seen  a  vision,  persecu- 
tion still  followed  me,  and  my  wifels.. 
fathers  family  were  very  much  op'posed 
to  oux_being_rnarried.      I  was,  therefore. 


BIOGRAPHICAL    ENCYCLOPEDIA. 


093 


under  the  necessity  of  taking  her  else- 
where; so  we  went  and  were  married 
a.t  the  house  of  Squire  Tarbull,  in  South 
Bainbridg-e,  Chenango  county,  New 
York.  Immediately  after  my  marriage, 
I  left  Mr.  Stoal's  and  went  to  my 
father's,  and  farmed  with  them  that 
.^season."  Emma  accepted  the  gospel 
as  it  had  been  revealed  t h rough __.5gr 
h u sbahlT'anig^^a s  baptized  by  Oliver 
Cowdery  in  Colesville,  Broome  county. 
New  York,  in  June,  1830.  After  th^s 
she  shared  wath  her_Jia^aJlil.,-tus_Joys 
and^^orrows.  and^  together_mth  him, 
passedJJirgugh  the  persecutions__of_£J-ew 
York.  Ohio.  Missouri  and  Illinois.  In 
a  revelation  given  through  Joseph 
Smith  in  Ju|y^l530L she  was  called  "an 
€leciIJady"_and  commanded  to  expound 
.ScriptiJEes  and  to  exhort  the  Church." 
( Doc\_,&:,  Cov.  25:  7.)  When  the  first 
Female  Relief  Society  of"~tfie  Church 
was  organized  in  Nauvoo,  111.,  March 
17,  1842^  .fjhe  was  chosen  to  stand  at 
the  head  of  the  same  as  its  president^ 
/.  a  position  which  she  filled  with  marked 
distinction  as  long  as  the  society  con- 
tinued to  hold  meetings  in  that  city. 
When  the  Saints  j\vere  expelled  from 
Illinois"Tn  1846  Emma  Smith  chose  to  re- 
main  aTTier  home  in  Nauvoo^aihere^he 
w asjnarried  to  Lewas  C^JBidamon  Dec . 

23ri847r_the_R_ev.   William     Haney^^ a 

Methodi.st  elergyman^jperrormlng  the 
niavrriage-  -ceremony.  Mr.  Bidamon, 
who  was  generally  known  as  Major 
Bidamon,  made  the  Mansion  House 
(which  had  been  built  as  a  hotel  by  Jo- 
seph the  Prophet)  his  family  home,  and 
there  he  lived  with  Emma  as  his  wife 
for  about  twenty-two  years.  About 
1869  theyjtoolc  possession^of-a  portion  of 
the  old  Nauvoo  House, a  brick  structure 
whiGb_was_pariIy  buiTt~by^  the  Saints 
befqre__tJi£X-Ieft  Nauvoo,  and  which  for 
many  years  had  stood  as  a  ruin  on  the 
river  bank,  reminding  the  visitor  of 
Nauvoo's  past  glory.  Major.  Bidamon 
coniDleied__a,__part  of  the  house  and 
mov;^jUiis  family  into  it.  and  that  his- 
toric building__now^25?came  Emma's 
home_diu^ing.the  remainder  of  her  days. 
While  residing  as  Mrs.  Bidamon  in  the 
Mansion  House  and  later,  as  stated,  in 
the  Nauvoo  House,  Emma  was  fre- 
{luentJy-viskeii  by  re!ati"veS~and' friends 
from  Utah.  To  many  of  these  she 
seemed  restless  and  unhappy,  but  she 
always  manifested  gi-eat  interest  in  the 
friends  of  her  first  husband.      Her  dis- 


/ 


like    for    Pres.    Brigham    Young   Is    be- 


lieved by  many  to  have  been  the  main 
cause  of  her  ivfusal  to  gather  with  The 
Saints  to  the  mountains;  and  it  is  also 
asserted  that  she  on  the  same  ground, 
later  on,  influenced  her  sons  to  take  the 
stand  they~di(rTrrregard  to  the  so-called 
lie-organization.  Sister  Emma  died  in 
Nauvoo,  April  30,  1879,  and  at  Ihe  time 
of  her  demise  ffie^^TSeseret  News"  said 
editorially:  f^o  the  old  members  of 
the  Church  the  deceased  was  well 
known,  as  a  lady  of  more  than  ordinary 
intelligence  and  force  of  character. ^Her^ 
opposition__tothe  doctrine  of  plural 
marriage,  which,  however,  she  ^T°Hrst 
embraced;  led  to  her  departtrt't)  from 
the  fajth,  of  _the  gospel  /  as  "Fevealed 
through  hef  martyred  husban3.  She 
chose 


remain  at  Nauvoo  when  the 
Saints  left  for  the  west,  and  in  conse- 
(|uence  lost  the  honor  and  glory  that 
might  have  crowned  her  brow  as  "the 
elect  lady."  She  was  the  mother  of  four 
(seven)  children,  all  the  sons  of  the 
Prophet  Joseph,  viz:  Joseph,  now  lead- 
er of  the  sect  which  commonly  bears 
his  name,  Frederick  (deceased),  Alex- 
ander and  David.  It  was  mainly 
through  her  influence  that  they  were 
led  into  the  bypath  wherein  they  have 
gone  astray.  She  has_jiow__gone  be- 
yond  the  veil  to  await  the  great  day  of 
accounts.  TTiere  ii~lTo~Teeirng"  pr  hit- 
terness  in  the  hearts  of  the  Saints  to- 
ward §ister''''Emrnar"&mttTr,  hut  only  of 
pity^and  sorrow  for  the  course  she  pur-  i 
sued.      May  her  remains  rest  in  peace,i4- 

SNOW,  Kliza  Koxey.  second  pres- 
ident of  the  Relief  Societies  in  the 
Church  of  Jesus  Christ  of  Latter-day 
Saints,  was  born  Jan.  21,  1804,  in  Becket, 
Berkshire  county,  Mass.,  daughter  of 
(Jliver  Snow  and  Rosetta  L.  Pettibone. 
Her  father  was  a  native  of  Massachu- 
setts and  her  mother  of  Connecticut. 
Before  hearing  and  accepting  the  gos- 
pel of  Christ,  as  revealed  through  the 
Prophet  Joseph  Smith.  Eliza's  parents 
belonged  to  the  Baptists.  But  they 
were  broad  in  their  views,  and  hospit- 
able to  all  good  people,  whether  profes- 
sors of  religion  or  otherwise.  Eliza 
with  her  brothers  and  sisters  being 
carefully  trained  in  habits  of  industry, 
economy  and  strict  morality,  received 
also  the  best  of  scholastic  education 
that  the  country  then  afforded.  In  her 
youth.  Miss  Snow  became  an  expert 
needle-woman.  She  also  excelled  in 
straw    work   which    was    then    in    great 


694 


LATTER-DAY    SAINT 


demand  for  use  in  the  manufacture  of 
hats  and  bonnets.  But  she  was  best 
known  and  recognized,  even  in  early 
life,  as  a  writer  of  great  promise.  Her 
father  was  a  farmer,  but  much  of  his 
time  was  occupied  with  public  business. 
And  Eliza  was  often  employed  as  sec- 
retary for  her  father;  her  natural  capa- 
bilities rendering  her  well  adapted  to 
such  service.  While  quite  young  she 
wrote  poems  for  various  publications, 
and  won  an  enviable  reputation  among 
the  publishers  who  were  favored  with 
productions  from  her  pen.  When  but 
twenty-two  years  of  age,  she  was  so- 
licited through  the  press  to  write  a  re- 
quiem for  John  Adams  and  Thomas 
Jefferson,  whose  simultaneous  deaths 
on  the  Nation's  Independence  day,  1826, 


afforded  a  theme  well  suited  to  the  lofty 
and  patriotic  spirit  which  always  char- 
acterized Miss  Snow's  muse.  With  the 
appearance  of  the  poem  answering  the 
request,  in  the  publications  of  the  day, 
the  young  authoress  suddenly  found 
herself  becoming  famous.  She  was 
ushered  into  the  society  of  learned  and 
distinguished  people,  among  whom  were 
Alexander  Campbell,  the  noted  scholar 
and  theologian,  and  the  founder  of  the 
Campbellite  sect,  Sidney  Rigdon,  and 
other  refined  students  of  the  Scriptures. 
Early  in  the  year  1835  Eliza's  mother 
and  her  elder  sister,  Leonora,  having 
previously  joined  the  Church,  visited 
the  Saints  at  Kirtland.  On  returning 
home,  their  testimony  of  the  truth  of 
Joseph  Smith's  divine  authority  and  the 


doctrines  taught  by  him,   caused  Eliza 
to   investigate   the   new   religion.       She 
found   it   true,   and   became   a   member 
of  the  Church  of  Jesus  Christ  of  Latter- 
day  Saints,  being  baptized  April  5,  1835. 
In  the  following  December  she  removed 
from    Mantua,    Portage     county,    Ohio, 
where  her  father's   family  had   resided 
for  many  years,  to  Kirtland,  Ohio,  the 
gathering  place  of  the  Saints.       There 
she  boarded     with     the     family     of  the 
Prophet,  and  taught  a  select  school  for 
young   ladies.       What   the   struggle    to 
her  feelings  must  have  been,  in  leaving 
her  childhood's  home  (a  place  most  ten- 
derly and  beautifully  described    in    her 
poem  entitled  "My  Own  Home"),  with 
its  cherished  inmates,  giving  up  all  her 
worldly  prospects,     the     glowing  ambi- 
tions which  her  successes  would  natur- 
ally have  fed  and  heightened,  and  de- 
voting her  life  thenceforth  to  the  ser- 
vice of  the  Lord,  with  a  despised     and 
per.secuted  people,  she  pictures  as  well, 
perhaps,    as   it   is   possible     for   human 
tongue  to  tell,   or  pen   to  write,   in  her 
immortal  poem,  "Evening  Thoughts,  or, 
What  it  is  to  be  a  Saint."     From  that 
time  forward.   Miss  Snow's  life  and  la- 
bors,  in   whatever  channel   they  might 
be  directed,  were  all  for  the  building  up 
of  the  Kingdom  of  God.      Her  thoughts 
were    there;    her    hands    could    be    em- 
ployed in  no  work  that  had  not,  in  some 
way.    connection   with    the    gospel    plan 
of  salvation;  no  other  theme  could  ever 
again  inspire  her  muse.       In  several  of 
her  poems,  written  at  an  early  period  of 
her  experience  in  the  Church,  is  shown 
how  entirely  she  had  withdrawn  herself 
from  the  allurements  of  worldly  ambi- 
tions.       In    an    "Introductory     Invoca- 
tion," preceding  "Two  Chapters  of  the 
Life  of  President  Joseph     Smith,"   she 
wrote:     "For  thy  approval,    Lord,  shall 
prompt  my  pen,"   etc.       And  again,   at 
the     commencement     of     the     city     of 
Adam-Ondi-Ahman,  "Awake!  my  slum- 
bring  minstrel;  thou  hast  lain,"  etc.  The 
joy  and   gratitude   she   felt  afterwards, 
realizing     the     divine     love     which  the 
Father   had    shown    her    were    diffused 
through   the  psalms  and   hymns  which 
flowed  from  her  pen,  under  the  inspira- 
tion of  the  Holy  Spirit,  for  the  comfort- 
ing,  strengthening  and  edifying  of  the 
Saints.       How  much  her  people  needed 
such  help  as  she  was  from  that  source 
enabled  to  give  them, and  how  great  the 
blessings  which   were  thus  received   at 
her  hands,   although   sensed   in  a  large 


BIOGRAPHICAL    ENCYCLOPEDIA. 


695 


degree,  it  is  impossible  to'estimate.  The 
appreciative  Saints,  among  whom  and 
for  whom  she  labored,  gave  her  the  no- 
ble and  well  merited  title  of  "Zlon's 
Poetess" — a  name  of  far  greater  worth 
to  her  than  any  high  sounding  title 
which  the  world,  under  other"  circum- 
stances, might  sometime  have  bestowed 
upon  her.  Her  writings,  ever  full  of 
the  testimony  of  the  truth,  have  been  of 
inestimable  worth  in  promoting  the  in- 
terests of  the  gospel  wherever  it  has 
been  preached  among  the  nations  of  the 
earth.  Her  "Invocation,  or  the  Eter- 
nal Father  and  Mother,"  which  com- 
mences with,  "O,  my  Father!  thou  that 
dwellest,"  it  may  be  said,  is  sung  in 
nearly  all  lands  and  in  almost  every 
tongue,  and  carries  conviction  to  all 
honest  hearts  of  the  truth  of  the  prin- 
ciples it  conveys.  Soon  after  her  ar- 
rival in  Kirtland,  Miss  Snow's  loyalty 
to  the  work  of  the  Lord  was  manifested 
by  her  cheerfully  giving  what  means 
she  possessed  to  aid  the  building  of  the 
Temple  there.  Eliza's  father  also  em- 
braced the  gospel,  and  she  had  the  joy 
of  welcoming  her  parents  and  her 
brothers  imd  sisters  to  Kirtland.  In  the 
spring  of  1838  the  Snow  family,  Eliza 
included,  left  Kirtland,  like  many  oth- 
ers of  the  persecuted  Saints,  and  trav- 
eled west  to  Adam-Ondi-Ahman.  On 
the  way,  Eliza  remained  at  Far  West 
for  a  time,  to  take  care  of  her  brother 
Loi-enzo  who  was  very  sick;  they  were 
kindly  entertained  at  the  home  of  Elder 
Sidney  Rigdon.  When  the  brother  was 
convalescent  they  both  joined  the  fami- 
ly at  Adam-Ondi-Ahman.  In  all  the 
trying  scenes  through  which  the 
Church  passed,  during  the  dark  days  of 
its  mobbings  and  drivings,  "Sistei 
Eliza,"  as  she  was  best  known,  cheered 
and  solaced  all  by  her  woids  of  hero- 
ism, patriotism  and  unswerving  fideli- 
ty to  the  cause  of  God,  both  spoken 
and  written.  The  fertile  mind  and 
great  heart  of  this  gifted  woman 
seemed  ever  ready  and  able  to  do  jus- 
tice to  every  occasion  in  all  places.  In 
April,  1839,  she  wrote,  in  an  "Appeal  to 
Americans,"  a  poem  commencing 
Vi'ith  "There's  a  dark,  foul  stain 
on  the  Eagle's  crest."  In  the 
same  month  and  year,  and  at  the 
same  place,  she  wrote  an  address  "To 
the  Citizens  of  Quincy,"  a  poem  full  of 
gratitude  and  appreciation  for  kind  and 
humane  treatment  which  the  homeless, 
exiled   Saints,     for     a  time,  received  at 


their  hands.  In  1840,  still  in  Quincy,  in 
a  poem  entitled  "Columbia!  My  Coun- 
try!" beginning  with  her  own  loved 
land,  she  takes  her  reader  on  an  enter- 
taining journey  thiough  different  coun- 
tiies  of  the  earth.  When  the  Prophet 
Joseph  organized  the  Relief  Society  at 
Nauvoo,  on  the  17th  of  March,  1842, 
Sister  Eliza  R.  Snow  was  appointed  to 
fill  the  vei-y  responsible  position  of  sec- 
retary in  that  most  important  organiza- 
tion. She  was  sealed  to  the  Prophet 
Joseph  Smith  in  the  Celestial  Order  of 
Marriage,  which  includes  Plurality  of 
Wives,  June  29,  1842;  being  one  of  the 
early  converts  to  that  doctrine.  After 
the  martyrdom  of  her  husband,  June 
27,  1844,  Sister  Eliza  was  prostrated  with 
grief,  and  besought  the  Lord  with  all 
the  fervency  of  her  soul  to  permit  her 
to  follow  the  Prophet  at  once,  and  not 
leave  her  in  so  dark  and  wicked  a 
world.  And  so  set  was  her  mind  on  the 
matter,  that  she  did  not  and  could  not 
cease  that  prayer  of  her  heart  until  the 
Prophet  came  to  her  and  told  her  that 
she  must  not  continue  to  supplicate  the 
Lord  in  that  way,  for  her  petition  was 
not  in  accordance  wath  his  design  con- 
cerning her.  Joseph  told  her  that  hia 
work  upon  earth  was  completed  as  far 
as  the  mortal  tabernacle  was  concerned, 
but  her's  was  not;  the  Lord  desired  her, 
and  so  did  her  husband,  to  live  many 
years,  and  assist  in  carrying  on  the 
great  Latter-day  work  which  Joseph 
had  been  chosen  to  establish.  That  she 
must  be  of  good  courage  and  help  to 
cheer,  and  lighten  the  burdens  of  oth- 
ers. And  that  she  must  turn  her 
thoughts  away  from  her  own  loneliness, 
and  seek  to  console  her  ])eople  in  their 
bereavement  and  sorrow.  How  quick- 
ly and  how  well  that  brave  and  heroic 
\\oman  heeded  the  admonition  of  her 
noble  husband,  is  shown  in  the  fact  that 
four  days  only  after  the  martyrdom  of 
the  Prophet  and  his  brother  Hyrum,  in 
a  poem  dated  July  1,  1844,  she  most 
\ividly  and  pathetically  described  the 
awful  tragedy  of  the  assassination,  and 
the  exalted  characters  of  the  muidered 
brothers.  This  poem  begins  with,  "Ye 
heavens,  attend!  Let  all  the  earth  give 
earl"  In  the  same  month  of  July  we 
find  her  administering  consolation  to 
the  wounded  and  suffering  Apostle. John 
Taylor,  in  a  poem  commencing  with, 
"Thou  Chieftain  in  Zion!"  And  soon 
after,  she  offered  encouragement  in  a 
cheering  manner  to  President  Brigham 


696 


LATTER-DAY    SAINT 


Young,  in  her  poem,  "A  responsible  sta- 
tion is  surely  thine,"  etc.  Heber  C. 
Kimball,  Willard  Richards  and  others 
of  the  brethren  were  also  comforted  by 
her  cheering  words.  While  songs  and 
hymns  full  of  hope  and  trust  were 
given  without  stint  to  the  distressed 
and  defenseless  Saints  from  Sister  Eliza 
R.  Snow's  pen,  they  often  awakened 
a  spirit  of  peace  and  cheer  in  the  self- 
forgetfulness  which  they  inspired.  Nov. 
24.  1844,  she  wrote,  "Lines  on  the  Birth 
of  the  Infant  Son  of  Mrs.  Emma, Widow 
of  the  late  General  Joseph  Smith."  Of 
the  Prophet's  mother,  "The  Venerable 
Mrs.  Lucy  Smith,  '  Sister  Eliza  wrote 
a  poem  full  of  love  and  veneration, May, 

1845,  at  Nauvoo.  Feb.  19,  1846,  after 
leaving  the  city  of  Nauvoo,  she  wrote 
"Camp  of  Israel,  '  number  one,  "West 
side  of  the  Mississippi."  This  was  a 
song  which  the  Saints  sang  with  hearty 
zest.  It  contains  seven  verses  and  a 
chorus.  It  commences  with,  "Although 
In  woods  and  tents  we  dwell."  "Camp 
of  Israel,"  number  two,  was  written  on 
leaving  the  first  encampment  after 
crossing  the  Mississippi  river,  March  1, 

1846.  Thus  all  the  hard,  rough  way, 
"from  Kirtland  to  Salt  Lake,"  like  a 
"nursing  mother"  lulling  her  weary, 
restless  darlings  to  quiet  and  repose, 
or  stimulating  them  to  farther  exertion 
by  reminding  them  of  promised  recom- 
pense, did  this  angelic  "Queen  of  Song" 
foster  and  nourish  the  oft-times  sinking 
spirits  of  her  over-worked  and  under- 
fed brethren  and  sisters.  Her  "Song  of 
the  Desert,"  was  written  on  the  "Bank 
of  the  Platte  river,  Aug.  25,  1847."  And 
farther  on,  between  the  Platte  and 
Green  rivers,  she  wrote  greetings  "To 
President  Brigham  Young  and  Camp," 
who  were  returning  to  Winter  Quarters 
after  their  Pioneer  entrance  into  the 
Valley  of  the  Great  Salt  Lake,  and  met 
the  company  with  which  Sister  Eliza 
was  traveling.  After  arriving  in  Salt 
Lake  valley.  Sister  Eliza  was  provided 
with  a  home  by  President  Brigham 
Young,  to  whom  she  was  married  in 
1849.  And  she  remained  a  member  of 
his  household  from  that  time  until  her 
death.  In  November,  1847,  she  wrote 
to  Sisters  M.  A.  Young,  V.  Kimball  and 
E.  A.  Whitney  a  poem  entitled  "Come 
to  the  Valley."  from  the  Valley  of  the 
Great  Salt  Lake.  Sister  Eliza  was  now 
nearlng  her  prime,  being  forty-three 
years  of  age.  Exposures  and  hard- 
ships had  racked  her  constitution,     her 


I)hysical  system  was  reduced  to  pover- 
ty, and  for  some  years  she  suffered  with 
enfeebled    health.       When   the    Endow- 
ment House  was  dedicated  in  May,  1855. 
Pres.  Brigham  Young  asked  Sister  Eliza 
if  she  would  go  and  take  charge  of  and 
l>reside  over    the  sisters'  work  therein. 
In    answer    she    referred    to    her   feeble 
(  ondition  of  health,  and  expressed  fears 
that  she  would  be  unable  to  do  justice 
to  so  important  a  mission.  Pres.  Young 
assured  her  that  her  health  should  im- 
Itrove  and  she  should  grow  stronger,and 
have    joy    in    the    labors    to    which    the 
Lord  was  calling  her.      Her  faith  in  the 
words  of  the  man  of  God  caused  her  to 
accept  the  call,  and  his  promises  to  her 
were  immediately  fulfilled;  she  held  the 
sacied  office  then  conferred  upon  her  as 
long  as  ordinance  work  was  done  in  the 
Endowment  House.      In  1866,  when  the 
organization   of  the   Relief   Society   be- 
gan to  be  made  general  throughout  all 
the  Wards   and   Stakes  of  Zion,   Sister 
Eliza  was  set  apart  as  president  over 
the  entire  sisterhood  of  the  Church.    In 
that  position   she   labored  continuously 
for     twenty-one      years,     until     failing 
health    caused   her   to   remain    quiet   at 
home,  but  a  short  time  previous  to  her 
death.      Her  wise  and  cheering  counsel 
was  much  sought  by  her  sisters  in  their 
private   as   well    as   public   affairs,    and 
her  great  heart  and  mind  seemed  cap- 
able of  comprehending,  and  to  a  won- 
derful   extent,    of     correcting  whatever 
difficulties  were  presented  to  her.     Bet- 
ween  herself  and   her  faithful  brother, 
the  late  President  Lorenzo  Snow,  there 
ever    existed    the    most    tender   sisterly 
and  brotherly  love.       And   perhaps     no 
other  mission  ever  assigned  to  either  of 
them  was  completed  with  more     entire 
satisfaction  than  was  their  tour  to  and 
from    Palestine,    which     they     had    the 
privilege  of  taking  together,  in  1872-73. 
in  company  with  Pres.  George  A.  Smith 
and  a  small  party  of  Saints.      While  in 
♦  he   Holy  Land,    among     various   other 
poems,    and    an     extensive     correspon- 
dence, principally  to  the  "Woman's  Ex- 
ponent,"   Sister   Snow   wrote   an    "Apo- 
strophe to  Jerusalem,"  commencing  as 
follows:       "Thou  City  with  a  cherished 
name."       Of    the    books    published      by 
Eliza  R.  Snow,  mention  may  be  made  of 
her  first  volume  of  poems,  published  in 
1856,      "Correspondence       of     Palestine 
Tourists,"    compiled    and    published     in 
1875:  her  second  volume  of  poems,  pub- 
lished   in   1877:    a   hymn-book,    a    tune- 


BIOGRAPHICAL  ENCYCLOPEDIA. 


697 


book,  and  a  First  and  Second  Speaker 
for  the  Children's  Primary  Association, 
and  "Biography  and  Family  Record  of 
Lorenzo  Snow,"  published  in  1884.  Sister 
Eliza's  death  occurred  Dec.  5,  1887,  at 
the  Lion  House,  Salt  Lake  City,  when 
she  was  eighty-three  years,  ten  months 
and  fourteen  days  old.  Her  remains 
were  interred  in  Pres.  Brigham  Young's 
private  burying  ground,  on  the  hill-side 
northeast  of  his  family  residences  and 
the  Eagle  Gate.— L.  G.  R. 

YOUNG,  Ziiia  Diantha  Huntington* 

third  president  of  all  the  Relief  Socie- 
ties of  the  Church  of  Jesus  Christ  of 
Latter-day  Saints,  was  born  Jan.  31, 
1821,  in  Watertown,  Jefferson  county. 
New  York,  the  daughter  of  William 
Huntington  and  Zina  Baker.  Her 
father's  family  was  a  direct  descendant 
from  Simon  Huntington,  the  Puritan 
immigrant  who  sailed  for  America  in 
1633.  He  died  at  sea,  but  left  three 
sons  and  his  widow,  Margaret.  The 
church  records  of  Roxbury,  Mass.,  con- 


tain the  earliest  record  of  the  Hunting- 
ton name  known  in  New  England,  and 
in  the  hand-writing  of  the  Rev.  John 
Elliot  himself,  the  pastor  of  that  an- 
cient church.  Sister  Zina's  grandfather, 
Wm.  Huntington,  the  revolutionary  sol- 
dier, married  Prescinda  Lathrop,  and 
was  one  of  the  first  settlers  in  the  Black 
liiver  valley,  northern  New  York.  The 
Huntingtons  and  Lathrops  intermar- 
ried. The  Huntingtons  embraced  the 
fulness  of  the  gospel  at-  Watertown, 
NVw  York,  and  Zina  D.,  when  only  fif- 


teen years  old,  was  baptized  by  the 
Patriarch  Hyrum  Smith,  Aug.  1,  1835, 
and  soon  after  went  to  Kirtland  with 
her  father's  family.  In  this  year  she 
received  the  gift  of  tongues.  On  one 
occasion  in  the  Kirtland  Temple  she 
heard  a  whole  invisible  choir  of  angels 
singing,  till  the  house  seemed  filled  with 
numberless  voices.  At  Kirtland  she  re- 
ceived the  gift  of  interpretation.  She 
was  also  at  the  memorable  Pentecost 
when  the  spirit  of  God  filled  the  house 
like  a  minghty,  rushing  wind.  Zina  was 
a  member  of  the  Kirtland  Temple  choir. 
She  experienced  the  persecutions  in 
Missouri  and  Illinois,  and  her  mother 
died  from  fatigue  and  privation  in  Nau- 
voo,  July  8,  1839.  Only  two  of  the 
family  were  able  to  follow  her  remains 
to  their  resting  place.  Sister  Zina  was 
married  in  Nauvoo,  and  had  two  sons, 
but  this  not  proving  a  happy  union,  she 
subsequently  separated  from  her  hus- 
band. Joseph  Smith  taught  her  the 
principle  of  marriage  for  eternity,  and 
she  accepted  it  as  a  divine  revelation, 
and  was  sealed  to  the  Prophet,  after  the 
order  of  the  new  and  everlasting  cove- 
nant. Oct.  27,  1841,  her  brother  Dimick 
officiating.  Sister  Zina  was  a  member 
of  the  first  organization  of  the  Relief 
Society  at  Nauvoo,  and  when  the  Tem- 
ple was  ready  for  the  ordinances  to  be 
performed,  received  there  her  blessings 
and  endowments.  After  the  martyr- 
dom of  the  Prophet  Joseph  and  Hyrum, 
she  was  united  in  marriage  for  time  to 
Brigham  Young,  and  with  othei's  of  the 
Saints  left  Nauvoo  Feb.  9,  1846,  crossing 
the  Mississippi  on  the  ice.  Arriving 
at  Mt.  Pisgah,  a  resting  place  for  the 
exiles,  Father  Huntington  was  called  to 
preside  and  Zina  D.,  with  her  two  little 
boys,  remained  with  him  temporarily. 
Sickness  visited  the  camp,  and  deaths 
were  so  frequent  that  help  could  not  be 
obtained  to  make  coflfins.  Many  were 
buried  with  split  logs  at  the  bottom  of 
the  grave  and  brush  at  the  sides,  that 
being  all  that  could  be  done  by  mourn- 
ing friends.  Her  father  was  taken  sick, 
and  in  eighteen  days  he  died.  After 
these  days  of  trial  she  went  to  Winter 
Quarters,  and  was  welcomed  into  the 
family  by  Brigham  Young.  With  them, 
she  in  May,  1848,  began  the  journey  to 
Great  Salt  Lake  valley,  walking,  driv- 
ing team  and  cooking  beside  camp-fires. 
After  her  arrival  in  the  Valley,  in  Sep- 
tember, she  lived  in  tents  and  wagons 
until  log  houses  could  be  built.      Here, 


698 


LATTER-DAY    SAINT 


April  3,  1S50,  was  born  Zina,  daughter 
of  Brigham  Young  and  Zina  D.  H. 
Young.  When  the  Relief  Society  was 
organized  in  Utah  by  Pres.  Brigham 
Young,  Sister  Zina  was  one  of  the  first 
identified  with  that  work,  as  treasurer, 
and  when  a  central  organization  of  the 
Relief  Societies  in  the  Church  was  ef- 
fected. June  19,  18S0,  and  Sister  Eliza 
was  called  to  preside  over  the  same. 
Sister  Zina  was  chosen  as  her  first 
counselor,  which  position  she  occupied 
until  the  death  of  Sister  Snow,  in  1887, 
when  she  was  appointed  to  fill  the 
formers  place  as  president  of  the  so- 
ciety— a  position  which  she  held  until 
her  death.  When  in  1891  the  local  body 
became  connected  with  th«  National 
Council  of  Women,  Sister  Young  be- 
came vice  president  of  the  great  na- 
tional organization.  One  of  the  most 
useful  fields  of  her  labor  was  serial  cul- 
ture. She  raised  cocoons,  attending  to 
them  with  her  own  hands,  and  had 
charge  of  a  large  cocoonery  and  mul- 
berry orchard  belonging  to  Pres.  Young. 
When  the  Silk  Association  was  organ- 
ized, June  15,  1876,  she  was  chosen 
president.  Great  good  was  accom- 
plished, mulberry  trees  were  planted 
and  cocoons  raised  in  every  part  of  the 
Territory  where  the  climate  would  per- 
mit. A  good  article  of  silk  was  manu- 
factured with  home  machinery.  Sister 
Zina  also  took  a  course  of  medical  stud- 
ies, being  one  of  the  first  to  adopt  the 
wish  of  Pres.  Brigham  Young,  for  as 
many  of  the  sisters  as  would  be  useful 
for  the  practice  in  the  many  settle- 
ments, among  their  own  sex,  to  qualify 
themselves.  Ladies  came  from  different 
settlements,  stimulated  by  her  example. 
In  all  departments  of  woman's  labor 
for  the  public  good.  Sister  Zina  was 
found  at  her  post  doing  her  share  of 
active  work  in  the  best  manner  possi- 
ble. She  traveled  among  the  different 
settlements,  visiting,  organized  socie- 
ties or  assisting  Sister  Eliza  R.  Snow, 
or  the  local  authorities  in  organizing. 
.\t  a  mass  meeting  of  ladies  held  in 
Salt  Lake  City.  Nov.  16,  1878.  Sister 
Zina  delivered  a  very  elof|uent  im- 
promptu address.  Sister  Augusta  J. 
r'rocheron.  one  of  the  repoiters  on  that 
occasion,  notinfic  the  increasing  earnest- 
nes  in  her  voice  and  words,  writes: 
"I  raised  my  eyes  to  her  standing  just 
before  the  table  we  were  using.  Sud- 
denly, as  though  hei-  words  struck  home 
like   an    electric   shock,    several    gentle- 


men sitting  at  my  right  hand,  clutching 
the  arms  of  the  chairs,  started  as 
though  they  would  rise  to  their  feet; 
their  faces  burning  with  the  truths  they 
heard,  their  eyes  fixed  upon  her  fearless 
face  and  uplifted  hands.  I  can  never 
forget  that  moment.  It  was  more  than 
eloquence,  it  was  inspiration.  Following 
is  a  portion  of  hei-  address:  'The  prin- 
ciple of  our  religion  that  is  assailed 
is  one  that  lies  deep  in  my  heart.  Could 
I  ask  the  heavens  to  listen;  could  I  be- 
seech the  earth  to  be  still,  and  the 
brave  men  who  possess  the  spirit  of  a 
Washington  to  hear  what  I  am  about 
to  say.  I  am  the  daughter  of  a  mas- 
ter mason!  I  am  the  widow  of  a  mas- 
ter mason,  who,  when  leaping  from  the 
window  of  Carthage  jail  pierced  with 
bullets,  made  the  masonic  sign  of  dis- 
tress; but.  gentlemen  (addressing  the 
representatives  of  the  press  that  were 
present),  those  sigrns  were  not  heeded 
except  by  the  God  of  heaven.  That  man, 
the  Prophet  of  the  Almighty,  was  mas- 
sacred without  mercy!  Sisters,  this  is. 
the  first  time  in  rny  life  that  I  have 
dared  to  give  utterance  to  this  fact,  but 
I  thought  I  could  trust  my  soul  to  say 
it  on  this  occasion;  and  I  say  it  now  in 
the  fear  of  Israel's  God,  and  I  say  it  in 
the  presence  of  these  gentlemen,  and  I 
wish  my  voice  could  be  heard  by  the 
whole  brotherhood  of  masons  through 
out  our  proud  land.  That  institution 
I  honor.  If  its  principles  were  prac- 
ticed and  strictly  adhered  to,  would 
there  be  a  trespass  upon  virtues?  No. 
indeed.  Would  the  honorable  wife  or 
daughter  be  intruded  upon  with  im- 
punity? Nay.  verily.  Would  that  the 
ladies  of  America,  with  the  honorable 
Mrs.  Hayes  at  their  head;  would  that 
the  Congress  of  the  United  States,  the 
law  makers  of  our  nation,  could  produce 
a  balm  for  the  many  evils  which  exist 
in  our  land  through  the  abuse  of  vir- 
tue, or  could  so  legislate  that  virtue 
could  be  protected  and  cherished  as  the 
life  which  the  heaven  has  given  us.  Wt 
in  common  with  many  women  through- 
out our  broad  land,  would  hail  with 
joy  the  approach  of  such  deliverano^. 
for  such  is  the  deliverance  that  woman 
needs.  The  pi  inciple  of  plural  marriage 
is  honorable.  It  is  a  principle  of  the 
Gods,  it  is  heaven  born.  God  revealed 
it  to  us  as  a  saving  principle;  we  have 
accepted  it  as  such,  and  we  know  it  is 
of  him,  for  the  fruits  of  it  are  holy. 
Even    the    Savior,    himself,    traces     his 


BIOGRAPHICAL    ENCYCLOPEDIA. 


699 


lineage  back  to  polygamic  parents.    We 
are  proud  of  the  principle,  because  we 
know  its  true  worth,  and  we  want  our 
children  to  practice  it,  that  through  us 
a  race  of  men  and  women  may  giow  up 
possessing  sound  minds  in  sound  bodies, 
who  shall  live    to    the  age  of  a  tree." 
During  the  summer  of  1879  Sister  Zina 
decided  to  take  a  trip  to  the  Sandwich 
Islands  for  her  health,  and  was  accom- 
panied by  Miss  Susa  Young.     She  had 
the  opportunity  of  meeting  many  per- 
sons of  note  to  whom  she  imparted  cor- 
rect information   regarding  our  people, 
distributing   tracts   and    books.       Great 
respect   was   paid   her   and   many   ova- 
tions.      She   assisted   the   native   mem- 
bers of  the  Church  in  getting  an  organ 
for  their  meetings,  and  contributed  lib- 
erally  for   other     benevolent   purposes. 
On   her   return    she   spent   most   of   her 
time  attending  meetings  of  the  various 
organizations.  Sericulture  was  not  for- 
gotten or  neglected.  She  also  continued 
her   labors   in   the   House   of   the   Lord. 
In    the   fall    of   1880,    Sisters    Zina     and 
Eliza  R.   Snow  went  to   St.    George,    to 
labor   in   the   Temple,    and   visited     the 
organizations   of   the   women   and   chil- 
dren, wherever  practicable.      They  held 
meetings  by  the  way,  often  camped  out 
over  night,  and  traveled  thus  over  one 
thousand  miles.       Returning  March  31, 
1881,  they  were  met  at  the  depot  by  a 
party  of  thirty  ladies,  in  carriages,  who 
escorted  them  to  the  Lion  House  where- 
a  reception  of  welcome   home   awaited 
them.       Aug.   20,   1881,   accompanied   by 
her   foster   son,    Lieut.    Willard   Young, 
she  started  for  New  York  to  gather  up 
the  records  of  her  relatives.      Dr.  E.  B. 
Ferguson   was   going   to    purchase     her 
medical  studies  further  in  some  branch- 
es, to  be  of  greater  service  among  the 
people.       Previous  to  their  going     they 
were  blessed  and  set  apart  by  the  First 
Presidency  of     the     Church,     to  speak 
upon  the  principles  of  the  gospel  if  op- 
portunity presented.       Sister  Zina  was 
cordially  received  by  her  relatives,  and 
invited  to  speak  in  Sunday  school  and 
temperance  meetings.      She  visited  New 
York  city,  and  listened  to  many     cele- 
brated  divines,   attended   the   Woman's 
Congress  at  Buffalo,  N.  Y.,  but  was  re- 
fused five  minutes  to  represent  the  wo- 
men of  Utah,  visited  Watertown,  N.  Y., 
then  to  Vermont,  and  thence  to  Albany 
county,  and  spoke  in  several  meetings. 
Sister   Zina   returned    to   New   York    to 
attend  the  N.  W.  S.  A.  convention, with- 
out opportunity     of     addressing     them. 


She,  however,  assisted  the  brethi-en  in 
organizing  a  Relief  Society  in  New 
York.  With  Lieut.  Willard  Young  she 
visited  West  Point,  and  returned  home 
March  7,  1881,  received  by  her  daugh- 
ters and  many  friends,  the  return  be- 
ing the  occasion  for  a  most  delightful 
party.  Sister  Young  died  at  her  home 
in  Salt  Lake  City,  Aug.  28,  1901.  Sister 
Augusta  J.  Crocheron  describes  Sister 
Zina  in  the  following  language  in  her 
book,  entitled  "Representative  Women 
of  Deseret,"  published  in  1884:  "Pic- 
ture and  words  are  alike  powerless  to 
convy  the  beauty  of  her  face,  her  spirit 
and  her  life.  Each  succeeding  year 
adds  a  tenderer  line  to  her  face,  a 
sweeter,  gentler  intonation  to  her  voice, 
a  more  perceptible  power  to  her  spirit 
from  the  celestial  fountains  of  faith, 
widens  the  circle  of  her  friends, 
strengthens  and  deepens  their  love  for 
her,  and  brings  a  richer  harvest  of  no- 
ble labors  to  her  name." 

SMITH,  Bathsheba  Wilson,  fourth 
president  of  the  Relief  Societies  in  the 
Church  of  Jesus  Christ  of  Latter-day 
Saints,  was  born  May  3,  1822,  in  Shinn- 
sten,  Harrison  county,  West  Virginia, 
daughter  of  Mark  Bigler  and  Susannah 


Ogden.  Her  father  was  from  Penn- 
sylvania, her  mother  from  Maryland. 
The  school  facilities  in  her  vicinity  were 
limited.  The  county  of  Harrison  was 
hilly,  and  the  roads  of  primitive  char- 
acter; the  mode  of  travel  was  chiefly 
on  horseback  riding,  in  which  few  could 
excel  her.      In  her  girlhood  she  was  re- 


700 


LATTER-DAY    SAINT 


Ugriously  inclined,  loved  virtue,  honesty, 
truthfulness  and  integrity;  attended 
secret  prayers,  studied  to  be  cheerful, 
industrious  and  happy,  and  was  always 
opposed  to  rudeness.  During  her  fif- 
teenth year  some  Latter-day  Saints 
visited  the  neighborhood;  she  heard 
them  preach  and  believed  what  they 
tiaughL  She  knew  by  the  spirit  of  the 
Lord,  in  answer  to  her  prayer,  that  Jo- 
seph Smith  was  a  Prophet  of  the  Lord, 
and  that  the  Book  of  Mormon  was  a 
divine  record.  Aug.  21,  1837,  she  was 
baptized;  and  most  of  her  father's 
family  joined  the  Church  about  the 
same  time.  They  soon  felt  a  desire  to 
gather  with  the  rest  of  the  Saints  in 
Missouri;  her  sister.  Nancy,  and  fami- 
ly sold  their  property,  intending  to  go 
in  the  fall,  and  Bathsheba  was  very 
anxious  to  go  with  them.  Her  father 
having  not  yet  sold  out  his  property, 
she  was  told  she  could  not  go.  This 
caused  her  to  retire  very  early,  feeling 
very  sorrowful.  While  weeping,  a  voice 
said  to  her,  "Weep  not,  you  will  go  this 
fall."  She  was  comforted  and  perfect- 
ly satisfied,  and  the  next  morning  tes- 
tified to  what  the  voice  had  said  to  her. 
Soon  after,  her  father  sold  his  home, 
and  they  all  went  to  Missouri,  to  her 
.ffreat  joy,  but,  on  their  arrival  there, 
they  found  the  State  preparing  to  war 
against  the  Saints.  A  few  nights  be- 
fore they  reached  Far  West,  they 
camped  with  a  company  of  Eastern 
Saints,  but  sep.irated  on  acount  of  each 
company  choosing  different  ferries.  The 
company  that  Sister  Bathsheba  and  her 
family  were  members  of  arrived  safe- 
ly at  their  destination,  but  the  others 
were  overtaken  by  an  armed  mob  at 
Haun's  mill;  seventeen  were  killed, 
others  were  wounded,  and  some  maimed 
for  life.  In  a  few  days  after  their 
arrival  in  Missouri,  a  battle  was  fought 
between  the  Saints  and  the  mob,  in 
which  David  W.  Patten  (one  of  the 
first  Twelve  Apostles)  was  wounded, 
and  he  was  brought  to  the  house  where 
they  were  stopping.  Sister  Bathsheba 
witnessed  his  death  the  same  day,  and 
saw  thousands  of  mobbers  arrayed 
against  the  Saints,  and  heard  their 
dreadful  threats  and  savage  yells,  when 
the  Prophet  Josph  and  his  brethren 
were  taken  into  their  camp.  The 
Prophet.  Patriarch  and  many  others 
were  taken  to  prison;  and  the  Saints 
had  to  leave  the  State.  In  the  spring 
they  had  the  joy  of  having  the  Prophet 


and  his  brethren  restored  to  them  at 
Quincy.  Illinois.  In  the  spring  of  1840 
the  farnily  of  Sister  Bathsheba  moved 
to  Nauvoo,  where  she  had  many  op- 
liorlunities  of  hearing  the  Prophet  Jo- 
seph preach,  and  tried  to  profit  by  his 
instruction,  and  also  received  many  tes- 
timonies of  the  truths  which  he  taught. 
July  2r>.  1841,  Bathsheba  was  married  to 
George  A.  Smith,  the  then  youngest 
member  of  the  Twelve  Apostles,  Elder 
Don  Carlos  Smith  (brother  of  the 
Prophet)  officiating.  George  A.  Smith 
was  first  cousin  to  the  Prophet  Joseph. 
When  Sister  Bathsheba  first  became  ac- 
quainted with  George  A.  Smith,  he  was 
the  junior  member  of  the  first  quorum 
of  Seventies.  June  26,  1838,  he  was 
ordained  a  member  of  the  High  Council 
of  Adam-Ondi-Ahman,  in  Daviess  coun- 
ty, Missouri.  .lust  about  the  break  of 
day  on  the  26th  of  April,  1839,  while 
kneeling  on  the  corner  stone  of  thp 
foundation  of  the  Lord's  House  at  Far 
West,  Caldwell  county,  Missouri,  he 
was  ordained  one  of  the  Twelve  Apos- 
tles, and  then  started  on  a  mission  to 
Europe,  from  which  he  retuined  in  July, 
1841,  ten  days  previous  to  their  mar- 
riage. July  7,  1842,  a  son  was  bom  to 
them;  they  named  him  George  Albert. 
Two  months  afterward  George  A., as  the 
Saints  loved  to  call  him,  went  on  a  mis- 
sion to  the  Eastern  States.  On  his  pre- 
vious mission  (to  England),  he  injured 
his  left  lung,  causing  hemmorhage.  In 
the  fall  of  1843,  George  A.  and  Bathshe- 
ba received  their  endowments  and  were 
united  under  the  holy  order  of  celestial 
marriage.  Sister  Bathsheba  heard  the 
Prophet  Joseph  charge  the  Twelve  with 
the  duty  and  responsibility  of  the  or- 
dinances of  endowments  and  sealing  for 
the  living  and  the  dead.  She  met  often 
with  her  husband,  Joseph  and  others 
who  had  received  their  endowments, 
in  an  upper  room  dedicated  for  the  pur- 
pose, and  prayed  with  them  repeatedly 
in  those  meetings.  In  the  spring  of 
1844,  Elder  Smith  went  on  another  mis- 
sion, and  soon  after  he  left,  persecu- 
tion began  in  the  city  of  Nauvoo,  which 
ended  in  the  martyrdom  of  the  Prophet 
and  Patriarch.  Geo.  A.  Smith  returned 
to  Nauvoo  in  August,  1844,  and  on  the 
14th  a  daughter  was  born,  whom  they 
named  Bathsheba.  Having  become 
thoroughly  convinced  that  the  doctrine 
of  plurality  of  wives  was  from  God. 
and  firmly  believing  that  she  should 
participate  with  her  husband  in  all  his 


BIOGRAPHICAL.    ENCYCLOPEDIA. 


701 


blessings,  glory  and  honor,  Sister  Bath- 
sheba  gave  to  him   several   wives  dur- 
ing the  year  of  his  return   home.     She 
says   of   this:        "Being   proud     of     my 
husband    and    loving    him    very    much, 
knowing  him  to  be  a  man  of  God,  and 
having   a    testimony    that    what    I    had 
done  was  acceptable   to   my   Father   in 
heaven,  I  was  as  happy  as  I  knew  how 
to  be."       In   1846,   Geo.  A.     Smith     and 
family  left  Nauvoo     for     the  unknown 
west,  as  exiles  for  the  gospel's  sake.  "It 
would  be  vain,"  writes  Sister  Smith,  "to 
describe  how  we  traveled  through  snow, 
wind   and   rain,   how   roads   had   to     be 
made,  bridges  built  and  rafts  construct- 
ed, how  our  poor  animals  had  to  drag 
on  day  after  day  with  scanty  food;  nor 
how  we  suffered  from  poverty,  sickness 
and  deaths,  but  the  I^ord  was  with  us, 
His   power  was   made     manifest   dally. 
"We  arrived  in   Great  Salt  Lake  valley 
in   October,   1849,    after   traveling     over 
sterile  deserts^  and   plains,     over     high 
mountains  and   through   deep   canyons, 
ferrying   some     streams     and     fording 
others,   but  all  was  joy  now."       Sister 
Bathsheba  went   to   her  sister's  house, 
and  oh!   how  delightful  it  did  seem  to 
be    once    more    in    a    comfortable    room 
with  a  blazing  fire  in  the  hearth,  where 
the  mountain's  rude  blasts  nor  the  des- 
ert's wild  winds  could  not  reach  them. 
In  March,  1850,  Sister  Bathsheba  moved 
into   their   own   house.       In    December, 
1850,  George  A.  Smith  was  called  to  go 
south   to  found   a   settlement   in   Little 
Salt  Lake  valley,  two  hundred  and  fif- 
ty miles  from  Salt  Lake  City.      In  1851, 
he  returned, having  oeen  elected  a  mem- 
ber of  the   Utah  legislature   from  Iron 
county.      In  1856  he  was  sent  to  Wash- 
ington, D.  C,  to  ask  for  the  admission 
of  Utah  as  a  State.       In  May,  1857,  he 
returned  to  Utah,  and  in  1858  he  went 
south  with  his  family.      In  leaving  their 
homes  the  Saints  felt  as  they  did  when 
they    left    Nauvoo,    that      they    should 
never   see    them    again,     as    they   were 
fleeing  before    the     approaching   army. 
However.  President  Buchanan  sent  out 
his  peace  commissioners  with  his  pro- 
clamation which     declared     a     general 
amnesty  to  "all  offenders."      Peace  be- 
ing restored,  the  Saints  returned  to  Salt 
Lake   City  in  July,   having  been     gone 
three  months.       When      Geo.   A.   Smith 
and    family   entered    the     city,    it   was 

almost  sundown;  all  was  quiet,  every 
door  was  boarded  up.  From  only  two 
or    three    chimneys    smoke    was    rising. 


How    still    and    lonely,    yet    the    breath 
of  peace  wafted  over  the  silent  city,  and 
it  was  home.      They  had  left  a  partly 
finished   house,   and   they  now  resumed 
work   upon   it;    by   October   it   was   fin- 
ished.     Sister  Bathsheba  says:  "It  was 
so  comfortable  and  we  were  so  happy. 
We  had  plenty  of  room.       My  son  and 
daughter    took   great    pleasure    In   hav- 
ing   their    associates      come     and    visit 
them  frequently.       They  would  have  a 
room  full  of  company,  and     would  en- 
gage  in  reading  useful   books,    singing, 
playing  music,  dancing,  etc.       My     son 
played  the  Hute,  flutina  and  was  a  good 
drummer.      My  son  and  daughter  were 
good  singers;  they  made  our  home  Joy- 
ous with  song  and  jest."       In  1860  this 
son  was  sent  on  a  mission  to  the  Moqui 
Indians.      He  was  interested  in  this  and 
apt  in  learning  the  new  language.      Af- 
ter being  set  apart  by  the   authorities 
for  that  mission,  he  started  Sept.  4,  1860, 
and  had  traveled  about  seven  hundred 
miles,   when   on   Nov.   2,   1860,     he     was 
killed    by    Navajo     Indians.       In     1873, 
Sister  Bathsheba  made  a  tour  with  her 
husband  and  Pres.  Brigham  Young  and 
party  to  the  Colorado  and  up  the  Rio 
Virgen   as   far  as   Shonesburg.    In   1872, 
they  made  another     tour      with     Pres. 
Young  and  party,  visiting  at  St.  George, 
Virgen   City,   Long  "Valley  and   Kanab. 
In  1873,   she  went  again  with  her  hus- 
band,  Pres.   Young,   and   company  and 
spent   the   winter   in   St.    George,    going 
by  way  of  Sanpete  and  Sevier  counties. 
During   this   journey   Sister   Bathsheba 
attended  several  meetings  with  the  sis- 
ters, returning  home  in  April,  1874.    She 
has  visited  the  Saints  as  far  south  as 
the  junction  of  the  Rio  Virgen  with  the 
Colorado,    has    visited    the    settlements 
on   the   Muddy  and  also  the   Saints   as 
far  north  as     Bear     Lake      and     Soda 
Springs.       On    their   travels   they   were 
often  met  by  bands  of  music,  and  thou- 
sands of  children  bearing  banners  and 
flags,    and    singing   songs     of   welcome. 
Sister  Bathsheba  enjoyed     these   tours 
very  much.       She     accompanied     many 
explorations  down  into  deep  gulches  to 
see    the    water    pockets,    over   beautiful 
plains  in  carriages  or  cars,     and     over 
mountains   and    deserts.       In   reference 
to  her  position  in  duties  of  a  public  and 
spiritual  character,  we  find  the  follow- 
ing recorded:      "Returning  from  a  tour, 
Feb.  19,  1876,  they  arrived  in  Salt  Lake 
City,    finding  all    safe   at   home.       Her 
husband  was  not  well;  she  thought  she 


ro2 


LATTER-DAY    SAINT 


could  soon  nurse  him  up  to  health,  but 
her  efforts  were  all  in  vain;  he  expired 
Sept.  1,  1876,  after  a  long  sickness.  The 
departure  was  a  shock  to  many.  For 
many  months  prayers  had  been  offered 
up  through  all  parts  of  the  Territory, 
for  his  restoration  to  health.  Seated 
in  his  chair,  his  faithful  wife  beside 
him.  he  turned  from  his  conversation 
with  Dr.  Seymour  B.  Young  and  others 
who  constantly  attended  him,  and  lean- 
ing upon  her  devoted  heart  breathed 
his  last."  Sister  Bathsheba  W.  Smith 
belonged  to  the  first  Relief  Society 
which  was  organized  at  Nauvoo,  March 
17,  1842,  and  was  present  when  it  was 
organized,  the  Prophet  Joseph  presid- 
ing. She  officiated  as  Priestess  in  the 
Nauvoo  Temple,  acted  as  first  counselor 
to  Pres.  Rachel  Grant  in  the  Relief 
Society  of  the  Thirteenth  Ward,  Salt 
Lake  City,  for  many  years:  was  a 
counselor  to  Mary  I.  Home  in  the  Gen- 
eral Retrenchment  Association  in  the 
Fourteenth  Ward,  and  acted  as  treas- 
urer of  the  Relief  Society  of  the  Salt 
Lake  Stake.  She  also  oflficiated  in  the 
holy  ordinances  of  the  Endowment 
House  in  Salt  Lake  City  for  many 
years,  and  was  one  of  the  board  of  di- 
rectors in  the  Deseret  Hospital.  In  the 
Seventeenth  Ward,  where  she  located 
several  years  ago,  she  acted  for  a  long 
time  as  treasurer  of  the  Ward  Relief 
Society  and  subsequently  as  president 
of  the  organization.  In  1887,  when 
Sister  Zina  D.  H.  Young  became  presi- 
dent of  all  the  Relief  Societies  in  the 
Church,  Sister  Bathsheba  was  chosen 
as  her  second  counselor,  which  position 
she  filled  until  Sister  Young's  death. 
At  a  meeting  of  the  First  Presidency 
and  the  Apostles  held  in  the  Temple, 
Salt  Lake  City,  Oct.  31,  1901,  Sister 
Bathsheba  W.  Smith  was  chosen  to  act 
as  president  of  the  Relief  Societies  in 
all  the  world.  This  action  was  ratified 
by  the  unanimous  vote  of  10,000  Saints 
in  conference  asembled  Nov.  10,  1901. 
Sister  Bathsheba  was  an  ordinance 
worker  in  the  Logan  Temple  for  several 
years,  and  when  the  Salt  Lake  Temple 
was  completed  in  1893,  she  was  chosen 
as  one  of  the  workers  in  that  sacred 
edifice.  June  30.  1893^  Pres.  Lorenzo 
Snow  and  his  assistants  appointed  and 
set  apart  Sister  Zina  D.  H.  Young  to 
take  charge  of  the  woman's  department 
in  the  Salt  Lake  Temple  with  Bathshe- 
ba W.  Smith  as  her  first  and  Minnie  J. 
Snow   as  her  second  assistant.     Owing 


to  the  illness  of  Sister  Young  it  soon 
fell  to  the  lot  of  Sister  Bathsheba  to 
preside  over  the  sisters  in  the  Temple, 
— a  position  which  she  still  occupies. 
Sister  Bathsheba  is  often  reverently 
spoken  of  as  "the  beloved  wife  of 
George  A.  Smith."  To  her,  in  one 
sense,  this  would  be  the  dearest  praist 
that  could  be  spoken,  But  yet  a  loft- 
ier, holier,  and  even  the  earth-love 
seems  to  hover  around  her  very  pres- 
ence. A  litle  child  once  said,  "When 
I  look  at  Sister  Bathsheba,  I  do  not  see 
her  with  her  bonnet  on;  I  see  her  as 
she  will  look  when  she  wears  that 
crown  that  is  waiting  for  her."  Such 
is  the  impression  her  face,  her  gentle 
voice  and  manner  convey. 

HYDE,  Annie  Taylor,  first  coun- 
selor to  Bathsheba  W.  Smith,  president 
of  the  Relief  Societies  of  the  Church, 
is  the  daughter  of  Pres.  John  Taylor 
and  Jane  Ballantyne,  and  was  born  in 


Salt  Lake  City,  Utah,  Oct.  20,  1849.  She 
was  educated  by  private  instructors 
and  in  the  Deseret  University.  At  the 
age  of  eighteeen  she  became  a  teacher 
in  the  Relief  Society.  For  more  than 
six  years  she  served  as  a  Sabbath 
scool  teacher  in  the  Fourteenth  Ward, 
and  she  was  private  teacher  in  her 
father's  family  school  for  five  years. 
Dec.  15,  1870,  she  was  married  to 
Alonzo  E.  Hyde,  a  son  of  Apostle  Orson 
Hyde,  the  fruits  of  which  union  are 
eight  children,  four  boys  and  four  girls. 


BIOGRAPHICAL    ENCYCLOPEDIA. 


703 


all  of  whom  are  living-.  Sister  Hyde 
has  taken  an  active  part  in  the  work 
of  the  Y.  L.  M.  I.  A.,  and  for  many 
years  she  labored  in  the  presidency  of 
the  17th  Ward  association.  June  15, 
1895.  she  was  appointed  to  be  fu'st  coun- 
selor in  the  presidency  of  the  Relief  So- 
cieties of  Salt  Lake  Stake,  and  held  that 
position  till  Nov.  10,  1901,  when  she  was 
chosen  to  be  first  counselor  to  Sister 
Bathsheba  W.  Smith,  in  the  general 
presidency  of  Relief  Societies  of  the 
Church,  and  she  is  at  present  laboring- 
to  fulfill  the  duties  of  that  responsible 
calling.  Sister  Hyde  has  also  been 
called  and  set  apart  to  officiate  in  the 
Salt  Lake  Temple  as  one  of  the  regu- 
lar workers.  She  has  traveled  quite 
extensively  in  Europe  and  America,  but 
notwithstanding  this,  and  the  time  oc- 
••upied  in  the  discharge  of  her  public 
duties,  she  has  creditably  reared  a  large 
family,  and  proven  herself  a  model  wife 
and  mother,  feeling  always  that  her 
first  dutj-  was  to  her  family,  and  that 
the  grandest  and  noblest  aim  of  a  wo- 
man should  be  to  make  her  home  bright 
and  happy  and  raise  her  children  in 
the  faith  of  the  gospel.  April  11,  1901, 
she  organized  the  Society  of  the  Daugh- 
ters of  the  Utah  Pioneers  and  was 
chosen  as  its  first  president.  She  has 
been  given  the  permanent  title  of 
"Founder   of   the   Society." 

BALLANTYNE,  Richard,  founder  of 
the  great  Sunday  School  system  of  the 
latter-day  Saints,  was  born  in  Whit- 
i-idgebog,  Roxburgshire,  Scotland,  Aug. 
26,  1817,  son  of  David  Ballantyne  and 
Ann  Bannerman.  Both  his  parents 
were  born  In  Scotland,  his  father  in 
Merton  or  Earlston,  in  1743,  and  his 
mother,  in  the  Highlands,  in  1784.  His 
father  was  first  married  to  Cecelia  Wal- 
lace, who  died  leaving  three  children, 
^Villiam,  Henry  and  Margaret,  all  of 
whom  died  in  Scotland.  When  sixty 
years  of  age  he  married  his  second  wife 
who  was  then  nineteen  years  of  age. 
Her  children's  names  and  the  dates  of 
their  birth  are  as  follows:  Ann.  born 
Aug.  7,  1809;  died  Feb.  10,  1819.  Peter, 
born  June  1.^,  ISU:  died  in  Ogden,  Sept. 
I--'.  1893.  Jane,  born  April  11,  1813,  died  in 
Salt  Lake  City  Dec.  26,  1900.  Robert, 
born  Dec.  9,  181.5;  died  in  infancy.  Rich- 
ard, born  Aug.  26,  1817:  died  in  Ogden. 
Nov.  8,  1898.  A-..nie.  born  Sept.  2,  1819. 
James,  born  August.  1821;  died  in  1833; 
buiied  in  Earlston  cemetery.  Richard's 


father,  David  Ballantyne,  a  large, hand- 
some man,  six  feet  tall  and  weighing 
over  200  pounds,  died  in  1829,  in  Spring- 
hall,  near  Kelso,  Roxburgshire,  Scot- 
land, and  was  buried  in  Ednam 
churchyard,  without  hearing  the 
gospel;  but  he  was  a  good,  de- 
vout and  faithful  follower  of  Christ, 
and  a  lover  of  his  divine  truth  and  mis- 
sion. His  mother  and  all  her  family 
joined  the  Church,  becoming  devout  be- 
lievers in  the  doctrines  of  Christ  as  re- 
stored through  the  Prophet  Joseph 
Smith.  After  gathering  to  Nauvoo,  111., 
with  her  family  in  1843,  she  continued 
a  faithful  member  of  the  Church, cheer- 
fully bearing  all  the  severe  trials  and 
privations  of  the  expulsion  the  travels 


in  the  wilderness,  and  the  settling  of  a 
new  country  in  the  Salt  Lake  valley, 
finally  passing  away  from  the  troubles 
of  this  life  in  peace,  in  October,  1871. 
She  was  buried  in  the  Salt  Lake  City 
cemetery,  in  the  lot  of  President  John 
Taylor,  who  had  married  her  daughters 
Jane  and  Annie.  Richard  Ballantyne,  ,- 
who  was  early  taught  to  be  moral  and 
religious,  was  baptized  by  sprinkling 
when  an  infant,  into  the  "Relief  Pres-^ 
byterian  Church,"  being  later  taught  in 
its  doctrines.  ^\Vhen  twenty-one  years 
of  age  he  became  an  elder,  and  later  a 
ruling  elder  whose  duties  consisted  of 
visiting  among  the  members  with  the 
)iriest,  and  looking  after  the  finances 
of  the  church,  in  which  he  was  greatly 
blessed?)lt  was  while  still  a  young  man 
that  Re  began  his  labors  as  a  Sunday 
school   teacher,   which   work   he  contin- 


704 


LATTER-DAT    SAINT 


ued  to  his  dying  day,  After  due  in- 
vestigation, he  was  baptized  into  the 
Church  of  Jesus  Christ  of  Latter-day 
Saints  by  Elder  Henry  McCune,  presi- 
dent of  the  branch  in  Edinburgh,  in  the 
waters  of  Leith,  on  a  beautiful  moon- 
light night,  in  December,  1842.  "All 
nature  seemed  to  be  at  peace,"  he 
writes;  "to  look  at  the  broad  expanse 
of  waters,  and  to  contemplate  the  mys- 
teries of  the  unfathomed  deep,  might 
well  suggest  the  mysteries  of  the  un- 
known future  that  now  lay  before  me; 
and  what  if  a  picture  thereof  had  been 
unfolded  to  me!  What  would  I  have 
seen?"  What,  indeed,  but  persecu- 
tion at  home;  pilgrimage  to  a  foreign 
land;  tempestuous  seas;  Nauvoo,  with 
its  sore  trials  and  martyred  Prophet 
and  Patriarch;  the  pioneer  journey  over 
the  deserts  to  the  Rocky  Mountains, 
surrounded  by  wild  beasts  and  savages, 
in  the  midst  of  sickness,  hunger  and 
death;  the  new  and  barren  home  where 
there  was  supreme  war  with  the  ele- 
ments and  crickets  for  a.  scant  liveli- 
hood; himself,  moved  upon  by  the  spirit 
of  God  to  build  a  house,  without  money 
or  other  help,  in  which  to  teach  the 
children  the  gospel  of  Jesus  Christ,  and 
establish  the  Sunday  Schools  which,  un- 
der the  fostering  hand  of  God's  provi- 
dence, were  (to  grow  in  his  lifetime  to 
be  a  mighty  aid  in  God's  "marvelous 
work  and  a  wonder;"  travels  over  un- 
known seas  to  proclaim  the  gospel  to 
the  heathen,  until,  without  purse  or 
scrip,  he  should  girdle  the  earth  in  his 
mission  of  love;  '  the  peculiar  days  of 
the  "Reformation"  in  his  desert  home; 
the  armies  of  the  nation  unwittingly 
sent  to  Utah  with  a  view  to  accomplish 
what  other  trials  and  sufferings  had 
failed  to  achieve;  again  the  abandon- 
ment of  home  in  the  "Move;"  the  re- 
turn in  peace  and  the  marvelous  growth 
of  his  chosen  people  until  the  silenct- 
of  the  mountain  valleys  is  broken  by 
the  voice  of  thrift  and  industry;  him- 
self standing  as  the  husband  of  three 
wives,  and  father  of  twenty-two  chil- 
dren, and  over  one  hundred  grandchil- 
dren, with  sons-in-law,  and  daughters- 
in-law;  the  "raid"  and  legal  persecution 
of  1882-90,  with  its  fearful  apprehen- 
sions, imprisonments  and  fines;  the 
light  and  prosperity  of  the  decade  clos- 
ing the  nineteenth  century,  darkened 
to  him  by  financial  failure;  the  end  of 
his  days,  marked  by  the  peace  of  a  life 
well  spent;  and  the  joy  of  beholding  a 


united  and  honored  family,  and  having 
a  mind  full  of  faith  and  hope  and  trust 
in  God,  which  could  in  the  end  exclaim: 
"I  know  that  my  Redeemer  Uvea." 
Having  at  length  reviewed  most  of 
these  Incidents,  he  writes:  "The  fore- 
going, to  show  how  wise  it  is  in  God 
to  keep  the  future  mostly  hidden  from 
our  view!"  As  to  the  employments  of 
his  life  up  to  this  time:  When  seven 
years  of  age,  he  herded  his  mother's 
cows  on  the  public  roads;  at  ten  he 
tended  garden,  walks,  and  the  lawn  of 
a  wealthy  gentleman,  working  also  on 
the  farm;  from  twelve  to  fourteen,  he 
worked  exclusively  on  the  farm.  His 
education  was  obtained  during  the 
time  from  nine  to  fourteen  that  he  oc- 
casionally attended  school,  mostly  in 
the  winter  months.  At  fourteen  he 
was  apprenticed  as  a  baker,  to  a  Mr. 
Gray,  serving  three  years.  When  he 
was  sixteeen,  he  was  made  foreman  of 
the  business;  he  also  served  one  year 
as  baker's  foreman  in  Kelso,  under  a 
Mr.  Riddle.  His  former  master.  Gray, 
dying,  he  purchased  his  business  for  $25 
and  became  his  own  master,  for  five 
years  conducting  his  business  in  Earl- 
ston;  quitting  to  remove  to  Nauvoo 
when  he  quit  baking  forever,  for  he 
never  liked  it.  Leaving  his  native 
country  in  1843,  with  his  mother,  two 
sisters  and  a  brother,  he  came  by  way 
of  New  Orleans,  to  Nauvoo,  111.  Here 
he  became  the  manager  and  bookkeeper 
of  the  Coach  and  Carriage  Association, 
where  many  of  the  wagons  were  built 
which  aided  the  first  emigrants  to  cross 
the  plains  to  Utah.  In  1846,  he  settled 
the  affairs  of  John  Taylor's  printing  es- 
tablishment, hired  a  flouring  mill  with 
Peter  Slater,  36  miles  east  of  Nauvoo, 
and  he  also  engaged  in  farming  on  the 
east  bank  of  the  Missouri  river.  Dur- 
ing the  troubles  in  Nauvoo,  he  with 
others,  was  in  the  hands  of  the  mob 
for  over  two  weeks,  suffering  greatly 
from  exposure  and  hardship.  In  1846 
he  went  with  the  scattered  remnants 
of  Nauvoo  to  Winter  Quarters,  where 
he  remained  about  eighteen  months,  un- 
til May  18,  1848,  at  which  date  he  start- 
ed for  the  Valley,  crossing  the  plains 
in  Pres.  Brigham  Young's  company, 
which  arrived  in  Salt  Lake  City  in  Sep- 
tember. In  the  year  previous,  he  mar- 
ried Huldah  Meriah  Clark,  and  their 
first  son,  Richard,  was  born  while  cross- 
ing the  plains.  Arriving  at  the  "Old 
'*^ort."   he  again  went  to  farming,     on 


BIOGRAPHICAL    ENCYCLOPEDIA. 


705 


Mill  creek.  He  lost  his  crop  for  three 
years  in  succession,  and  finally  obtained 
five  acres  on  Canyon  creek.  Here  a 
terrific  hail  storm  destroyed  his  crop. 
In  1846.  he  was  ordained  a  Seventy  by 
Pres.  Joseph  Young-,  and  shortly  there- 
after a  High  Priest  by  Apostle  John 
Taylor,  which  latter  office  in  the 
Church  he  held  and  honored  to  the  time 
of  his  death.  He  labored  with  con- 
stancy in  the  Priesthood,  considering 
all  his  duties  a  pleasure,  but  his  Sab- 
bath school  labors  were  his  chief  de- 
light. Cupon  arriving  in  the  Valley,  he 
immediately  began  to  consider  how  the 
moral  and  spiritual  welfare  of  the  chil- 
dren might  be  advanced;  and,  having 
obtained  a  little  home,  he  asked  his 
Bishop  for  permission  to  establish  a 
Sunday  school.  Permission  was  granted, 
but  there  was  no  prospect  for  obtaining 
a  house  to  meet  in  for  months  to  come. 
Under  this  predicament,  he  resolved  to 
build  an  addition  to  his  home,  and  there 
begin  the  work.  In  the  summer  of  1849 
he  hauled  rock  from  the  Cottonwood 
quarries  and  laid  the  foundation  of  red 
sand  stone,  and  also  made  the  adobes, 
hauled  logs  to  the  saw  mill  for  a  share 
of  the  lumber,  exchanged  work  with  a 
carpenter  who  made  the  doors  and  win- 
dows, and  so  the  first  Sunday  school 
house  was  built,  and  the  first  school, 
numbering  some  fifty  students,  was 
held  in  it  on  the  second  Sunday  in  De- 
cember, 1849.  Later  it  was  held  in  the 
Fourteenth  Ward  meeting  house.  I 
asked  him  at  one  time,  why  he  was  so 
desirous  of  organizing  a  Sunday  school. 
He  replied  in  writing:  ("I  was  early 
called  to  this  work  by  the  voice  of  the 
spirit,  and  I  have  felt  many  times  that 
I  have  been  ordained  to  this  work  be- 
fore I  was  born,  for  even  before  I  joined 
the  Church,  I  was  moved  upon  to  work 
for  the  young.  Surely  no  more  joyful 
nor  profitable  labor  can  be  performed 
by  an  Elder.  )  There  is  growth  in  the 
young.  The  seed  sown  in  their  hearts 
is  more  likely  to  bring-  forth  fruit  than 
when  sown  in  the  hearts  of  those  who 
are  more  advanced  in  years.  Further- 
more, I  had  passed  through  much  trou- 
ble, had  been  sorely  tried  by  friends 
and  foes,  and  in  it  all  the  gospel  had 
proved  such  a  solace  to  me  that  I  was 
very  desirous  that  all  the  children  of 
the  Saints  should  learn  to  prize  it  as  I 
valued  it.  And  more,  I  saw  that  the 
children,  from  the  very  nature  and  cir- 
cumstances  of   the   people,   mere   being 

Vol.  1,  No.  45. 


neglected,  and  I  wanted  to  gather  them 
into  the  school  where  they  could  learn 
not  to  read  and  write,  but  the  goodnes.s 
of  God,  and  the  true  gospel  of  salva- 
tion given  by  Jesus  Christ."  In  this 
way  he  was  engaged  temporally  and 
spiritually,  when  in  the  fall  of  1852,  he 
was  called  to  go  on  a  mission  to  Hin- 
doostan,  India.  After  a  long  and  peril- 
ous voyage,  he  arrived,  with  twelve 
other  Elders,  in  Calcutta,  July  24,  1853. 
In  St.  Thomas  Mount,  near  Madras,  he 
helped  to  organize  a  branch,  Aug.  3, 
1853,  with  three  members,  he  having 
been  appointed  to  labor  in  that  vicinity, 
with  Elders  Robert  Owen  and  Robert 
Skelton.  He  also  published  several 
issues  of  the  "Millennial  Star  and 
Monthly  Visitor,"  in  which  many  of  his 
writings  on  the  gospel  are  set  forth. 
Sailing  for  England,  via  Cape  of  Good 
Hope,  July  25,  1854,  he  arrived  in  Lon- 
don, Dec.  6,  1854,  and  then  made  his 
way,  in  charge  of  a  company  of  Saints, 
to  St.  Louis,  Mo.,  via  New  Orleans.  In 
the  spring  of  1855  he  was  placed  in 
charge  of  a  company  of  emigrants, num- 
bering about  five  hundred,  with  fifty 
wagons,  all  of  whom  arrived  in  Salt 
Lake  City  in  first  class  condition,  Sept. 
25,  1855.  Thus,  in  so  early  a  day,  he 
had  encompassed  the  earth  on  his  mis- 
sion. He  was  met  by  Pres.  George  A. 
Smith,  who  remarked:  "You  have  ac- 
complished a  journey  around  the  world 
without  purse  or  scrip,  and  brought  in 
your  company  with  a  band  of  music 
and  flags  flying."  Immediately  upon 
his  arrival,  Pres.  Young  appointed  him 
to  a  home  mission  to  preach  to  the 
Saints  in  the  well-remembered  "re- 
formation." In  this  he  devoted  his 
time  till  May,  1857.  He  was  married  to 
Mary  Pearce,  Nov.  27,  1855,  and  about 
two  years  later  to  Caroline  Sanderson. 
Taking  a  fencing  contract  on  the  Jor- 
dan, after  his  release,  he  earned  a  team 
with  which,  making  several  trips,  he 
moved  his  family  to  Nephi,  prior  to  the 
coming  of  Johnston's  army.  Here  he 
remained  farming  for  two  years,  rais- 
ing 400  bushels  of  wheat  each  season, 
returning  to  Salt  Lake  City  in  the  fall 
of  1859^  In  1860,  having  been  offered 
a  $3,000  stock  of  merchandise,  he  re- 
moved to  Ogden,  becoming  one  of  the 
first  business  men  of  that  city,  where 
he  opened  a  store  and  prospered  ex- 
ceedingly. Reasons  of  a  religious  na- 
ture induced  him  to  quit  business  and 
go  to  farming:       Brigham     Young  had 

Nov.    9,    1901. 


706 


LATTER-DAT    SAINT 


publiely  said  that  "unless  the  Elders 
of  the  Church  (luit  their  merchandising, 
they  will  all  go  to  hell."  He  thought 
so  much  of  his  religion,  and  believed  in 
the  word  of  President  Young  (although 
the  latter  had  privately  told  him  to  do 
as  his  judgment  dictated)  to  such  an 
extent  that  he  immediately  abandoned 
his  business  ouisuit.  Said  he:  "I 
did  not  want  to  go  to  hell,  and  I  had 
previously  noticed  that  nearly  every 
•Mormon"  merchant  I  had  known  had 
apostatized.  "  He  then  purchased  a 
farm  in  Eden,  Ogden  valley,  where  he 
raised  some  large  crops,  and  had  six 
successively  destroyed  by  grasshoppers. 
He  assisted  in  building  the  I'nion  Pa- 
cific railway  in  186S,  and  also  the  Cen- 
tral Pacific.  He  became  the  manager, 
later,  of  a  combination  of  three  co- 
operative stores,  on  call  from  Pres. 
Franklin  D.  Richards,  which  he  after- 
wards purchased  and  closed  out  in  1871. 
For  the  next  six  years  he  returned  to 
farming,  until,  in  May,  1877,  he  sold  his 
farm  and  purchased  the  "Ogden  Junc- 
tion," established  in  1870,  successfully 
publishing  the  paper  for  eighteen 
months,  to  November,  1878,when  he  sold 
out.  Then  he  went  to  railroading, 
helping  to  build  the  Oregon  Short  Line. 
Returning  in  1881.  he  entered  480  acres 
of  land  under  the  Davis  and  Weber 
Counties  Canal,  and,  with  others,  began 
and  completed  the  stupendous  task  of 
building  that  waterway.  In  1889  he 
sold  his  interests  for  $16,000  and  pur- 
chased the  lumber  business  of  Bernard 
White.  The  "boom"  in  Ogden  followed; 
he  was  induced  to  dabble  in  real  es- 
tate, which,  with  reverses  in  business, 
brought  about  by  the  panic  of  1893,  com- 
l)letely  ruined  him  financially,  and 
doubtless  hastened  his  death, which  took 
place  in  Ogden,  on  Nov.  8,  1898.  Elder 
Ballantyne  was  fourteeen  years  a  mem- 
ber of  the  Weber  county  court,  and  sev- 
eral times  an  alderman  in  Ogden  city, 
with  an  unimpeachable  record  for  hon- 
esty and  conscientious  work.  ^In  1872 
he  was  chosen  superintendent  of  Sab- 
bath schools  for  Weber  Stake,  which 
r>osition  he  held  and  magnified  until 
death.^  Prior  to  this,  he  was  a  zealous 
woi  kcr  in  the  schools,  being  the  founder 
i){  the  Sunday  school  idea  in  Weber, 
as  well  as  he  had  been  in  Salt  Lake 
•  'ity.  From  him  and  from  his  labor 
the  work  gradually  extended  to  the 
whole  Church.  He  heliied  to  erect  the 
<Vntial  and  other  school-houses,  being 


one  of  the  trustees,  and  was  ever  an 
advocate  of  the  system  of  schools  which 
would  place  a  good  common  school  edu- 
cation within  easy  reach  of  the  people. 
He  was  the  senior  member  of  the  High 
Council  at  his  death,  having  been  a 
member  thereof  for^^  over  seventeen 
years.  Here  he  was  known  as  a  firm 
defender  of  the  right,  and  a  lover  of 
fair  play  and  justice.  Aug.  26,  1897,  he 
was  honored  by  a  public  celebration  of 
his  natal  day,  he  being  then  eighty 
years  old.  Thousands  of  children, with 
their  teachers  from  all  parts  of  the 
county,  marched  in  procession  through 
the  streets  of  Ogden,  with  music  and 
banners,  in  his  honor;  at  Lester  Park, 
where  the  festivities  were  continued, 
he  was  literally  covered  with  a  wilder- 
ness of  flowers,  contributed  by  the  little 
ones  from  every  settlement  and  Ward 
in  the  county.  The  Sunday  schools, 
upon  request  of  General  Superintendent 
George  Q.  Cannon,  contributed  towards 
assisting  him  to  build  a  small  home  in 
which  the  last  three  months  of  his  life 
were  spent  in  quiet  peace,  marred  only 
by  the  weakness  of  his  body.  He  was 
conscious  to  the  last,  and  full  of  ideas 
and  plans  for  the  progress  and  welfare 
of  the  schools.  His  work  in  this  line 
kept  him  young  in  spirit,  his  interests 
being  entwined  about  the  hosts  of  Sun- 
day School  children  whom  he  dearly 
loved.  Elder  Ballantyne  was,  in  his 
early  days,  very  strict  and  sometimes 
austere;  close  in  business,  but  strictly 
honest.  In  later  years,  he  was  full  of 
sympathy  and  affection.  He  was  a 
strong-minded  man,  but  ever  moved  by 
justice  to  the  oppressed,  and  mercy  to 
the  sinner  and  the  weak.  He  was  one 
of  the  strong  characters  common  to 
the  pioneers  and  the  early  members  of 
the  "Mormon"  Church  to  whose  cause 
his  whole  soul  was  devoted.  He  was 
a  thorough  Christian,  of  whom  it  is 
truly  said:  "He  sought  first  the  king- 
dom of  God  and  his  righteousness."  His 
labors  and  devotion  to  Zion,  and  his 
noble  life, will  shed  sunshine  upon  many 
generations  yet  to  be. — Edward  H.  An- 
derson. 

GODDARD,  George,  first  assistant 
general  superintendent  of  Latter-day 
Saints'  Sunday  schools,  from  1872  to 
1899,  was  born  Dec.  5,  1815,  in  Leicester, 
England.  He  was  baptized  into  the 
Church  Jan.  21,  1851,  his  wife  also  join- 
ing at  the  same  time.       Six  days  later 


BIOGRAPHICAL    ENCYCLOPEDIA. 


707 


he  was  confirmed  by  Elders  Jacob 
Gates  and  Claudius  V.  Spencer,  and  on 
the  3rd  of  the  following  month  Jacob 
Gates  ordained  him  an  Elder.  He  left 
England  with  his  wife  and  eight  chil- 
dren on  the  ship  "Essex,"  Oct.  11th  of 
the  same  year,  and  on  New  Year's  day, 
1S52,  arrived  at  St.  Louis,  Mo.,  having 
lost  two  children  on  the  way.  Another 
child  died  in  St.  Louis,  and  two  more  of 
cholera  on  the  plains,  which  he  crossed 
in  the  summer  of  1852,  reaching  Salt 
Lake  City  Sept.  15,  1852,  Before  join- 
ing the  Church  he  had  been  in  com- 
fortable circumstances,  doing  a  good 
business,  but  by  becoming  a  "Mormon" 
and  preaching  the  gospel  in  the  market 
place  every  Wednesday  night,  he  alien- 
ated    his     customers,  and  within  eight 


months  after  his  baptism  his  business 
passed  into  the  hands  of  his  creditors 
and  he  was  left  In  poverty,  with  a  large 
family  on  his  hands.  It  was  through 
the  unsolicited  assistance  of  one  of  his 
brothers,  who  felt  disgrace  at  his  be- 
coming a  "Mormon"  and  was  anxious  to 
get  rid  of  him,  that  he  and  his  family 
crossed  the  Atlantic  as  related.  He 
saw  hardships  and  poverty  prior  to  and 
after  reaching  the  haven  of  his  hopes 
— Salt  Lake  City,  Utah,  where  he  first 
engaged  in  peddling  on  a  small  scale, 
gradually  gathering  around  him  the 
comforts  of  life.  He  was  much  inter- 
ested in  home  industries,  and  manu- 
factured hats,  ink  and  other  articles. 
In  a  sketch  of  his  life  written  by  him- 
self he  mentions  the  following  items  of 
his     experience:        "Fourteen     months' 


mission  to  Canada,  by  hand-cart  to  the 
Missouri  river,  1857  and  1858.  Three 
years  gathering  rags  as  a  mission,  in 
18G1,  1862  and  1863.  Nine  years  super- 
intendent of  the  Thirteenth  Ward  Sun- 
day school,  from  1867  to  1876.  Twenty- 
seven  years  clerk  to  Presiding  Bishop 
Edward  Hunter,  from  1856  to  1883. 
Twenty-six  years  First  Assistant  Gen- 
eral Superintendent  of  Sunday  Schools, 
from  1872.  Ten  years  clerk  of  general 
conference,  from  1874  to  1884.  Four 
years  clerk  of  the  School  of  the  Proph- 
ets. Three  years  clerk  and  treasurer 
to  the  Salt  Lake  Stake  Assembly  Hall, 
from  1877  to  1880.  Twenty  years  a 
member  of  the  Tabernacle  choir.  Twen- 
ty-five years  a  member  of  the  Thir- 
teenth Ward  choir.  Twenty-three  years 
a  member  of  the  Old  Folk's  Committee, 
from  1875."  The  sketch  in  question 
was  Avritten  in  October,  1898,  and  in  it 
he  says:  "I  am  now  eighty-three  years 
old,  lacking  only  a  few  weeks,  and  dur- 
ing the  past  five  years  I  have  traveled 
between  twenty  and  thirty  thousand 
miles  by  railway  and  several  thousand 
miles  by  team,  over  all  kinds  of  roads, 
in  heat  and  cold,  by  night  and  by  day, 
in  the  interest  and  for  the  benefit  of  the 
youth  of  Zion,  who  are  connected  with 
our  Sunday  schools.  I  have  visited 
thirty-eight  Stakes  of  Zion.  I  use 
neither  tea,  coffee,  wine,  liquor  nor 
beer,  and  I  am  blessed  of  the  Lord  with 
good  health,  which  causes  my  heart  to 
rejoice  exceedingly."  It  was  Brother 
Goddard  who  instituted  the  printing  of 
the  Articles  of  Faith  in  card  form,hav- 
ing  several  thousand  of  these  published 
for  use  in  Sunday  schools  on  Feb.  18, 
1878.  He  held  the  office  of  a  Seventy 
from  Dec.  27,  1854,  and  for  many  years 
was  one  of  the  presidents  of  the  27th 
quorum  and  afterwards  of  the  8th  quo- 
rum. He  was  ordained  a  High  Priest 
Feb.  24,  1894,  and  a  Patriarch  Oct.  28, 
1897.  Elder  Goddard  died  at  his  home 
in  Salt  Lake  City  Jan.  12,  1899,  as  a  vic- 
tim to  la  grippe,  following  a  severe  cold 
contracted  some  time  before. 

MAESER,  Karl  G.,  second  assistant 
general  superintendent  of  Latter-day 
Saints  Sunday  schools,  from  1894  to 
1901,  was  born  Jan.  16,  1828,  in  Meiszen, 
Saxony,  Germany.  His  father  was  an 
artist  employed  in  the  china  works 
where  the  famous  Dresden  china  is 
produced.  He  was  in  easy  circum- 
stances but  by  no  means  wealthy.    Karl 


708 


LATTER-DAY    SAINT 


attended  the  public  school  of  Melszen, 
and  finished  his  education  in  the  nor- 
mal school  at  Dresden,  graduating 
from  that  institution  in  May,  1848.  He 
became  one  of  the  teachers  in  the  city 
schools  of  Dresden,  and  later  was  em- 
ployed as  a  private  tutor  in  the  fami- 
lies of  prominent  Protestants  in  Bo- 
hemia. He  again  connected  himself 
with  the  city  schools  of  Dresden.  His 
superior  ability  was  soon  recognized 
and  he  was  given  the  position  of  head 
teacher  in  the  Budig  institute.  While 
connected  with  that  institution  the  two 
most  vital  events  of  his  life  transpired. 
One  was  the  securing  of  a  wife,  the 
daughter  of  the  principal  of  the  normal 
college,  who  was  his  faithful  helpmeet 
for  a  half  a  century,  evincing  a  devo- 


tion seldom  equalled  even  by  her  own 
sex.  His  wife  was  the  sister  of  Mrs. 
Edward  Schoenfelt  of  East  Brighton, 
and  also  of  Camilla  Cobb.  The  father 
of  these  girls,  Emmanuel  Meith,  died 
when  Camilla  was  a  little  girl,  and  Dr. 
Maeser  adopted  her.  She  was  brought 
up  under  the  good  man's  teachings  and 
example,  and  was  brought  to  Utah  by 
him.  The  other  event  was  that  which 
turned  the  current  of  his  life,  the  meet- 
ing with  three  "Mormon"  missionaries, 
viz.  the  late  Apostle  Franklin  D.  Rich- 
ards. "Pres.  William  Budge,  of  the  Bear 
Lake  Stake,  and  Elder  William  H.  Kim- 
ball, son  of  the  late  Pres.  Heber  C. 
Kimball.  When  a  boy  Dr.  Maeser's  at- 
tention had  been  attracted  to  the  "Mor- 
mons" by  an  illustration  that  appeared 
in   a  newspaper,     and     the   impression 


made  upon   him   at   that   time   waa   so 
profound  that  he  anxiously  waited  for 
an   opportunity   to  meet  with  a  repre- 
sentative of  the  "Mormon"   Church,  or 
to  investigate  the  much  criticized     re- 
ligion by  other  means.  But  that  oppor- 
tunity did  not  present  itself  until  1855, 
when   he     met     the   Elders   mentioned. 
They  were  promptly  invited  to  the  home 
of  the  eager  young  teacher,  and  as  they 
recited  the  story  of  the  gospel  and  its 
restoration,    his    soul    glowed    with    an 
inward  fire.      He  accepted     their  mes- 
sage with  as  much  avidity  as  a  starving 
man    would   have   received     a     loaf   of 
bread.  On  the  nis-ht  of  Oct.  14,  1855,  the 
three     Elders,      Dr.      Maeser,     Edward 
Schoenfeldt  and    some  others,   repaired 
to   the   banks   of   the   historic    Elbe,    in 
which  river    Dr.    Maeser    was  baptized 
by  Apostle  Richards.     It  was  the  first 
baptism  in  Saxony  in  this  dispensation. 
After     performing     the     baptism     the 
party   started   back   towards   the  home 
of   Dr.    Maeser.       The   only   Elder   who 
could    talk   German   was   Elder   Budge, 
and    the    conversation    was    carried    on 
between     Apostle     Richards     and     Dr. 
Maeser,    with     Elder   Budge  acting   as 
interpreter.      The  colloquy  had  not  pro- 
ceeded   long,    however,      when    Apostle 
Richards  told  Elder  Budge  that  it  was 
not  necessary  for  him  to  interpret  any 
more,   as  he  and   "Brother  Maeser  un- 
derstand each   other  perfectly."     Elder 
Schoenfeldt  relates  that  it  was  a  very 
dark  night,  and  when  he  first  realized 
that  the  two  men  were  conversing  to- 
gether with  perfect  felicity,  yet  neither 
understood    the   native     tongue    of   the 
other,   his  feelings  were  undescribable, 
for  he  knew  that  it  was  a  divine  man- 
ifestation.      Dr.     Maeser  in  later  years 
testified    that   when    he   emerged    from 
the   water,    he   prayed     that     his   faith 
might  be  confirmed  by  some  manifes- 
tation  from   heaven,   and   he   felt  con- 
fident   that   his    prayer     would    be   an- 
swered.   Realizing   that   the   moment   it 
became  known  that  he  was  a  "Mormon" 
he  would  be  almost  scourged  from  the 
city.    Dr.    Maeser   resigned   his   position 
and  went  to  London,  where  he  labored 
for  some  time  among  the  German  peo- 
ple in  that  city.  He  succeeded  in  build- 
ing up  a  branch  of  the  Church  in  their 
midst.    He  then  took  passage  for  Amer- 
ica,disembarking  at  Philadelphla,Penn., 
where  he  was  retained  as  a  missionary 
under   Pres.   Angus   M.    Cannon.       The 
Panic  of  1857  came  on  and  he  had   to 


BIOGRAPHICAL    ENCYCLOPEDIA. 


709 


seek  employment  or  perish.  In  company 
with  four  young  Elders,  he  traveled 
by  foot  to  Virginia.  In  Richmond  he 
obtained  a  position  as  music  teacher  in 
the  family  of  ex-President  John  Tyler 
and  others.  He  remained  there  six 
months,  when  he  was  called  to  preside 
over  the  Philadelphia  conference,  hold- 
ing that  position  until  June,  1860.  Dr. 
Maeser  emigrated  to  Utah  in  1860,  ar- 
riving in  Salt  Lake  in  the  company 
of  Patriarch  John  Smith,  in  October  of 
that  year.  As  naturally  as  water  seeks 
its  level  Dr.  Maeser  turned  to  the  school 
room.  Opening  a  school  in  the  Fif- 
teenth Ward,  Salt  Lake  City,  he  re- 
mained there  until  the  attention  of 
Bishop  Sharp,  and  others,  was  attract- 
ed to  him,  when  he  acepted  a  school 
in  the  Twentieth  Ward  at  their  urgent 
solicitation.  How  well  his  labors  were 
appreciated  at  that  place  is  evinced 
in  the  unwillingness  of  Bishop  Sharp 
and  Charles  R.  Savage  and  others  to 
give  him  up.  In  1864  Pres.  Brigham 
Young,  having  recognized  the  excellent 
ciualities  as  a  teacher  possessed  by  Dr. 
Maeser,  made  him  the  private  tutor  to 
his  family.  At  this  time  he  also  acted 
as  organist  for  the  Tabernacle  choir. 
In  1S67  he  was  called  to  preside  over 
the  Swiss  and  German  mission,  and 
among  other  monuments  of  his  efficient 
and  intelligent  labors  in  that  field, 
stands  "Der  Stern,"  the  mission  paper. 
The  paper  is  still  flouiishing  and  has 
been  of  incalculable  benefit  to  the  mis- 
sion. In  1876  Pres.  Brigham  Young 
called  Dr.  Maeser  to  go  to  Prove  and 
organize  the  Brigham  Young  academy. 
W"ith  one  of  less  resources  the  behest 
could  not  have  been  obeyed,  but  Dr. 
.\Iaeser  was  fitted  by  nature  for  the 
work  he  had  in  hand.  He  possessed  the 
learning,  the  experience,  the  wisdom, 
and  above  all  the  spirituality  to  bring 
about  the  full  fruition  of  his  ambitious 
dreams.  The  motto  that  guided  his  life 
was,  "be  yourself  what  you  would 
have  your  pupils  become,"  and  every 
pupil  who  ever  came  under  his  benign 
influence,  knew  that  his  walk  was  as 
true,  and  that  his  heart  was  as  pure  as 
was  necessary  to  form  an  example  for 
their  emulation.  The  growth  of  not 
only  the  academy  but  all  of  the  Church 
schools,  from  such  crude  and  poor  be- 
ginnings to  their  present  proud  station 
among  the  educational  institutions  of 
the  West,  is  due  mostly  to  his  indefat- 
igable efforts,  coupled  with  intelligence 


and  devotion.  On  the  system  of  the 
Church  schools  is  stamped  the  impress 
of  his  organizing  genius;  in  that  field 
he  stands  forth  pre-eminent.  He  could 
bring  order  out  of  chaos  and  mold  small 
beginnings  to  large  endings.  With  a 
rare  gift  of  prescience  he  understood 
the  needs  of  the  future  and  laid  the 
foundations  of  his  work  deep  and  wide 
so  that  they  will  stand  for  the  require- 
ments of  future  years.  Wherever 
children  needed  help  and  sympathy 
there  was  Dr.  Maeser  with  his  hands 
outstretched  eager  to  assist  them.  The 
Sunday  schools  being  largely  an  insti- 
tution for  children  and  the  youth,  he 
was  a  conspicuous  and  able  worker  in 
that  field,  and  in  1894  he  was  chosen 
second  general  superintendent  of  all  the 
Latter-day  Saint  Sunday  schools,  to  fill 
a  vacancy  caused  by  the  death  of  Elder 
John  Morgan— a  position  which  he  filled 
with  great  credit  until  his  death.  In 
1898  the  students  of  the  B.  Y.  Academy 
at  Provo  gave  Dr.  Maeser  a  jubilee  in 
commemoration  of  his  fifty  years  of 
service  as  a  teacher.  It  was  a  gala 
day.  The  building  was  too  small  to 
accimmodate  half  of  the  people  who 
clamored  for  admittance.  Addresses 
were  made  by  some  of  the  venerable 
man's  eminent  pupils,  among  whom 
were  Dr.  James  ^.  Talmage,  Benjamin 
Cluff,  Prof.  Geo.  H.  Brimhall,  and  oth- 
ers. In  1895  an  effort  was  made  to 
place  Dr.  Maeser  at  the  head  of  the 
State  schools,  the  Democratic  State 
convention  nominating  him  for  State 
Superintendent  of  Public  Instruction, 
but  it  was  not  destined  that  he  should 
be  drawn  away  from  the  channel 
through  which  he  had  directed  all  of  his 
efforts.  He  was  honored  with  a  seat 
in  the  constitutional  convention,  where 
he  helped  to  inject  into  the  organic  law 
of  the  State  many  wise  and  wholesome 
laws  regulating  the  educational  system 
of  Utah.  Elder  Maeser  died  Feb.  15,1901, 
at  his  home  in  Salt  Lake  City. 

TAXNER,  Joseph  Marion,  second  as- 

sisant  general  superintendent  of  Lat- 
ter-day Saint  Sunday  schools,  was  born 
March  26,  1859,  in  Payson,  Utah  county, 
Utah.  He  is  the  second  but  oldest  liv- 
ing, son  of  Myron  Tanner  and  Mary 
Jane  Mount,  who  when  their  son  was 
about  three  years  of  age  moved  to  Pro- 
vo, where  he  received  his  earliest  edu- 
cation in  the  public  schools.  From  his 
fourteenth   to  his   seventeenth   year   he 


710 


LATTER-DAY    SAINT 


w«us  an  employee  of  the  Provo  Woolen 
Mills.  He  worked  during  the  day  In 
the  factory  and  attended  a  night  school 
organized  at  the  Brlgham  Young  Aca- 
demy, under  Dr.  Karl  G.  Maeser.  The 
class  originally  consisted  of  some 
twenty-six  factory  hands  who  gradually 
lost  their  interest  In  the  studies,  and  he 
finally  became  the  only  student  of  the 
class  which  continued  during  the  entire 
school  year.  It  was  during  these  night 
cla.5ses,  at  which  he  was  the  only  stu- 
dent, that  a  sympathetic  friendship 
sprang  up  between  the  boy  and  Dr. 
Karl  G.  Maeser— a  friendship  that  be- 
came increasingly  intimate  during  Dr 
Maeser's  life.  At  the  age  of  seventeen 
he  entered  the  academy  as  a  regulai 
student  and  was  a  membei-  of  its  first 
graduating  class  in  the  year  1878,  thus 


becoming  one  of  the  first  tea-chers  who 
had  graduated  from  the  institution. 
He  remained  at  the  academy  as  a 
teacher  of  various  subjects,  especially 
of  mathematics,  fiom  his  nineteenth  to 
his  twenty-fifth  year.  In  1879  he  was 
engaged  in  engineering  work  in  the  con- 
struction of  the  Denver  and  Rio  Grande 
railroad,  and  in  1882  was  appointed  city 
surveyor  of  Provo.  In  1884  he  left  for 
a  misison  to  Germany.  In  view  of  his 
profession  as  teacher  he  traveled  ex- 
tensively in  America  and  Europe  on 
his  way  to  the  missionary  field,  and  was 
finally  assigned  to  the  Berlin  confer- 
ence. In  the  fall  of  1885  he  was  trans- 
ferred to  Turkey  for  the  purpose  of 
opening  a  mission   in   the   Sultan's   do- 


minion.      During    the     spring    of    1SS6 
he  visited   the  principal  Oriental  coun- 
tries   bordering   on    the    Mediterranean, 
and  especially  the  Holy  Land,  where  an 
opportunity   was   discovered   to  open   a 
mission    among    the    German    colonists 
who    were    colonizing    Palestine    under 
the  idea   that   the  chief   feature   of  the 
gospel    in    these   last   days  was   that  of 
gathering.        A    number    of    these    Ger- 
mans subsequently  accepted  the  gospel 
and  emigrated   to  America.       After  3V2 
years  of  missionary  labor  and  travel  in 
most  of  the  countries  of  Europe  and  in 
the    Holy    Land,      he      returned    home, 
reaching  Utah  in  December,  1887.      Ow- 
ing   to    the    ill    health    of    Dr.    Karl    G. 
Maeser  at   that   time,   he   took  the  lat- 
ter's  Avork  in  the  Brigham  Young  Aca- 
demy   for    the    remaining    part    of    the 
year.       In   the   summer   of  1888  he  was 
elected  piesident  of  the  Brigham  Young 
College   at    Logan,    and    the   same   year 
was  appointed  a  member  of  the  Church 
Board   of   Examiners,     and   the   Church 
Board  of  Education  at  the  same     time 
conferred  upon  him  the  doctor's  degree. 
After    three    years'    presidency    of    the 
Brigham  Young  College,  he  resigned  his 
position   to   take   up  a   course  of  study 
in  the  East,  and  passed  three  years  at 
Harvard     TTniversity,       chiefly     in     the 
study    of    law.        On      his    return    from 
Harvard  he  entered  the  practice  of  law 
in    Salt    Lake    City,    where    in    1896    he 
became    the    first    Supreme    Court     re- 
l)orter  under  the  new  State  government. 
"While   occupying    that    office   he   edited 
the  first  five  volumes  of  the  Utah  State 
Reports.      He  was  the  same  year  elect- 
ed president  of  the  Agricultural  College, 
at  Logan,  a  position  which  he  held  for 
four  years.       Upon   resigning  his   posi- 
tion   as   college    president       in    1900,    he 
again    entered    the    practice    of    law    in 
Salt  Lake  City  and  became  a  member 
of  the  law   firm   of     Ferguson,   Cannon 
&   Tanner.       After  a  practic?  covering 
a  iieriod  of  ten  months,  in  1901,  he  wa.s 
appointed     deputy     superintendent      of 
State  schools  and  later  in  the  same  year 
received  the  appointment  of  general  su- 
perintendent of  Church  schools,  to  suc- 
ceed Dr.   Kail  G.   Maeser.   who  had  i-e- 
cently    died.        Dr.    Tanner,      who    had 
been  a  member  of  the  Deseret  Sunda> 
School    Union     Board     since   1896,    was 
chosen  second  assistant  supei-intendent 
of  Sunday  schools  in  1901.  and  about  the 
same  time  was  appointed  second  assist- 
ant  superintendent   of  religion   classes. 


BIOGRAPHICAL,    ENCYCLOPEDIA. 


711 


For  more  than  twenty  years  Dr.  Tan- 
ner has  been  a  constant  contributor  to 
Church  magazines,  and  at  present  is 
assistant  associate  editor  of  the  "Ju- 
venile Instructor,"  and  edits  "Current 
Topics"  in  the  "Improvement  Era."  His 
studies  and  teaching  during  the  past 
twenty-five  years  have  covered  a  wide 
lange,  including,  as  they  do,  mathemat- 
ics, languages,  history,  and  law.  His 
travels  in  Europe,  Asia  and  Africa 
have  extended  to  most  of  the  historical 
fields  of  those  continents  and  have  been 
undertaken  in  pursuance  of  his  interest 
in  historical  research.  These  accumu- 
lated experiences  in  educational  insti- 
tutions and  in  travel  are  particularly 
helpful  to  his  work  in  the  school  and 
in  the  editor's  chair. 

GRIGGS,    Thomas   Cott.     one  of  the 

presidents  of  the  2nd  quorum  of  Seven- 
ty and  a  member  of  the  Sunday  School 
Union  Board,  was  born  June  19,  1845,  in 
Dover,  county  of  Kent,  England.  His 
mother   having  joined    the   Church,    he, 


while  quite  young,  also  became  interest- 
ed in  the  teachings  of  the  Elders,  and 
was  baptized  May  17,  1856,  in  the  Straits 
of  Dover  by  Elder  Thos.  Liez.  Two 
years  before  this  he  was  rendered 
fatherless.  Together  with  his  mother 
he  emigrated  to  America  in  1856,  cross- 
ing the  Atlantic  in  the  ship  "Wellfleet," 
and  arrived  in  Boston,  Mass.,  July  11, 
1856.  There  was  a  branch  of  the 
Church  in  Boston  at  that  time  and  the 
boy  and  his  mother  remained  there  for 
several  years,   and   there   Thomas   first 


became  interested  in  music.  Some  time 
after  his  arrival  in  Boston  a  brass  band 
was  organized  there  composed  of 
Church  members,  led  by  Elder  John 
Eardley,  and  with  it  the  young  man 
became  identified  as  an  active  and  en- 
thusiastic performer.  Upon  the  break- 
ing out  of  the  great  civil  war.  Brother 
Griggs  and  his  mother  started  for  Utah, 
in  company  with  other  emigrating 
Saints.  They  traveled  by  rail  and 
steamer  to  Florence,  Nebraska,  where 
they  were  met  by  Church  teams  from 
the  Valley.  Crossing  the  plains  in  Cap- 
tain Joseph  Home's  company,  they 
reached  Salt  Lake  City  on  Sept.  13,  1861, 
The  young  man  continued  his  interest 
in  music,  and  for  some  time  after  his 
arrival  in  Utah  he  played  in  John  Eard- 
ley's  band,  the  leader  and  most  of  the 
members  of  the  band  having  emigrated 
to  the  gathering  place  of  the  Saints. 
Later  he  became  a  member  of  Mark 
Croxall's  band— celebrated  in  those 
days  for  its  excellent  accomplishments 
as  a  musical  organization.  For  a  few 
years  during  the  early  sixties  Brother 
Griggs  was  in  the  employ  of  Walker 
Brothers,  and  engaged  at  their  branch 
mercantile  house  in  Fairfield,  better 
known  as  Camp  Floyd.  While  there  he 
undertook  to  acquire  a  knowledge  of 
vocal  music.  A  class  in  vocal  music 
was  oiganized  in  the  settlement  by  a 
brother  named  B.  B.  Messenger,  who 
afterwards  became  the  choir  leader  in 
the  branch  of  the  Church  at  that  place. 
Some  of  Brother  Grigg's  young  asso- 
ciates were  intending  to  join  the  class 
and  they  persuaded  him  to  go  along 
with  them.  As  an  instrumentalist  he 
had  already  gained  a  knowledge  of  the 
rudiments  of  music  and  he  found  it  an 
easy  matter  to  apply  this  knowledge 
to  his  vocal  studies;  and,  having  this 
advantage,  he  became  one  of  the  teach- 
er's most  apt  pupils.  In  the  course  of 
time  the  leader  of  the  choir  removed 
form  the  settlement. and  Brother  Griggs 
was  called  to  take  his  place.  The  mem- 
bers of  the  choir  were  very  much  inter- 
ested in  their  mufical  labors  and  for  a 
time  they  formed  an  efficient  and  cred- 
itable organization.  From  this  time 
dates  Elder  Griggs'  career  as  a  choir 
conductor.  On  his  return  to  Salt  Lake 
City  he  joined  the  Tabernacle  choir,  in 
18C6-67,  and  has  sung  under  five  of  its 
leaders— Professors  Charles  J.  Thomas, 
Robert  Sands,  George  Careless,  Eben- 
ezer  Beesley  and  Evan  Stephens.  While 


712 


LATTER-DAY    SAINT 


filling   a   mission    to    Great    Britain,    to 
which  he  had  been  called  in  April,  1880, 
ne  was  appointed  conductor  of  the  Ta- 
bernacle choir.      He  had  frequently  led 
the  choir  before  this  time  in   the     ab- 
sence  of   the   previous   conductor.       At 
that    same    time      Professor    Ebenezer 
Beesley   was   chosen   as   assistant  con- 
ductor,   and    took    charge    of   the    choir 
during  Elder  Griggs'  absence.       On  his 
return  from  England,   recognizing     the 
ability   with   which   his   assistant     con- 
ducted the  choir  and  the  unity  and  good 
feeling  existing  in  the  organization,  El- 
der   Griggs    cheerfully    and    graciously 
proffered    to    exchange    jiositions     with 
him,  and  requested  that  Elder  Beesley 
continue  to  conduct  as  he  had  been  do- 
ing.      With   the   consent   and   approval 
of   the   Church   authorities   this   change 
was  made.       For  ten  years  previous  to 
his  departure  upon  the  English  mission 
already   mentioned,    and    for   ten   y?ars 
ifter  his  i-eturn.  Brother  Griggs  led  the 
choir    of    the    Fifteenth    Ward    of    Salt 
Lake   City:    and    during   his    leadership 
it   had   the  reputation   of  being  among 
the  best  of   such   organizations   in   tha 
fity.       His   missionary    labors   in    Eng- 
land were  in  the  London  conference, and 
here  his  musical   talents  were  brought 
Into  requisition  for  the  advancement  of 
the  cause  in  which  he  was  enlisted.  In 
j.ddition  to  his  active  interest  in  music- 
al  matt.?rs.    Elder   Griggs   has   been   an 
untiring  worker  in   the  Sunday  school. 
From  1874  to  1891  he  was  superintendent 
of  the  Fifteenth  Ward  Sabbath  school, 
and  from  1891  to  1901.  superintendent  of 
the   Sunday   schools  of     the   Salt   Lake 
Stake.        In    1878    he    was    appointed    a 
member   of    the    publication    committee 
of  the  Deseret  Sunday  School  Union,  al- 
though he  had  been  connected  with  the 
I'nion   for  some  two  years  previous  to 
that  date.      In  this  capacity  he  has  had 
especial    charge    of   the    preparation   of 
the  musical  works  issued  by  that  body. 
In   1882,   through   his   suggestion,    priaes 
were  offered  by  the  Union  for  original 
musical  compositions  suitable  for  Sun- 
day school  and  choir  use.      In  response 
to  this  offer  a  collection  of  songs     and 
other  pieces  was  received.  These  songs, 
with  others  already  at  hand,  were  com- 
piled  by  Brother  Griggs,   with  Brother 
Beesley  associated,  into  what  is  known 
as   the    "Deseret   Sunday     School    Song 
Book."        Brother    Griggs    was    also    a 
member  of  the  committee  that  compiled 
the    "Latter-day     Saints'      Psalmody," 


now  in  general  use  in  nearly  all  Ward 
choirs  and  Church  schools.      As  a  mem- 
ber of  the.  Deseret  Sunday  School  Union 
Board  he  has  been  a  constant  worker 
ever  since  his  connection  with  it,  hav- 
ing rendered  practical  assistance  in  the 
establishment    of    the    various    projects 
of  the  Union  for  the  general  benefit  of 
the  Sunday  school  movement.      He  has 
traveled  extensively  among  the  Stakes 
of  Zion  in  the  Sunday  school  cause.    In 
May,    1900,    he   was   appointed    business 
manager  for  the  Union,  and  since  then 
hig    whole    time    has    been    occupied    in 
Sabbath    school   work.       In   September, 
1901,  he  was  released  from  his  position 
as  superintendent  of  Sunday  schools  in 
the  Salt  Lake  Stake,  in  order  that  his 
whole  attention  might  be  given  to  the 
general   Sunday     school     cause.       As  a 
composer  of  music  Brother  Griggs  be- 
gan his  training  under  the  tutorship  of 
Professor  George  Careless.      His    com- 
positions are  mostly  hymn  and    Sunday 
school  song  tunes.      A  number  of  these 
are  found  in  the  Psalmody  and  the  Sun- 
day School  Song  Book  already  referred 
to;    pieces  from  his  pen   have  also  ap- 
peared from  time  to  time  in  the  pages 
of  the  "Juvenile  Instructor."  His  music- 
al settings  to  the  songs  entitled,  "Jubi- 
lee Hymn,"  "Land  of  the  Blest,"  "The 
Sabbath  Day,"  "God  is  Love,"  etc.,  are 
among    the    favorite    pieces     found     in 
ITtah's     musical     publications.       Elder 
Griggs  has  beeen  active  in  various  call- 
ings in   the  Priesthood   since  he  was  a 
boy.   He  was  called   to   the   office  of  a 
Teacher    by      Elder      George    Q.    Can- 
non,      at       a       conference       held       in 
Boston.  Sunday,    April    2,    1860,  and  or- 
dained the  Sunday  following,  April  9th. 
by  Elder  John  Eardley.       Sept.   5,   1863. 
he   was   ordained   an   Elder   by   Samuel 
L.   Sprague.   and     received     his  endow- 
ments the  same  day.       Feb.  9,  1867,  he 
was  ordained  a  Seventy,  by  Elder  Jesse 
W.  Fox.  and  received  into  the  36th  quo- 
rum.      He   joined     the   second   quorum 
Oct.  29,  1883,  and  was  chosen  as  one  of 
the  presidents  in  that  quorum  Aug.  30. 
1886.      This  latter  position  he  still  holds. 
Both    the    name      and    the    features    of 
Thomas  C.  Griggs  are  familiar  through- 
out the  Stakes  of  Zion.       As  a  worker 
in  the  interest  of  Sunday  schools  he  Is 
as  well  known  as  he  is  for  his  labors 
in   the  musical  line;    and   he  has   made 
himself  eminently   useful    in   both   pur- 
suits.      He   has   been   a   Sunday   school 
worker  for  over   thirty-five  years,   and 


BIOGRAPHICAL  ENCYCLOPEDIA. 


713 


for  the  past  twenty-five  years  has  been 
prominently  connected  with  the  Deseret 
Sunday  School  Union.  His  record  as 
a  musician  dates  still  farther  back,  and 
for  the  past  thirty-five  years  he  has 
been  an  active  member  of  the  Salt  Lake 
Tabernacle  choir.  Brother  Grig-gs  is  a 
man  of  a  g^nial^  happy  disposition, con- 
siderate and  thoughtful  in  his  inter- 
(.•<.)urse  with  his  fellow-man;  he  is  meth- 
(idical,  systematic  and  punctual  in  his 
habits,  possessed  of  original  ideas  and 
jilans;  he  has  the  patience,  persistence 
and  tact  to  carry  out  his  projects.  He 
takes  pride  in  his  labors  and  is  admir- 
ably adajUed  to  his  calling  as  a  teach- 
t-r  and  leader  among  the  youth  of  Zion, 
his  example  as  well  as  his  precept  be- 
ing' such  as  may  be  followed  with  profit. 
— Edwin  F.  Parry. 

CUMMINGS,  Horace  Hall,  c  mem- 
ber of  the  Sunday  school  Union  Board, 
^vas  born  June  12,  1858,  in  Piovo,  Utah 
county,  Utah,  son  of  B.  F.  Cummings 
and  Cathaiine  Hall.  His  father  was 
a  pioneer  of  I^tah,  arriving  in  the  Val- 
ley in  September,  1^47,  in  the  first  com- 
I)any  that  followed  the  pioneers  under 
the  immediate  leadership  of  Pres.  Brig- 
harn  Young.  Horace  was  born  at  the 
time  of  the  famous  "move  south."  His 
parents,  having  arrived  at  Provo  from 
their  northern  home,  secured  from  a 
kind  friend  a  granary  for  shelter,  and 
some  straw  on  the  floor  for  a  bed,  and 
here  he  was  born.  After  the  danger 
from  the  army  was  over,  the  family  re- 
turned north,  living  a  time  at  Ogden 
and  then  at  Willow  Creek,  Salt  Lake 
county,  but  finallly  removed  to  Salt 
Lake  City,  where  they  lived  for  many 
years.  Horace  obtained  such  school- 
ing as  the  district  schools  at  that  time 
afforded,  supplemented  by  some  excel- 
lent training  in  the  14th  Ward  Sunday 
school  which  was  under  the  able  super- 
intendoncy  at  that  time  of  Geo.  H.  Tay- 
lor, and  in  August,  1877,  he  entered  the 
Deseret  University  as  a  normal  student. 
Before  completing  the  one  year  normal 
course,  however,  his  father  and  eldest 
brother  were  both  called  on  missions, 
and  he  quit  school  to  support  the  fami- 
ly. After  their  return,  he  re-entered 
the  University  and  successfully  com- 
jileted  the  normal  course,  which  had 
been  extended  to  a  two  years'  course. 
Being  successful  as  a  teacher,  he  fol- 
lowed that  profession  for  several  years. 
In  1895  he  obtained  a  degree  of  bachelor 


of  science,  with  a  State  normal  certifi- 
cate. He  has  taught  in  the  B.  Y.  Col- 
lege, in  Logan,  the  18th  Ward  Semina- 
ry, the  Central  Seminary  and  Church 
schools,  besides  teaching^  in  several  dis- 
trict schools  of  Salt  Lake  City.  He  has 
been  teaching  in  the  University  of  Utah 
since  1895,  and  at  present  holds  the  po- 
sition of  Director  of  Science  in  the  State 
Normal  School.  In  June,  1885-87,  he 
went  on  a  mission  to  Mexico,  mastering 
the  Spanish  language  and  doing  a  good 
work.       He  has  been  a  Sunday     school 


worker  for  over  twenty-live  years,  was 
a  membei-  of  the  "Central  Committee" 
which  started  the  Y.  M.  M.  I.  A.  and 
almost  ever  since  has  been  connected 
with  that  work.  He  is  a  member  of 
the  High  Council  of  the  Granite  Stake 
and  superintendent  of  the  Academy  of 
that  Stake  as  well  as  of  the  Religion 
classes.  In  October,  1901,  he  was  ap- 
pointed a  member  of  the  Deseret  Sun- 
day School  Union  Board,  and  in  No- 
vember an  aid  in  the  Church  Religion 
(^lass  Board.  He  is  now  at  work  with 
a  committee  chosen  by  these  two  boards 
on  a  course  of  study  for  the  Latter-day 
Saint  Sunday  schools  and  religion 
classes.  Elder  Cummings'  life  thus  far 
has  been  a  very  active  one,  his  labors 
mostly  being  with  the  young.  He  has 
been  fairly  successful  in  a  financial  way 
and  served  as  a  member  of  the  third 
State  legislature.  He  is  now  a  resi- 
dent of  East  Mill  Creek,  where  he  mar- 


714 


LATTER-DAY    SAINT 


ried  Barbara  M.  Moses,  the  daughter 
of  Julian  Moses,  one  of  the  early  pio- 
neers of  that  place. 

WELLS,  Janius  Free,  the  first  or- 
ganizer of  Young  Men's  Mutual  Im- 
provement Associations  in  the  Church, 
was  born  June  1,  1854,  in  Salt  Lake  City, 
Utah,  son  of  Daniel  H.  Wells  and  Han- 
nah Free.  He  attended  school  in  the 
Union  Academy  under  Dr.  Henjy  I. 
Doremus  and  afterwards  in  the  Fif- 
teenth Ward  and  old  Seventies'  Hall 
under  Professors  Bartlett,  Tripp  and  O. 
H.  Riggs.  He  completed  his  education 
at  the  Deseret  University,  of  which  he 
was  a  student  under  David  O.  Calder, 
the  Misses  Cook  and  Dr.  John  R.  Park. 
He  was  baptized  when  about  eight 
years  old  and  ordained  an  Elder  when 
quite  a  youth.  In  1872-74  he  filled  a 
mission  to  Great  Britain,  laboring  in 
the  London  and  Nottingham  confer- 
ences. He  also  visited  the  Scandinavi- 
an and  the  Swiss  and  German  missions, 
and  made  a  tour  of  other  parts  of  the 
continent  of  Europe,  going  as  far  east 
as  Vienna  and  south  to  Naples.  Later, 
he  visited  Europe  twice  (in  188.5  and  in 
1891).  He  was  ordained  a  Seventy  in 
October,  1875,  and  called  to  pfo  on  a 
mission  to  the  United  States.  On  this 
mission  he  labored  in  Iowa,  Missouri 
and  Illinois,  and  in  the  summer  of  1876 
in  New  England,  and  among  his 
father's  kindred  in  the  State  of  New 
York.  In  the  first  week  of  June,  IST.S, 
he  was  called,  by  Pres.  Brigham  Young, 
to  organize  the  societies  of  the  young 
men,  and  he  effec-ted  the  first  oi'ganiza- 
tion  of  the  Young  Men's  Mutuial  Im- 
provement Associations,  as  now  consti- 
tuted, in  the  Thirteenth  Ward,  Salt 
Lake  City,  on  Thursday  evening,  June 
10,  1875.  He  has  labored  ever  since 
in  the  cause  of  these  associations,  de- 
voting almost  the  whole  of  his  time  to 
that  work  for  a  period  of  .seventeen 
years.  In  October,  1879,  he  established 
"The  Contributor,"  a  monthly  magazine 
jiublished  in  the  interest  of  the  im- 
provement associations,  of  which  he 
was  ihe  editor  and  publisher  for  thir- 
teen years. 

BRIMHALL,  George  H..  a  member 
of  the  general  board  of  Y.  M.  M.  T.  A., 
is  thf-  son  of  Patriarch  George  W. 
Brimhall  and  Rachel  Ann  Mayer  and 
was  born  Dec.  9.  1852,  at  Salt  Lake  City, 
Utah.      He  is  the  eldest  of  ten  children 


born  under  the  eternal  covenant  of 
marriage:  George  H.,  Rachel  E.,  Elmer 
M.,  Orilla  M.,  Omer  M.,  Ruth  R..  Prud- 
ence M.,  Ether  R.,  Tryphena  M.,  and 
Grace  M.  When  twenty-two  years  of 
age  he  was  united  in  marriage  for  time 
and  eternity  to  Alsina  E.  Wilkins,  who 
became  the  mother  of  six  children, Lucy 
Jane,  Alsina  E.,  George  W.,  Mark  H.. 
Wells  R.,  and  Milton  H.  At  thirty-one 
he  received  in  marriage  for  time  and 
eternity  Flora  Robinson.  The  children 
from  Lhis  union  are,  Dean  R.,  Fay  R., 
Fawn  R.,  Burns  R.,  and  Paul  P..  Bro. 
Hrimhall  has  been  ordained  a  Teacher, 
an  Elder,  and  a  High  Priest.  He  has 
filled  the  apointments  of  president  of  an 
Elders'  quorum  at  Spanish  Fork,  clerk 
of  the  High  Priests'  quorum,  at  Provo, 
home   missionary,    and   member    of   the 


Higli  Council  of  the  Utah  Stake  of  Zion. 
and  missionary  to  the  State  of  Colo- 
rado. For  twenty-six  years  he  ha.s 
been  a  Sunday  school  worker,  as  teach- 
er, as  V\'ard  superintendent,  as  a  mem- 
ber of  Stake  superintendency,  as  a 
teacher  of  Sunday  school  normal  class 
in  the  Church  Normal  Training  School 
and  for  twenty-six  years  a  worker  in 
the  Young  Men's  Mutual  Improvement 
Association,  as  Ward  secretary, as  Ward 
president,  as  Stake  superintendent,  and 
as  member  of  the  general  board.  For 
thirty-one  years  he  has  labored  as  a 
teacher,  an  assistant  in  a  mixed  school, 
as  a  regular  teacher,  as  prin- 
cipal of  the  schools  in  Spanish 
Fork,  as  superintendent  of  Utah 
county     schools,       as       superintendent 


BIOGRAPHICAL    ENCYCLOPEDIA. 


715 


of  Provo  diy  schools;  teacher  in  the  in- 
termediate department  of  the  Brighaum 
Young  Academy,  assistant  teacher  of 
])edag:ogy,  professor  of  pedagogy,  di- 
rector of  the  Normal  Training  School, 
principal  of  the  High  School  depart- 
ment, and  acting  president  of  the  Brig- 
ham  Young  Academy.  He  has  con- 
ducted teachers'  institutes  and  deliv- 
ered educational  lectures  in  Utah,  Idaho 
and  Arizona.  Elder  Brimhall  has  al- 
ways loved  labor;  has  an  inherent  dis- 
like for  idleness  and  aimless  activity. 
He  gleaned  wheat  for  bread  in  times  of 
scarcity,  drove  cows  to  Dixie  on  foot, 
did  janitorial  work  to  pay  tuition  at 
Provo  High  School,  has  had  the  man- 
agement of  a  farm  since  he  was  nine- 
teen years  of  age,  and  as  a  rest  from 
mental  strain  he  finds  no  more  enjoy- 
able recreation  than  working  on  the 
farm  or  in  the  canyon. 

ANDERSON,  Kdward  H.,  a  member 
of  the  general  board  of  Y.  M.  M.  I.  A., 
was  born  Oct.  8,  1858,  in  Billeberga, 
Malmohus  Ian,  Sweden.  He  emigrated 
to  Am^^rioa  in  1864,  crossing  the  Atlantic 


in  the  "Monarch  of  the  Sea,"  and  ar- 
rived in  Salt  Lake  City  Sept.  15,  1864, 
having  crossed  the  plains  in  Capt.  Wm. 
B.  Preston's  company.  He  resided  in 
Mill  Creek,  Farmington,  and  Hunts- 
ville,  successively,  alternately  laboring 
on  the  farm  and  attending  the  common 
schools;  and,  in  1877,  graduated  from 
the  normal  department  of  the  Universi- 
ty of  Utah,  taking  up  the  profession  of 


teaching  in  Weber  county.  He  was 
baptized  July  1,  1869.  In  April,  1879,  he 
became  Interested  in  the  newspaper 
business,  and  for  a  decade  figured  as 
the  leading  newspaper  manager  and 
editor  in  Ogden.  He  was  ordained  an 
Elder  in  1880,  and  in  1881  he  married 
Jane  S.  Ballantyne,  a  daughter  of  the 
late  Richard  Ballantyne,  founder  of  the 
Sunday  schools  of  the  Latter-day 
Saints.  She  is  a  woman  of  strong  char- 
acter and  excellent  ability.  With  her 
he  has  a  family  of  six  boys  and 
one  girl.  For  nearly  two  years, 
prior  to  Sept.  3,  1890,  Elder  An- 
derson edited  and  managed  the 
"Contributor"  under  Junius  F.  Wells. 
On  that  day,  he  left  for  Europe,  hav- 
ing been  called  on  a  special  mission  to 
preside  over  the  Scandinavian  mission. 
He  took  charge  of  the  oflfice  Sept. 
28,  1890,  and  presided  with  honor 
over  the  mission  with  all  its  arduous 
duties  until  his  release  and  return  home 
in  October,  1892.  On  his  return,  he 
wrote  "A  Brief  History  of  the  Church." 
and  "A  Life  of  Brigham  Young,"  for 
the  publishing  house  of  Cannon  &  Sons. 
He  was  elected  city  recorder  of  Ogden 
in  1893,  and  was  twice  re-elected,  hold- 
ing the  office  till  January,  1900,  not  be- 
ing a  candidate  for  re-election.  He  has 
held  many  local  Church  positions,  hav- 
ing acted  as  Stake  clerk  of  Weber  Stake 
of  Zion,  and  superintendent  of  the  Y^. 
M.  M.  I.  A.  for  about  ten  years;  he  also 
acted  as  assistant  historian  of  the  We- 
ber Stake  for  some  time,  and  filled  the 
position  of  county  superintendent  of 
public  schools  for  eight  years,  prior  to 
his  departure  for  Europe.  In  1893  he 
became  a  member  of  the  Board  of  Aids 
to  the  general  superintendency  of  the 
Y.  M.  M.  I.  A.,  and  in  1899  he  succeed- 
ed Elder  Brigham  H.  Roberts  as  asso- 
ciate editor  of  the  "Improvement  Era." 
Nov.  24,  1900,  he  was  chosen  a  member 
of  the  High  Council  of  the  Weber  Stake. 
He  had  previously  acted  as  an  alter- 
nate member  of  that  body  and  was  or- 
dained a  High  Priest  as  early  as  1882. 
At  the  general  election  in  November, 
1900,  he  was  elected  a  member  of  the 
fourth  State  legislature,  serving  for  the 
term.  March  2,  1901,  he  was  confirmed 
by  the  U.  S.  Senate  for  surveyor-gen- 
eral of  "Utah,  to  which  position  Pres. 
McKinley  nominated  him  Feb.  23,  1901. 
Elder  Anderson  is  a  hard  student  and 
diligent  worker,  and  one  of  the  bright- 
est men  in  the  Church. 


716 


LATTER-DAY    SAINT 


HULL,  Thomas,  secretary  of  the 
general  board  of  Y.  M.  M.  I.  A.,  was 
born  Dec.  27,  1855,  in  London,  England, 
a,nd  was  baptized  when  but  a  young 
boy.  He  was  ordained  a  Priest  April 
19.  1874,  by  Bishop  Robert  T.  Burton 
and  ordained  an  Elder  by  Bishop  Tlobt. 
T.  Burton  March  7.  1875.  He  emigrat- 
ed to  Utah  in  1875  and  located  in  Salt 
Lake  City.  During  the  winter  of  1S75- 
76,  when  the  organizing  of  the  Y.  M.  M. 
I.  A.  was  in  progress  throughout  the 
Church,  he  was  called  as  a  missionary 
to  labor  in  the  interest  of  that  work 
in  Salt  Lake  and  Davis  Stakes.  He  was 
ordained  a  Seventy  Jan.  28.  1876,  and 
became  a  member  of  the  30th  quorum; 
later  (June  26,  1893)  he  was  chosen  to 
be  one  of  the  presidents  in  the  2nd  quo- 
lum  of  Seventy,  which  position  he  still 
fills.  April  28th,  1877,  he  married  Mar- 
garet C.  Swan.  In  1891  he  labored  as 
a  mutual  improvement  missionary  in 
Davis,   Weber  and   Box   Elder     Stakes. 


eaily  years  were  passed  in  his 
native  place  and  in  Payson,  Utah 
county;  and  at  the  age  of  fifteeen  he 
entered  the  Brigham  Young  Academy 
for  a  brief  course  of  study.  Graduat- 
ing in  1883,  he  immediately  accepted  a 


He  was  appointed  general  .secretary  of 
the  Y.  M.  M.  I.  Associations  in  1897,  and 
in  1898  was  also  made  general  treasurer 
of  that  organization,  both  of  which  po- 
sitions he  is  efficiently  filling  at  pres- 
ent. He  is  also  assistant  business 
manager  of  the  "Improvement  Era," 
the  official  organ  of  the  Young  Men's 
Mutual  Improvement  Associations. 

DONE,  VVillard,  a  member  of  the 
general  board  of  Y.  M.  M.  I.  A.,  is  the 
son  of  John  Done  and  Sarah  Barker, 
and  was  born  Dec.  10,  1865,  in 
Moioni,     Sanpete    County,    Utah.      His 


position  as  an  instructor  in  the  acade- 
my. He  continued  this  work  for  a  lit- 
tle over  three  years,  when,  on  Nov.  15, 
1886,  he  was  called  to  Salt  Lake  City 
to  take  charge  of  the  newly  organized 
Salt  Lake  Stake  Academy,  now  the  Lat- 
ter-day Saints'  University.  He  re- 
mained connected  with  this  institution 
until  June,  1899,  when  he  resigned  to 
become  professor  of  theology  in  the 
Brigham  Young  College,  at  Logan.  He 
remained  in  that  position  only  a  year; 
and  in  the  summer  of  1900  he  left  the 
school  room  on  account  of  impaired 
health,  and  went  into  other  lines  of 
work.  In  the  meantime  he  had  occu- 
pied several  ecclesiastical  positions, 
among  them  that  of  home  missionary 
and  Stake  reporter  in  the  Salt  Lake 
Stake  of  Zion;  and  one  of  the  presidents 
of  the  10th  quorum  of  Seventy.  He 
lesigned  these  positions  on  going  to 
Logan;  and  there  he  was  appointed  sec- 
ond counselor  to  Samuel  Roskelly,pres- 
idont  of  the  High  Priests'  quorum,  of 
the  Cache  Stake  of  Zion.  He  was  re- 
leased from  this  position  when  the 
Cache  Stake  was  divided,  in  the  spring 
of  1901.  In  the  meantime  he  had  re- 
turned to  Salt  Lake  City,  where  he  has 
since  resided.  Dec.  23,  1885,  he  was 
married  in  the  Logan  Temple  to  Miss 
Amanda  Forbes,  of  American  Fork. 
They  have  had  seven  children,  six  of 
whom  are  now  living.  As  one  of  the 
aids  in  the  General  Board  of  Mutual 
Improvement  Elder  Done  has  each 
year,  since  1897,  been  a  member  of  the 
Manual  Committee,  which  is  entrusted 
with  the  work  of  preparing  a  course 
of  study  for  each  season's  work.       He 


BIOGRAPHICAL,    ENCYCLOPEDIA, 


717 


has  also  devoted  himself  considerably 
to  other  literary  work,  being  the  au- 
thor of  the  little  volume,  "Women  of 
the  Bible."  and  a  contributor  to  the 
local  magrazines. 

TANNER,  Henry  S.,  a  member  of 
the  general  board  of  Y.  M.  M.  I.  A.,  was 
bom  Feb.  15,  1869,  in  Payson,  Utah 
county,  Utah,  son  of  Joseph  S.  Tanner 
and  Elizabeth  Clark  Haws.  After  leav- 


succeed  Dr.  Karl  G.  Maeser  (who  was 
then  located  in  San  Francisco),  Aug. 
15,  1894;  and  was  released  to  return 
home  Nov.  22,  1896.  After  returning 
from  the  California  mission.  Elder  Tan- 
ner taught  in  the  B.  Y.  Academy  until 
June,  1897.  In  September,  of  the  same 
year,  he  commenced  the  study  of  law 
in  Ann  Arbor,  Michigan,  where,  in  two 
years,  he  completed  the  three  year  law 
course,  graduating  a  Bachelor  of  Laws 
from  the  University  of  Michigan  June 
22,  1899.  In  July,  1899,  he  located  in 
Salt  Lake  City,  Utah,  and  began  the 
practice  of  law;  and  he  was  elected  to 
the  office  of  city  judge  of  Salt  Lake 
City,  Utah,  Nov.  5,  1901.  He  is  a  member 
of  the  19th  ecclesiastical  Ward,  of  the 
Salt  Lake  Stake,  is  one  of  the  presi- 
dents of  the  Thirtieth  quorum  of  Seven- 
ty, and  a  member  of  the  General  Board 
of  the  Young  Men's  Mutual  Improve- 
ment Associations  of  the  Church. 

CLAYTON,  William,  a  prominent 
Elder  in  the  Church,  was  born  July  17, 
1814,  at  Penwortham,  Lancashire,  Eng- 
land. When  the  first  Latter-day  Saint 
missionaries  arrived  in  England  in  1837, 
Wm.  Clayton  was  among  the  first  to 
embrace  the  doctrines  of  the  restored 
gospel,  and  soon  after  his  baptism  he 
was  ordained  to  the  Priesthood  and  sent 
out  to  labor  as  a  missionary.  In  March, 


ing  the  district  school  of  Payson,  he  at- 
tended the  B.  Y.  College  at  Logan  and 
the  B.  Y.  Academy  at  Provo  for  five 
years,  gradua^^ing  from  the  latter  in- 
stitution as  a  Bachelor  of  Pedagogy  in 
June,  1894,  and  in  June,  1897,  the  degree 
of  Bachelor  of  Didactics  was  conferred 
upon  him.  He  married  Laura  L.  Wood- 
land in  the  Logan  Temple  March  5,  1890, 
and  on  March  12th,  of  the  same  year, 
he  started  on  a  mission  to  the  South- 
ern States.  Being  assigned  to  the  South 
Carolina  conference  his  labors  were 
confined  to  South  Carolina,  North  Caro- 
lina and  Georgia.  He  presided  over  the 
conference  for  several  months  and  was 
released  to  return  home  Oct.  2,  1892. 
During  the  summer  of  1894  he  filled  a 
short  mission  in  Park  City,  Summit 
county,  and  immediately  upon  his  re- 
turn to  Provo,  where  he  resided,  he  was 
called  to  preside  over  the  California 
mission.       He  left  Salt     Lake   City,   to 


1838,  when  Heber  C.  Kimball  and  Orson 
Hyde  returned  to  America  and  left  Jo- 
seph Fielding  in  charge  of  the  British 
mission,  Wm.  Clayton  was  appointed  to 
act  as  second  counselor  to  Pres.  Joseph 


718 


LATTER-DAY  SAINT 


Fielding,  which  position  he  occupied  un- 
til the  arrival  of  the  Twelve  in  1840.  In . 
October,  1838,  he  quitted  his  temporal 
business  to  give  himself  wholly  to  the 
ministry,  and  he  soon  commenced 
preaching  and  baptizing  in  Manchester. 
Eighteen  months  later  (April  15,  1840), 
he  reported  240  members  in  the  branch 
he  had  built  up  in  that  city.  Being 
honorably  released  from  his  mission- 
ary labors  in  Great  Britain  he  emigrat- 
ed to  America,  sailing  from  Liverpool, 
England,  in  the  ship  "North  America," 
Sept.  8.  1840,  and  arrived  in  Nauvoo, 
111.,  in  December  of  that  year.  Locat- 
ing temporarily  on  the  west  side  of  the 
Mississippi  river  he  was  chosen  clerk 
of  the    High     Council  in  Iowa  in  July, 

1841,  but  he  soon  became  a  permanent 
citizen  of  Nauvoo,   where  he,   in  June. 

1842,  succeeded  Willard  Richards  as 
clerk  to  the  Prophet  Joseph  Smith. 
Subsequently  he  was  appointed  clerk 
and  recorder  of  the  Nauvoo  Temple, 
and  was  also  elected  treasurer  of  the 
city  of  Nauvoo.  He  was  present  when 
Joseph  Smith  received  the  revelation  on 
celestial  marriage,  and  was  an  intimate 
associate,  and  tried  and  trusted  friend 
of  the  Prophet,  to  whom  he  continued 
to  act  as  private  secretary  up  to  the 
time  of  the  latter's  martyrdom.  While 
laboring  in  that  capacity,  he  tran- 
scribed the  revelation  on  celestial  mar- 
riage and  other  revelations,  under  the 
Prophet's  dictation  and  direction.  At 
the  time  of  the  exodus  from  Nauvoo 
in  1846,  Elder  Clayton  came  west  with 
the  rest  of  the  Saints  and  was  a  promi- 
nent figure  in  the  "Camps  of  Israel," 
and  at  Winter  Quarters.  In  1847  he 
came  to  Great  Salt  Lake  valley  as  one 
of  the  original  pioneeers  under  the  im- 
mediate leadership  of  Pre.s.  Brigham 
Young,  and  acted  as  clerk  of  the  camp. 
He  returned  east  the  same  year,  but 
came  to  the  Valley  the  second  time  in 
1848,  after  which  he  resided  perma- 
nently in  Salt  Lake  City  till  the  day 
of  his  death.  He  held  various  offices 
of  public  trust  and  responsibility  in 
the  community  after  his  arrival  in  the 
Valley.  Thus  he  served  for  several 
years  as  treasurer  of  Z.  C.  M.  I.;  for 
many  years  he  was  Territorial  recor- 
der of  marks  and  brands,  and  up  to  a 
few  months  before  his  death  (when 
he  resigned  his  offlce  on  account  of 
sickness)  he  held  the  position  of  Terri- 
torial Auditor  of  Public  Accounts.  El- 
der Clayton  died  at  his  home  in  the 
17th  Ward,  Salt  Lake  City,  Dec.  4,  1879. 


At  the  time  of  his  demise  the  "Deseret 
News,"  speaking  of  him  editorially, 
.said:  "He  was  a  man  of  sterling  in- 
tegrity, remarkable  ability,  a  faithful 
Latter-day  Saint,  and  a  good  and  use- 
ful citizen,  whose  death,  though  a  hap- 
py relief  from  his  sufferings,  was  felt 
deeply  by  hosts  of  personal  friends." 
Elder  Clayton  left  a  large  family  (over 
thirty  children),  having  during  -his 
lifetime  married  several   wives. 

RICHARDS,     Samuel     Whitney,    a 

veteran  Elder  in  the  Church,  is  the  son 
of  Phinehas  Richards  and  Wealthy 
Dewey  and  was  born  Aug.  9,  1824,  in 
Richmond,  Berkshire  county,  Mass. 
His  mind  was  naturally  religiously  in- 
clined and  as  a  boy  he  took  much  in- 
terest in  spiritual  matters.  When  he 
was   eleven  years  old,   the  fact   that  a 


new  dispensation  from  God  had  come 
to  man  on  earth  in  this  day  was  first 
brought  to  his  mind,  by  the  visits  of 
the  "Mormon"  Elders  to  his  father's 
house.  Samuel  eagerly  investigated 
their  message,  and  at  fourteen  he 
yielded  obedience  to  the  principle  of 
baptism  and  became  a  member  of  the 
Church.  He  was  ordained  to  the 
Priesthood  at  the  age  of  fifteen  and  sent 
out  to  labor  as  a  missionary  in  parts  of 
New  York,  Connecticut  and  Vermont. 
While  on  this  mission  he  passed 
through  many  trials,  but  notwith- 
standing his  youth  and  his  lack  of  a 
collegiate  education,  he  was  able,  with 
the  assistance  of  the  Lord, to  present  the 
gospel  in  a  convincing  manner  to  many 


BIOGRAPHICAL    ENCYCLOPEDIA. 


719 


of  the  honest  in  heart.  In  1842  he 
g-iithered  with  his  father's  family  in 
Nauvoo,  111.,  where  he  became  person- 
ally acquainted  with  the  Prophet  Jo- 
Feijh,  his  brother  Hyrum  and  the  other 
general  authorities  of  the  Church.  As 
a  daily  occupation  he  labored  on  the 
Nauvoo  Temple  as  a  carpenter  till  the 
completion  of  the  structure.  He  was 
present  at  its  dedication,  and  then  be- 
gan performing  ordinance  w'ork  there- 
in, which  work  he  continued  till  the 
final  closing  of  the  Temple.  In  1846 
he  left  for  Europe  to  perform  his  first 
foreign  missionary  labor.  Since  that 
time  he  has  filled  three  other  foreign 
missions,  covering  a  period  of  nine 
years.  Though  his  missionary  work 
in  Europe  was  performed  mainly  in 
Great  Britain,  it  also  extended  to 
France,  Italy,  Switzerland  and  Ger- 
many. He  has  spent  altogether  six- 
teen years  of  his  life  as  a  missionary. 
In  America  he  has  labored  in  all  of  the 
New  England  States,  and  in  eight  of 
the  Eastern  and  Middle  States  as  well 
as  in  Canada.  For  twenty  years  he  held 
such  civil  offices  in  Utah  as  member 
of  the  first  city  council  of  Salt  Lake 
City,  alderman,  police  judge,  president 
of  the  city  council,  U.  S.  commissioner 
for  Pavis  county,  justice  of  Salt  Lake 
county,  inember  of  the  Territorial  leg- 
islature, etc.,  in  all  of  which  offices 
he  conducted  himself  with  credit  and 
marked  ability.  His  military  career 
commenced  with  the  Nauvoo  Legion, 
in  which  body  he  officiated  as  drill 
sergeant.  Next  he  was  commissioned 
in  Salt  Lake  City  as  colonel  of  the  2nd 
I'egiment  of  infantry  and  did  service 
as  such  till  the  Legion  was  disbanded 
by  Gov..  Shaffer.  From  his  regiment 
he  furnished  and  mostly  fitted  out  at 
his  own  expense,  a  company  to  supress 
the  Indian  uprising  in  Sanpete  county. 
In  1852-54,  as  president  of  the  Europ- 
ean mission,  he  edited  and  published 
the  "Millennial  Star,"  and  also  pub- 
lished a  nuiTiber  of  the  standard  books 
of  the  Church.  He  has  also  contributed 
many  articles  to  the  different  Church 
periodicals  during  his  long  and  useful 
career  in  the  Church.  There  are  few 
men  living  who  have  had  a  more  varied 
experience  in  the  Chinch  than  Elder 
Samuel  W.  Richards;  he  has  mingled 
with  lords,  peers  and  rulers  of  mon- 
archial  governments,  as  well  as  people 
in  the  humblest  walks  in  life;  he  has 
fated  mobs  and  tyrants  who  were  try- 


ing to  stop  the  progress  of  God's  work; 
he  has  associated  with  Prophets,  Seers 
and  Revelators;  he  has  seen  angels 
and  conversed  with  them;  he  has  en- 
joyed heavenly  visions  of  untold 
grandeur  on  many  different  occasions, 
in  which  he  has  been  permitted  to  look 
deep  into  the  future,  and  he  has  wit- 
nessed the  manifestations  of  the  power 
of  God  in  the  healing  of  the  sick,  the 
casting  out  of  devils,  the  speaking  in 
tongues,  etc.,  almost  during  his  entire 
life.  Elder  Richards  is  still  hale  and 
hearty,  considering  his  advanced  years,- 
and  enjoyes  his  lat)ors  in  the  Temple 
of  God  (in  Salt  Lake  City),  Avhere  he 
has  been  a  worker  for  a  number  of 
years.  He  is  always  full  of  blessings 
and  words  of  encouragement  for  the 
Saints  and  carries  a  heavenly  smile  on 
his  countenance.  The  mere  touch  of 
his  hand  bespeaks  a  heart  full  of  that 
sympathy  and  love  which  is  character- 
istic of  a  true  servant  of  God. 

SMITH,  Klias,  president  of  all  the 
High  Priests  in  the  Church  from  1870 
to  1877  and  president  of  the  High 
Priests'  quorum  in  the  Salt  Lake  Stake 
of  Zion  from  1877  to  1888,  was  born 
Sept.     6,     1804,     in     Royalton,   Windsor 


county,  Vermont,  near  Sharon,  where 
his  cousin,  the  Prophet,  was  born.  In 
1809  his  father  emigrated  to  the  town 
of  Stockholm,  St.  Lawrence  county. 
New  York.  There  Elias  was  raised 
in  the  wilderness,  with  but  few  oppor- 
tunities for  schooling.  Most  of  his 
knowledge    was    acquired    by    observa- 


720 


LATTER-DAY    SAINT 


tion  and  "study  wUhout  a  master." 
In  his  youth  he  assisted  his  father  in 
clearing  the  wilderness  and  making  a 
farm.  After  he  was  twenty-one  years 
of  age  he  entered  public  life  and  held 
various  offices  of  trust  in  the  new  town, 
Stockholm.  He  also  taught  school 
several  terms.  The  announcement  of 
the  mission  of  the  Prophet  and  the 
rapid  growth  and  strange  career  of  the 
rhurch  of  Jesus  Christ  of  Latter-day 
Saints  very  naturally  drew  into  the 
faith  several  of  the  Smith  family.  The 
famous  Apostle  Greorge  A.  Smith  was 
a  missionary  ol  the  Church  at  the  age 
of  sixteeen.  but  his  elder  cousin  Elias 
was  31  years  of  age  when  he  embraced 
the  faith.  His  mind  was  well  mat- 
tured.  for  he  had  already  been  ten 
years  in  public  life.  Soon  after  the 
Prophet  had  his  remakable  visions, 
which  resulted  in  the  raising  up  of  the 
great  latter-day  work,  he  communicat- 
ed with  his  uncles  Asahel.  Samuel, 
Silas  and  John,  all  of  whom  llvel  in 
the  same  neighborhood.  After  the  or- 
ganization of  the  Church  Uncle  Joseph 
Smith,  first  Patriarch  of  the  Church, 
with  his  .=on  Don  Carlos,  paid  the  fami- 
lies of  his  brothers  a  visit  in  August, 
l,S30,  and  brought  them  the  Book  of 
Mormon.  They  all  believed  it  pretty 
much,  but  none  of  them  were  baptized 
till  lS3o,  excepting  Uncle  John  Smith, 
afterwards  the  Patriarch  of  the  Church 
and  father  of  Apostle  George  A.  Uncle 
John  was  baptized  Jan.  9.  1832,  and 
started  for  Kirtland.  Ohio,  May  1,  1833. 
In  1835  Hyrum  Smith  and  David 
AVhitmer  came  into  the  neighborhood, 
and  the  families  of  Asahel  and  Silas 
were  baptized,  most  of  them  on  the 
1st  of  July,  but  Elias  was  not  baptized 
until  Aug.  27,  1835,  his  cousin  Hyrum 
administering;  the  next  morning  he 
was  ordained  an  Elder.  In  the  town 
and  neighborhood  of  Stockholm  they 
raised  up  a  branch  of  the  Church,  and 
in  May,  1836,  the  two  families  of  the 
Smiths  before  named,  with  their  con- 
verts, making  quite  a  little  company, 
started  for  Kirtland,  Ohio.  The  com- 
pany took  steamer  at  Ogdensburg,  St. 
Lawrence  county,  and  sailed  up  the  St. 
Lawrence  river  to  Rochester,  where  a 
portion  of  the  company  disembarked, 
at  the  mouth  of  the  Genesee  river,  on 
account  of  the  boat  being  heavily 
loaded.  One  part  of  the  company,  in- 
cluding the  brothers  Asahel  and  Silas, 
continued  the  journey  by  land,  while 
the    othr-r      pait      under      Elias    came 


fioni  liuffalo  by  steamer.  where 
he  landed  the  company  of  Saints 
bound  for  Kirtland.  With  him  was 
his  grandmother,  Mary  Duty  Smith, 
aged  93  years.  During  the  landing 
of  the  company  he  sat  her  on 
the  wharf  to  give  her  fresh  air,  but 
a  shower  coming  on,  he  sought  a  pub- 
lic house  near  by  for  a  room  for  her 
during  the  night,  but  was  refused; 
whereupon  he  went  to  a  hotel,  on  the 
same  block,  and  was  cordially  treated. 
While  he  was  taking  his  grandmother 
to  the  hotel,  Joseph  the  Prophet,  his 
brother  Hyrum  and  Fred.  G.  W^illiams, 
from  Kirtland,  came  down  to  the  wharf 
to  meet  them.  They  followed  them  to 
the  hotel,  and  Joseph  and  Hyrum  went 
into  the  room  to  see  their  grandmoth- 
er, but  would  not  make  themselves 
known  that  night.  They  left  their 
grandmother  there  for  the  night  in 
comfortable  quarters,  and  with  their 
cousin  Elias  returned  to  Kirtland,  in 
the  midst  of  the  storm,  arriving  very 
late.  Next  morning  they  took  carriage 
and  drove  down  for  their  grandmother, 
while  Elias  hired  teams  and  went  down 
to  the  emigrants,  whom  he  had  shel- 
tered for  the  night  in  a  warehouse. 
The  meeting  between  the  grandmother 
and  her  Prophet  descendant  and  his 
brother  was  most  touching.  Joseph 
blessed  her  and  said  she  was  the  most 
honored  woman  on  earth.  She  had 
desired  to  see  all  her  children  and 
grandchildren  before  she  died,  which, 
with  one  exception  was  providentially 
granted  her,  and  she  passed  away  con- 
tented. She  arrived  in  Kirtland  May 
17,  1836,  and  died  on  the  27th,  aged  93 
years;  she  was  buried  near  the  Kirt- 
land Temple.  Elias  Smith  and  his 
cousin  Joseph  had  not  seen  each 
other  since  they  played  together  when 
small  boys  until  they  met  at  the  ho- 
tel at  Fairport.  In  1837-38  Elias 
Sm.ith  taught  school  at  Kirtland;  but 
in  the  latter  part  of  1837  a  great  apos- 
tasy occurred  at  that  place,  when  sev- 
eral of  the  original  Twelve  and  other 
prominent  men  sought  to  divide  the 
Church.  The  Prophet,  his  brother  Hy- 
rum, Sidney  Rigdon,  Brigham  Young, 
and  others  of  the  leaders  fled  from 
Kirtland  to  save  their  lives,  while  a 
company  of  over  six  hundred  of  the 
faithful  was  organized  to  follow  them 
to  Far  West.  This  company,  known 
in  Church  history  as  the  Kirtland 
Camp,  was  under  seven  captains, 
namely:    James  Foster.   Josiah   Butter- 


BIOGRAPHICAL    ENCYCLOPEDIA. 


721 


field,  Zeia  Pulsipher,  Joseph  Young, 
Henry  Harriman,  Elias  Smith  and  B. 
S.  Wilder.  The  company  was  principal- 
ly org-anized  and  sustained  by  the  Sev- 
enties (of  whom  Elias  Smith  was  at 
this  time  secretary),  who  undertook 
the  removal  of  this  part  of  the  Church 
from  Kirtland  to  Missouri;  and  it  was 
done  greatly  on  the  co-operative  plan. 
Not  having  sufficient  means  to  get 
through,  the  company  stopped  on  their 
way  and  took  a  big  job  on  the  Spring- 
field and  Drayton  turnpike.  They  left 
Kirtland  early  in  July,  1838,  and  arrived 
at  Far  West  on  the  2nd  of  October. 
From  Far  West  they  went  to  Adam- 
Ondi-Ahman,  where  they  disbanded. 
But  scarcely  had- the  company  disband- 
ed when  the  exterminating  army  of 
Governor  Boggs,  Under  Generals  Lucas 
and  Clark,  marched  upon  Far  West  to 
drive  the  "Mormons"  en  masse  out  of 
Missouri.  The  brethren  nobly  took  up 
arms  to  defend  their  people,  as  mas- 
sacres and  extermination  threatened 
the  whole,  from  the  Prophet  leader 
down  to  the  last  born  babe.  Already, 
before  the  fall  of  Far  West,  had  oc- 
curred the  horrible  massacre  at  Haun's 
Mill,  where  men  and  children  were  ac- 
tually butchered  by  the  mob.  During 
the  dreadful  scenes  of  the  extermina- 
tion of  the  Saints  many  were  wounded 
and  murdered  and  several  women  were 
ravished  to  death.  That  the  defend- 
ers would  have  fought  heroically  in 
the  defense  of  their  people  is  certain, 
but  they  were  betrayed  by  their  own 
commander  into  the  hands  of  General 
Lucas.  "I  saw,"  says  Brigham. 
"Brother  Joseph  Smith,  Sidney  Rig- 
don,  Parley  P.  Pratt,  Lyman  Wight 
and  George  W,  Robinson  delivered  up 
by  Colonel  Hinkle  to  General  Lucas, 
but  expected  that  they  would  have  re- 
turned to  the  city  that  evening  or  the 
next  morning,  according  to  agreement 
and  the  pledge  of  the  sacred  honor  of 
the  officers  that  they  should  be  allowed 
to  do  so,  but  they  did  not  so  return. 
The  next  morning  General  Lucas  de- 
manded and  took  away  the  arms  of 
the  militia  of  Caldwell  county,  assur- 
ing them  they  should  be  protected:  but 
as  soon  as  they  obtained  possession  of 
the  arms,  they  commenced  their  rav- 
ages by  plundering  the  citizens  of  their 
bedding,  clothing,  money,  wearing  ap- 
parel, and  everything  of  value  they 
could  lay  their  hands  upon,  and  also 
attempted  to  violate  the  chastity  of  the 
women    in   the   presence  of  their     hus- 

Vol.  1,  No.  46. 


bands  and  friends.  The  soldiers  shot 
down  our  oxen,  cows,  hogs  and  fowls 
at  our  own  doors,  taking  part  away, 
leaving  the  rest  to  rot  in  the  street. 
They  also  turned  their  horses  in  our 
field  of  corn."  Elias  Smith  was  one 
of  those  defenders  of  Far  West  who 
were  forced  to  give  up  their  arms,  and 
one  of  the  committee  chosen  to  effect 
the  removal  of  the  Saints  from  Mis- 
souri to  Illinois,  and  was  one  of  the  last 
that  left  Far  West.  Hastily  gathering 
up  the  remnant  whose  lives  were  again 
threatened  by  the  mob.  he  started  with 
Ihem  from  Far  West  April  19.  1839.  but 
meeting  the  Twelve  on  the  way,  he  re- 
turned with  them  to  fulfil  a  revelation 
concerning  a  conference  to  be  held  at 
Far  West,  April  26,  1839,  when  work 
on  the  Temple  was  to  be  resumed  and 
certain  men  were  ordained  to  the 
Priesthood.  Yet  notwithstanding  the 
threatenings  of  the  mob  this  imposing 
ceremony  was  performed,  and  Wilford 
Woodruff  and  George  A.  Smith  or- 
dained Apostles.  After  taking  part  in 
the  solemn  performance  Elias  Smith 
journeyed  with  the  Twelve  to  Quincy, 
then  went  to  Commerce  (Nauvoo),  and 
returned  to  Quincy  where  a  general 
conference  of  the  Church  was  held  af- 
ter the  escape  of  the  Prophet  from  pris- 
on: and  the  committee  settled  up  the 
affairs  of  the  emigration  of  poor  Saints 
from  Missouri.  After  the  removal  into 
Illinois,  Elias  Smith  settled  at  Nash- 
ville, Lee  county,  four  miles  from  Nau- 
voo. In  the  organization  of  the  Stake 
in  Lee  county,  he  was  taken  out  of 
the  Seventies'  quorum  and  made  a 
High  Councilor,  and  subsequently  was 
ordained  to  act  as  the  Bishop  of  the 
Stake,  which  position  he  held  until  the 
Stake  was  broken  up,  when  he  went 
to  Nauvoo.  At  Nauvoo  he  was  asso-' 
elated  with  the  press  and  became  the 
manager  of  the  "Times  and  Seasons  ' 
and  the  "Nauvoo  Neighbor."  After 
the  martyrdom  of  his  cousins  Joseph 
and  Hyrum,  he  followed  the  leadershii> 
of  Brigham  Young,  as  did  also  th-- 
Apostle  George  A.  Smith.  with  his 
father  John,  who  was  now  the  chief 
Patriarch  of  the  Church.  Thus,  not- 
withstanding that  Emma,  first  wife  of 
the  Prophet,  with  her  sons  and  "Moth- 
er Lucy"  Smith,  remained  at  Nauvoo 
with  the  relics  of  their  martyred  dead, 
the  surviving  leaders  of  the  Smith 
family  were  with  the  Saints  In  their 
exodus,  and  were  among  the  founders 
of   Utah.       The    sons   of   Hyium    Smith 

Nov.  16.  1901. 


722 


LATTER-DAY    SAINT 


also  tame  with  the  people  to  build  up 
with  them  the  religious  fabric  which 
the  blood  of  their  father  and  uncle  had 
sanctified.  With  his  family  Elias  Smith 
took  up  the  pioneer  journey  from  Nau- 
voo  in  May,  1846,  intending  to  go  with 
the  body  of  the  Church  to  the  Rocky 
Mountains  that  year,  but  the  call  of 
the  Mormon  battalion  soon  afterwards 
hindering  this  he  sojourned  a  while  in 
lowavillle,  Van  Buren  county.  Iowa, 
where  his  mother  died  in  October,  1846, 
and  his  father  in  July,  1848.  In  1851 
he  emigrated  to  Utah,  and  soon  after 
was  elected,  by  the  legislature,  probate 
judge  of  Salt  Lake  county,  in  which 
office  he  was  continued  up  to  1882.  His 
terms  of  office  ranged  from  four  years 
to  one.  In  1852  he  was  also  appointed 
one  of  the  code  commission  of  three, 
with  Albert  Carrington  and  William 
Snow,  he  being  chairman.  Their  du- 
ty was  to  present  to  that  legislature 
of  pioneers,  unskilled  in  legal  science, 
those  laws  best  adapted  to  the  peculiar 
condition  and  character  of  the  people: 
and  whatever  may  be  the  criticism  of 
the  lawyers  of  today  upon  their  work, 
undoubtedly  these  men  acted  with 
strict  fidelity,  and  the  most  conscien- 
tious intention.  Judge  Smith  emi- 
nently filled  the  most  important  judi- 
cial sphere,  in  Utah,  the  probate  courts 
being,  until  the  McKean  period,  prac- 
tically the  Courts  of  Justice  for  the 
people.  Indeed,  he  was  known  in  all 
the  acts  of  his  life,  and  in  his  essen- 
tial character  and  (juality  of  mind,  to 
be  conscientious  in  the  highest  de- 
gree. It  was  not  his  nature  to  ad- 
minister unrighteously:  and  in  the  pe- 
culiar case  of  Utah,  with  "Gentile"  and 
"Mormon"  in  chronic  conflict,  that 
quality  of  mind  and  judgment  had  am- 
l)le  ojiportunity  to  manifest  itself.  In 
this  (luality  of  justice  his  peer  was 
Daniel  Spencer,  who  occupied  an  office 
in  the  Church  analogous  to  that  of 
( hief  justice  of  the  State,  and  to  whose 
ecclesiastical  court— the  High  Council 
—Gentiles  did  in  the  early  days  repeat- 
edly lake  their  cases  for  arbitration,  in 
preference  to  "going  to  law,"  either  in 
the  federal  or  probate  courts.  Elias 
Smith  and  Daniel  Spencer  may  there- 
fore be  offered  to  the  Gentile  reader  as 
the  proper  tyires  of  the  judges  of  the 
■Mormon"  Israel.  Besides  his  ju- 
dicial sphere.  Judge  Smith  filled  other 
important  callings.  He  was  business 
manager  »(  the  "Deseret  News,"  under 


Dr.  Willard  Richards,  in  the  early  rise 
of  journalism  and  literature  in  the 
West,  and  was  postmaster  of  Salt  Lake 
City  from  July,  1854,  until  the  John- 
ston army  came  in  1858.  In  1856  he 
became  editor  of  the  "Deseret  News," 
retaining  the  position  until  September, 
186.1,  when  he  was  succeeded  by  Albert 
Carrington:  after  that  time  he  con- 
fined himself  mostly  to  his  judicial  du- 
ties. In  1862,  he  was  a  member  of  the 
Constitutional  Convention,  and  one  of 
the  committee  who  drafted  the  Consti- 
tution for  the  State  at  that  time.  While 
in  his  private  capacy  he  was  univer- 
sally respected,  in  his  public  sphere 
he  may  also  be  said  to  have  been 
without  an  enemy,  notwithstanding  he 
so  long  administered  law  and  equity. 
Judge  Elias  Smith  was  a  bachelor  un- 
til he  was  forty-one  years  of  age.  He 
mairied  Lucy  Brown,  a  native  of  Eng- 
land, at  Nauvoo,  Aug.  6,  1845.  She  was 
born  at  Biggleswade,  in  Bedfordshire. 
Jan.  4,  1820;  came  into  the  Church  in 
1842,  and  arrived  in  Nauvoo  in  1843;  she 
is  the  mother  of  Elias  A.  Smith,  who 
succeeded  his  father  as  judge  in  Salt 
Lake  county.  Judge  Smith  died  at  his 
home  in  Salt  Lake  City,  Utah,  June  24, 
1.S88.  (Culled  principally  from  the 
writings  of  Edward  W.  Tullidge.) 

WELLS,  Heber  Manning,  first 
governor  of  the  State  of  Utah,  is  the 
son    of   Daniel    H.     Wells   and    Martha 


Givens,  and  was  born  in  Salt  Lake  City 
Utah,  Aug.  11,  1859.  He  was  educated 
in    the   Salt   Lake  City  Schools,   and  in 


BIOGRAPHICAL    ENCYCLOPEDIA. 


723 


the  Deseiet  University.  At  the  age  of 
sixteeen  he  began  to  work  for  the  city 
as  tax  collector,  and  he  steadily  rose 
in  position  till  he  became  the  deputy 
city  recorder.  In  1882  he  was  ap- 
pointed by  the  city  council  to  be  city 
recorder,  a  vacancy  having  been  caused 
by  the  resignation  of  John  T.  Caine. 
This  position  he  filUed  so  acceptably 
that  he  was  successively  elected  to 
that  office  in  1884,  1886,  and  1888.  He 
was  nominated  by  the  Republican  par- 
ty, in  1895,  for  governor  of  Utah,  and 
he  was  elected  to  serve  five  years  in 
that  capacity.  During  those  five  years 
he  displayed  marked  executive  ability 
and  made  such  a  clear,  clean  record 
that  he  was  again  elected  to  that  office, 
for  a  term  of  four  years,  in  1900,  and  is 
the  present  incumbent  of  that  position. 
In  1890  he  became  the  cashier  in  the 
State  Bank  of  Utah.  Gov.  Wells  is 
extensively  interested  in  various  busi- 
ness enterprises  and  is  a  director  in 
the  State  Bank  of  Utah;  the  Consolid- 
ated Wagon  and  Machine  Co.,  the 
Brigham  Young  Trust  Co.,  etc.,  etc. 
He  is  a  descendant  of  revolutionary 
forefathers,  as  well  as  being  a  son  of 
a  pioneer  of  Utah,  and  he  is  a  member 
of  the  "Society  of  the  Sons  of  the 
American  Revolution"  and  the  "Sons  of 
the  Pioneers  of  Utah."  Jan.  15,  1880, 
he  married  Mary  Elizabeth  Beatie.who 
died  Oct.  12,  1888,  leaving  him  two  chil- 
dren. He  married  Teresa  Clawson, 
Oct.  15,  1892.  who  bore  him  two  chil- 
dren and  died  July  12,  1897.  In  1901 
fJuly  5th)  he  married  Emily  Katz,  of 
Salt  Lake  City.  Gov.  Wells  is  a  man 
of  ability  and  good  judgment,  and  pos- 
sesses the  moral  courage  to  carry  into 
effect  bis  honest  convictions. 

HAMMOND.  James  f  haddeus,  .first 
Secretary  of  the  State  of  Utah,  is  the 
son  of  Milton  T>.  Hammond  and  Lo- 
visa  Miller,  and  was  born  Dec.  11,  1856, 
at  Farmington,  Davis  county,  Utah. 
He  Avas  baptized  into  the  Church  when 
about  eight  years  of  age  and  was  later 
ordained  an  Elder.  In  religious  work 
he  has  always  taken  an  active  part, 
having  labored  in  responsible  positions 
in  the  various  Church  organizations. 
During  1881-82  he  filled  a  mission  to  the 
Southern  States,  whei-e  he  performed  a 
good  work  in  the  State  of  Tennessee. 
On  his  return  home  he  was  called  to 
labor  as  a  home  missionary  in  the 
Cache    Stake   of   Zion,    in    which    capa- 


city he  labored  for  two  years,  and  was 
chosen  to  be  the  assistant  recorder  in 
the  Logan  Temple.  Dec.  18.  1884,  he 
married  Leonora  Blair,  the  issue  of 
which  union  is  three  boys,  all  of  whom 
are  living.  In  civil  life  Bro.  Ham- 
mond   is    by    profession    a    lawyer,    but 


W"^"" 

^™^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^| 

i 

k 

't             i 

f 

'       \ 

^9  T^  ^^H 

l 

^m   Mf'^             .^^^^^^H 

1 

11 

htu;  also  been  a  merchant,  having  con- 
ducted H  book  and  stationery  store  in 
Logiin,  irtah.  He  has  always  been  an 
ardent  and  enthusiastic  worker  in  the 
field  of  politics,  and  he  has  been  en- 
trusted with  many  offices  within  the 
gift  of  the  people.  For  six  years  he 
served  as  county  clerk  of  Cache  coun- 
ty: he  served  as  a  senator  in  the  Ter- 
ritorial legislature  in  1884  and  1886; 
and  was  a  member  of  the  House  in 
the  session  of  1890.  In  1887  he  was  a 
member  of  the  constitutional  conven- 
tion; and  in  1895  he  was  the  nominee  of 
the  Republican  party  for  secretary  of 
State  and  was  elected,  and  served  ef- 
ficiently in  that  capacity  for  five  years. 
He  was  re-elected  to  the  same  office 
again  in  1900.  Bro.  Hammond  is  un- 
assuming in  manner,  stable  in  charax;- 
ter  and  a  hard  worker  in  all  that  he 
undertakes  to  do. 

BERNHISKL,  John  Milton,  Utah's 
first  delegate  to  Congress,  was  born 
June  23,  1799  in  Tyrone  township,  Cum- 
berland  county,   Pennsylvania-,     son   of 


724 


LATTER-DAY    SAINT 


Samuel  and  Susannah  Beinhisel,  and 
was  engaged  in  the  practice  of  medi- 
cine in  New  York  for  many  years.  He 
joined  the  Church  at  an  early  day  in 
New  York,  and  at  a  conference  held  in 
that  city  April  15,  1841.  he  was  or- 
dained a  High  Priest  and  set  apart  to 
act  as  a  Bishop  in  the  New  York 
branch  of  the  Church,  under  the  hands 
of  Geo.  W.  Harris  and  Lucin  R.  Fos- 
ter. In  1843  he  cast  his  lot  with  the 
Saints  in  Nauvoo.  111.,  and  became  at 
once  a  prominent  factor  in  the  com- 
munity at  that  place.  When  the 
Prophet  Joseph  was  kidnajipped  at 
Dixon.  111...  KldL-r  IJernhisel  was  one  of 
the  first  to  take  steps  looking  to  his 
rescue.  In  March,  1844,  he  met  with 
the  Prophet  and  other  leading  men  of 
the  Church  in  Nauvoo,  to  council  upon 
the  best  policy  for  the  Saints 'to  adopt, 
in  order  "to  obtain  their  rights  from 
the  nation  and  insure  protection  for 
themselves  and  children,  and  to  secure 
a  resting  place  in  the  mountains,  or 
some  uninhabited  region,"  where  they 
could  enjoy  the  liberty  of  conscience 
guaranteed  them  by  the  constitution  of 
their  country.  After  the  destruction 
of  the  "Expositor"  press  in  Nauvoo, 
Dr.  Bernhisel  presented  the  plain  facts 
concerning  that  matter  in  a  letter 
which  he  wrote  to  Governor  Thos. 
Ford.  A  few  days  later  he  testified 
under  oath  about  the  movements  of  the 
mob  \\  hich  was  pivparing  to  attack 
Nauvoo  and  reported  in  person  to  the 
governor  in  Carthage,  whither  he  went 
in  company  with  Apostle  John  Taylor 
for  that  nun)ose.  After  the  Prophet 
Joseph  had  started  for  the  Rocky 
Mountains.  June  22,  1844,  Dr.  Bern- 
hisel crossecl  the  river  to  visit  him 
and  render  him  and  companions  what 
assistance  he  could  under  the  circum- 
stances. Subse(|uentl.v,  after  Joseph 
had  gone  to  Carthage,  to  give  himself 
up,  accortling  to  the  governor's  lecjuest. 
Dr.  Bernhisel  was  selected  as  a  witness 
to  testif.v  in  Joseph's  case  at  the  in- 
tended trial  and  he  also  visited  Joseph 
and  his  fellow  prisoners  in  the  Carth- 
age jail  twice  on  the  26th  of  June — 
the  day  before  the  martyrdom.  After 
the  Prorihefs  death.  Elder  Bernhisel 
remained  firm  in  the  faith  and  sus- 
tained the  Twelve  Apostles  to  the  full- 
est extent  of  his  power,  during  the 
exodus  of  the  Saints  from  Nauvoo  and 
in  their  location  in  the  Rockv  Moun- 
tains.       He    arrived    in    the    Valle"    in 


July,  IS.'il.  accompanied  by  four  of  the 
newly  appointed  Federal  officers  for 
Utah,  and  at  the  first  general  election 
held  in  Utah  Territory  Aug.  4.  1851. 
Dr.  Bernhisel  was  elected  Utah's  first 
delegate  to  Congress.  He  was  sub- 
scjuently  re-elected  three  times  (in 
1853,  1855  and  1857)).  and  thus  served 
the  Territory  as  its  delegate  for  eight 
years,  or  until  1859,  when  he  was  suc- 
ceeded by  Hon.  Wm.  H.  Hooper.  Doc- 
tor Bernhisel  died  in  Salt  Lake  City 
Sept.  28,  1881.  At  the  time  of  his  de- 
mi.'-e,  the  "Deseret  News"  containeil 
the  following:  "He  (Dr.  Bernhisel)) 
was  a  man  of  learning,  of  very  tem- 
perate and  abstenious  habits,  a  perfect 
gentleman  in  manner,  and  a  much 
i-espected  veteran  among  the  people  of 
God.  He  joined  the  Church  of  Jesus- 
Christ  of  Latter-day  Saints  while  in  its 
infancy,  and  was  a  very  dear  friend 
of  the  Prophet  Joseph  Smith.  *  *  * 
He  was  firm  in  his  integrity  to  the 
work  of  God,  and  in  modesty  as  well 
as  talent  in  his  profession,  and  ex- 
emplary bearing,  he  was  a  type  of  un- 
ostentatious worth,  and  inspired  all 
who  had  the  pleasure  of  his  actiuaint- 
ance   with    feelings   of  esteem." 

HOOPER,  AVilliam  Henry,  Utah  s 
second  delegate  to  Cimgress,  was  born 
in  Dorchester  county,  on  the  eastern 
shore  of  Maryland,  Dec.  25,  1813.  H^ 
received  a  limited  common  school  edu- 
cation, and  early  engaged  as  a  mere 
bank  clerk  in  Baltimore.  He  was 
sub.seciuently  for  some  years  a  mer- 
chant on  the  eastern  shore  of  Mary- 
larrd.  In  1835  he  emigrated  to  Illinois, 
where  he  engaged  in  mercantile  pur- 
suits. He  afterwards  became  a 
steamboat  cai)tain  on  the  Mississii>pi. 
In  18.50  he  removed  to  Utah.  In  De- 
cember. 1852,  he  married  Mary  Knowl  • 
ton.  by  whom  he  had  nine  childien. 
thiee  sons  and  six  daughters.  He  was 
elected  a  member  of  th  •  Utah  legisla- 
ture and  served  as  secretary  of  the 
Territory.  He  was  chosen  United 
States  senator  undei-  the  State  organi- 
zation of  Deseiet.  adopted  by  the  peo- 
ple of  Utah  in  1862.  He  was  elected  a 
delegate  to  the  thirty-sixth,  thirty- 
ninth,  fortieth,  forty-first  and  forty- 
second  Congresses,  receiving  each  time 
an  almost  unanimous  vote.  The  ser- 
\ice  of  Mr.  Hooper  in  the  forty-first 
Congress  was  specially  distinguished 
on    March    23,    1870,    by     his   celebrated 


BIOGRAPHICAL    ENCYCLOPEDIA. 


725 


and  masterly  speech  in  defense  of  "Po- 
lygramy  in  Utah."  In  a  summary  of 
the  speech  given  by  himself,  near  the 
close  of  its  delivery,  he  said  he  had 
aimed  to  show:  "1.  That  under  our 
Constitution,  we  are  entitled  to  be  pro- 
tected in  the  full  and  free  enjoyment 
of  our  relig-ious  faith.  2.  That  our 
views  on  the  marriage  relation  are  an 
essential  portion  of  our  religious  faith. 
3.  That  in  considering  the  cognizance 
of  the  marriage  relation  as  within  the 
purview  of  Church  regulations,  we  are 
practically    in    accord    with    all      other 


Christian  denominations.  4.  That  in 
our  views  of  the  marriage  relation  as 
a  part  of  our  religious  belief,  we  are 
entitled  to  immunity  from  persecu- 
tion under  the  Constitution,  if  such 
views  are  sincerely  held;  that  if  such 
\iews  are  erroneous,  their  eradication 
must  be  by  argument,  not  by  force. 
5th.  That  of  our  sincerity  we  have, 
both  by  words  and  works  and  suffer- 
ings, given  for  nearly  forty  years 
abundant  proof.  6th.  That  the  bill, 
in  practically  abolishing  tiial  by  jury, 
as  well  as  in  many  other  respects,  is 
unconstitutional,  uncalled  for  and  in 
direct  opposition  to  that  toleration  in 
religious  belief  which  is  characteristic 
of  the  nation  and  age."  He  displayed 
great  energy  in  his  congressional  ca- 
reer, as  in  every  sphere  in  life  in  which 
he  moved,  and  made  a  splendid  record, 
doing  excellent  service  to  an  ajDpreci- 
ative  constituency.  His  characterist- 
ic genialty  of  address  and  manners,  as 


well  as  his  recognized  ability,  gave  him 
a    powerful!    mfluence   in    the   National 
legislature,    being  a  universal   favorite 
among     the  members  of  the  House  of 
Representatives.      He  got  a  settlement 
of  two  unpaid  and     unrecognized   ses- 
sions of  the  Territorial  legislature;    he 
obtained    payment   of     Governor   Brig- 
ham     Young's     account      against     the 
United   States  treasury,  and  succeeded 
in  geting  an  appropriation  to  pay  the 
expenses    of    the    Indiar    War    of   1850. 
The    latter    portion    of    the    history    of 
Captain   Hooper,   as  he  was   familiarly 
called,  in  a  business  'sense  was  closely 
interwoven    with      Zion's      Commercial 
Mercantile     Institution.       At     its     first 
organization,   in   the  winter  of  1868,   he 
was   elected   a   director,    retaining  that 
position    until    October,    1877.        In    1873 
he   was    elected    superintendent    of   the 
institution,  acting  in  that  capacity  un- 
til April,  1875.      In  October,  1877,  he  was 
elected  president  of  the  mammoth  con- 
cern,   retaining   that   position   until   his 
demise.      In  every  capacity  in  that  con- 
nection he  labored  assiduously  and  in- 
telligently    to     further     its     interests, 
manifesting   remarkable    quickness     or 
perception  and  good  judgment,  in  which 
he  was  admitted  to  have  no  superiors. 
He  was  also  one  of  Utah's  most  promi- 
nent bankers.      In  1869,  associated  with 
Horace  S.  Eldredge  and  Lewis  S.  Hills, 
he  started  a  bank.      In  1870  th  9  capital 
was  increased  and  the  bank  organized 
under  the  title  of  the  Bank  of  Deseret; 
in  1872  the  capital  was  still  further  in- 
creased, the  necessary  bonds  being  de- 
posited and  iSlSO.OOO  of  national  curren- 
cy  issued.       The    institution    was   then 
styled    the    National    Bank   of   Deseret, 
of  which  he  was  president;  he  retained 
that   position     till     his     death.       Elder 
Hooper  died  at  his  residence  in  the  19th 
Ward,  Salt  Lake  City,  Dec.  30,  1882.  In 
an  obituary  published   in  the   "Deseret 
News"   at  the   time  of  his  demise,   the 
following      occurs:        "In      appearance 
Captain   Hooper  was   tall   and   slender, 
of   dark,    almost     swarthy    complexion. 
His  face  was,  in  his  pleasanter  moods, 
lighted  with  a  genial   smile.       He  was 
hearty  in  his  address,     almost  amount- 
ing  to   joviality.       Like   most   men     of 
uncommon  calibi-e  he  had  peculiarities, 
which  almost  extended  into  eccentrici- 
ty.      It  was  his  habit  after  making  a 
pointed  statement  to  utter  a  monosyl- 
lable and  poke  the  party  addressed  with 
his   right    thumb,    as    much   as   to   say, 


726 


LATTER-DAY    SAINT 


You  know  that's  so;  don't  you  know?" 
He  was  the  embodiment  of  physical 
and  mental  activity  and  was  exceeding- 
ly sensitive,  capable  of  feeling  the  very 
extremes  of  joy  and  sorrow.  He  had 
a  kindly  word  for  evei-ybody,  and  his 
hand  was  frecjuently  open  to  the  calls 
of  benevolence,  as  many  people  have 
practical  occasion  to  know." 

CAINE,  John  Tlioinns,. Utah's  fourth 
delegate  to  Congress,  is  the  son  of 
Thomas  Caine  and  Elinor  Cubbon,  and 
was  bom  in  the  parish  of  Kirk  Patrick. 
Isle  of  Man,  Jan.  S,  1829.  Speaking  of 
the  days  of  his  childhood.  Elder  Caine 
says:  "I  knew  if  I  ever  amounted  to 
anything,  it  would  be  by  my  own  exer- 
tions, for  I  had  no  one  to  help  me  and 
was  practically  alone  in  the  world.  I 
had  confidence,  however,  that  a  straight 
forward,  honorable  cour.'^e,  backed  by 
energy  and  perseverance,  would  suc- 
ceed, and  such  a  course  I  have  endeav- 
ored to  pursue."  At  the  tender  age  of 
six  years,  in  his  far-off  island  home, 
young  Caine  found  himself  virtually  an 
orphan,  homeless  and  friendless,  so  far 
as  parental  roof,  father,  mother,  broth- 
ers and  sisters  were  concernefl.  Hi.'; 
father  emigrated  to  America,  and  his 
mother  died,  leaving  him  in  the  care  of 
his  grandfather,  Hugh  Cubbon,  a  small 
farmer  and  tailor.  When  about  nine 
years  of  age,  he  was  taken  to  Douglas, 
the  principal  town  of  the  island,  where 
he  lived  with  an  aunt,  Mrs.  William 
Cowley,  his  father's  sister,  who  sent 
him  to  school,  thus  giving  him  his  first 
tuition.  When  about  eleven,  he  took 
up  hi.s  residence  at  Peel,  and  another 
aunt,  his  mother's  sister,  Mrs.  John 
Richardson,  who  lived  at  the  Halla- 
moore,  near  Peel,  placed  him  in  a  posi- 
tion to  continue  his  education  and  oth- 
erwise treated  him  with  great  kindness. 
The  Richardsons  were  wealthy,  pos- 
sessing valuable  business  and  propei- 
ties  both  in  the  Isle  of  Man  and  in 
Liverpool.  At  the  latter  place,  Mr. 
Richardson  (^an  Englishman)  was  the 
head  of  a  large  merchant  tailoring  es- 
tablishment. With  a  view  of  fitting 
John  T.  tfi  take  a  lucrative  place  in 
this  establishment,  his  relatives  urged 
him  to  oljtain  some  knowledge  of  the 
tailor's  trade.  In  deference  of  their 
wishes,  he  made  the  attempt,  and  for  a 
time  became  an  appientice  to  the  trade, 
but  his  heart  was  not  in  it,  the  occupa- 
tion being  distasteful  to  him.       His  de- 


sire was  to  become  a  printer.  Neither 
i\{  thvse  trades,  however,  was  he  des- 
tined to  follow.  At  Peel  he  first  heard 
of  "Mormonism"— in  1841.  Apostle 
John  Taylor  was  preaching  in  a  school 
house,  when  young  Caine  happened  to 
be  passing  by.  With  a  boy's  curiosity, 
he  stepped  into  the  building,  just  be- 
fore the  speaker  closed,  and  there  had 
his  first  view  of  a  "Mormon"  Elder. 
Subsequently,  he  heard  other  Elders 
jireach,  and  was  present  at  the  first 
"Mormon  '  baptism  at  Peel;  it  was  at 
the  seaside,  near  the  home  of  his  Uncle 
John  Gracey,  who  afterwards  joined 
the  Church.  Though  favorably  im- 
pressed with  "Mormonism,"  as  taught 
by  such  men  as  William  Mitchell,  Wil- 
liam C.  Dunbar,  ^Villiam  Gill  Mills,  and 
others,  the  lad  did  not  at  once  embrace 


it,  though  it  influenced  to  some  extent 
his  determination,  formed  about  this 
time,  to  leave  the  Old  Country,  whei-e 
he  saw  little  chance  to  succeed,  and 
seek  his  fortune  in  America.  A  few 
pounds  left  him  by  his  grandfather, 
added  to  means  furnished  him  by  the 
Richardsons,  enabled  him  early  in  1S46 
to  carry  out  his  intention.  He  pro- 
ceeded to  Liverpool,  and  on  the  ITth  of 
March  sailed  from  that  port  on  the 
bark  "Shanunga,"  accompanied  by  a 
cousin  two  years  younger  than  himself. 
An  uneventful  voyage  of  six  weeks 
brought  him  to  New  York,  where  he 
landed  on  the  30th  of  April.  He  first 
found   employment   in  a  merchant   tai- 


BIOGRAPHICAL    ENCYCLOPEDIA. 


727 


lor's  establishment.  Having-  made  an 
investigation  of  the  claims  of  various 
churches,  he  became  convinced  of  the 
truth  of  "Mormonism,"  and  was  bap- 
tized by  Elder  William  H.  Miles  in  the 
East  River,  New  York,  March  28,  1847. 
In  the  branch  of  the  Church  existing  in 
New  York  City  at  that  time.  John  T. 
Caine  acted  as  a  Teacher,  an  offiee 
to  which  he  was  ordained  on  July  11th, 
following  his  baptism.  The  Saints  held 
their  meetings  at  the  corner  of  Broad- 
way and  Grand  streets,  now  in  the  very 
heart  of  the  metropolis.  William  I. 
Appleby  was  president  of  the  Eastern 
churches,  and  such  notable  Elders  as 
Jedediah  M.  Grant,  Parley  P.  Pratt, 
Wilford  Woodruff,  Erastus  Snow, 
Franklin  D.  Richards,  Jesse  C.  Little, 
Robert  Campbell  and  others  were  con- 
tinually coming  and  going.  John  T. 
Caine  remained  a  resident  of  New  York 
city  until  October,  1848,  when  he  re- 
moved to  St.  Louis,  Mo.,  going  by 
steamboat  to  Perth  Amboy,  New  Jer- 
sey—the nearest  railroad  station  to 
New  York — via  Philadelphia  to  Harris- 
burg-,  Pennsylvania,  which  was  as  far 
west  as  the  railroad  then  extended. 
Thence  he  went  by  canal  to  the  foot  of 
the  Allegheny  Mountains  (which  were 
crossed  in  open  cars  worked  on  in- 
clined planes  by  stationary  engines), by 
canal  to  Pittsburg-  and  thence  by 
steamboat  via  Cincinnati  and  Cairo  to 
St.  Louis.  He  there  became  actively 
engaged  in  Church  work,  was  made  as- 
sistant to  the  clerk  of  the  conference. 
Daniel  Mackintosh,  and  on  the  7th  of 
July,  1849,  was  ordained  an  Elder  by 
Nathaniel  H.  Felt,  president  of  the 
St.  Louis  conference,  which  comprised 
at  that  time  about  two  thousand  Lat- 
ter-day Saints.  The  immediate  cause 
of  Elder  Caine's  ordination  was  the 
presence  of  cholera  in  the  city,  which 
was  suffering  terribly  from  that 
scourge,  it  having-  come  up  from  New 
Orleans  in  the  spring-.  Elder  Caine's 
assistance  was  neeeded  in  administer- 
ing- to  the  sick.  The  cholera  raged  for 
three  consecutive  years  in  St.  Louis, 
and  though  continually  in  the  midst  of 
it,  administering  to  its  victims,  he  him- 
self was  never  attacked.  While  there 
he  met  the  estimable  woman  who  be- 
came his  wife.  Miss  Margaret  Nightin- 
gale, a  connection  of  the  Nightingale 
and  Leach  families  who  were  among 
the  first  converts  to  "Mormonism"  at 
Preston,    England,    in   1837,    her   g-rand- 


mother  Leach  being  the  second  woman 
b.aptized  into  the  Church  in  Europe. 
They  liad  emigrated  to  Nauvoo,  and  in 
the  exodus  drifted  to  St.  Louis.  John 
T.  Caine  and  Margaret  Nightingale 
were  married  Oct.  22,  1850,  by  Elder 
Alexander  Robbins,  who  had  succeeded 
Elder  Felt  in  the  presidency  of  the  St. 
Louis  conference.  Their  first  child,  a 
daughter,  Agnes  F).,  now  Mrs.  Arthur 
Pratt,  of  Salt  Lake  City,  was  born  in 
St.  Louis.  Oct.  1,  1851.  That  year  Brn. 
("aine  became  an  American  citizen.  ])e- 
ing  naturalized  in  the  court  of  common 
ideas.  Elder  Caine  acted  as  general 
ag-ent  for  the  "Frontier  Guardian,"  -i 
paper  edited  and  published  by  Apostle 
Or.son  Hyde  at  Kanesville,  Iowa.  He 
also  assisted  in  emigrational  and  other 
business  matters  for  Elder  Hyde  and 
for  the  emigrating  Saints  generally. 
He  succeeded  Elder  Mackintosh  as  slerk 
of  the  conference,  and  during  the  last 
year  of  his  residence  in  St.  Louis  was 
first  counselor  to  its  president,  Thomas 
Wi-igley.  The  Caine  family  left  St. 
Louis  en  route  for  Utah  May  S.  1852. 
The  company  in  which  they  crossed  the 
plains,  the  eleventh  of  the  season,  con- 
sisting of  fifty  wagons,  was  commanded 
by  Captain  James  McGaw,  with  John 
T.  Caine  as  captain  of  ten,  arrived  at 
Salt  Lake  City  Sept.  20,  18.52.  The 
journey  was  uneventful  except  for  the 
death  of  several  jiersons  from  cholera, 
which  attacked  the  company  while  on 
the  plains.  Brother  Caine's  first  em- 
ployment in  Utah  was  at  digging-  beets, 
carrots,  etc.,  on  shares.  He  subse- 
quently engaged  at  school  teaching, 
having  secured  through  the  influence 
of  Elder  Miio  Andrus  a  district  school 
at  Hollidayburg  (J^ig  Cottonwood),  ten 
miles  southeast  of  Salt  Lake  City.  He 
taught  school  duiing  the  winter  of 
1852-53,  and  meantime  having  become 
identified  with  the  Deseret  Dramatic 
association,  made  several  appearances 
upon  the  stage  of  the  Social  Hall,  the 
main  temple  of  the  drama  in  Utah  at 
that  period.  He  was  present  at  the  y 
opening  of  the  Social  Hall  in  January,^' 
1853.  His  first  appearance  upon  the 
boards  at  Salt  Lake  City  was  as  Glavi-^ 
in  the  "Lady  of  Lyons,"  but  his  first 
hit  was  as  Aminadab  Sleek  in  the  "Se- 
rious Family,"  a  play  in  which  he  had 
appeared  at  a  charity  entertainment  in 
St.  Louis.  His  Aminadab  Sleek  cap- 
tured the  play-going  public,  and  John 
T.  Caine  was  a  man  of  prominence  fiom 


728 


LATTER-DAY    SAINT 


that  hour.    In  January.  18.i4,  Bro.  Caine 
became   a   clerk   in    the   Tithing   Office, 
having    charge    simultaneously    of    the 
Social   Hall,    where    dramatic    perform- 
ances were  given.      April  7,  1854,  Elder 
Caine   was   called,    with    a    number   of 
others,  to  take  a  mission  to  the  Haw- 
aiian Islands.  He  was  poorly  prepared, 
in  a  worldly  way,  for  such  an  undertak- 
ing,   having   a    wife    and    two    children 
dependent   upon   him,   and   no   home   in 
which  to  leave  them.      In  this  extrem- 
ity he  found  a  kind  friend  in  Elder  Jo- 
seph Cain,  who  opened  the  door  of  his 
own  home  to  the  misionary's  wife  and 
children   and   treated   them   with   every 
consideration.  To  asist  him  on  his  way, 
Rro.  Caine  was  given  a  benefit  by  the 
Deseret  Dramatic  Association,  as  were 
three  other  members  of  that  organiza- 
tion, namely,  James  M.  Barlow, William 
C.    Duribar   and    James    Ferguson,    who 
wei-e  going  on  missions  to  Europe.     It 
was  arranged   to  have  one  of  the  four 
benefits  on  consecutive  nights,  and  di- 
vide  the     aggregate     i-eceipts     eciualiy 
among  the  four  missionaries.      John  T. 
Caine's  benefit  took  place  on  the  even- 
ing of  April  22nd.  The  play  was  "Pizar- 
ro,"  in  which  the  beneficiary  sustained 
the  title  role,     while     James   Ferguson 
Impersonated     Rolla,     Jo.seph     M.  Sim- 
mons.   Alonzo,    Mrs.    Hyde    (afterwards 
Mrs.     "Woodmansee)     Cora,      and    Mrs. 
AVheelock,   Elvira.       The  series  of  per- 
formances   was    well     patronized,    not- 
withstanding  the     inclement     weather 
that  prevailed,  and  each  of  the  Elders 
named     received  eighty  dollars     as  his 
shai-e    of    the    proceeds.        Elder    Caine 
bade    farewell    to    family     and    friends 
May  4.  1854,  and  started  for  the  Haw- 
aiian   Islands,    via   southern   Utah    and 
southern  California.      Elders  Joseph  F. 
Smith,  Silas  Smith,  Edward  Partridge, 
William  W.   Cluff,   Henry  P.   Richards, 
Silas    S.    Smith.    Eli    Bell,    Simpson    M. 
Molen.  Ward  E.  Pack,  Orson  K.  Whit- 
ney, Sixtus  E.  Johnson,  Joseph  A.  Peck, 
Jolin   R.   Young,   Smith  Thurston,  John 
A.  West.  Washington  Rogers,     George 
Spiers  and  William  King  were  members 
of   the  same  company.     Pres.   Brigham 
Young  with  a  party  set  out  at  the  same 
time   for  a   tour  through   the  southern 
settlements,  in  the  course  of  which  he 
held    a    conference    at    Chicken    Creek, 
Juab   county,    with     the     Indian    Chief 
Wauk-aw    (Walker)    and    concluded     a 
treaty  of  peace.      The  missionaries  ac- 
companied Pres.  Young  as  far  as  Cedar 


City,  and   thence,  under  the  leadership 
of  Apostle  Parley  P.  Pratt,  crossed  the 
country    to    San    Bernardino,      then      a 
■Moimon"  colony.       Much  of  the  route 
was   over  a   sandy   desert,   and   travel, 
which   was   by   means   of   wagons   and 
saddle   horses,   was  very  difflcult.       To 
avoid   the   intense  heat  on   the   deserts 
they    traveled     by     night,    resting  and 
.■sleeping  during  the  day.      They  reached 
San    Bernardino    on    the    9th    of    June, 
and   were   kindly   received   by  Apostles 
Amasa  M.  Lyman  and  Charles  C.  Rich. 
Bishop    Crosby    and    others   in    charge. 
Selling  their  outfits  for  barely  enough 
to  enable  them  to  reach  San  Francisco 
for  which  they  took  steamer  from  San 
Pedro,   the  missionaries     arrived   there 
on    the    10th    of   July,    and    met    Elders 
George    Q.      Cannon,     William    Farrer, 
James  Hawkins  and  Henry  W.  Bigler, 
jusl  from  the  Hawaiian  Islands.  Elders 
Nathan   Tanner   and   William   McBride 
of  that  mission  were  also  in  San  Fran- 
cisco.       During    the    summer    the   mis- 
sionaries,  in  order  to  procure  funds  to 
pay  their  passage  to  the  islands,  sought 
and    found    employment   in    San    Fran- 
cisco   and    its    vicinity,    some    of    them 
working  on  ranches  during  the  harvest- 
ing season.  Elder  Caine  had  the  temer- 
ity to  hire  out  as  a  cook  at  one  of  the 
ranches   where    threshing    was   in    pro- 
gress.      Finally    they    set    sail    for    the 
islands,  but  not  all  upon  the  same  ves- 
sel.    Elder  Caine,     with   three     or  four 
others,   took  passage  on   the  brig  "Su- 
san   Abigail,"    which   sailed    from     San 
Francisco  Dec.   1,   1854,   and   arrived  at 
Honolulu  the  day  before  Christmas.  At 
the    first    conference    of    the    Hawaiian 
mision    held    after   his   arrival,    he   was 
appointed  counselor  to  Silas  Smith, who 
was    made    president    of    the    mission. 
Elder  Caine  also  presided  over  the  Oahu 
conference.       Most   of   the   time   he  re- 
sided at  Honolulu,  where  some  one  was 
needed  to  attend  to  the  correspondence, 
transact   business   for   the   Church   and 
represent   the   mission    in   controversies 
that  arose  from  time  to  time  with  the 
Hawaiian    government,    owing    to    sec- 
tarian   and    other    anti-Mormon    influ- 
ences.      While    thus  engaged,    he     an- 
swered an  attack  made  upon  the  "Mor- 
mon"   people   and    secured    its   publica- 
tion  in    the   "Polynesian,"    the   govern- 
ment official  organ.      This  was  the  first 
defense   of   "Mormons"    ever    published 
in  an  Hawaiian  newspaper.  Elder  Caine 
had    charge     of      an    English-speaking 


BIOGRAPHICAL  ENCYCLOPEDIA. 


729 


branch  of  the  Church,  made  up  largely 
of  emigrants  from  Australia  who  were 
detained    at   Honolulu,      the   vessel     in 
which  they    sailed      having    been  con- 
demned as  unseaworthy.      Owing  to  his 
residency   at   Honolulu,    where    English 
was  very  generally   spoken  and  where 
he  conducted  services  in  English,  he  did 
not  acf(uire  a  perfect  knowledge  of  the 
Hawaiian  tongue.       The  climate  of  the 
islands    did    nut    agree    with    him,    and 
this,  with  the  further  fact  that  his  pres- 
ence was  needed  at  home,  induced  Pres. 
Young  to  send  for  him   to  return  ear- 
lier than  was  originally  intended.     He 
sailed  from  Honolulu  Aug.  1,  1856,     on 
the  packet  ship  "Francis  Palmer,"  ar- 
riving at  San  Francisco  on  the  24th  of 
that  month.      After  some  delay  in  San 
Francisco   and     nei:rhborhood   securing 
means  for  his  trip  home,  he  proceeded 
by  way  of  San  Pedro  and  Los  Angeles 
to  San   Bernardino,   and  there  cast  his 
first  vote  for  a  President  of  the  United 
States,  having  lived  in  California  thir- 
ty days  before  election,  and  thus  gained 
that  right  according  to  the  laws  of  that 
State.      He  voted  for  James  Buchanan, 
the   Democratic   candidate.       This   was 
the    only    opportunity    he    had    to   vote 
for  President  until  he  voted  for  William 
Jennings    Bryan    in    1896.       From     San 
Bernardino  he  retraced  the  same  route 
that   he   had   formerly   traveled,    liding 
horseback  all  the  way  to  Cedar     City, 
Utah.        At    a    point    between    Fillmore 
and  Salt  Lake  City,  some  time  in  No- 
vember,   1856,    he    met    the    legislative 
party  on   its   way   to   the   former  place 
to  hold  the  regular  session  of  the     as- 
sembly.     Being  informed  that  his  name 
had  been  proposed  for  assistant  secre- 
tary  of   the   council,    he   returned   with 
the  legislators  to  Fillmore.      They  there 
held  one  meeting  and  adjourned  to  Salt 
Lake   City,    where   Elder   Caine   served 
in  the  position  for  which  he  had  been 
nominated.      This  was  his  first  political 
ofTice.       At   subsequent  sessions  of  i^e 
legislature,   which  met  yearly,   he  con- 
tinued to  be  assistant  secretary  of  the 
council,   and   was  afterwards  secretary 
of   that    body    for   many    sessions.       In 
1857  he  was  military  secretary  with  the 
rank  of  lieutenant-colonel  on   the  staff 
of  Lieutenant-General  Daniel  H.  Wells, 
commander  of  the  Nauvoo  Legion.  Soon 
after   his    return    from    the    Islands    he 
became  one  of  Pres.  Brigham  Young's 
private    clerks,    to    attend    to    his    per- 
sonal business,  and  was  associated  with 


Hiram    B.    Clawson    and     Thomas     W. 
Ellerbeck,     the       President's     business 
manager  and  chief  book-keeper  respec- 
tively.      At   the   bi-eaking  up  of  Camp 
Floyd  in  1861,  John  T.  Caine  was  sent 
with   Hiram  B.  Clawson  and  David  O. 
("aider,  of  the  President's  office,  to  at- 
tend the  great  auction  sale  of  govern- 
ment property  at  the  post,  where  they 
I)urchased  large  quantities  of  goods  for 
Pies.   Young's   private   stores.       In   the 
meantime  he  had  resumed  his  connec- 
tion  with   the  Deseret  Dramatic  Asso- 
ciation,  and   in  a  short   time  had   suc- 
ceeded David  Candland  as  stage  man- 
ager at  the  Social  Hall.      This  was  the 
inauguration    of    his    extended    manag- 
erial career.      Warmly  seconding  Pres. 
Young's    proposition    that    "the    people 
must   have   amusements — the   best   and 
most  wholesome  ones  that  could  be  pro- 
vided"— he  with  others  now  urged  upon 
the  President  the  advisability  of  erect- 
ing  a   large   theatre   to     supercede   the 
small  and  inadequately  equipped  Social 
Hall,  where  the  legitimate  drama  might 
be  fostered  and  the     play-going,     fun- 
loving   public   be   properly   entertained. 
This  led     to     the     building  of  the  Salt 
Lake    Theatre,    ground    for    which    was 
broken    July   1,    1861,    and    the   building 
dedicated   on   the   evening  of  March   6, 
1862.       The  first  dramatic  performance 
given  at  this  theatre  was  witnessed  two 
nights  later,  the  plays  presented  being 
"Pride  of  the  Market"   and   "State  Se- 
crets,"  with  a  comic   song  by  Wm.   C. 
Dunbar  intervening.      In  "Pride  of  the 
Market,"     Bro.     Caine     sustained     the 
role  of  the  Marquis  de  Volage.       Until 
the  introduction  of    outside     talent,  he 
continued    to    play     leading     roles     at 
the    theatre,    and    was   associated    with 
Hiram  B.  Clawson  in  its  management. 
As   stage   manager,     all     performances 
were    put    upon    the    boards    under    his 
personal  supervision.      After  retiring  as 
an  actor  he  continued  to  be  stage  man- 
ager, and   in   one   way  or  another  was 
connected  with  the  theatre  for  a  period 
of  twenty  years.       Early  in  the  spring 
of   1866.   he,    in   company   with   a  party 
composed  of  Wm.   Jennings,   Hiram  B. 
Clawson,   Thos.   Taylor  and     John     W. 
Young,   crossed   the  plains  to  the  Mis- 
souri   river    by    stage   and    spent    some 
six    months    in    New    Y'ork    and    other 
eastern    cities,     assisting     in    forward- 
ing  that   year's    "Mormon"    emigration 
from    Euiope,      and    transacting    other 
business     for      Pres.     Young.       In  1867 


730 


LATTER-DAY    SAINT 


Messrs.  Clawson  and  Caine  leased  the 
Salt  Lake  Theatre  from  Pres.  Young, 
paying  him  the  first  year  a  rental  of 
$15,000.  The  lessees  did  not  make  much 
money  out  of  it  that  season,  but  after- 
wards the  rental  was  reduced  and  the 
railroad  having  reached  Salt  Lake,  the 
next  two  years  they  prospered.  In 
March,  1870,  Elder  Caine  went  to  Wash- 
nigton,  D.  C,  to  carry  the  protest  of 
the  people  of  Utah  against  the  Cullom 
bill,  which  had  passed  the  House  of 
Representatives  and  was  pending  in 
the  Senate  of  the  United  States.  He 
remained  for  several  months  at  the 
capital,  assisting  Hon.  William  H. 
Hooper.  Utah's  delegate,  in  his  labors, 
and  returned  home  in  July  of  that  year. 
His  extended  legislative  experience, first 
in  a  clerical  capacity,  and  afterwards 
as  a  member  of  the  legislative  council, 
in  which  he  served  for  the  sessions  of 
1874,  1876,  1880  and  1882.  was  preparing 
him  for  his  own  Congressional  career. 
During  his  absence  in  '^'ashington,two 
of  his  old-time  friends.  Edward  L. 
Sloan  and  Wm.  C.  Dunbar,  had  es- 
tablished the  "Salt  Lake  Daily  Herald." 
The  "Herald"  was  founded  in  June, 
1870.  Mr.  Sloan  being  its  editor  and  Mr. 
Dunbar  its  business  manager.  They 
solicited  Bro.  Caine,  upon  his  return 
from  Washington,  to  take  stock  in  their 
enterprise  and  act  as  the  paper's  man- 
aging editor.  He  took  a  third  interest 
in  the  paper,  retaining  the  position  of 
managing  editor  until  the  "Herald" 
Company  was  incorporated.  He  con- 
tinued foi*  many  years  to  own  stock  in 
the  "Herald."  and,  as  is  the  case  with 
the  Salt  Lake  Theatre,  his  name  will 
always  be  identified  with  its  history. 
Elder  Caine's  standing  in  the  communi- 
ty at  this  period  is  shown  by  the  simple 
fact  that  in  October,  1871.  when  the 
great  Chicago  fire  swept  away  a  large 
portion  of  that  city,  rendering  a  hun- 
dred thousand  people  homeless  and  des- 
titute, ho  was  appointed  at  a  meeting 
called  by  the  mayor  of  Salt  Lake  City 
chairman  of  a  committee  of  "Mormon" 
and  non-Mormon  citizens  to  reecive 
subscriptions  for  the  relief  of  the  suf- 
ferers. In  1872  he  figured  in  the  Consti- 
tutional Convention  held  in  Salt  Lake 
City,  in  which  both  "Mormons"  and 
non-Mormons  participated.  In  1873 
was  formed  the  Salt  Lake  Theatre  Cor- 
poration, which  purchased  from  Pres. 
Young  the  famous  place  of  amusement 
he  had  founded,  and  proceeded  to  trans- 


form the  somewhat  old-fashioned  in- 
terior, making  it  in  every  respect  a 
modern  and  finely  equipped  temple  of 
the  drama.  The  managers  of  the  the- 
atre under  this  regime  were  Hiram  B. 
Clawson,  John  T.  Caine  and  Thomas 
^Villilams,  with  James  Vinson  as  stage 
manager.  As  a  business  venture  it  was 
a  failure,  owing  in  part  to  the  heavy 
expense  of  remodeling  the  theatre  and 
supporting  its  newly  organized  stock 
company,  but  mostly  to  the  fact  that 
1873  was  a  panic  year  through  the  na- 
tion, and  the  effects  of  the  wide-spread 
financial  depression  were  felt  for  sev- 
eral years  following.  In  1875  Bro.  Caine, 
p.lm.ost  broken  dov.-n  in  health  owing  to 
his  arduous  labors  as  a  theatrical  and 
newspaper  manager — for  both  these 
burdens  were  upon  him  simultaneously 
— took  a  trip  to  Europe  to  recuperate 
his  exhausted  energies.  He  left  home 
in  IMay,  and  returned  about  the  middle 
of  August,  much  benefitted  in  health. 
During  his  absence  he  visited  his  birth- 
place on  the  Isle  of  Man,  and  also 
toured  England,  France.  Belgium  and 
the  Netherlands.  Soon  after  his  return 
he  was  nominated  and  in  February, 
1876.  elected  recorder  of  Salt  Lake  City, 
an  office  which  he  filled  with  great  ef- 
ficiency, and  to  which  he  was  re-elect- 
ed in  1878,  1880  and  1882.  He  also  serveil 
as  a  member  of  the  board  of  regents 
of  the  L'niversity  of  Deseret  from  1876 
to  1886,  and  held  various  other  respon- 
sible positions,  figuring  prominently  in 
most  of  the  public  events  of  the  period. 
Ecclesiastically  he  was  also  prominent 
as  a  member  of  the  High  Council  of  the 
Salt  Lake  Stake  of  Zion.  to  which  po- 
sition he  was  set  apart  Oct.  16.  1859. 
and  he  acted  as  second  counselor  in  the 
Stake  presidency  during  the  consecutive 
administrations  of  Stake  Presidents 
Daniel  Spencer.  John  "W.  Young,  and 
George  B.  Wallace,  from  October,  1868. 
to  April,  1876.  At  the  reorganization 
of  the  Stake  just  prior  to  the  death  of 
Pres.  Young,  Elder  Caine  retired,  but 
in  1878  was  chosen  an  alternate  coun- 
cilor and  in  1881  became  a  regular  mem- 
ber of  the  High  Council,  which  posi- 
tion he  holds  at  the  present  time.  He 
has  &lso  served  as  a  home  missionary 
in  the  Salt  Lake  Stake,  for  many  years 
faithfully  fulfilling  all  the  calls  made 
upon  him.  In  the  winter  of  1880-81  he 
was  associated  with  Hon.  W^illiam  H. 
Hooper  as  a  representative  of  Hon. 
George   Q.   Cannon,   Utah's  delegate   in 


BIOGRAPHICAL    ENCYCLOPEDIA. 


731 


Congress,  in  the  contest  which  then 
arose  while  the  latter  was  absent  at 
his  post  of  duty  in  Washington,  D.  C, 
over  his  right  to  a  seat,  in  the  House 
of  Representatives.  It  was  against  the 
protest  of  Messrs.  Hooper  and  Caine 
that  Governor  Eli  H.  Murray,  on  Jan. 
8,  1881,  thwarted  the  will  of  the  people 
expressed  at  the  polls  in  the  previous 
November,  and  gave  to  Allen  G.  Camp- 
bell, the  defeated  Liberal  candidate  for 
the  delegateship,  the  certificate  of  elec- 
tion rightfully  belonging  to  George  Q. 
Cannon,  who  had  been  re-elected  by  a 
vote  of  18,568  as  against  1,357,  the  num- 
ber of  ballots  cast  for  his  opponent. 
In  the  subsequent  litigation  by  which 
it  was  sought  to  compel  Acting-Gover- 
nor Thomas,  in  the  absence  of  Gover- 
nor Murray,  to  give  a  certificate  of  elec- 
tion to  the  sitting  delegate,  Bro.  Caine 
acted  alone  as  the  agent  for  Bro.  Can- 
non. In  April,  1882,  he  was  a  repre,- 
sentative  of  Salt  Lake  county  in  the 
Constitutional  Convention,  which  met 
at  Salt  Lake  City  on  the  10th  of  that 
month,  and  proceeded  to  frame  a  State 
constitution  prior  to  petitioning  Con- 
gress for  Utah's  admission  into  the 
Union.  In  June  of  the  same  year  he 
was  one  of  seven  delegates  appointed 
by  the  convention  to  present  the  con- 
stitution and  its  accompanying  memo- 
rial to  Congress,  and  with  a  portion  of 
the  delegation  immediately  proceeded 
to  Washington  and  discharged  that 
duty.  While  in  all  the  offices  and  po- 
sitions of  trust  held  and  occupied  by 
him  he  performed  the  duties  in  such  a 
way  as  to  command  the  respect,  esteem 
and  confidence  of  the  public  whose  ser- 
vant he  was,  it  was  as  a  member  of 
Congress  that  his  more  arduous  work 
was  done  and  which  elevated  him  to 
the  distinguished  place  which  he  has 
occupied  in  the  minds  of  the  people  of 
Utah.  Elder  Caine  entered  Congress 
at  a  stormy  period  in  the  history  of 
Utah,  and  for  long  years  thereafter  the 
fight  was  incessant,  bitter  and  unre- 
lenting. He  succeeded  Hon.  George  Q. 
Cannon  who  had  been  elected  to  the 
forty-seventh  Congress, but  whose  seat, 
after  an  ugly  contest,  had  been  declared 
vacant  under  the  provisions  of  the  new- 
ly enacted  Edmunds  law  in  April,  1882. 
At  a  People's  Party  convention  held  at 
Salt  Lake  City  Oct.  13,  1882,  he  was 
nominated  as  delegate  to  Congress,  not 
only  to  the  Forty-eighth  Congress,  be- 
ginning March  4,  1883,  but  to  serve  out 


the  unexpiied  i)ortion  of  his  predeces- 
sor's term  in  the  Forty-seventh  Co!i- 
gress  as  well,  and  on  the  7th  of  No- 
vember following  was  overwhelmingly 
elected,  receiving  23,039  votes, as  against 
4,884  votes  cast  for  his  opponent,  the 
Liberal  candidate,  Hon.  Phillip  T.  Van 
Zile.  Upon  retiring  from  the  city  gov- 
ernment of  Salt  Lake  City,  and  resign- 
ing the  office  of  city  recorder  and  au- 
ditor, he  was  presented  with  the  follow- 
ing testimonial  signed  by  the  mayor, 
alderman,  councilors  and  all  the  officers 
of  the  city:  "We,  the  undersigned, 
mayor,  alderman,  councilors,  and  offi- 
cers, of  the  Corporation  of  Salt  Lake 
City,  desiring  to  express  our  confidence 
in  and  appreciation  of  the  ability  and 
integrity  of  Hon.  John  T.  Caine,  city 
recorder  and  auditor  of  public  accounts, 
on  the  occasion  of  his  retirement  from 
the  duties  of  those  offices,  take  pleas- 
ure in  reviewing  our  association  with 
him  in  his  official  position  and  in  adopt- 
ing this  testimonial.  Hon.  John  T. 
Caine  was  elected  recorder  of  Salt  Lake 
City  Feb.  14,  1876,  and  entered  immedi- 
ately upon  the  duties  of  his  office.  On 
the  22nd  of  the  same  month  he  was,  on 
the  nomination  of  Councilor  Brigham 
Young,  appointed  by  the  unanimous 
vote  of  the  council,  auditor  of  public 
accounts.  To  thes?.  the  chief  clerical 
offices  of  the  municipality,  Mr.  Caine 
brought  the  advantage  of  long  experi- 
ence, thorough  education,  and  strict 
discipline,  which  have  been  manifested 
in  the  adoption  of  a  complete  system 
of  accounts  in  all  the  departments  of 
the  city  government,  reporting  to  him 
for  auditation,  in  the  great  improve- 
ment of  the  council  records,  and  in  the 
general  regulation  of  the  recorder's  of- 
fice. When  the  construction  of  a  canal 
to  supply  the  city  with  water  from  the 
Jordan  river  was  projected,  Mr.  Caine 
took  an  active  and  energetic  part  in 
securing  the  necessary  legislative  au- 
thority to  provide  the  means  required, 
and  in  carrying  the  project  to  its  suc- 
cessful issue,  his  last  official  act  as 
auditor  being  to  report  the  satisfactory- 
condition  of  the  canal  fund.  Mr.  Caines 
ready  aid  and  counsel  to  the  various 
city  officers  and  the  assistance  of  his 
recognized  legislative  ability  in  the 
deliberation  of  the  city  council,  have 
won  from  all,  who  have  been  associated 
with  him,  the  highest  sentiments  of 
respect  and  confidence  which  we  hei"e- 
by  take  occasion  to  gratefully  acknowl- 


732 


LATTER-DAY    SAINT 


edge.  While  we  regret  the  necessity 
which  compels  a  severance  of  the  very 
cordial  official  relationship  that  has  for 
more  than  seven  years  bound  him  to 
the  interests  which  we  represent,  it  is 
■with  undiminished  confidence  and  cor- 
diality that  we  sustain  Mr.  Caine  in  the 
more  distinguished  position  which  the 
suffrages  of  the  people  of  Utah  have 
called  him  to  occupy.  Territorial  Dele- 
gate to  the  Congress  of  the  United 
States,  in  which  capacity  we  wish  him 
great  prosperity  and  the  completest 
success.*  Elder  Caine  was  one  of  a 
number  of  public  spirited  citizens,  who, 
in  May.  18S3.  after  the  veto  by  Gover- 
nor Murray  of  the  bill  passed  by  the 
legislature  appropriating  money  for  the 
completion  of  the  T'niversity  building 
on  Union  Square,  advanced  means  out 
of  their  private  purses  for  the  comple- 
tion of  the  half  finished  edifice,  trust- 
ing to  what  then  seemed  the  forlorn 
hope  of  reimbursement  through  the  act 
of  some  future  governor  of  the  Terri- 
tory, whose  anti-Mormon  proclivities 
were  not  so  pronounced  as  those  of  the 
then  reigning  executive.  Upon  a  fa- 
vorable report  in  his  case  from  the 
House  Committee  on  Elections,  Dele- 
gate Caine  was  sworn  in  and  took  his 
seat  in  the  United  States  House  of 
Representatives  Jan.  17,  1883.  It  would 
not  be  profitable,  though  decidedly  en- 
tertaining, to  recount  in  full  the  story 
of  his  combats,  his  victories  and  his 
disappointments  and  defeats  in  the 
48th,  49th,  50th,  ,")lst  and  52nd  Congress- 
es, to  each  of  which  he  had  been  elected 
by  overwhelming  majorities;  that  at 
the  election  to  the  .■j2nd  Congress 
amounting  to  neaiiy  10.000  plurality.  It 
may  almost  be  said  that  a  battle  royal 
was  waged  from  start  to  finish  through 
all  the  eleven  years  of  his  service,  the 
victory  coming  to  Bro.  Caine  and  the 
people  for  whom  he  fought  unremit- 
tingly, at  the  close  nf  his  long  service, 
in  the  practically  unanimous  consent 
of  all  parties  to  admit  Utah  to  the 
Union  and  confer  upon  the  long  suffer- 
ing citizens  the  lights  and  privileges 
which  had  been  denied  them  for  so 
many  years.  Hro.  Caine  had  barely 
taken  his  seat  in  the  House  when  he 
was  confronted  with  a  measuie  propos- 
ing to  amend  the  so-called  FJdmunds 
bill  which  had  been  introduced  in  the 
Senate  by  Senator  Edmunds,  the  au- 
thor of  the  original,  and  was  called  to 
the  attention  of  the  House  Committee 
on  the  Judiciary  by  Mr.  Van  Zile,  who 


solicited  and  was  granted  a  hearing 
upon  the  measure.  This  bill  was  the 
original  of  what  after  many  disap- 
pointments and  defeats  became,  five 
years  later,  the  Edmunds-Tucker  bill. 
Delegate  Caine's  maiden  effort  in  his 
Congresional  career  was  in  an  argu- 
ment before  the  House  Judiciary  Com- 
mittee in  opposition  to  this  measure 
and  in  answer  to  Mr.  Van  Zile.  The 
measure  was  defeated  in  the  Senate  by 
parliamentary  tactics  on  the  part  of  the 
Democrats,  who  on  general  principles 
wei-e  opposed  to  the  bill.  It  came  up 
again,  however,  in  an  enlarged  form  in 
the  4Sth  Coneress  and  was  known  as 
the  Hoar  bill.  While  it  passed  the 
Senate,  which  was  Republican,  no  ac- 
tion was  taken  upon  it  in  the  House  of 
Representatives,  which  was  Democrat- 
ic. Numerous  bills  on  the  Utah  and 
"Mormon"  question  were  introduced 
both  in  the  Senate  and  House  during 
the  4Sth  Congress,  and  also  many  joint 
resolutions  proposing  an  amendment 
to  the  Constitution  of  the  United  States 
prohibiting  polygamy.  The  bill  which 
attracted  the  most  attention  in  the 
House  of  Representatives,  and  the 
passage  of  which  was  urged  the  most 
l^ersistently  was  the  Cassidy  bill,  pro- 
posing to  reorganize  the  legislative 
jiower  of  the  Territory  by  conferring  all 
legislative  authority  upon  a  commis- 
sion composed  of  fifteen  men  to  be  ap- 
pointed by  the  President  and  confirmed 
by  the  Senate.  This  measure  was  re- 
ferred to  the  House  Committee  on  the 
Territories,  where  it  was  considered 
at  great  length,  its  passage  being  urged 
by  Representative  Cassidy,  of  Nevada, 
and  other  enemies  of  Utah  and.  her  peo- 
ple. Delegate  Caine,  almost  single- 
handed  and  alone,  combatted  this  meas- 
ure day  after  day  before  the  commit- 
tee and  had  the  satisfaction  of  seeing 
it  side-tracked  by  the  committee  re- 
porting a  substitute  in  the  shape  of  a 
marriage  bill  for  the  Territory  which 
was  never  considered  by  the  House. 
Early  in  the  49th  Congress,  the  w-ar- 
fare  against  Utah  and  the  "Mormons" 
was  resumed  in  both  houses.  Many 
new  bills  and  joint  resolutions  were  in- 
troduced. One  by  McAdoo  of  New 
Jersey  proposed  to  disfranchise  all  po- 
lygamists;  another  by  Woodburn  of 
Nevada  provided  for  the  institution 
of  a  test  oath  and  to  make  it  a  crime 
to  be  a  member  of  the  "Mormon" 
Church  or  to  contribute  to  its  support. 
The  temper  of  Congress  and  the  nation 


BIOGRAPHICAL    ENCYCLOPEDIA. 


733 


was  such  that  there  was  a  disposition 
to  pass  some  \ery  drastic  measure 
against  the  "Moi-mons."  This  feeling 
culminated  in  the  introduction  and 
passag-e  by  the  Senate  of  the  new  Ed- 
munds bill,  which  afterwards  passed 
the  House  and  has  since  been  known 
in  Utah  as  the  Edmunds-Tucker  law. 
Delegate  Caine  declares  that  when  this 
measure  was  referred  to  the  House  Ju- 
diciary committee,  its  chairman,  Hon. 
J.  Randolph  Tucker, was  utterly  opposed 
to  it.  What  influences  were  brought  to 
bear  to  cause  him  to  change  his  mind 
have  not  yet  been  found  out.  Upon 
the  passage  of  the  measure  in  the 
House  of  Representatives,  Delegate 
Caine  delivered  what  was  designated  at 
the  time  a  most  vigorous,  eloquent  and 
logical  speech  against  its  passage.  His 
argument  was  widely  published  and 
elicited  much  complimentary  comment, 
not  only  in  the  House,  but  in  the  press 
of  the  country.  However,  the  disposi- 
tion of  the  people  of  the  United  States 
was  such  that  no  degree  of  eloquence, 
and  no  amount  of  argument,  could  stay 
the  passage  of  the  bill.  Upon  the  Sen- 
ate's lefusal  to  accept  the  House 
amendments  to  the  measure,  and  it  be- 
ing sent  to  a  committee  of  conference, 
he  secured  the  appointment  of  Hon. 
Patrick  A.  Collins,  a  Democratic  m?m- 
ber  from  Boston,  as  one  of  the  con- 
ferees on  the  part  of  the  House,  much 
to  the  annoyance  and  chagrin  of  Mr. 
Tucker,  who  desired  that  the  commit- 
tee should  be  composed  entirely  of  the 
friends  of  the  bill.  Mr.  Collins  fought 
bravely  against  the  bill,  and  secured 
the  elimination  or  modification  of  many 
of  the  most  objectionable  features.  In 
this  Congress,  also.  Delegate  Caine  in- 
troduced the  bill  whicji  finally  culmin- 
ated in  giving  Utah  a  fourth  district 
judge.  Bro.  Caine  was  elected  a  dele- 
gate from  Salt  Lake  county  to  the 
Constitutional  Convention  which  con- 
vened in  Salt  Lake  City  June  30,  1887. 
He  was  president  of  the  convention  and 
strongly  urged  the  adortion  of  the 
clause  in  the  proposed  Constitution  pro- 
hibiting bigamy  and  polygamy,  believ- 
ing this  to  be  the  true  solution  of  the 
"Mormon"  problem,  and  the  only  course 
that  would  satisfy  the  government  and 
people  of  the  United  States.  The  open- 
ing of  the  first  session  of  the  50th  Con- 
gres  was  characterized  by  the  introduc- 
tion of  another  flood  of  bills  relating 
to    I'tah,    joint     resolutions     proposing 


amendments  to  the  Constitution,  em- 
powering Congress  to  legislate  upon  the 
subjects  of  marriage  and  divorce,  and 
I)rohibiting  bigamy  and  polygamy,  were 
introduced  by  Senators  Dolph  of 
Oregon,  Cullom  of  Illinois,  and  by 
Representatives  Springer  of  Illi- 
nois and  Culberson  of  Texas.  Senator 
Paddock  of  Nebraska,  an  ex-member  of 
the  Utah  Commission,  introduced  in 
the  Senate  a  bill  constituting  the  gov- 
ei-nor,  secretary  and  members  of  the 
Utah  Commission  a  hoard  to  redistrict 
and  re-apportion  Salt  Lake  City  into 
aldermanic  and  councilmanic  districts. 
The  object  being  to  so  district  the  city 
as  to  give  the  Libeials  the  control  of 
the  city  government.  Senator  Cullom 
presented  to  the  Senate  another  bill  for 
a  legislative  commission  for  Utah,  to  be 
composed  of  the  governor  and  twelve 
citizens  appointed  by  the  President; 
Delegate  Dubois  of  Idaho  presented  a 
similar  bill  in  the  House.  Delegate 
Caine  opposed  all  these  measures,  mak- 
ing the  plea  to  senators  and  members 
that  they  should  wait  and  see  if  the 
Edmunds-Tucker  law  would  not  accom- 
plish all  they  desired  in  settling  the 
"Moimon"  question.  Jan.  12,  1S88,  Dele- 
gate Caine  presented  in  the  Hounse  of 
Representatives  the  memorial  and  con- 
stitution adoi)ted  by  the  constitution- 
al convention  of  1887.  About  the  same 
time  he  introduced  a  bill  for  an  enab- 
ling act  for  the  territoiy  of  Utah,  all 
of  which  were  referred  to  the  Commit- 
tee on  Tt-rritories-  and  ordered  to  be 
printed.  The  same  documents  having 
been  presented  to  the  president  of  the 
Senate  by  the  delegation  sent  by  the 
constitutional  convention,  a  bill  for  an 
enabling  act  was  introduced  by  Senator 
Butler  of  South  Carolina  and  referred 
to  the  Senate  Committee  on  Territo- 
ries. The  Senate  Committee  having 
granted  a  hearing  to  the  delegation 
from  Utah  in  the  interest  of  statehood. 
Delegate  Caine,  Feb.  18,  1888,  made  a 
strong  argument  showing  the  honesty 
and  sincerity  of  the  people  of  Utah 
in  adopting  the  constitution  with  the 
clause  prohibiting  polygamy  and  pledg- 
ing their  good  faith  in  executing  the 
law  upon  all  violators  of  that  provision. 
In  this  session  of  Congress,  the  fight 
over  the  proposed  removal  of  the  South- 
ern Ute  Indians  from  Colorado  to  San 
Juan  county,  Utah,  was  precipitated 
by  the  introduction  in  the  House  of  a 
bill    by    Representative    Symes   provid- 


734 


LATTER-DAY    SAINT 


ing  for  such  removal.      Delegate  Caine 
antagonized     the     proposition   through 
that  and  the  two  succeeding  Congress- 
es,   appearing    both    before    the    Senate 
and    House    Comittees    on    Indian    af- 
fairs,  securing  adverse  reports   in   two 
Congresses   and   by    combination     with 
other  interests  defeating  its  considera- 
tion  in   the   last   Congress   in   which    it 
was  agitated.    The  removal  was,  there- 
fore,   not    effected,    notwithstanding   all 
the  efforts  put  forth  in  its  interests  by 
the  State  of  Colorado,   with  two  Sena- 
tors and  a  Representative  in  Congress. 
Among  other   bills   presented   by  Dele- 
gate  Caine    in    the   49th   Congress,   was 
one  providing  for  the  erection  of  a  gov- 
ernment building  in  Salt  Lake  City  at 
a  cost  of  $500,000.       It  was  at  this  ses- 
sion of  Congress,  on  Aug.  2oth    and  on 
October  4th   respectively,    that   he     de- 
livered in  the  House  of  Representatives 
his  well-remembred  speeches   "Polyga- 
my in  Utah  a  Dead  Issue"   and   "Mor- 
mon   Facts    vs   Anti-Mormon    Fiction," 
in  which  he  set  the  people  of  the  Ter- 
ritory   right   befoi-e     the     country   and 
made    plain    the    circumstances    of    the 
wrong  doing  to  which  they  were  being 
subjected   in   the   face  of   their   sincere 
promises,   professions  and  actions.     At 
the  beginning  of  1889,  the  House  Com- 
mittee on  Territories  at  the  solicitation 
of  Delegate  Caine,  accorded  a  long  and 
patient   hearing     to     delegations    from 
Utah  in  regard  to  the  admission  of  the 
Territory  as  a  State;   and   on   the  16th 
and  17th  of  January,   he  delivered   be- 
fore the  committee  a  forcible  argument 
In   favor   of   admission.       The   outcome 
of    this    hearing    was    a   report    by    the 
committee  through  Chairman  Springer 
favorable    to    the    claims    of    Utah    for 
statehood,  but  the  report  came  too  late 
to  i-eceive  action  during  that  Congress. 
On   April  29th  and   30th  and     May  1st, 
1889,  Delegate  Caine,  as  the  representa- 
tive   of    the    Territory    of    Utah,      upon 
invitation   of   the  committtee,   attended 
the  three  days'   celebration   in  the  city 
of  New  York  in  honor  of  the  centennial 
anniversary   of     the     inauguration     of 
George  Washington  as  President  of  the 
United    States,    and    participated    as    a 
guest  in  reviewing  the  great  naval, mili- 
tary and  civic  parades  of  the  occasion, 
being  the    most    magnificent  pageants 
ever    witnessed    In    that    city.     He    was 
also  a  guest  at  the  banquet  given  at  the 
Metropolitan    Opera     House     on    April 
30th.       Among  the  guests,  which  num- 
bered between  eight  and  nine  hundred, 


were  the  largest  number  of  prominent 
men,   not   only   officials,   but   celebrities 
from  all  parts  of  the  country,  ever  as- 
sembled at  a  banquet  on  the  American 
continent.        With    the    opening   of    the 
51st   Congress  came   another  deluge   of 
anti-Utah  bills  and  resolutions,  among 
them  being  one  by  Representative  Ezra 
Ji.   Taylor,   who   was     among  the  most 
piominent  supporters  of  the  Edmunds- 
Tucker   bill    in    the    previous    Congress. 
This   was   a  joint   resolution   providing 
for    the     stock    Constitutional  Amend- 
ment  forbidding   polygamy;    a   bill   in- 
troduced  by   Stewart   of  Vermont,   but 
the  text  of  which  was  furnished  by  Salt 
Lake  Liberals,  proposed  to  disfranchise 
all  members  of  the  "Mormon"   Church 
and    forbidding     the    naturalization    of 
such  persons,   denying  them  the  privi- 
lege of  settling  upon  or  filing  on  public 
lands.etc;  another  bill  by  Senator  Piatt 
of  Connecticut   taking  away   the   right 
to  vote  or  hold  office  from  persons  who 
taught,    advised,    counseled    or   encour- 
aged others  to  enter  into  polygamy  or 
celestial    marriage;    a    bill    by    Senator 
Edmunds    to    take    the    control    of    the 
public  schools  out  of  the  hands  of  the! 
people  and   to  practically  revolutionize 
the    school    system    of    the    Territory; 
another  measure  by  Senator  Cullom  to 
amend  the  Edmunds  law  of  1882,  mak- 
ing   that    act    far   more    stringent,    and 
punishing  by  disfranchisement  not  only 
polygamists,    but    all    members    of    the 
"Mormon"  Church;   the  notorious  Stru- 
ble    bill,    introduced    in    the    House    of 
Representatives     by   Struble     of   Iowa, 
.'■imilar  in  its  disfranchising  provisions 
to  that  of  the  Cullom  bill  in  the  Senate. 
This  bill  and  one  which  had  passed  the 
Fenate  under  the  whip  of  Senator  Ed- 
munds,   proposing    to    devote    the    per- 
gonal   property    escheated      from      the 
"Mormon"  Church  to  the  public  schools 
of    the    Territory,    were    very    strongly 
urged,  and  much  pressure  was  brought 
upon  Congress  to  act  upon  them.  While 
it  is  well  known  that  all  these  iniquit- 
ous  bills    were    defeated,    it    is    not   so 
well   known   that  it   required   incessant 
watching    and    work    on    the    part    of 
Delegate    Caine   and    other   workers    to 
bring  about  that  result.     April  23,  1890, 
he    delivered,    before    the    House    Com- 
mittee   on    Territories,    which    had    the 
Strubble     bill     under    consideration,     a 
strong   argument   against    the   disfran- 
chisement of  the  "Mormons,"  and  other 
objectionable  features  of  that  measure. 


BIOGRAPHICAL    ENCYCLOPEDIA. 


735 


The  bill  was  favorably  reported  to  the 
house    by    Chairman    Struble,    and    its 
!)assage   recommended,   but  by  various 
processes   he  was  prevented   from  get- 
ting it  before  the  House  for  action.  The 
Edmunds  bill  relative  to  the  escheated 
personal    property   of   the    Church   was 
defeated   by   parliamentarj'   default,    in 
loosing  its  place  on  the  calendar,   and 
Delegate       Caine      and      congressional 
friends  preventing  its  being  reinstated. 
On     the  passage     of  the     bill     for   the 
admission  of  Idaho  as  a  State,  he  de- 
livered a  speech  in  which,  while  favor- 
ing the  admission  of  the  Territory,  he 
opposed   the   provision   of  the   enabling 
act    which      disfranchised      "Mormon" 
citizens  residing  there,  because  of  their 
Church  membership.     Delegate  Caine's 
labors    during    the    52nd    Congress,    the 
last  of  his  long  service  in  the  House  of 
Representatives,  can  only  receive  brief 
reference  to  some  of  his  more  import- 
ant efforts  in  behalf  of  his  constituents 
and  the  great  Territory  which  he  repre- 
sented.    The   first    measure    calculated 
to   affect  Utah  adversely,   which   came 
up  in  this  Congress,  was  the  perennial 
Ute  removal  bill.    The  bill  was  strongly 
opposed    before    the    House    Committee 
on    Indian    Affairs    by    Delegate    Caine 
and  other  opponents  of  the  scheme,  but 
the   influence   of  Colorado   appeared   to 
dominate  the  committee,  which  report- 
ed the  measure  favorably  to  the  House. 
But   the   opponents   of   the   bill   in    the 
House   gave    the    committee    plainly    to 
understand    that    if   they   attempted    to 
bring   that   measure  up,   all   their  pro- 
posed   legislation    would    be    defeated. 
This  ended  the  matter  in  that  Congress. 
Jan.  7,  1892,  he  introduced  in  the  House 
bills  for  the  erection  of  a  government 
building    in    Salt    Lake    City,    and    one 
in  Ogden  as  he  had  previously  done  in 
the  51st  Congress.     He  also  introduced 
a    bill    for    creating    another    land    dis- 
trict in  the  Territory,  with  an  office  in 
Ogden.     He  appeared  before  the  House 
Committee    on    Public     Buildings    and 
Grounds,  and  urged  favorable  action  on 
the  Salt  Lake  and  Ogden  Public  Build- 
ing  Bills.     A   bill,    through    the   efforts 
of  Senator  Paddock   of  N'^braska,   had 
passed    the   Senate,    making  an   appro- 
priation for  the  Salt  Lake  building  of 
$500,000.      Delegate    Caine    pressed    the 
House    committeejji.  place    the    same 
amount  in  the  House  bill,  but  the  com- 
mittee assured   him   that  such   a  large 
amount  might  kill  the  measure  in   the 


House;    they   therefore  favored   and   so 
reported  the  measure  carrying    an  ap- 
propriation of  $250,000,  and  recommend- 
ed   its   passage.     But   opposition   or   in- 
difference to  giving  public  buildings  to 
cities   in  Territories  prevented   its  con- 
sideration  by  the   House.     Jan.   7,    1892, 
the   celebrated    "Home    Rule"    bill    was 
introduced   in   the   House   of  Represen- 
tatives by  Delegate  Caine.     It   had  al- 
ready been  presented  in  the  Senate  by 
Senator   Charles    J.    Faulkner   of   West 
Virginia.      On    Feb.    10th,    a    delegation 
from    Utah    favoring    the    passage    of 
the  measure  appeared  and  made  argu- 
ments before  the  House  Committee  on 
Territories,    being    introduced    for    that 
purpose  by  Delegate  Caine.     The  hear- 
ings were  continued  on  Feb.  16th,  17th, 
19th    and    20th.      Hearings    on    this    bill 
were  also  had  before  the  Senate  Com- 
mittee on  Territories,  commencing  Feb. 
11th,  and  continuing  on  the  13th,   18th, 
20th  and  23rd.     Those  who  made  argu- 
ments   in    favor    of    the   measure    were 
Hons.    H.    W.    Smith,    C.    C.    Richards, 
J.   W.    Judd,   Franklin   S.   Richards,    T. 
J.  Anderson,  Joseph  L.  Rawlins,  Frank 
H.  Dyer  and  Ex-Governor  West;  those 
who    opposed    were    the    Hons.    O.    W. 
Powers,    C.    E.    Allen,    C.    W.    Bennett 
and  John  Henry  Smith,  the  two  latter 
arguing   in    favor   of   Statehood    rather 
than   "Home  Rule."     During  the  hear- 
ing before  the  Senate  Committee,  Dele- 
gate   Caine    introduced    and    read    the 
petition    for    amnesty,    dated    Dec.    19, 
1891,    signed    by    the    First    Presidency 
and  Twelve  Apostles  of  the  Church  of 
Jesus  Christ  of  Latter-day  Saints,  thus 
securing  its   in.sertion   in    the   Congres- 
sional   Record,    and    publication    in    a 
government  document.     Delegate  Caine 
worked    zealously    for    the    passage    of 
the    Home    Rule    bill    and    saw    his    ef- 
forts crowned  with  success  by  its  pas- 
.'age   through   the   House  of  Represen- 
tatives on  July  8,  1892,  the  vote  being, 
yeas  164,  nays  41,  absent  and  not  vot- 
ing   123.      He   regarded    the    passage   of 
this  bill  as  clearing  the  way  for  State- 
hood for  the  Territory.     March  4.  1892, 
he    introduced    a    bill    granting    to    the 
University   of   Utah,    for    a    University 
site,    a    tract    of    sixty    acres    of    land 
on  the  Fort  Douglas  Military  Reserva- 
tion at  Salt  Lake  City.     This  measure, 
at  that  time,  met  with  some  opposition 
from  the  War  department  and  the  bill 
was    not    pressed.      It,      however,      be- 


736 


LATTER-DAY    SAINT 


came  law  in  a  subsequent  Congress.  In 
June.  lSlt2,  Delegate  Caine  having  been 
eletted  as  a  delegate  by  a  regular 
Democratic  convention,  held  in  Ogden. 
attended  the  National  Democratic  Con- 
vention at  Chicago,  which  placed  in 
nomination  Grover  Cleveland  for  presi- 
dent and  Adlai  E.  Stevenson  for  vice- 
pr<?sident.  There  was  a  strong  contest- 
ing delegation,  headed  by  Judge  O.  W. 
Powers,  representing  the  Tuscaroras, 
a  society  claiming  to  be  Demo- 
cratic, made  up  mostly  of  mem- 
bers of  the  Liberal  party.  Delegate 
Caine's  acquaintance  with  public  men 
who  were  members  of  the  convention, 
largely  assisted  in  securing  the  seating 
of  the  regular  delegation  from  Utah, con- 
sisting of  Judge  Henry  P.  Henderson 
and  himself.  Delegate  Caine  was  ap- 
pointed a  member  of  the  committee  on 
platform  and  resolutions,  and  was  in- 
strumental in  securing  a  clause  in  the 
platform  favoring  admission  into  the 
Union  of  all  territories  having  the  nec- 
essary population  and  other  qualifica- 
tions for  statehood.  Jan.  14,  1.S93.  Dele- 
gate Caine  introduced  in  the  House  of 
Representatives  a  bill  for  an  enabling 
act  for  the  admission  of  Utah  as  a 
State  in  the  Union.  A  similar  bill  was, 
at  his  reciuest,  introduced  in  the  Senate 
by  Senator  Faulkner,  of  West  Virginia. 
This  bill  was  practically  identical  with 
the  one  which  became  a  law  in  the  next 
Congress.  The  bill  was  referred  to  the 
committee  on  territories,  before  which 
Delegate  Caine  soon  after  secured  a 
hearing  in  advocacy  of  the  measure. 
The  committee  considered  the  bill  fully 
and  ordered  it  to  be  rei)oited  back  to 
the  House  with  a  favorable  recommen- 
dation for  its  passage.  Representative 
Charles  H.  Mansur  of  Missouri  was  aj)- 
pointfd  to  draft  the  report;  at  his  re- 
riuest  Mr.  Caine  assisted  him  in  it.s 
prejiaration.  The  bill  and  repoit  were 
l)rtsented  to  the  House  Jan.  24,  1S93, 
and  the  bill  placed  on  the  calendar.  This 
report  was  adopted  verbatim  l)y  the 
Committee  on  Teritories  of  the  Fifty- 
third  Congress  and  was  the  report  upon 
which  the  enabling  act  became  law. 
That  Delegate  Caine's  bill  failed  of  pas- 
sage in  the  Fifty-second  Congress  was 
due  to  the  (lood  of  business  which  came 
at  the  close  of  the  session,  and  the 
change  of  administration.  Through  the 
lieraonal  efforts  of  Delegate  Caine  and 
others,  the  Democrats  in  each  hou.se 
and    many    Republicans    were    unitedly 


committed  to  the  bill,  and  if  the  rules 
had  permitted  getting  the  measure  be- 
fore the  House  for  action,  it  would 
doubtless  have  gone  through  by  a  large 
and  enthusiastic  majority.  Aside  from 
preventing  the  passage  of  legislation  in- 
imical to  the  people  of  I^tah,  Elder 
Caine  during  his  congressional  career 
did  much  to  benefit  his  constituents. 
No  citizen  of  T'tah,  or  even  of  Idaho  or 
Arizona,  ever  appealed  to  him  for  as- 
sistance in  any  matter  before  the  gov- 
ernment, but  that  he  received  a  ready 
and  courteous  response:  and  such 
prompt  action  as  the  object  demanded. 
This  he  did  irrespective  of  who  the 
applicant  might  be,  never  asking  if  he 
were  friend  or  foe,  "Mormon"  or  Gen- 
tile. During  the  anti-Mormon  raid, when 
many  old  and  feeble  men  were  un- 
dergoing terms  of  imprisonment  in  the 
T^tah  and  other  penitentiaries,  he  ren- 
dei-ed  valuable  services  in  securing  pre- 
sidential clemency  and  free  pardons  for 
many  such.  In  these  matters,  and  man.v 
others  requiring  executive  action.  Bro- 
ther Caine  speaks  in  the  highest  terms 
of  the  magnanimity  and  high  sense  of 
justice  always  manifested  by  Presi- 
dent Cleveland  in  the  consideration 
of  Utah  affairs.  While  in  Congress,  he 
secured  the  passage  of  a  measure  for 
the  relief  of  the  inhabitants  of  the  town 
of  Ferron,  Emery  county,  and  the  cities 
of  Richfield  and  Morgan,  by  which  their 
corporations  were  enabled  to  increase 
the  aiea  of  their  townsite-  entries  by 
filing  upon  school  land  within  their  cor- 
porate limits.  He  also  secured  large 
aprcpriations  for  the  construction  and 
completion  of  the  Utah  penitentiary, 
making  it  the  substantial,  commodious 
and  well  equipped  prison  it  stands  to- 
day. He  was  actuated  in  this  matter  by 
a  double  motive,  first  to  benefit  the  in- 
mates who  might  be  imprisoned  therein, 
and  second  to  have  a  good  prison  to 
turn  over  free  of  cost  to  the  State  of 
T'tah  when  admitted  into  the  T'nion.  He 
also  secured  appropiiafions  amounting 
to  $ir,,000  for  the  benefit  of  the  Sheebit 
Indians  of  Washington  county  to  pur- 
chase land,  .seeds  and  agricultural  im- 
plements, to  place  them  in  a  position  to 
become  self-sustaining.  During  his  sev- 
« ral  terms  in  Congress,  Elder  Cain.- 
sei'ved  as  a  membei*  of  the  House  com- 
mittee on  Post-office  and  Post-roads, 
and  in  addition  thereto,  in  the  Fifty- 
scond  Congress  he  was  a  member  of 
the    Committees   on    the    "Pacific   Rail- 


BIOGRAPHICAL    ENCYCLOPEDIA. 


737 


roads.  ..n  Coinnge  Weights  and  Mea- 
sures, (in  Private  Land  ("laims.  and 
of  the  special  Committee  on  Irrigation 
or  Arid  Lands  in  the  United  States. 
During  his  whole  term  In  Congress  he 
served  as  a  member  of  the  DemocraUc 
Congressional  Campaign  Committee, 
and  the  representative  of  the  Territor.v 
of  Utah,  and  took  an  active  part  in  all 
the  deliberations  and  plans  of  the  com- 
mittee for  the  advancement  of 
Democratic  interests  in  the  sev- 
eral Ctmgressional  districts.  He  thus 
formed  the  acquaintance  of  quite  a 
large  part  of  the  leading  men  of  the 
party.  Brief  as  is  this  refer- 
ence to  the  more  important 
work  performed  by.  Elder  Caine 
in  a  public  way,  it  is  extenled 
enough  to  prove  the  character  of  the 
man,  to  show  his  capabilities  for  work, 
his  comprehension  of  the  requirements, 
his  patriotism,  his  devotion  to  duty  and 
to  Utah  and  her  people.  In  his  Inter- 
course with  public  men,  he  was  ever 
dignified  and  courteous.  He  enjoyed 
the  respect  and  confidence  of  his  as- 
sociates in  Congress,  among  whom, 
while  he  made  no  enemies,  he  had 
many  warm  friends.  With  the  presi- 
dent, the  heads  of  depar  ments  and 
the  attaches  of  the  several  government 
offices,  he  always  maintained  the  most 
cordial  relations.  Upon  the  dissolu- 
tion of  the  People's  and  Liberal  parties, 
and  the  division  of  the  citizens  of  Utah 
upon  national  party  lines  as  Democrats 
and  Republicans,  Bro.  Caine.  who  bai 
always  been  a  Democrat  in  jp'rit.  be- 
came fully  identified  with,  and  has 
since  figured  as  one  of  the  leaders  of 
the  Democratic  party  of  Utah.  After 
the  organization  of  the  Democratic 
party,  it  was  suggested  to  him  by  per- 
sonal friends  in  the  party  that  in  order 
to  show  to  the  country  that  the  disso- 
lution of  the  People's  party  was  an 
honest  reality,it  would  do  much  to  stim- 
ulate confidence  in  the  movement  to 
nominate  a  non-Mormon  for  delegate 
to  Congress  for  the  election  of  1S92 
While  feeling  that  the  long  fight  he 
had  made  towards  settling  the  so- 
called  "Mormon  question"  and  his  ef- 
forts to  secure  statehood  for  Utah 
which  was  then  in  sight,  entifed  him 
to  re-election  and  the  privilege  of  con- 
summating the  work  of  bringing  Utah 
into  the  Union,  yet  for  the  sake  of 
restoring   confidence,   estalishing   peace 

Vol.   1,   No,   47. 


and  good  fellowship  between  "Mor- 
mons" and  non-Mormons  throughout 
the  Territory,  he  willingly  sacrificed 
his  own  political  interests  and  heart- 
ily joined  in  the  nomination  and  work- 
ed for  the  election  of  Hon.  Joseph  L. 
Rawlins,  as  delegate  to  Congress.  In 
the  Interim  between  his  retiring  from 
Congress  and  the  advent  of  statehood 
in  January,  1896,  he  held  the  office  of 
auditor  of  public  accounts  for  the  Ter- 
ritory of  Utah,  to  which  he  was  ap- 
pointed by  Gov.  Caleb  W.  West,  Dec. 
28,  1893.  At  the  fall  election  of  1893, 
the  Territory  of  Utah  went  Republican, 
that  party  electing  a  majority  of  the 
members  of  the  legislative  assembly. 
This  caused  the  Democrats  of  the  Ter- 
ritory to  fear  that  it  might  have  a  det- 
rimental effect  upon  Congress,  which 
was  strongly  Democratic,  and  prevent 
favorable  action  by  the  Senate  upon  the 
Utah  statehood  bill,  which  had  passed 
the  House  of  Representatives  In  De- 
cember of  that  year.  In  order  to  as- 
certain what  the  feeling  really  was 
among  the  Democratic  leaders  in  Con- 
gress, at  a  suggestion  of  some  promi- 
nent Utah  Democrats,  Bro.  Caine  made 
a  trip  to  Washington  in  January,  1894. 
and  had  a  consultation  with  some  of 
the  prominent  men  of  the  party  over 
the  Utah  situation.  While,  as  D  mo- 
crats,  they  were  disappointed  at  th?  re- 
sult of  the  late  election  in  Utah,  they 
declared  that  the  Territory  had  all  the 
qualifications  for  statehood  and  was 
entitled  to  admision  into  the  Union  ir- 
respective of  politics,  and  it  was  the 
avowed  policy  of  the  Democratic  party 
that  the  Territory  should  be  admitted 
before  the  close  of  that  session.  This 
assurance  was  highly  satisfactory  to 
him  and  the  friends  at  whose  instance 
he  undertook  the  delicate  mission.  Fu- 
ture events  proved  that  the  assurance 
then  given  by  the  Democratic  leaders 
in  Congress  was  faithfully  carried  into 
effect.  The  enabling  act  <"or  the  ad- 
mision of  Utah  into  the  Union  passing 
the  Senate  in  July,  1894,  and  being  ap- 
proved by  Pres.  Grover  Cleveland,  on 
the  16th  of  that  month.  The  Demo- 
cratic convention  for  the  nomination  of 
State  ofl^cers,  in  anticipation  of  the 
early  admission  of  the  State  of  Utah, 
convened  in  Ogden,  Sept.  5.  1895,  when 
Hon.  John  T.  Caine  was  almost 
unanimously  nominated  for  the  first 
governor     of     the    State.     He     entered 

Nov.   23.   1901. 


738 


LATTER-DAY    SAINT 


heartily  into  the  campaign,  and  in 
company  with  Hon.  Brigham  H.  Rob- 
erts, th'^  Democratic  candidate  for  Rep- 
leseniative  in  Congress,  made  a  very 
thorough  canvass  of  the  State,  visiting 
all  the  most  populous  counties,  and 
speaking  in  nearly  all  the  cities  and 
towns  that  could  be  reached  in  the 
lime  at  their  command.  The  Demo- 
cratic State  ticket,  however,  was  de- 
feated at  the  polls,  and  Bro.  Caine 
shared  the  fate  of  his  party.  In  1S96 
he  was  nominated  by  the  Democrats  of 
Salt  Lake  county  as  a  candidate  for 
State  senator,  and  after  a  sharp  can- 
vass of  the  county,  he  was  elected. 
During  the  session  he  acted  as  chair- 
man of  the  committee  on  appropria- 
tions. The  family  record  of  John  T. 
Caine  and  wife  show  them  to  be  the 
father  and  mother  of  thirteen  children. 
Though  a  public  man,  whose  duties 
have  taken  him  much  from  home.  Elder 
Caino  is  (K)nn\stic  in  his  tastes  and  de- 
votedly attached  to  his  wife  and  chil- 
dren, whose  affection  for  him  is  like- 
wise unbounded.— Compiled  principally 
from  sketches  by  Orson  F.  AVhitney 
and  Byron  Groo. 

CAKKLKSS,  George  Edward  Per*  y, 

director  of  the  Tabernacle  Choir  for 
several  years, was  born  Sept.  24,  1839,  in 
London,  England.  He  was  baptized  and 
confirmed  a  member  of  the  Church  by 
Elder  John  Hyde.  Oct.  6,  18.50.  and  was 
later  ordained  to  the  Pii^stlood  and 
labored  in  different  poFitions  in  the 
London  branch  for  fourteen  years.  In 
1864  he  emigrated  to  Utah  and  located 
in  Salt  Lake  City,  where  he  became  a 
member  of  the  sixth  quoium  of  Seven- 
ty. As  a  boy,  Bro.  Careless  exhibited 
marked  budding  musical  talent  and  be- 
came a  student  in  the  Royal  Academy 
of  London,  afterward  taking  orchestral 
positions  under  the  baton  of  several 
prominent  leaders,  playing  in  Exeter 
Hall,  Drury  Lane  and  the  Crystal  Pal- 
ace, in  concert,  operas  and  oraorios 
when  the  performers  reached  into  the 
thousands.  Having  received  the  gos- 
pel, his  musical  ability  was  in  requi- 
sition as  a  director  of  the  choir  and 
at  ail  the  gatherings  of  the  Saints  in 
London,  until  in  1864,  when  he  emigrat- 
ed to  Utah.  Soon  after  his  arrival  in 
Salt  Lake  City  he  became  the  Ua.er 
of  the  theater  orchestra  and-  held  that 
position  first  for  six  years,  and  agan 
at  a  later  period  he  served  a  term  of 
six  years     in     that     caracity,     maVing 


twelve  years  altogether.  Musical 
dramas  were  successfully  produced  un- 
der his  direction,  and  he  was  appointed 
conductor  of  the  Tabernacle  choir,  re- 
taining that  supreme  position  for  four- 
teen years.  In  1875  Professor  Careless 
made  the  first  grand  effort  at  oratorio 
with  the  "Messiah,"  having  a  combina- 
tion of  soloists  and  instrumenta  ists 
'■partly  'Mormons'  and  i  artly  outsid- 
ers." In  1879  he  organized  the  Ca:  e- 
less  orchestra  and  for  seven  years  he 
regularly  gave  orchestral  concerts, 
which  grew  in  public  favor  and  esteem, 
and  were  not  only  satisfactory  from 
an  artistic  standpoint,  but  weie  a  so 
financial  successes.  The  receipts  for 
the  first  concert  were  about  $500,  while 


the  last  one  brought  in  $1,000.  He  was 
a  partner  for  some  years  with  DavU 
<^.  Calder,  together  with  whom  he  jub- 
lished  the  "Musical  Times,"  the  first 
publication  of  its  kind  in  the  Rocky 
Mountains.  To  publish  music  in  i  ro- 
per type  was,  however,  reserved  for  a 
later  serial,  "The  Utah  Magazine."  In 
orchestral  and  operatic  pres?ntation, 
the  professor  has  had  no  equal  and  no 
successor.  His  success  in  the  "Mika- 
do." "Pinafore,"  etc.,  and  as  an  or- 
ganizer was  pre-eminent.  This  was 
the  secret  of  his  phenomenal  succ  S5 
in  presenting  Handel's  famous  "Mes- 
siah." The  labor  attending  this  can 
hardly  be  computed,  for  but  one  of  his 
instrumentalists,  soloists  or  chorus  had 
ever  heard  that  magnificent  work;  yet 
patient,  willing,  and  the  inspiration  be- 
gotten   of    loving    confidence    cementei 


BIOGRAPHICAL    ENCYCLOPEDIA. 


739 


the  incongruous  and  untrained  e'.e- 
ments  into  one,  until  all  the  critics  were 
astonished  and  both  the  press  and  the 
public  vied  in  appreciated  enconium. 
Soon  after  his  arrival  in  Utah,  Elder 
Careless  married  Miss  Lavinia  Triplett, 
who  was  an  associate  with  him  in  the 
London  choir.  She  was  an  unusually 
gifted  woman.  As  a  composer,  Pro- 
fessor Careless  is  counted  by  musicians 
as  among  the  solid  ones  of  our  time; 
his  versatility  never  degeneiates  intj 
levity,  and  his  sacred  music,  from  th? 
dirge-like  melody  of  "Rest  for  the 
weary  soul,"  to  the  semi-jub  lant 
"Hark,  listen  to  the  trumpeters,  they 
call  for  volunteers,"  is  certainly  of  wide 
range.  But  in  the  Psalmody  it  will 
be  seen  that  while  he  ran  the  whole 
gamut  of  expression,  he  in  every  in- 
stance subordinated  his  musical  fancy 
to  the  words.  There  is  a  fitness,  an 
appropriateness,  which  tells  how  faith- 
fully he  entered  into  the  spirit  of  the 
writers  and  interpreted  their  motive 
with  the  faculty  of  the  connoisseur  and 
the  precision  of  the  master.  His  su- 
premacy was  ackhowledged  by  his  co- 
adjutors in  both  editions  of  the  Psalm- 
ody, when  they  made  him  their  leaier 
in  that  delicate  work,  where  his  in- 
spiration and  talent  had  such  scope 
that  all  Israel  now  sings  ani  will  con- 
tinue to  sing  his  music  long  after  he 
has  passed  from  earth.  In  1888,  E  der 
Careless  married  Jane  Davis,  daugh- 
ter of  Edward  W.  Davis,  and  since  his 
retirement  from  an  unusually  busy  life, 
he  has  quietly  resided  in  the  First 
Ward,  Salt  Lake  City,  where  he  still 
gives  his  time  to  extending  the  know- 
ledge and  love  of  his  fascinating  pro- 
fession, giving  lessons  in  voice  tra  n- 
ing,  violin,  piano,  cabinet  organ,  har- 
mony and  sight-reading,  a  prcgram 
which  exhibits  capacity  and  atility 
such  as  only  long  experience  could  ven- 
ture upon  and  real  worth  fully  sus- 
tain. 

BEESLEY,  Ebenezer,  director  of  the 
Tabernacle  choir  from  1880  to  1889,  was 
born  Dec.  14,  1840,  at  Bicester,  Oxford- 
shire, England,  eldest  son  of  Wm.  S. 
Beesley  and  Susannah  Edwards.  As  a 
child  Brother  Beeseley  was  naturally 
endowed  with  musical  talent,  which 
showed  itself  as  early  as  the  age  of  two 
years.  At  that  time  the  Wesleyan 
Methodist  choir  of  his  native  town  met 


for  practice  at  the  home  of  his  parents. 
The  child  was  found  to  be  joining  in 
the  singing  and  was  soon  able  to  take 
his  part  with  the  rest;  in  fact.  Brother 
Beesley  does  not  remember  the  time 
when  he  could  not  sing.  When  he  was 
six  years  old  some  prominent  ladies  of- 
fered to  have  him  trained  as  a  choir  boy 
at  St.  George's  Chapel,  Windsor,  but  his 
parents  could  not  consent  to  part  with 
him,  as  he  was  then  the  only  child,  his 
younger  brother  having  recently  died. 
He  is  now  thankful  that  he  remained 
with  his  parents,  for  they  soon  after- 
wards joined  the  Church  of  Jesus  Christ 
of  Latter-day  Saints,  and  thus  he  be- 
came acquainted  with  the  goapel  as  re- 


vealed by  God  in  these  days.  He  was 
baptized  Sept.  22,  1849,  by  Elder  Thos. 
Tanner,  at  Woodburn  Green,  Bucking- 
hamshire, and  emigrated  to  Utah  in 
1859,  crossing  the  Atlantic  in  the  ship 
"Wm.  Tapscott,"  and  the  plains  in  Cap- 
tain Geo.  Rowley's  hand-cart  company; 
arrived  in  Salt  Lake  City,  Sept.  4,  1859. 
He  first  settled  in  Tooele  city,  where  he 
remained  for  a  year  and  a  half,  and  be- 
came identified  with  the  Sunday  school 
work  there.  He  was  also  ordained  a 
Seventy,  Aug.  20,  1860,  by  George  Atkin 
and  became  identified  with  the  43rd 
quorum  of  Seventy.  In  1861  he  removed 
to  the  Nineteenth  Ward,  Salt  Lake  City, 
where  he  was  called  upon  by  Superin- 
tendent William  Asper  to  lead  the  sing- 
ing in  the  Sunday  school.  There  were 
no  Sunday  school  song  books  in  use  at 
that  time,  and  the  music  had  to  be  cop- 
ied by  hand.     This  eventually  gave  rise 


740 


LATTER-DAY    SAINT 


to  the  call  on  the  "Juvenile  Instructor" 
to  print  songs  with  the  music,  to  which 
request    the    publishers    promptly    res- 
ponded.      The  publication     of     Sunday 
school  songs,  mostly  by  our  own    com- 
jtosers,    has    been   continued    up    to   the 
present    time.     Brother  Beesley   under- 
taking the  labor  of  revising  and  prepar- 
ing the  music  for  the  printer  for  many 
years.      Brother  Beesley    also    led    the 
Nineteenth  Ward  choir  for  a  number  of 
years,  and  under  his  leadership  many  of 
our  present  best  known  singers  gained 
their  first  experience  in  public  singing. 
Soon  after  arriving  in  Salt  Lake  City, 
Elder  Beesley  began  a  systematic  study 
of   the    violin    under   Professor   Charles 
J.  Thomas,  and  in  1863  joined  the  Thea- 
ter orchestra,     of  which     he  is     still     a 
member.     Later,    he   studied   the  violin 
and    harmony   under   Professor    George 
Careless,  and  soon  after  commenced  to 
compose  Sunday  school  and  other  hymn 
tunes   for   general   use.     He   has   taken 
particular  interest  in     compiling     these 
productions  and  also   those  of  his  fel- 
low   composers     into  book    form.     The 
first  of  Brother  Beesley's  books  was  a 
small    pamphlet,    containing    the    most 
frequently   used   congregational    hymns 
set  to  the  old  tunes;  next  came  a  larger 
book  of  hymns    and    a,nthems    for    the 
Tabernacle  choir.     Then  he  compiled  a 
book  of  songs  and  hymns  to  be  used  in 
the  mutual  improvement     associations. 
He    also    compiled    and    supervised    the 
publication     of     the      present     Sunday 
School  Union  Song  Book,  being  assisted 
in  this  labor  by  Elder  Thos.  C.  Griggs. 
His    latest   efforts,    in    the    direction    of 
music  books,  was  the  production  of  the 
Latter-day   Saints   Psalmody,   he  being 
the  prime  mover  in  the  matter.    In  this 
he  called  to  his  aid  such  composers  as 
George    Careless,     Joseph     J.     Daynes, 
Evan  Stephens  and  Thomas  C.  Griggs. 
Brother  Beesley,  however,  had  general 
oversight  of  the  work,  and  in  addition 
to  writing  many  new  pieces,   arranged 
the  old   tunes  for  congregational   sing- 
ing,   and    made    many    selections    from 
other  composers.     All   this,    with   proof 
reading,    etc.,    required    constant    labor 
for  many  months,  but  the  Psalmody,  or 
its  completion,  proved  at  once  lo  be  of 
great  assistance  to    the    choirs    of    the 
Church  everywhere.     During     the     ab- 
sence of  Professors  Thomas  and  Care- 
less, for  several  months  he  took  charge 
of  the  Salt  Lake  Theater  orchestra,  and 
enjoyed  the  support  of  many  of  Utah's 


best  instrumentalists.     In  August,  1880, 
he  was  appointed  leader  of  the  Taber- 
nacle choir,  and  held  that  position  for 
over  nine  years;  and  by  the  assistance 
of  the  orchestra  was  enabled     to     give 
several  successful  concerts  in  Salt  Lake 
City  and  the  adjacent  towns.    After  re- 
tiring from  the  Taber^iacle  choir.  Bro- 
ther   Beesley,    by   invitation    of    Bishop 
Thomas  Atkins,   of  Tooele  city,  moved 
again  to  that  quiet  little  town  for  the 
purpose    of    training      the      choir     and 
teaching   music.       He   remained     there 
four  and  a  half  years,  then  removed  to 
Lehi,   Utah  county,   where  he  followed 
the   same   ]ine   of   work   for   two  years. 
During  th       period  he  had  the  satisfac- 
tion Oi.    .  .  mg  the  two  choirs  which  he 
had   trained   take   the   first   and   second 
prizes   at    the   Eisteddfod   given   in   the 
Salt   Lake   Tabernacle   in   1898,   and   he 
now  possesses  a  gold  medal  which  was 
presented     to   him   on     that     occasion. 
Brother   Beesley  was   for   many   years, 
and  is  still,  captain  of  the  martial  band 
attached  to  the  second  regiment  of  the 
Nauvoo  Legion.     The  Union  Glee  Club 
and  other  musical    societies    might    be 
mentioned  wherein  he  has  taken  an  ac- 
tive  part   and   enjoyed   the   association 
of  congenial  friends.     Now  in  his  more 
advanced  years  he  is  enjoying  the  satis- 
faction of  having  spent  the  most  of  his 
past  life  in  his  favorite  ocupation,  and 
in  nothing  does  he  feel  more  pride  than 
in  the  good  he     has  been     able     to  do 
among  the  youth  of  Zlon. 

STEPHENS,  Evan,  director  of  the 
Tabernaele  Choir,  was  born  June  28, 
1854,  in  the  village  of  Pencader,  Car- 
marthenshire, South  Wales,  tenth 
child  of  David  and  Jane  Stephens.  The 
home  of  the  family  at  the  time  was  a 
small  straw-thatched  cottage,  and  his 
parents  were  compelled  to  toil  long 
hours  and  practice  rigid  economy  in 
order  t<'  feed  and  clo'^-»,  in  comfort 
and  decency,  their  multifarious  off- 
spring. His  father  followed  the  occupa- 
tion cf  a  farm  laborer.  Little  Evan 
was  a  sickly,  puny  babe  and  there  were 
many  and  grave  doubts  as  to  whether 
he  would  not,  at  a  tender  age,  be  re- 
tired from  the  battle  of  life  by  the 
spectre  which  sooner  or  later  overtakes 
all  mankind.  But  he  survived  the  ills 
and  ijfrils  of  childhood,  and  as  matur- 
ity approached  developed  a  stronger 
const ilution;  though  he  was  never  a 
robust  man,  physically.    All  the  family 


BIOGRAPHICAL    ENCYCLOPEDIA. 


741 


fipoko  their  ancient  native  tongue,  and 
before  the  age  of  six  Evan  began  to 
attend  the  village  school,  which  was  a 
strictly  English  one,  and  he  did  not 
urdervland  a  word  of  that  language. 
Bel^\  een  the  ages  of  six  and-  ten  years 
he  spent  much  of  his  time  in  school; 
but  his  earnings  were  needed  for  family 
expenses,  and  when  ten  years  old  he 
was  employed  on  a  farm  to  herd  cattle 
and  tiheep,  and  perform  such  other  la- 
bor as  he  was  capable  of.  His  brothers 
and  sisters  were  all  obliged  to  earn,  .or 
aid  in  earning,  their  own  living,  at  an 
early  age,  and  he  did  likewise.  His 
parents  were  both  Latter-day  Saints 
prior  to  his  birth,  and  he  was  baptized 
when  about  eight  years  old.    The  meet 


ings  of  the  local  branch  were  held  at 
the  home  of  his  family,  and  at  least 
some  of  the  features  of  the  religious  ex- 
ercises made  deep  impressions  upon 
his  mind  at  a  very  early  age.  Speaking 
of  his  earliest  recollections  of  the 
singing  of  hymns,  he  says  that  the  ef- 
fect it  had  upon  him  was  poetical 
rather  than  musical.  The  singing  was 
all  in  one  part,  and  to  him  was  not 
very  impressive;  but  he  always  noted 
Ihe  metre  of  the  hymns,  and  readily 
knew  what  tune  was  suited  to  a  given 
one.  In  1866,  when  he  w-as  tweU'e  years 
old,  his  parerts.  with  some  of  their 
children,  including  him,  migrated  from 
their  native  country  to  Utah.  An  el- 
der son  Thomas  and  a  daughter  Ann 
had  preceded  the  rest  of  the  family, 
and  were  living  in  Willard.  Box  Elder 
county  and  it  was  through  aid  extend- 
ed by  them  that  the  parents  and  other 


children  were  enabled  to  make  the  jour- 
nev.  The  immigrating  family  reached 
Salt  Lake  City,  Oct.  2,  1866,  and  a  week 
later  went  to  Willard,  Box  Elder  county, 
where  they  settled.  The  experiences 
and  environments  into  which  young 
r.van  plunged,  and  which  engaged  and 
surrounded  him  during  the  following 
twelve  years  were  certainly  not  of  a 
character  ordinarily  supposed  to  tend 
towards  the  development  of  musical 
talent.  They  were  so  completely  the 
reverse  of  this  that  the  wonder  is  they 
di.l  r.ot  smother  every  smoldering 
musical  flame  in  the  soul  of  the  young 
immigrant.  A  boy  of  twelve,  and  by  no 
n.ear:^^  robust,  he  became  a  farm  hand, 
his  wages  being  his  board.  Evan  was 
most  of  the  time,  summer  and  winter, 
a  hired  hand  with  some  of  the  farmers 
I,  the  little  town  of  Willard.  First 
he  herded  sheep  and  performed  the 
lighter  kinds  of  farm  labor,  and  as  he 
crew  older  he  was  compelled  to  ac- 
;,uire  an  experience  in  the  h-^^^J-^^ 
of  farm  work,  hauling  wood  from  the 
mountains,  etc.  Even  the  humble  and 
Tborious  employment  of  a  ^od  earner 
was  embraced  in  the  regiment  an  ove<^- 
ruling  Providence  had  laid  out  for  him^ 
and^or  some  years  he  carried  rock  and 
inortar  to  build  several  residences  in 
Willard.  When  about  nineteen  years 
old  Evan  Stephens  changed  his  em- 
ployment as  a  farm  hand  and  common 
aborer  to  become  a  section  hand  on  the 
Vtah  Northern  railroad.  He  regarded 
this  as  a  decided  promotion,  "was  a 
change  that  brought  him  cash  for 
wages,  instead  of  grain,  livestock,  etc 
in  which  his  employers  had  usually 
settled  their  scores  with  him.  This 
change  brought  another  advantage,  foi 
Lt  his  new  employment  he  had  to  work 

ten  hours  a  day.  whereas  farm  work 
and  chores  filled  in  all  the  time 
from  sunrise  till  sunset.  He 
thus  found  a  little  time  in  which 
to  study  music.  At  the  time  he 
went  to  Willard  that  place  pos- 
sessed an  unusually  good  ^hoir  for 
,hose  days,  and  at  the  first  Sabbath 
service  the  boy  attended,  he  %yas 
charmed  by  the  singing.  He  soon  be- 
came greatly  attt.ched  to  its  leader. 
Daniel  Tovey.  who  ere  long  enlisted 
him  as  an  alto  boy.  in  which  capacity 
he  soon  became  a  valued  member  of  the 
choir.  Not  long  after  he  joined  the 
choir  he  was  seized  with  an  intense 
longing   to    learn    to   read   music.      For 


742 


LATTER-DAY    SAINT 


ihis  purpose  he  quietly  borrowed  some 
(;f  the  choir  books,  and.  unaided,  tried 
to  grasp  the  signiticanie  of  the  notes. 
He  at  length  managed  to  leain  a  few 
i/asy  tunes.  No  one  knew  what  he  was 
trying  to  do,  consequently  he  had  no 
assistance.  He  was  now  thirteen  years 
(if  age,  and  excessively  timid  and  bash- 
lul.  It  was  these  (jualities  that  pre- 
vented nim  from  seeking  help.  His 
love  for  music  grew,  and  soon  the  te- 
.lium  of  farm  work  begun  to  be  ac- 
companied by  a  longing-  in  the  boys 
heart  to  write  music  of  his  own;  when 
he  was  about  fourteen  years  old, 
Brother  Tovey,  the  leader  of  the  choir, 
and  several  of  its  members,  to  whom 
I  he  boy  was  much  attached,  removed 
from  Willard  to  Malad  valley.  Young 
Kvan  would  gladly  have  gone  with 
them,  had  not  his  parents  objected. 
Brother  David  P.  Jone.s,  who  had 
iielped  the  boy  to  become  an  alto  sing- 
er, now  became  leader  of  the  choir,  and 
Evan  was  satisfied  to  continue  sing- 
mg  under  him.  About  this  time  Evan's 
biothej-  Jolin  arrived  from  Wales, 
'iringing  some  new  tune  books,  and  the 
loimer  was  permitted  to  feast  on  their 
contents.  At  this  time  also,  Evan  was 
employed  by  a  stone  mason,  whose 
name  was  Shadrach  Jones,  and  who 
was  a  lover  of  music  and  the  choir  s 
basso.  While  the  boy  helped  him  build 
walls,  Brother  Jones  would  talk  to  him 
of  leading  Welsh  musicians,  and  even 
of  Handel,  the  greatest  master.  Evan's 
brother  John  who  was  homesick  for  his 
beloved  Wales,  with  its  feasts  of  music, 
would  describe  to  him  the  grand  choral 
contests  of  the  Welsh  people,  "thus  in- 
si)iring  me,"  as  Professor  Stephens 
lately  said  to  the  writer,  "to  new  and 
delightful  efforts,  and  day-dreams  of 
i<rand  performances,  though  1  really 
thought  nothing  of  myself  in  connec- 
tion with  them;  but  my  imagination 
reveled  in  such  conceptions."  While 
Evan  was  still  "clerking"  for  the 
.7iusical  mason,  Brother  Shadrach 
Jones,  in  other  words,  carrying  the  hod 
for  him.  Brother  Edward  Woozley 
came  direct  from  Wales  to  take  charge 
<<f  the  choir,  and  organize  a  brass  band, 
lit  Willard.  The  new  choir  leader 
brought  with  him  a  large  quantity  of 
fine  music,  the  kind  described  by 
Evan's  brother.  He  liked  boy  altos, 
and  soon  made  Evan  their  leader.  The 
latter  copied  nis  part,  and  generally 
the    entire    piece,    and    soon    formed    a 


taste  for  really  classical  vocal  music. 
But  the  band  he  did  not  like,  and,  much 
to  the  annoyance  of  Brother  Woozley, 
always  refused  to  take  part  in  it.  Evan 
had  entered  his  sixteenth  year  when 
his  brother  Thomas  bought  a  four-oc- 
tave cabinet  organ.  Fortune  overruled 
that  Evan  should  spend  some  months 
at  home  that  winter,  and  he  thus  began 
to  play  on  what  has  always  been  his 
favorite  instrument.  At  this  time  he 
was  growing  fast  and  working  hard, 
but  his  passion  for  music  rapidly  in- 
creased in  intensity.  Every  leisure 
moment  was  occupied  in  reading,  writ- 
ing or  thinking  music.  A  new  impetus 
was  soon  to  be  given  to  his  progress 
in  music,  and  of  the  circumstances  at- 
tending' it  he  speaks  in  the  following 
.strain,  tinged  with  a  peculiar  humor 
which  is  one  of  his  characteristics:  "A 
visit  to  Salt  Lake  City,  for  the  pur- 
pose of  attending  conference,  enabled 
me  to  hear  the  great  organ  and  the 
Tabernacle  Choir,  and  to  witness  a  con- 
cert in  the  Fifteenth  Ward  under  the 
direction  of  Thomas  C.  Griggs;  also  to 
become  acquainted  with  the  tithing 
yard  as  a  fashionable  resort,  with  its 
softly  perfumed  manure  piles  on  which 
to  slumber.  It  was  many  years  before 
I  sought  any  other  stopping  place  in 
Salt  Lake  City."  Speaking  of  the  same 
visit  Professor  Stephens  says:  "It  was 
during  this  visit  that  I  entered  the 
Tabernacle  in  true  country  style,  minus 
coat,  when,  under  the  shadow  of  the 
great  organ,  I  was  asked  to  return  to 
my  hotel  and  don  that  article,  which 
was,  even  then,  in  Salt  Lake  City, 
deemed  essential  on  such  an  occasion. 
I  haven't  got  to  the  dress  coat  yet,  and 
I  know  not  how  soon  I  may  receive 
a  similar  invitation  to  either  vacate  or 
appear  in  that  becoming  garment."  In 
1870.  when  he  >vas  in  his  seventeenth 
year,  he  worked  on  the  read  in  Little 
Cottonwood  canyon  for  some  months, 
and  music  slumbered.  But  on  his  re- 
turn to  Willard  it  was  taken  up  again. 
This  year,  during  the  abscnre  of  the 
choir  leader,  Brother  Jones,  Evan  was 
invited  to  take  his  place.  The  Wil- 
lard choir  had  been  invited  to  take 
part  with  the  Tabernacle  choir,  under 
Professor  George  Careless,  at  the  Oc- 
tober conference,  and  there  were  twen- 
ty-four hymn  tunes  ani  an  nems  to 
learn  in  two  months.  Evan  had  man- 
aged to  purchase,  with  wheat,  a  small 
cabinet   organ,    which   was   kept   in    the 


BIOGRAPHICAL    ENCYCLOPEDIA. 


743 


JU.hing    granary,    above    the    bins,    that 
he    might    practice    without    disturbing 
any  one  after  work  hour-=.       He  could 
play  the  hymn  tunes,  but  not  the  more 
difficult   anthems,    and    as    he   was   the 
only  organist,  and  his  the  only  organ, 
in  town,  the  hardest  part  of  the  work 
of   preparing    for   the   conference     was 
done  witht  the  voice  alon?.      The  "Hal- 
lelujah   chorus"    from    Handel's    "Mes- 
siah"  was    the   most   difficult   and     the 
first   of    the    twenty-four       pines     the 
young    leader    undertook    to    fac'i    his 
choir.      The  latter  sang  it  at  home  be- 
fore   going   to    conference.      The    rising 
young  musician  had,  by  this  time,  com- 
posed  considerable       music,       some   of 
which  was  sung  at  local  concerts  given 
during  the   winter  of  1870-71.       During 
this  winter  and  most  of  th  >  time  until 
he    ceased    manual    labor,    eight    years 
later,  he  carried  out.  in  additon  to  his 
other   duties,    substantially   the   follow- 
ing   program    of    musical      work     each 
week:    As     organist    for    th^      Sabbath 
school,   he  performed  at  one  rehearsal, 
and    on    Sunday    morning;    he    led    the 
choir    at    two    meetings     and      one    re- 
hearsal: and  when  concerts  were  given, 
one  or  two  additional   rehearsals  were 
held;    and    he    led    the    singing   at    one 
([uorum   meeting.        Th  re    we  e    aided 
to  his  weekly  musical  woik,  a  portion 
of  the  time,  one  or  two  glee  club  prac- 
tices,   and    the       training    of    a    music 
reading  class.       On  reaching  his  twen- 
tieth   year   he    was    a    railrcad    section 
hand,  happy  in  the  thought   that  with 
a   day's     work  of   only   ten   hours,     he 
would    have    more   leisure      time     than 
heretofore  to  devote  to  music.       Up  to 
this  time  his  musical  compositions  had 
been    written    at    odd    moments,      but 
now,   after    work  hours,    he   could   give 
more   time,    and    with   greater   regular- 
ity, to  music.       He  read  much  of  such 
general    literature    as    was    within    his 
reach,  and  was  very  fond  of  potry  and 
the  drama.      He  had  been  a  member  of 
a  dramatic  association  for  two  or  three 
years.       Several  of  his  plays  had   been 
performed  to  the  immense  satisfaction 
of  the  good  people  of  Willaid        Seme 
of    them    were   musical    dramas,    which 
after    having    been    successfully    given 
in  Willard,  were  repeated  in  Logan,  af- 
ter   his    removal    to    the    latter    place. 
For  nearly  five  years  he  was  a  railroad 
section  hand,  usually  spending  the  win- 
ter in  shoveling  snow   or  gravel   in   the 


mountains  which  divide  Salt  Lake  and 
<'ache   valleys.       It    was    this    employ- 
ment that  first  took  him   to  Logan,  at 
which  time  he  was  about   twenty-four 
years  old.       In  1879   the   Logan  Taber- 
nacle choir  needed  an  organist.         The 
leader,    Prof.    Alex.    Lewis,    had    heard 
Evan  Stephens  play,  one  evening,  while 
the  latter  was  on  a  snow  shoveling  ex- 
pedition    to     Logan,    and   wa-i    pleased 
with   the    performance.       Prof.      Lewis 
wrote  to  the  young  man,   asl  ing  if  he 
would    be    willing    to    come    to    Logan, 
provided    employment    were    found    for 
him  at  the   railroad   shops  there.       He 
had   been   receiving  as  a   railrcad   sec- 
tion hand,  $37.50  per  month,  and  when 
a  letter  came  offering  him  $<i   per  day. 
he  hesitated  no  longer.      He  became  an 
inmate  of  the  household  of  Prof.  Lewis, 
and  he  speaks  most  gratefully    and  af- 
fectionately of  the  home  he  had  there. 
His   connection   with   the   Logan  choir, 
which  even  at  that  time  was  a  splen- 
did       organization,    gave    him    intens? 
satisfaction,  and   it   was   his  delight   to 
accompany    its    singing    on    the    organ. 
But     the     daily     labor     by     which     he 
earned       his      bread,       embittered     his 
life.       He     was    striker     for     a    black- 
smith,   an    extra      cross      one,      "made 
more  so  perhaps,"  says, Prof.  Stephens, 
■by  my  incapacity.     I  was  not  master 
of  my  arm  beat."    He  adds:     "This  was 
the  second  occupation  in  life  that  I  had 
tried     and     Avhich     I     thoroughly     de- 
tested.    The   other   was   working   on    a 
threshing    machine,    especially    at    the 
chaff  end."     Six   weeks   of  striking  for 
a  blacksmith  was  all  he  could  endure, 
and    he    returned    to   Willard.      But    he 
was   immediately    urged   to   come   back 
to  Logan  as  a  music  teacher,  and  after 
holding   the   matter    under   advisement 
a  .short  time,  decided  to  do  this.     This 
decision    launched    him    on    an    upward 
and     onward     course     of     remarkable 
swiftness,   and  from  the  time  when  he 
put    it    into    execution,    which    was    in 
the  month  of  April,  1880,  dates  his  ca- 
reer   as    a    professional    musician.      He 
began  by  giving  eight  or  ten  hour  les- 
sons daily  to  private  pupils  on  the  or- 
gan, but  soon  had  singing  classes,  both 
juvenile    and    adult.     He    had    had    ex- 
perience in  singing  class  work  in  Wil- 
lard,  where  most  of  the   young  people 
in  town  had  been  under  his  instruction. 
From    the    outset    of    his    career    as    a 
teacher.    Professor   Evan    Stephens   has 


744 


LATTER-DAY    SAINT 


had  both  a  penchant  and  a  talent  for 
teaching  singing  on  a  wholesale  plan. 
Large  classes  have  been  his  forte,  and 
the  larger  they  are  the  better  pleased 
he  seems.  He  has  always  appeared 
able,  ever  since  he  began  teaching 
music,  to  draw  children  and  young 
people  to  him  in  immense  numbers.  A 
number  of  times  during  Stake  confer- 
ences Evan  Stephens  gave  concerts  in 
I^ogan,  which  surprised  and  delighted 
the  people,  and  attracted  the  attention 
of  some  of  the  general  authorities  of 
the  Church.  These  entertainments 
practically  demonstrated  his  ability  to 
accomplish  remarkable  results  in  the 
training  of  singing  classes  composed 
of  the  crudest  material.  Something- 
over  two  years  had  thus  been  spent 
in  Logan  (during  which  time  a  num- 
ber of  airs  and  Sunday  School  tunes. 
composed  by  Evan  Stephens,  had  be- 
come popular  throughout  the  Terri- 
tory), when  finding  himself  financially 
able  to  do  so,  he  determined  to  spend 
some  time  in  Salt  Lake  City  for  the 
purpose  of  studying  the  pipe  organ.  He 
began  this  study  in  March,  18S2,  under 
Professor  Joseph  J.  Daynes,  but  ere 
long  the  officers  of  the  Deseret  Sunday 
School  Union  requested  him  to  organ- 
ize classes  of  Sabbath  school  children 
and  teach  them  to  sing,  as  he  had  done 
in  AVillard  and  Logan.  He  responded 
and  soon  was  giving  instruction  to  2.')0 
children,  gratis.  After  some  months 
of  training,  the  little  ones  sang  in  a 
concert  given  in  the  Salt  Lake  Theatre, 
an  entertainment  which  cleared  ex- 
penses, and  created  a  demand  for  more 
.iuvehile  singing  classes.  Within  a 
Meek  400  new  pui)ils  were  added,  and 
this  movement  led  to  a  series  of  con- 
certs given  in  the  Tabernacle,  at  which 
.iuvenile  choruses,  embracing  hundreds 
of  children,  sang.  These  concerts  were 
all  given  partly  for  the  benefit  of  some 
public  institution,  and  partly  to  sustain 
the  classes.  After  three  years  of  study 
and  labor  in  Salt  Lake  City,  during 
which  time  he  had  enlisted  the  sym- 
pathy and  co-operation  of  the  then 
leading  vocalists  of  the  city  by  his  un- 
stinted aid  to  their  progress.  Professor 
Stephens  began  to  foster  a  longing  de- 
sire to  go  east.  He  wished  to  ascertain 
where  he  really  .stood  in  music,  and 
what  his  deficiencies  were,  and  to  take 
a  course  of  study.  About  the  time  he 
began    to    entertain    this    purpose,    the 


litigation  in  which  the  Church  was  in- 
volved compelled  the  disuse  of  the  Tab- 
ei'nacle  for  entertainments  requiring  an 
iidmission  fee;  but  Professor  Stephens 
had  been  preparing  his  juvenile  classes 
for  a  concert  in  that  building,  and  he 
gave  it  at  his  own  expense,  admission 
being  free.  However,  a  few  enthusias- 
tic friends  reimbursed  him  for  most  of 
his  outlay.  This  concert  was  given  in 
May,  188."),  and  immediately  thereafter 
Professor  Stephens  went  to  Boston, 
where  he  remained  ten  months,  study- 
ing under  George  Chadwick  and 
George  E.  "Whiting,  at  the  New 
F.ngland  conservatory  of  music.  Owing 
to  the  Tabernacle  being  no  longer  used 
for  any  excejit  free  entertainments, 
Prof.  Stephens  saw  no  encouragement 
in  continuing  to  organize  and  teach 
large  juvenile  classes.  He  therefore 
formed  some  adult  classes,  which  grew 
in  proficiency  until  they  could  study 
oi)eras;  and  at  length  out  of  them  was 
evolved  the  Stephens"  Opera  Company, 
■,\  h 'Ch  embraced  a  large  number  of 
young  ladies  and  gentlemen  who  could 
.'^irg.  and  flourished  during  the  years 
J^S:-.  and  1889.  This  organization  per- 
formed "The  Bohemian  Girl," 
■ -Martha"  and  "Daughter  of  the  Regi- 
ment" very  creditably,  and  to  immense 
audiences,  in  the  Salt  Lake  Theatre.  In 
1889,  the  Tabernacle  was  again  opened 
for  concerts,  and  the  great  muscian 
Gilmoie  arranged  to  give  one  in  it. 
Prof.  Stephens  was  engaged  to  organ- 
ize and  train  a  chorus  for  the  occasion, 
and  did  so,  thereby  adding  to  his  repu- 
tation. After  the  Gilmore  concert,  the 
membeis  of  the  chorus  desired  to  re- 
tain Prof.  Stephens  as  instructor,  and 
the  result  was  the  organization,  in  1889, 
of  the  Salt  Lake  Choral  Society,  with 
him  us  director.  This  organization  em- 
braced a  membership  numbering  about 
four  hundred,  and  included  most  of  the 
amateur  musical  talent  of  the  city. 
Prof.  Stephens  labored  ardently  as  its 
instructor.  In  1890  the  society  gave  a 
musical  festival  which  was  a  great  suc- 
cess, and  in  the  following  year  it  gave 
another  similar  entertainment,  at  which 
appeared  the  noted  singers  Emma 
Thursby  and  Myron  B.  Whitney  at 
a  stilary  of  $2,000.  The  following  two 
years,  Haydn's  "Creation"  and  Dudley 
Buck's  "Ligh  of  Asia"  were  given  with 
much  success.  The  success  of  this 
society,  and  the  excellence  of  its  per- 
formances,   led    to    the   desire,    that     a 


BIOGRAPHICAL    ENCYCLOPEDIA. 


745 


Tabeniacle     choir     of  large  dimensions 
iihould  be  built  up.  and  Prof.  Stephens 
was  requested  by  the  general  authori- 
ties   of    the    Church    to    undertake    the 
task.     He  was  appointed  director  of  the 
Tabernacle      choir.      and      within      six 
months  the  number  of  its  members  had 
been    increased    to    300.      This    increase 
in  the    size    of  the    choir    necessitated 
some        alterations       in        that        part 
of  the  Tabernacle   ocupied  by   it.     The 
changes      wei-e      suggested      by      Prof. 
Stephens,   and  made  under  the  skillful 
ciirccticu   <:f   the   Church   architect,   Jo- 
seph D.  C.  Young.     The  cost  was  paid 
]}artly    by    the   Church   and   partly    out 
of   funds   raised   by   concerts   given    by 
the  choir.    The  improvement  was  found 
to  benefit  the  accoustics  of  the  building 
so  much   that  the  hanging  decorations 
withii:  it  could  be  removed.    Soon  after 
this,  in  1892.  Prof.  Stephens  again  took 
tip  (eaching  the  children  by  wholesale, 
and   <;rganized   a   choir   of   twelve   hun- 
dren    jti\enlle    voices,    for    preparatory 
tiaining.     The     little     ones      did    good 
work,    but   on   account   of   the   indiffer- 
ence of  patents,   this  organization  was 
disbanded  in  1894.     At  the  present  time 
the  Tabernacle  choir  has  over    six  hun- 
dred   eitrolled    members,    and    while    it 
has,  for  many  years,  been  a  noted  bodv 
of    singers,    the    last    eleven    years   has 
seen  it  aca.uire  a  world-wide  fame.  Two 
hurdred   snd   fifty  of  its  members   en- 
tered thi  contest  at  the  World's  Fair  in 
1893,  and  won  the  second  prize  of  $1,000 
bfsides   giving   very   sucessful   concerts 
in  Denver,  Kansas  City.  St.  Louis,  Chi- 
cago and  Omaha  en  route.     From  1885 
to   1900,    Prof.    Stephens   had   charge   of 
vocal  music  at  the  University  of  Utah, 
during    which    time    several    thousand 
studL-nljj  of  iliat    institution  have  been 
taught  to  read   and  teach  music,   in  a 
simple  and  ( ff-otive  manner.     His   en- 
ergetic work,  especially  in  class  teach- 
ing,   has    a    marked    effect    in    making 
popular     the     study     of     vocal     music 
throughout   the   entire   State   of     Utah. 
.\bout    three-fourths    of   all    this    labor 
has   been    performed    gratuitously,    and 
the  rest  at  a  nominal   tuition  fee,   sel- 
dom   more    than    one    dol'ar    per    term. 
At  ordinary  prices  of  even  class  teach- 
ing,  the  public  of  the  northern  half  of 
the  Territory,  mainly  of  Salt  Lake  City, 
have      received    not    less    than    $r,0,<"00 
worth    of    vocal    music    lessons    grati=? 
from  Prof.  Evan  Stephens.      Out  of  his 
musical    work   have  grown   the   popular 


concerts   which  have   been   given   from 
time   to   time  under   his   direction,   and 
he   gives   it   as   his   opinion   that     they 
have   done    more    than    any   other   one 
thing  to  keep  musical  interest  alive  and 
growing  in  this  community  during  the 
term   named.       He  has   published   sev- 
eral  text-books   on   music,    mainly   for 
his  own  use,  containing  material  suit- 
able for  applying  his   own  methods  of 
teaching.      Professor  Stephens  was  the 
first,  and,  with  one  exception,  the  only 
person   to  venture   opera   by   local   tal- 
ent on   the  merit  of  its  musical  work. 
Prof.    Stephens  was  the  means  of  fos- 
tering   mUch    good    will    and    harmony 
among  vocalists  of  all  creeds,     by  suc- 
cessfully organizing  and  for  five  years 
Keeping     together     a     choral     society, 
which    gave    several    public    entertain- 
ments and  oratorios.  The  great  growth 
^>nd  success  of  the  Tabernacle  choir  at 
length  compelled  him  to  sever  his  con- 
nection  with   the   former   organization. 
In    1888    he    was    appointed    director   of 
music  for  the  Y".  M.  M.  I.  A.,  and  since 
then  has  done  much  to  introduce  male 
chorus  singing  among  the  members  of 
that  numerous  order.  For  this  purpose 
he   furnished   selections   for   the    "Ccn- 
tributor,"   and  organized  and  managed 
male    chorus    contests    under    the    aus- 
I'ices  of  the  mutual  associations.     These 
measures    have    done    much    to    foster 
male  singing.      Prof.  Stephens  has  done 
much  towards  bringing  into  notice  and 
popularity  home   musical    compositicns 
of  merit.  The  fact  that  anthems,  glees 
and  choruses  composed  by  home  talent 
often  intersperse  the  program  of  a  con- 
cert  given   in  a  Utah  town,   is  largely 
due  to  his  efforts.       He  has  also  had 
the  honor  and  the  labor  of  advancing 
the  study  of  music  in  the  public  schools 
of    Salt    Lake    City.        Since    the    choi^ 
visited  the   "World's  Fair"   it  has  won 
first    prizes    at    two    grand    contests    in 
Salt  Lake  City  also.    It  has  taken  three 
great  excursions  out  of  the  State:   one 
to  Colorado  and  two  to  California.  The 
making  of  the  Tabernacle  choir  a  fin- 
ancial self-supporting  organization,  in- 
cluding these  great  excursions,  has  in- 
volved  the  raising  and   expenditure  of 
nearly  one  hundred   thousand     dollars, 
which   has     been       done     under     Prof. 
Stephens'  management  almost  unaided, 
and  the  two  trips  to  California  entirely 
at  his  own  risk,   without  either  finan- 
cial backing  or  aid  from  any  commit- 
tee.     In  1900  he  took  a  rest,  and  a  visit- 


746 


LATTER-DAY  SAINT 


ing  trip  to  Europe  for  a  few  months, 
since  A\hich  time  he  has  wonderfully 
improved  in  health.  At  present  his 
labors  comprise  the  managing  and  di- 
recting of  the  Tabernacle  choir,  in- 
structing in  vocal  music  in  the  L.  D.  S. 
University,  and  teaching  a  juvenile 
choir  under  the  auspices  of  the  Sabbath 
school.  He  is  also  director  of  music 
for  the  Y.  M.  M.   I.  A. 

I>AYNES,  Joseph  John,  organist  of 
the  Tabernacle,  Salt  Lake  City,  for 
many  years,  was  born  April  2,  1851,  in 
Norwich,  England,  son  of  John  Daynes 
and  Eliza  Miller.  Sanctified  (as  was 
said  of  another)  "from  his  mother's 
knee,"  he  has  been  an  indefatiguable 
worker  from  near  the  beginning  of  his 
;ife,  and  most  likely  before,  for  at  the 
age  of  eighteen  months,  Joseph  J. 
Daynes  first  gav«  evidence  of  inspira- 
tional instinct  by  expressions  of  delight 
on  hearing  both  singing  and  instru- 
mental music.  His  father  (by  pro- 
fession a  watchmaker)  was  allied  with 
a  glee  club  in  his  native  town,  and  the 
family  possessed  a  piano,  which  im- 
plied at  that  time  culture  and  re- 
spectability. When  Joseph  was  four 
years  of  age,  both  the  little  family 
and  some  visitors  were  surprised  to 
hear  him  play  that  old  familiar  Eng- 
lish ballad  called,  "The  Ratcatchei's 
Daughter  "  and  his  progress  was  so  re- 
markable that  before  six  years  of  age 
his  precocious  ability  was  in  requisition 
for  both  concerts  and  sjiecial  enter- 
tainments, even  beyond  the  neighbor- 
hood of  his  birth.  In  1862  the  Daynes 
family,  father,  mother  and  two  chil- 
dren, emigrated  to  Utati,  the  lad  be- 
ing then  about  eleven  years  of  age  and 
quite  small  of  stature.  A  friend  of 
the  family  writes:  "Our  first  memory 
of  the  father  and  son  was  seeing  the 
little  fellow,  apparently  about  seven, 
running  alongside  his  father,  who  car- 
ried, by  a  strap  across  his  shoulder, the 
little  harmonium,  which  we  first  heard 
with  surprise  at  Pettlfs,  on  the  Jor- 
dan river,  near  Salt  Lake  City,  then 
later  in  the  writer's  home,  and  still 
later  (1869)  at  the  funeral  services  of 
a  beloved  wife,  where  Jofeeph  J.  accom- 
panied on  the  piano  those  songs  which 
are  spoken  of  to-day  as  the  most  strik- 
ing and  effective  of  experiences  then 
or  since.  Prior  to  this,  about  1863  or 
1864.   the   writer  had   brought   from   the 


east  for  his  own  Ward  an  organ,  the 
first  in  any  chapel  of  Utah;  and  the 
boy,  then  living  with  his  parents  in 
that  Ward  (the  Twentieth)  naturally 
came  to  the  front  as  its  manipulator, 
and,  of  course,  an  increased  choir,  un- 
der the  father,  enhanced  wonderfully 
the  services  of  the  then  favored  AVard." 
When  Pres.  Brigham  Young,  some  time 
after  their  arrival,  suggested  to  Brother 
Daynes  the  training  of  his  son  by 
Professor  Raymond,  the  latter  conclud- 
ed that  it  would  become  him  better  to 
be  the  pupil  rather  than  the  teacher. 
In  Mai'ch.  186V,  the  organ  donated  by 
the  Saints  in  Australia  was  ready  for 
use,  having  been  set  up  by  Elder  Jo- 
seph H.  Ridges  in  the  Old  Tabernacle, 
in  Salt  Lake  City,  he  having  been  dis- 
patched from  that  continent  on  pur- 
pose. Joseph  J.  Daynes  was  api)ointed 
organist;  and  he  continued  in  that  ser- 
\ice    until    the    new    oi-    big    tabernacle 


was  completed  and  its  mammoth  organ 
ready  for  use.  when  he  accepted  ap- 
liointment  to  this  more  responsiljle  yet 
developing  position.  For  about  thirty- 
three  years  he  labored  incessantly  in 
his  vocation  under  such  choir  leadeis 
as  Professors  George  Careless.  Chailes 
J.  Thomas.  Thos.  C.  Griggs  and  Evan 
Stephens,  until  from  the  necessities  of 
increasing  business  he  reluctantly  re- 
signed. The  professor's  attention  was 
not  exclusively  confined  to  this  arduous 
I'osition  with  its  routine  of  practices, 
reritals.  Sabliath  services  and  concerts, 
tint  in  the  Twentieth  Waid  his  services 


BIOGRAPHICAL    ENCYCLOPEDIA. 


747 


were  especially  felt.  As  a  composer 
of  musical  pieces  in  many  moods,  Pro- 
fessor Daynes  stands  high  in  the  com- 
munity. His  anthem,  "The  Nations 
Bow  to  Satan's  Thrall,"  (words  by  El- 
der John  Nicholson),  was  produced  in 
1884,  and  for  the  Temple  dedication  in 
1893,  he  created  that  grand  composition, 
"Let  all  Israel  Sing,"  which  was  after- 
ward sent  abroad  as  one  of  the  repre- 
sentative pieces  for  chorus  work  from 
Utah.  "The  Psalmody"  bears  record 
to  his  prolific  pen  and  brain,  as  about 
one-fifth  of  its  musical  contents  are  his 
compositions.  To  this  must  be  added 
much  secular  and  instrumental  music 
for  organ,  piano  and  orchestral  work. 
The  marches  performed  at  the  funeral 
of  Pres.  Brigham  Young  and  Pres. 
Wilford  Woodruff  were  of  his  composi- 
tion, and  were  very  effective,  and  fa- 
vorably if  sadly  received.  It  was  said 
of  the  immortal  Milton  that  he  consid- 
ered his  "Paradise  Regained"  as  far 
ahead  of  the  wonderful  "Paradise 
Lost."  Professor  Daynes,  while  acept- 
ing  the  general  verdict  of  his  associ- 
ates in  the  "divine  art,"  has  a  similar 
feeling  himself.  He  wrote  the  hymn 
tune  "Cecil"  (page  104  of  the  Psalmody) 
almost  without  concern  or  pride,  but 
later  found  it  to  be  among  the  most 
popular  of  his  productions;  and  the 
whole  Church  is  familiar  with  that 
choice  tune  of  his  to  those  inspiring 
words  written  by  our  too  little  heard 
Sister  Emily  Woodmansee,  "Providence 
is  over  all."  Professor  Daynes  was 
married  in  1872  to  Miss  Jennie  Sharp, 
daughter  of  Joseph  Sharp  and  niece  of 
Bishop  John  Sharo.  He  is  the  father 
of  five  living  children  and  two  who  died 
in  childhood.  His  oldest  son,  now 
twenty-eight  years  of  age,  is  married 
to  a  daughter  of  President  Wilford 
Woodruff.  Professor  Daynes'  name 
is  as  familiar  abroad  as  at  home.  For 
many  years  the  free  public  organ  re- 
citals at  the  Tabernacle,  begun  while 
he  was  organist,  have  been  enjoyed  by 
tens  of  thousands  of  tourists  visiting 
Utah.  Elder  J.  J.  McClellan,  who  now 
presides  at  this  grand  instrument,  will, 
doubtless,  enhance  the  memory  of  his 
predecessor  while  establishing  his  own 
fame  and  the  renown  and  enterprise  of 
the  "Mormon"  Church  and  people. 
Brother  Daynes  has,  in  his  new  loca- 
tion (Sugar  Ward,  near  Salt  Lake  City) 
been  induced  to  manipulate  the  organ 
and  to  lead  the  Ward  choir.— N. 


Mc(/LiELLAN,  John  Jasper, niganist 
of  the  Tabernacle, Salt  Lake  City,  is  the 
son  of  John  Jasper  and  Eliza  B.  Mc- 
Clellan, and  was  l)orn  April  20,  1874,  at 
Payson,  Utah  county,  Utah.  He  was 
baptized  into  the  Church  when  about 
eight  years  old,  and  was  later  ordained 
to  the  Priesthood.  From  early  child- 
hood he  displayed  talent  in  the  musical 
line,  and  at  the  age  of  ten  began  the 
study  of  music  in  Payson,  his  birth- 
Iilace,  with  a  local  teacher,  and  was 
organist  of  the  Church  there  at  eleven. 
Until  the  age  of  seventeen  years     was 


reached,  he  practiced  without  the  aid 
of  a  competent  teacher  upon  the  piano 
and  organ.  In  July,  1891,  he  left  Utah 
for  Saginaw,  Michigan,  where,  for 
eighteen  months,  he  pursued  his  studies 
diligently  under  the  guidance  of  a 
splendid  German  master,  Albert  W. 
Platte,  who  laid  the  foundation  thor- 
oughly for  the  young  man's  musical 
growth.  Bro.  McClellan  was  Prof. 
Platte's  assistant  at  St.  Paul's  church 
and  for  several  Sundays  (in  the  absence 
of  the  organist)  played  the  fine  organ 
in  the  First  Congregational  Church  of 
that  city.  He  also  participated  in  sev- 
eral piano  recitals  given  by  Prof. 
Platte's  pupils  with  good  success.  The 
Ann  Arbor  Conservatory,  had  been 
founded  in  the  meantime  and  Bro.  Mc- 
Clellan went  to  that  instituion.  Her<^ 
he  became  the  piano  pupil  of  Johann 
Erich  Schmaal,  and  studied  theory  and 
organ  with  Prof.  Stanley,  the  director 
of  the  school.  A  year  and  a  half  later 
the  great  Spanish  pianist,  Alberto  Jo- 


748 


LATTER-DAY    SAINT 


nas.  became  head  of  the  piano  school 
and  Bro.  McCMollan  was  soon  one  of  his 
favorite  pupils  and  received  favors  and 
encouragement  galore.  During  the  two 
and  a  half  years  of  his  stay  in  Ann  Ar- 
bor he  was  engaged  as  choirmaster  and 
organist  in  St.  Thomas  Catholic 
Church,  where  he  made  music  a  strong 
feature  of  the  worship.  He  wrote  a 
"Mass"  for  orchestra  and  choir  which 
was  given  on  Easter,  1896,  to  a  crowded 
church  and  repeated  two  weeks  later 
to  a  packed  edifice.  Musicians  w-ere 
imported  from*  Detroit  and  the  finest 
soprano  in  Michigan  was  soloist.  The 
Ann  Arbor  and  Detroit  critics,  chief 
among  them  the  one  on  the  "Free 
Press,"  were  enthusiastic  over  the 
work,  and  press  notices  were  exceeding- 
ly warm.  Other  compositions  were  some 
songs  which  were  sung  by  Prof.  Lam- 
son,  head  of  the  vocal  department,  at 
the  graduation  recital  of  Bro.  McCIel- 
lan.  During  his  course  at  Ann  Arbor 
he  also  founded  the  University  of  Mich- 
igan Symphony  Orchestra  and  gave 
several  concerts  and  was  elected  for 
two  terms  to  the  office  of  president 
of  the  "Enterpe  Musical  Club,"  which 
position  he  held  when  he  bade  adieu 
to  Ann  Arbor.  He  was  appointed  pro- 
fessor of  theory  in  the  conservatory 
the  last  year  of  his  stay  there,  and 
also  first  assistant  in  the  piano  classes 
of  Prof.  Jonas:  on  the  great  Columbian 
organ  (nearly  as  large  as  our  present 
Tabernacle  organ  and  which  was  used 
at  the  World's  Fair,  189.3)  he  was  as- 
sistant to  Dr.  Stanley,  playing  it  many 
times  and  also  taking  charge  of  the 
University  Chorus  (of  one  hundred  and 
fifty)  at  Vespers.  He  was  also  pianist 
of  the  great  Ann  Arbor  Choral  Union 
(three  hundred  voices)  for  the  last  year 
of  his  study.  Of  his  piano  recital  the 
press  said  glowing  things  and  the  direc- 
tors of  the  conservatory  and  piano  de- 
partment were  very  anxious  for  Bro. 
McClellan  to  stay  as  teacher  in  the 
school  and  made  him  splendid  offers. 
But  he  desired  to  come  home;  in  July, 
1x96.  he  arrived  in  Utah,  and  in  Septem- 
ber oi)ened  his  studio  in  Salt  Lake  City. 
For  two  years  he  was  director  of  music 
in  the  L.  D.  S.  College,  and  the  year 
following  si)ent  half  of  his  time  in 
charge  of  musical  affairs  at  the  B.  Y. 
Academy.  Provo.  and  the  remainder  of 
the  week  in  Salt  I.,ake  City  with 
his  piano  and  theory  students.  During 
this   period   he   was   chosen    the   pianist 


of  the  Salt  Lake  Opera  Co.  In  August, 
1899,  together  with  his  v^ife,  he  left 
Utah  for  Europe,  Berlin  being  the  ob- 
jective point.  Here  he  spent  a  year 
with  Xaver  Scharwenka,  the  noted 
Hungarian  pianist,  and  Ernest  Jedlicz- 
ka,  the  Russian  master,  studying  piano 
and  theory  under  their  inspired  guid- 
ance. During  his  stay  he  was  engaged 
to  plaj'  accompaniments  for  several  of 
Wirth's  ])upils  in  the  studio  of  this 
celebrated  man  who  is  counted  one  of 
the  best  ensemble  teachers  in  Europe. 
After  returning  to  Utah,  after  very 
profitable  study  abroad,  Bro.  McClellan 
was  tendered  the  chair  of  music  in  the 
State  University  and  made  organist  at 
the  Tabernacle.  The  Salt  Lake  Opera 
Company  chose  him  as  musical  di- 
rector, and  "Fatinitza"  and  "The  Wed- 
ding Day"  are  operas  given  since  his 
election  to  the  directorship.  Seeing 
the  limitations  of  the  old  Tabernacle 
organ,  he  set  about,  soon  after  his  as- 
signment as  organist,  to  interest  the 
Church  authorities  to  remodel  the  old 
instrument.  He  accomplished  his  aims, 
when,  on  Dec.  31,  1900,  the  authorities 
of  the  Church  decided  to  spend  $12,000 
on  the  famous  organ.  The  Kimball 
Company  secured  the  contract  and  to- 
day the  Tabernacle  contains  the  most 
perfect  and  grandest  organ  on  earth. 
There  are  larger  and  smaller  organs, 
but  none  so  superior  in  every  way.  Of 
course  the  perfect  accoustic  properties 
of  the  egg-shaped  building  are  a  great 
aid  in  the  securing  of  the  fine  tonal 
perfection  of  the  organ.  Bro.  McClel- 
lan conceived  of  the  idea  of  giving  free 
organ  recitals  in  the  Tabernacle  every 
week  (during  the  summer  months  at 
least)  for  the  benefit  not  only  of  tour- 
ists, but  also  for  the  music  loving  popu- 
lation at  home,  so  that  all  might  be- 
come better  acquainted  with  the  grand 
organ.  That  he  has  been  successful 
in  this  undertaking  is  attested  to  by 
the  fact  that  from  three  to  eight  thou- 
sand people  attend  these  recitals  regu- 
larly. At  present  Bro.  McClellan  is 
doing  some  composing,  teaches  a  large 
das  of  private  pupils  and  shows  off  the 
wonders  of  the  Tabernacle  organ  to 
hundreds  of  tourists  annually  He  says 
Salt  Lake's  greatest  need  (musically) 
is  a  large,  complete  orchestra,  and  this 
matter  is  now  receiving  his  attention. 
During  his  five  years  of  teaching,  fif- 
teen of  his  piano  pupils  have  gone  east, 
or  to  Europe,  to  perfect  themselves  in 


BIOGRAPHICAL.    ENCYCLOPEDIA. 


749 


jfiuciic,  and  most  of  them  are  doing  ex- 
ceedingly well.  During  his  stay  in 
Berlin,  Brother  McClellan  edited  a  new- 
edition  of  the  "L.  D.  S.  Hymnal,"  used 
by  the  German  Saints  the  world  over, 
of  which  an  edition  of  10,000  copies  was 
printed;  it  is  a  superior  work  of  210 
pages. 

FARR,  Loriii,  first  president  of  the 
Weber  Stake  of  Zion,  is  the  son  of 
Winslow  Farr  and  Olive  Hovey  Free- 
man, and  was  born  July  27,  1820,  in  the 


town  of  Waterford,  Caledonia  county, 
Vermont.  When  he  was  eight  years  old, 
his  parents  moved  north  into  the  town 
of  Charleston,  Orleans  county,  Vermont 
where  his  father  bought  a  farm.  In 
the  spring  of  1832,  when  Lorin  was 
eleven  years  of  age,  the  family,  for  the 
first  time,  heard  the  gospel  preached 
by  Orson  Pratt  and  Lyman  E.  John- 
son. Although  but  eleven  years  of  age 
Lorin's  mind  was  prepared  to  receive 
the  testimony  of  these  servants  of 
God,  so  he  was  baptized  by  Lyman  E. 
Johnson,  in  Clide  river,near  his  father's 
house,  and  confirmed  by  Orson  Pratt. 
In  the  fall  of  1837,  Father  Farr,  who 
vvith  his  family  had  joined  the  Church, 
sold  his  farm  and  moved  to  Kirtland, 
Ohio.  In  the  spring  of  1838,  Lorin 
started  for  Far  West..  Mo.,  where  he 
arrived  May  1st,  and  made  his  home 
with  the  Prophet  Joseph  Smith.  He 
passed  through  most  of  the  persecutions 
heaped  upon  the  Faints  in  Missouri, and 
when  they  were  driven  from  the  State, 
he  went  to  Quincy,  and  in  the  spring 
of  1840  settled     in     Mauvoo.  111.     In  the 


spring  of  1843  he  was  called  upon  a  mis- 
sion, by  the  Prophet  Joseph,  to  the 
Middle  and  Eastern  States,  with  the  in- 
struction to  go  wherever  the  spirit  led 
him  He  was  performing  this  duty 
when  the  sad  news  of  the  martyrdom 
of  the  Prophet  Joseph  and  Patriarch 
Hyrum  reached  him.  Eld^r  Farr  re- 
mained in  the  field,  comforting  and 
st'-engthening  the  Saints,  until  late  in 
November,  1844,  when  he  i-eturned  to 
Nauvoo.  Jan.  1,  1845,  he  was  married 
to  Miss  Nancy  B.  Chase,  by  Pres  Brig- 
ham  Young.  Elder  Farr  was  with  the 
Saints  during  all  their  troubles  in  Nau- 
voo and  assisted  in  building  the  Tem- 
ple. In  the  spring  of  1847,  he  prepared 
to  go  to  Great  Salt  Lake  valley,  where 
he  arrived  Sept.  20l.h  of  that  year.  He 
lived  in  Salt  Lake  City  till  the  spring 
of  1850,  when  he  was  called  by  Pres. 
Brigham  Young  to  go  to  Ogden  to  pre- 
side over  the  Saints  in  the  northern 
part  of  the  Territory.  The  following 
year  (1851),  when  the  Weber  Stake  of 
Zion  was  organized.  Elder  Farr  was 
called  and  set  apart  as  the  president  of 
the  Stake.  This  position  he  held  un- 
til 1870,when  he  was  called  on  a  mission 
to  Europe,  where  he  remained  until 
1871.  Elder  Farr  has  served  as  mayor 
of  Ogden  city  for  many  terms;  he  also 
represented  Weber  county  in  the  Terri- 
torial legislature  from  the  organization 
of.  the  Territory  until  he  was  disfran- 
chised, excepting  one  year  while  on  his 
mission  to  Europe.  He  is  a  public 
spirited  man  and  has  done  much  for 
the  advancement  of  the  kingdom  of  God 
and  the  commonwealth.  (See  also  Tul- 
lidge's  History,  Vol.  2,  Bio.  172.) 

WEST,  Chaxincey  Walker,  pre- 
siding Bishop  of  Weber  county  from 
1855  to  1870,  was  the  son  of  Alva  West 
and  Sally  Benedict  and  was  born  Feb. 
6,  1827,  in  Erie  county,  Pennsylvania. 
His  cofonial  ancestor,  Fiancis  West, 
who  settled  in  Duxbui-y.  Massachusetts, 
about  the  year  1620,  is  supposed  to  be 
identical  with  the  Capt.  (afterwards 
Admiral)  Francis  West,  brother  of  Lord 
De  La  Ware  who  was  governor  of  Vir- 
ginia in  1609.  (See  Hist.  Dudley  Fami- 
ly, Fol.  978.)  His  parents  removed  in 
his  childhood  to  the  State  of  New  York, 
where,  in  his  sixteenth  year,  he  obeyed 
the  gospel,  and  soon  after  started  out 
as  a  traveling  Elder.  In  the  fall  of  1841 
he  gathered  with  his  parents  to  Nau- 
voo, 111.,  where  he,  early,  in  1845,  was 
ordained  a  member  of  the  12th  quorum 


750 


LATTER-DAY    SAINT 


of  Seventy — quite  a  distinguished  posi- 
tion in  those  days  for  a  young  man  only 
seventeen  years  of  age.  When  the 
Saints  were  expelled  from  Nauvoo  in 
1846,  he  assisted  in  starting  the  first 
company  for  the  west.  In  June,  1846,  he 
left  with  his  and  his  father's  family,  to 
seek  a  home  in  the  Rocky  Mountains. 
He  partook  of  the  hardships  incident  to 
that  memorable  journey,  loosing  many 
of  his  kindred  on  the  way,  among  the 
number  his  father  and  mother  and 
brother  Joseph,  who  died  at  Winter 
Quarters.  With  no  available  resources 
but  his  indominable  will  and  industry 
he  succeeded  in  bringing  his  father's 
large  family     to    Great  Salt  Lake  val- 


ley, where  they  arrived  in  the  fall  of 
1S47.  He  was  one  of  the  first  settlers 
•  if  Salt  Lake  City  and  also  of  Provo, 
Utah  county,  from  which  latter  place, 
in  the  month  of  December,  1849,  he 
started  with  a  company  of  men  under 
the  direction  of  Apostle  Parley  P.  Pratt 
to  explore  the  southern  part  of  Utah. 
The  company  was  gone  two  months 
and  suffered  many  hardships,  but  re- 
turned in  safety.  It  was  upon  this  re- 
turn trip,  and  when  the  company  was 
threatened  with  starvation,  and  came 
near  perishing  in  the  snow,  that 
Brother  Pratt  selected  Chauncey  W. 
West  and  Nathan  Tanner  from  among 
the  members  of  his  party  to  go  to  the 
settlements  for  relief;  they  made  a 
most  remarkable  night  and  day  jour- 
ney to  Provo.  In  the  fall  of  1852,  Bro. 
West  and  36  others  were  called  to  go 
upon   missions  to  eastern  Asia.       They 


started  from  Salt  Lake  City  on  the  21st 
of  November,  taking  the  southern  route 
to  California.  On  reaching  San  Fran- 
cisco, the  Elders,  who  were  practically 
without  means,  learned  that  $6,250 
would  be  needed  to  take  them  to  their 
several  fields  of  labor.  Nothing  daunted 
they  immediately  distributed  them- 
selves over  the  city  of  San  Francisco 
and  throughout  the  mining  regions  of 
the  State,  seeking  employment.  Elder 
West  went  to  the  latter  section,  and 
in  less  than  two  weeks  the  required 
amount  was  raised.  Jan.  25,  1853,  El- 
der West  made  a  contract  with  Capt. 
Windsor  of  the  shp  "Monsoon,"  for  the 
pasage  of  the  Hindostan  and  Siam  mis- 
sionaries to  Calcutta,  agreeing  to  pay 
S200  per  passenger.  On  the  28th  they 
.set  sail  and  on  the  25th  of  April,  87  days 
from  the  time  of  their  embarkation, the 
\esFel  cast  anchor  in  the  river,  in  front 
i-f  the  city  of  Calcutta.  From  Cal- 
cutta Elder  West's  labors  were  extend- 
t-d  to  many  of  the  principal  cities  of 
Hindostan,  and  to  the  island  of  Ceylon. 
He  labored  principally  in  the  latter 
Ijlace  and  in  the  cities  of  Madras  and 
Bombay.  After  an  absence  of  two 
years  and  eight  months,  he  returned 
home,  arriving  at  Salt  Lake  City  July 
15.  1855.  Among  the  many  very  mar- 
\  elous  occurrances  of  this  eventful  mis- 
sion, interesting  and  profitable  mention 
might  be  made  of  the  following:  Five 
days  after  leaving  San  Francisco,  El- 
ders Richard  Ballantyne  and  Levi  Sav- 
age broke  out  with  smallpox  to  the 
great  consternation  of  the  captain  and 
crew.  The  Elders  promptly  called 
upon  the  Lord  in  fervent  prayer  for  the 
speedy  restoration  of  their  brethren, 
and  the  preservation  of  themselves  and 
the  crew  from  the  dreadful  disease.  God 
gave  them  an  immediate  witness  that 
their  prayers  would  be  answered, and  in 
less  than  two  weeks  the  stricken  Elders 
left  their  bunks  and  the  smallpox,  at 
first  so  threatening,  disappeared  from 
among  them.  The  night  previous  to 
their  arrival  at  Calcutta  Elder  West 
dreamed  of  seeing  a  little  boy  standing 
on  the  wharf  among  a  crowd  of  people 
waiting  for  the  arrival  of  the  Elders, 
and,  sure  enough,  when  they  did  arrive, 
there  he  stood.  Upon  going  ashore. 
Elder  West  picked  him  out  and  re- 
marked to  his  companions  as  he  did  so, 
"This  is  the  little  boy  that  I  saw  In 
my  dream."  Upon  enquiry  it  was 
found    that     Sister    Matthew    McCune, 


BIOGRAPHICAIi    ENCYCLOPEDIA. 


751 


learning  of  the  expected  arrival  of  the 
l-:iders  and  having  no  one  else  to  send 
lo  meet  them  (her  husband  being  away 
with  the  British  Army  at  the  tlmej 
sent  her  little  boy  to  the  wharf.  That 
little  boy  was  Henry  McCune,  now  a 
lesident  of  Nephi,  Utah,  who  but  a  lit- 
tle time  ago  related  the  incident  to  the 
writer.  During  their  voyage  from  Cey- 
lon to  Bombay  the  Elders  encountered 
a  terrific  storm,  and  through  an  error 
in  the  captain's  calculations,  the  ship 
was  driven  so  near  the  shore  that  the 
vessel  grounded  and  came  near  being 
broken  to  pieces.  The  life  boats  were 
launched,  but  immediately  foundered. 
In  the  midst  of  these  dreadful  scenes, 
Klders  AVest  and  Dewey  rebuked  the 
^vinds  and  waves  in  the  name  of  the 
Lord.  anO  almost  immediately  the  rag- 
ing elements  vrere  calmed,  and  the  ves- 
Fel  swung  off  into  deeper  water.  Al- 
though greatly  damaged,  and  having 
several  feet  of  water  in  the  hold,  the 
.^hip  was  taken  safely  to  port  and  no 
lives  were  lost.  When  homeward 
liound  Elder  West  engaged  passage  for 
himself  and  Elder  Dewey  from  Canton 
to  San  Francisco  en  the  American  ves- 
sel "Hiega,"  and  had  gone  as  far  as 
Hong  Kong,  China,  when  the  Lord 
\sarned  him  in  a  dream  to  leave  the 
shij),  which  he,  in  a  vision,  had  seen 
wrecked  upon  the  coral  reefs.  The 
^^  arning  was  promptly  obeyed,  and  the 
\essel  put  out  to  sea  never  to  return. 
It  was  wrecked  in  precisely  the  manner 
seen  by  Elder  West  in  his  vision,  for 
the  captain,  whom  he  afterwards  met, 
told  him  the  whole  occurrence,  and 
wanted  to  know  why  he  had  left  his 
ship  in  such  a  mysterious  manner.  To 
his  great  astonishment  Elder  West  re- 
lated his  dream,  when  the  captain  said 
with  an  oath,  "Why  did  you  not  tell 
me?"  The  Elder  replied,  that  if  he  had, 
he  would  have  paid  no  attention  to  the 
\\arning,  but  denounced  him  as  a  fool. 
The  captain  replied  with  another  oath, 
"I  guess  you  are  right."  While  wait- 
ing to  secure  another  passage  home, 
Ellder  Dewey  was  taken  violently  ill 
with  chills  and  fever  at  a  boarding 
house  kept  by  a  Mr.  Young.  In  the 
meantime  Elder  West  had  arranged 
with  Capt.  Miller  of  the  vessel  "Cressy" 
to  ship  as  a  sailor  to  San  Francisco, 
for  $15  per  month,  provided  his  com- 
jianion  was  able  to  accompany  him  by 
the  time  the  vessel  was  ready  to  sail. 
Most  fervently  did  they  pray  for  Elder 


Dewey's  recovery;  and  one  day,  while 
thus  engaged,  they  were  irresistably 
impressed  to  leave  the.  hotel  and  gc  on 
board  the  ship.  For  some  days  past  it 
had  been  raining  very  hard,  and  soon 
after  they  left  the  hotel,  the  storm 
loosened  from  the  mountain  side  near 
by  a  large  rock,  which  came  rolling 
down  with  terrific  force  and  struck  the 
hotel,  completely  demolishing  it.  One 
of  the  inmates  was  killed  and  several 
were  wounded.  In  the  fall  of  1855 
Brother  West  settled  in  Bingham's  fort, 
Weber  county,  and  on  the  29th  of  May 
removed  to  Ogden,  having  been  ap- 
pointed Bishop  of  the  First  Ward.  In 
the  fall  of  the  same  year  he  was  ap- 
pointed presiding  Bishop  of  Weber 
county,  a  position  which  he  held  up  to 
the  time  of  his  death,  fourteen  years 
later.  He  was  also  elected  to  the 
House  of  Representatives  by  the  We- 
ber county  constituency  about  this  time 
and  continued  a,  member  of  that  body 
until  the  year  1869,  when  failing  health 
compelled  him  to  retire  from  the  posi- 
tion. As  a  prominent  ecclesiastical 
officer  of  the  Church  he  was  untiring 
in  his  labors  and  zealous  in  the  extreme. 
His  devotion  to  the  cause,  and  loving 
fidelity  to  his  brethren,  early  won  for 
him  the  esteem  of  his  superiors,  and 
the  affectionate  regard  of  those  over 
whom  he  was  called  to  preside.  As  a 
legislator  he  was  equally  efficient. 
While  not  overly  fluent  in  speech,  he 
was  possessed  of  a  sound  judgment,and 
keen  appreciation  of  the  needs  of  his 
constituency,  and  the  commonwealth 
in  general,  so  much  so,  that  he  was  ear- 
ly called  to  occupy  leading  positions  on 
the  most  important  committees  of  the 
House,  and  became  prominently 
identified  with  all  the  leading  legis- 
lative movements  of  those  exciting  and 
crucial  times.  July  18,  1857,  he  received 
his  commission  from  Governor  Brigham 
Young  of  colonel  of  the  5th  regiment, 
in  the  Weber  Military  District,  and  in 
March,  1858,  was  made  brigadier-gen- 
eral in  the  Nauvoo  Legion  for  distin- 
guished services  in  the  Utah  war,  which 
position  he  filled  with  honor  and  ability. 
Being  a  man  of  great  courage,  un- 
bounded energy  and  commanding  pres- 
ence, he  was  frequently  selected  for 
the  most  difficult  and  dangerous  expedi- 
tions. He  and  his  command  were  among 
the  first  to  be  called  to  the  defense  of 
the  Saints  when  the  misguided  Pres. 
Buchanan    sent   an   invading   army    to 


752 


LATTER-DAY    SAINT 


Utah.  At  Echo  canyon  his  regiment, 
which  was  said  to  he  among  the  best 
drilled  and  disclijllned  of  the  Legion, 
occupied  the  post  of  danger  (always 
the  post  of  honor)  in  the  centre  of  the 
defile,  and  when  tidings  came  of  John- 
stons  Intended  detour  via  the  Bear 
river,  tJeneial  West  was  selected  to 
head  him  off.  By  forced  marches  he 
and  his  trusted  men  made  such  rapid 
progress  and  presented  such  an  aggres- 
sive front  to  the  enemy,  that  hearing 
(if  their  movements,  the  invading  troops 
returned  to  their  former  rendesvouz 
and  went  into  winter  (luaa-ters.  This 
practically  ended  active  hostilities,  and 
gave  the  government  an  opportunity  of 
obtaining  a  correct  understanding  of 
the  Utah  situation.  In  the  spring  of 
1863  C'hauncey  W.  West  was  a  member 
of  the  legislative  convention  of  the  in- 
cohate  Slate  of  Deseret  which  drafted 
a  constitution  and  sent  Hons.  Wm.  H. 
Hooper  and  Ceo.  Q.  Cannon,  senators, 
as  a  delegation  to  ask  for  the  admis- 
sion of  Utah  into  the  Union  as  a  State; 
and  at  the  April  conference,  1863,  Elder 
West  was  selected  to  go  to  England 
and  take  charge  of  the  European  mis- 
sion, in  the  absence  of  Geo.  Q.  Cannon, 
then  its  president.  He  left  Ogden  April 
21,  1862,  In  company  with  Hon.  William 
H.  Hooper,  and  traveled,  under  cavalry 
escort,  to  the  frontiers.  Upon  leaving 
Ogden,  the  people  of  Weber  county 
turned  out  en-masse  to  bid  him  good- 
bye. The  artillery  fired  a  salute  and 
bands  of  music  heading  civic  and  mili- 
tary organizations  accompanied  him 
.some  distance  upon  his  journey.  This 
public  demonstration  of  esteem  for  one 
whose  brief  sojourn  of  six  years  among 
them  had  so  won  the  hearts  of  his  fel- 
low-citizens, was  only  equalled  by  the 
right  royal  welcome  that  rr>et  him  on 
his  return  sixteen  months  later.  At 
Washington  he  was  introduced  to  Pres. 
Lincoln  and  other  distinguished  states- 
men, and  on  the  21st  of  June  he  sailed 
per  steamer  "City  of  Washington"  for 
Liverpool,  arriving  there  on  the  morn- 
ing of  the  4th  of  July.  He  immediate- 
ly entered  upon  the  duties  of  his  call- 
ing as  president  of  the  European  mis- 
sion and  so  continued  until  Pres.  Can- 
non's return.  He  visited  a'l  the  lead- 
ing conferences  of  the  British  Isles 
and  traveled  extensively  in  Europe, 
preaching  the  gospel  wheiever  oppor- 
tunity offered.  I^pon  the  return  of 
Pres.  Cannon  he  assisted  hirfi  generally 
with  the  affairs  of  the  mission  until  re- 


leased to  return  home  In  the  fall  of 
1X63.  As  a  business  man  Bishop  West 
was  pre-eminently  successful  until  the 
closing  years  of  his  life,  when  misfor- 
tune of  an  unusual,  and  seemingly  un- 
avoidable character,  overtook  him.  Pri- 
or to  this  he  was  one  of  the  most  re- 
sourceful men  in  Utah,  always  abound- 
ing in  enterprises  that  had  for  their 
primary  purpose  the  profitable  employ- 
ment of  his  people.  He  was  foremost 
in  the  building  of  canals  and  wagon 
roads,  and  the  first  to  develop  the  lum- 
ber Industry  by  the  building  of  saw 
mills  In  the  mountains.  He  and  Fran- 
cis A.  Hammond  established  a  tanneiy, 
boot  and  shoe  and  saddle  and  harness 
manufactory  In  Ogden.  He  also  con- 
ducted a  mercantile  business,  a  hotel, 
a  livery  stable,  a  blacksmith  and  wagon 
shop,  a  meat  market  and  many  other 
minor  establishments.  In  connection 
with  Joseph  A.  Young  he  erected  what 
was  then  one  of  the  largest  and  finest 
llouring  mills  in  the  Territory.  He  al- 
so engaged  extensively  in  freighting 
and  carried  the  surplus  products  of  his 
jieople  to  distant  markets.  In  all  these 
enterprises  employment  was  furnished 
to  hundreds  of  his  fellow-citizens. 
When  the  Union  Central  Pacific  rail- 
ways were  being  built,  he  and  Ezra  T. 
Benson  and  Lorln  Farr  took  a  contract 
to  grade  two  hundred  miles  of  the  latter 
road  from  Ogden  west.  It  was  In  the 
prosecution  of  this  work,  undertaken 
under  circumstances  that  made  It  her- 
culean in  character,  that  Bishop 
Chauncey  W.  West's  eventful  life  was 
brought  to  an  early  termination,  He 
had  been  given  Immediate  personal  su- 
pervision of  the  work,  which  was  being 
pushed  with  all  the  vigor  that  money 
and  the  competitive  energy  that  the  two 
companies  could  command.  As  the 
Union  and  Central  Pacific  forces  neared 
each  other,  work  was  kept  up  night  and 
day,  and  to  add  to  the  already  high 
tension  of  affairs,  the  Union  Pacific 
company  advanced  wages  so  as  to  draw 
off  the  working  force  of  Its  competitor. 
This  in  turn  had  to  be  met  by  another 
raise  on  the  part  of  the  Central  Pa- 
cific contractors,  and  thus  they  were 
placed  at  the  mercy  of  their  men  who 
became  masters  of  the  situation  Instead 
of  servants  of  those  by  whom  thsy 
were  employed.  It  was  under  these 
circumstances  of  labor  demoralization 
that  the  most  expensive  part  of  this 
woik  had  to  be  done,  and  in  conse- 
fiuenre   its     cost     w-as     enormous,    and 


BIOGRAPHICAL   ENCYCLOPEDIA. 


753 


far  beyond  the  prices  to  be  paid  there- 
for as  specified  in  the  contract.  Gover- 
nor Stanford,  who  was  personally  upon 
the  pround  and  understood  the  situa- 
tion fully,  promised  to  make  the  con- 
tiactois  more  than  whole,  if  they  would 
not  slacken  theii-  efforts,  but  rush  the 
work  to  completion  with  the  utmost 
possible  dispatch.  This  was  done,  but 
the  promise  was  never  fulfilled,  and  in 
conse(|uence,  the  contractors  were  fin- 
ancially ruined.  Rishop  West  went  to 
San  Francisco  to  get  a  settlement  with 
the  Central  Pacific  company,  but  died 
without  accomplishing  it.  His  health 
had  been  preatly  impaired  by  the  hard- 
ships and  exposure  to  which  he  had 
been  suhjeited  in  prosecuting  this 
work,  and  the  damp,  foggy  weather  of 
the  coast,  coupled  with  his  great  anxie- 
ty to  secure  such  a  settlement  as  would 
enable  him  to  discharge  his  obligations, 
proved  too  much  for  him  in  his  enfee- 
bled condition.  Jan.  6,  1870,  he  was 
compelled  to  take  his  bed,  from  which 
he  never  arose  again.  In  his  last  mo- 
ments his  great  anxiety  was  to  prevent 
grief  on  the  part  of  his  family.  Just 
previous  to  his  demise  he  declared  to 
his  wife  that  he  had  been  visited  by 
the  spirit  of  his  mother  and  many  of 
his  relatives  who  had  departed,  who 
expressed  joy  at  the  prospect  of  wel- 
coming him  speedily  to  their  society. 
At  six  o'clock  on  the  morning  of  Jan. 
9.  1870.  h's  noble  spirit  passed  away  to 
the  realms  of  the  just.  In  speaking  of 
his  death  Elder  Charles  W.  Penrose 
in  the  "Ogden  Junction"  says:  "Weber 
county  has  lost  a  man  of  great  value, 
the  Church  on  earth  a  bright  light  and 
a  faithful  and  devoted  minister,  and 
the  poor  a  generous  and  large  hearted 
benefactor.  Among  the  many  en- 
comiums passed  upon  his  character.one 
of  the  brightest  and  best  and  most  fre- 
quently repeated  is,  'He  was  a  friend  to 
the  poor.'  Chauncey  W.  West  has 
pas.sed  from  the  sight,  but  not  from  the 
memory  of  his  friends,  for  his  name  will 
be  numbered  among  those  of  earth's 
greatest  and  noblest."  Although  but 
43  years  of  age  at  the  time  of  his  death. 
Bishop  West  left  a  large  fami'y  to 
mourn  his  loss;  he  -v^as  the  husband 
of  several  wives  and  the  father  of  36 
children.  This  biographical  sketch  of 
Bishop  Chauncey  W.  West  will  be  most 
fittingly  closed  with  the  following  brief 
review  of  his  labors  in  the  British  mis- 

Vol.  1,  No.  48. 


sion.  and  of  his  life  and  character  In 
general,  from  a  private  letter  written 
by  Pres.  George  Q.  Cannon  to  his  son 
Hon.  Joseph  A.  West,  dated  January, 
1887:  "His  labors  during  this  mission 
were  greatly  appreciated  by  myself 
and  the  Elders  and  Saints.  During  my 
entire  acquaintance  with  him,  from  the 
time  of  his  arrival  at  Nauvoo  until  his 
death,  he  was  a  man  of  untiring  energy 
and  industry.  He  was  remarkable  for 
those  qualities  and  for  his  great  hope- 
fulness. I  do  not  think  he  ever  had 
a  feeling  of  discouragement  in  his  life. 
His  boundless  hope  doubtless  led  him 
into  enterprises  from  which  other  men 
would  shrink  and  made  him  carry  bur- 
dens which  others  would  not  have  at- 
tempted to  lift.  He  had  an  excellent 
command  of  his  temper,  and  a  very 
pleasing  address,  and  being  a  man  of 
handsome  face  and  figure,  he  made 
friends  wherever  he  went.  The  experi- 
ence which  he  had  in  public  life,  com- 
bined with  these  personal  advantages, 
made  him  a  most  valuable  aid  to  me  in 
my  labors,  and  our  association  together, 
while  he  was  in  that  mission,  forms  one 
of  the  pleasantest  recollections  of  my 
life.  In  the  early  years  of  my  ac- 
quaintance with  him,  and  especially  in 
summer  and  winter  quarters,  and  in 
crossing  the  plains,  and  the  first  two 
years  of  our  settlement  in  the  Salt  Lake 
valley,  which  was  as  long  as  I  remained 
there  before  taking  my  first  mission.  I 
was  always  greatly  impressed  with  the 
ripeness  of  his  physical  and  mental 
powers.  He  was  a  self-confident,  full- 
equipped  and  well  developed  mature 
man,  when  others  of  his  age  were  but 
youths  in  appearance  and  action.  I 
was  the  more  impressed  with  these 
characteristics  of  his  because  there  was 
not  a  month's  difference  in  our  ages, 
and  I  was  the  older.  When  he  left 
Nauvoo  he  was  only  nineteen  years,and 
when  he  reached  Salt  Lake  valley  only 
twenty  years  of  age;  but  among  those 
of  his  acquaintance  who  did  not  know 
his  age,  he  always  passed  as  a  man_ 
several  years  older."  From  this  and" 
many  like  expressions  given  to  the 
memory  of  his  life  by  noble  compeers 
his  record  may  close  thus:  "Chauncey 
Walker  West  was  held  in  the  highest 
esteem,  and  regarded  with  the  deepest 
affection  by  those  who  knew  him  best; 
he  is  spoken  of  as  having  been  a  wor- 
thy citizen;  as  a  militia  commanding 
officer   of   high   spirit   and   courage,    as 

Nov.  30,  1901. 


754 


LATTER-DAY    SAINT 


a  business  man  of  pre-eminent  enter- 
I>iise  and  ability,  and  as  a  never  fall- 
ing friend  and  benefactoi-  of  his  fellow- 
man. — W. 

WKST,  JoHeph  Alvn,  a  prominent 
Elder  in  the  Weber  Stake  of  Zion,  is  the 
son  of  Chauncey  W.  West  and  Mary 
Hoagland,  and  was  born  in  Salt  Lake 
City,  Utah,  Sept.  12,  1851.  His  colonial 
antestry  came  to  America  in  the  early 
l»art  of  the  sixteenth  centuiy,  and  his 
I)arents,  who  had  arrived  in  Utah  in 
1847,  removed  to  Hingham's  Fort,  We- 
ber county,  in  1855.  In  the  following 
spring  they  located  in  Ogden,  where 
Joseph  A.  received  a  common  school 
education.  He  subsequently  attended 
the  Deseret  University,  at  Salt  Lake 
City.  In  the  winter  of  1855  he  and  a 
number  of  other  young  men  were  called 
from    different    parts   of    the    Territory 


by  Pres.  Brigham  Young  to  go  to  Salt 
Lake  City,  and  learn  telegraphy,  prep- 
aratory to  taking  offlces  on  the  Deseret 
Telegraph  Line  then  projected  between 
Paris,  Idaho,  and  St.  George,  in  south- 
ern Utah.  The  first  office  on  this  line 
outside  of  Salt  Lake  was  opened  at  Og- 
den, and  here,  on  Dec.  1,  1866,  Joseph 
A.  West  received  Pres.  Young's  opening 
congratulary  message  directed  to  his 
father.  He  soon  after  went  to  Prove, 
where  he  remained  in  charge  of  the 
Provo  office  without  compensation  un- 
til released  to  return  home  the  follow- 
ing year.  In  the  meantime  the  West- 
ern  Union   Telegraph   compan>    built  a 


line    into    Idaho     and      Montana;      and 
u  hen  he  returned  to  Ogden,  he  was  ap- 
pointed   manager   of    the    Ogden    office, 
embracing    the    lines   of   the    two   com- 
panies.      When    in    the    early    days    of 
Utah's  settlement  the  necessity  existed 
for  the  maintenance     of     a  well   disci- 
plined   militia    organization,    Joseph    A. 
West  became  associated  therewith.  He 
first     acted     as       aid-de-camp     on   his 
father's  staff,  and  on  Feb.  20,  1868,  when 
in  his  17th  year,  he  was  commissioned 
by  Governor   Durkee   regimental   adju- 
tant in  the  first  regiment,  first  brigade, 
in  the  Territorial  militia.      In  the  fall  of 
1870  he  was  appointed  majoi-  of  cavalry 
and    detailed    to    enlist    a    battalion    of 
\olunteer    cavalry     from      among     the 
young  men  of  the  Weber  Military  Dis- 
trict, to  be  known  as  the  Weber  county 
Volunteers. .    So  popular  was  the  move- 
ment that  the  command  numbered  250 
in  a  very  short  time.  They  soon  became 
\ery  proficient  in  military  tactics,  un- 
der the  command  of  Major  West,  and 
being  completely  uniformed,   presented 
a  very  fine  appearance.       There  being 
<iuite  a  demand  for  surveyors  in  those 
early    days,    Pres.    Young,    about      this 
time,     requested  Brother  West's  father 
to  educate  his  son  for  this  profession. 
He  was  accordingly  sent  to  Salt  Lake 
City, where  he  entered  the  office  of  Jesse 
W.  Fox,  then.  Territorial  surveyor-gen- 
eral,   and    under    his    direction    he     re- 
ceived practical  training.  In  1868,  when 
eighteen   years   of   age,    he   had   so   far 
acquired  a  knowledge  of  the  profession 
as  to    be     deemed     qualified  to  act  as 
Deputy   Territorial    Surveyor.     He    was 
subsequently    elected    city    surveyor   of 
Ogden,  and  county  surveyor  of  Weber 
county;    and  when     the     Utah   Central 
Railway  was  being  built  betweeen  Og- 
den and  Salt  Lake  City  he  was  one  of 
the   engineers   who   had    charge    of   it? 
construction.  He  was  assistant  chief  en- 
gineer  of    the   Utah    and    Northern,    or 
Oregon  Short  Line,  as  it  is  now  called, 
and  in  addition  to  having  charge  of  the 
construction    of    this    line    from    Ogden 
north,    he     made     several    preliminary 
surveys  into   Idaho     through     regions 
then   comparatively     unknown.       Since 
that  time  he  has  headed  expeditions  as 
chief    engineer    for   projected    lines     of 
railways,    all    over   the   west,    many   of 
which  have  since  been  built.      As  early 
as  1880  he  made  extensive  surveys  be- 
tween   Salt    Lake    City   and   California, 
through   central     Nevada,       of     which 


BIOGRAPHICAL,    ENCYCLOPEDIA. 


755 


work   the   "Deseret   Evening-  News"   of 
Feb.  25,  1881,  made  the  following  com- 
plimentary mention:       "Joseph  A.  "West 
is  said  to  be  one  of  the  best  field  en- 
gineers in  the  west.      We  are  informed 
by  a   prominent   railway  man      yester- 
day that  he  accomplished  the  unusual 
feat  of  surveying  for  the  Salt  Lake  and 
Western   over   a   distance   of   350   miles 
of   desert   last   year."       Again,    in   1888, 
he  had  charge  of  the  Union  Pacific  sur- 
veys in  California  and  Nevada,  having 
for  their  object  the  obtainment  of  the 
most   feasible   route   for  a  railway   be- 
tween Salt  Lake  City  and  Los  Angeles, 
via   southern    Utah    and    south-eastern 
Nevada.       While   upon    this   expedition 
he  surveyed  three  lines  through  Death 
valley  and  encountered  many  hardships 
incident  to  that  dreadful  locality.       In 
1890  he  went  to  Oregon  and  built     the 
Sumpter  Valley  Railway,  of    which,  in 
addition    to    being    chief    engineeer,    he 
was  made  secretary,  and  subsequently 
general  superintendent.      He  was  chief 
engineer   and     superintendent    of    con- 
struction of  the  Utah  and  Pacific  Rail- 
way, and  after  its  completion  remained 
in  charge  of  the  operating  department 
of  the  road  until  again  called  to  go  to 
Oregon  to  superintend   the  building  of 
the  Sumpter  Valley  Extension.  Feb.  17, 
1865,  he  was  ordained  an  Elder,  and  a 
Seventy  March  20,  1869;  he  was  also  set 
apart    as   one    of   the    seven   presidents 
of  the  75th  quorum  of  Seventy.       Oct. 
21,  1877,  he  was  ordained  a  High  Priest 
and   set  apart  as  a  High  Councilor  in 
the  Weber  Stake  of  Zion,   which  posi- 
tion   he   held    until    called    to    go   on    a 
mission  some  five  years  later.      When 
the  young  men  of  Ogden  City  were  or- 
ganized   into     semi-religious     and    lit- 
erary   society   by   Apostle    Franklin    D. 
Richards,  in  the  early  70's,  Elder  West 
was   called    to  be   their   president,    and 
when  the  mutual  improvement  associa- 
tions were  organized  a  few  years  later, 
he  was  appointed  Stake  superintendent. 
About  this  time      "The  Amateur"   was 
published,    with    Jos.    A.    West    as    its 
editor.  This  little  periodical  ran  through 
two   volumes    and    was    enlarged    to    a 
four   page   publication,   12x16  inches   in 
size.      It  was  superceded  by  the  "Con- 
tributor."      Nov.    1,    1878,    Elder     West 
organized  the  Junction  Printing  Asso- 
ciation,  of  which  he  was  made  presi- 
dent and  business  manager  and  bought 
out  the  "Ogden  Junction,"     which     he 
greatly  enlarged  and  changed  from  an 


evening  to  a  mornfng  paper.       He  also 
published  a  semi-weekly  edition  of  the 
same  paper,and  the  following  year  pub- 
lished   a    paper    at    Logan    called      the 
"'Logan  Leader."      Hon.  Frank  J.  Can- 
non and  Benjamin  F.  Cummings,  jun., 
were  among  its  first  editors.       Having 
been  called  upon  a  mission  to  England, 
he  left  home  April  11,  1882,  with  a  large 
company  of  Elders  (over  which  he  was 
called    to    preside)      for     his    appointed 
field  of  labor.      He  arrived  at  Liverpool 
on   the   29th,   and   was  assigned   to   the 
London    conference.       In    June    follow- 
ing he  was  appointed  president  of  said 
conference,  which  position  he  held  un- 
til  his   return   home.       During  his  ab- 
sence,   he    traveled     considerably    over 
the  British  Isles  and     continental  Eu- 
rope, going  so  far  as  Rome  and  Naples, 
near  which  latter  place  he  visited  Her- 
culaneum   and    Pompeii     and   ascended 
Mount  Vesuvius.      The  winter  after  his 
return  from  England  he  was  appointed 
minute  clerk  of  the  lower  house  of  the 
Utah   legislature,   and   he  was   selected 
by  that  body  to  get  up  an  official  map 
of   Utah,    which    he    did    the    following 
year.       He    was    likewise    appointed    a 
member  of  the  board  of  directors  of  the 
Territorial    Insane    Asylum,    a   position 
which  he  held  for  several  years  and  un- 
til after  the  completion  of  the  building 
in    1885.      At    the    general    semi-annual 
conference  of  the  Young  Men's  Mutual 
Improvement  Associations,  held  at  Salt 
Lake  City,  in  October,  1883,  he  was  ap- 
pointed   first    assistant    in    the   general 
superintendency  of  the  organization,  in 
place  of  Milton  H.  Hardy.      In  1885  he 
was   nominated   for   the  legislature,  by 
the     people     of      Weber     county     and 
elected  by  a  large  majority.      He  served 
his  constituency  with  fidelity  and  dis- 
tinction,   and   was   made   a  member  of 
several  of  the  most  important  commit- 
tees   of   the    house.       During    much    of 
the   session    he   occupied    the   speaker's 
chair.      He  was  also  appointed    chair- 
man of  the  committee  on  memorials  to 
Congress,  and  of  the  committee  on  the 
governor's  vetoes.      These  vetoes  were 
annoyingly  frequent  during  the  session, 
occasioned  by     the  rabid  anti-Mormon 
disposition  of  the  governor.      They  cov- 
ered nearly  every  enactment  of  the  ses- 
sion,  including  the  general  appropria- 
tion bill,  carrying  with  it  the  pay  and 
expenses   of   every   department   of   the 
local  government,  as  well  as  the  appro- 
priations to  the  several  Territorial  in- 


756 


LATTER-DAY    SAINT 


stitutions,  such  as  the  Insane  Asylum, 
the  Deseret  University,  etc.,  etc.  At 
the  close  of  the  session  Joseph  A.  West 
was  selected  to  go  to  Washington  and 
assist  in  the  presentation  of  the  legisla- 
ture's side  of  the  controversy  with  the 
governor  to  the  General  Government. 
The  Congressional  appropriation  for 
the  pay  of  the  legislature  and  the  ex- 
penses of  the  session  had  been  with- 
held, and  this  he  was  also  instructed 
to  try  to  recover.  On  the  23rd  of  March, 
1886,  he  left  for  Washington,  where  he 
remained  until  the  10th  of  June  follow- 
ing. He  called  upon  the  President  and 
members  of  the  Cabinet,  and  labored 
diligently  among  the  members  of  Con- 
gress during  the  whole  period  of  his 
absence.  These  were  among  the  dark- 
est days  in  the  history  of  Utah,  for 
every  department  of  the  General  Gov- 
ernment seemed  to  be  arrayed  against 
her  people,  backed  by  the  public  senti- 
ment of  the  entire  nation.  It  was  at 
this  time  that  the  notorious  Enmunds- 
Tucker  bill  was  before  Congress — that 
infamous  measure  that  wrought  such 
havoc  and  produced  such  a  reign  of  ter- 
ror in  Utah  a  few  years  later.  Early 
in  May  John  T.  Caine  and  Joseph  A. 
West  joined  in  a  communication  to  the 
Hon.  J,  Q.  C.  Lamar,  then  secretary  of 
the  Interior,  fully  setting  forth  the 
Utah  situation,  and  asking  for  such 
legislation  as  would  relieve  the  Terri- 
tory of  the  embarrassing  situation  oc- 
casioned by  Governor  Marray's  sweep- 
ing veto  messages.  The  letter  having 
been  presented  to.  the  Cabinet,  the 
President,  under  date  of  May  11th,  sent 
a  special  message  to  Congress  upon 
the  subject,  taking  the  "Mor- 
mon" side  of  the  controversy. 
He  promptly  removed  the  gov- 
ernor, and  the  desrfred  legislative  relief 
was  soon  after  obtained.  Brother  West 
now  turned  his  attention  to  the  with- 
held legrislative  pay,  and  after  an  ar- 
duous struggle  with  the  First  Comp- 
troller of  the  Treasury,  Hon.  Milton  H. 
Durham,  finally  succeeded  in  securing 
every  cent  of  the  illegally  withheld 
appropriation,  to  the  great  satisfaction 
of  his  legislative  colleagues,  and  the 
people  of  the  Territory  in  general.  May 
4,  1886,  Jos.  A.  West  appeared  before 
the  full  judiciary  committee  of  the 
House  and  made  a  two  hours'  argu- 
ment against  the  Edmunds-Tucker  bill, 
a  lengthy  report  of  which  was  pub- 
lished in  the  Utah  papers  at  the  time. 
Since    his      return      from    Washington 


Brother  West  ha.<5  been  almost  con- 
stantly occupied  in  the  construction  and 
operation  of  railroads.  His  present 
home  is  at  Ogden,   Utah. 

PEERY,  David  Harold,  president 
of  the  Weber  Stake  of  Zion  from  1877 
to  1882,  was  the  son  of  Major  David 
Peery  and  Eleanor  Harmon,  and  was 
born  May  16,  1824,  in  Tazewell  county, 
Virginia.  His  early  years  were  spent 
on  his  parents'  plantation.  He  received 
a  collegiate  education,  and  commenced 
a  commercial  career  in  his  native  coun- 
ty in  1846.  Dec.  30,  1852,  he  married 
Nancy  Higginbotham,  a  daughter  of 
Wm.  E. Higginbotham  and  LoQise  Ward 
of  Virginia.  Her  parents  had  joined 
the  Church  in  1841,  under  the  preaching 
of  Jedediah  M.  Grant,  and  gathered  to 


i^^^flk 

i 

1^ 

^^.f 

S^r^ 

Nauvoo  the  next  year,  where  they  re- 
mained until  the  exodus  of  1846,  when 
they  went  west  with  the  Saints  as  far 
as  Winter  Quarters.  Their  daughter 
Nancy  at  that  time  was  eleven  years 
old.  Learning,  in  184S,  that  Mrs.  Hig- 
ginbotham's  parents  were  dead,  the 
family  returned  to  Virginia  in  1848,  to 
get  their  portion  of  the  estate,  expect- 
ing soon  to  gather  to  the  Rocky  Moun- 
tains. David  H.  Peery  became  ac- 
quainted with  the  daughter  and  mar- 
ried her.  In  1862  he  volunteered  and 
entered  the  Confederate  army  of  east- 
ern Kentucky  as  assistant  commissary 
under  General  Humphrey  MarshaH.  Up 
to  1861  he  had  been  remarkably  pros- 
perous in  business,  being  out  of  debt 
and  worth  more  than  1150.000,    with    a 


BIOGRAPHICAL,    ENCYCLOPEDIA. 


757 


good  name  and  character.  In  1861  a 
series  of  misfortunes  and  disasters  be- 
gan in  his  affairs.  His  oldest  son  died 
and  in  June,  1S62,  while  in  the  army, 
he  himself  was  taken  down  with  ty- 
phoid fever  and  removed  in  an  ambu- 
lance to  his  father's  home.  While  he 
was  sick,  his  father  and  mother  and 
father-in-law  all  died  of  the  same  dis- 
ease. In  July,  1862,  being  still  sick,  he 
was  removed  to  his  own  home  in 
Burke's  Gaidens.  His  wife  died  Sept. 
■M,  1862,  She  had  hetki  the  beloved 
companion  of  his  joys  and  sorrows. 
Soon  after  that  his  other  children  died 
with  the  exception  of  his  daughter 
Letitia,  who  is  now  the  wife  of  Hon. 
Charles  C.  Richards,  of  Ogden.  Being 
still  sick  and  much  distressed  in  mind, 
he  became  greatly  interested  in  reli- 
gion. Reading  the  Bible  and  the  wait- 
ings of  Parley  P.  Pratt,  he  became  con- 
vinced of  the  truth  of  the  gospel  as 
revealed  in  the  latter  days.  In  Novem- 
ber, 1862,  he  was  baptized  by  a  local 
Elder,  Absolom  Young,  when  the  snow 
was  a  foot  deep  and  the  ice  six  inches 
thick.  In  December,  1862,  he  returned 
to  the  Confederate  army,  and  acted  as 
sutler  under  the  comnnaiid  of  General 
AVilliams  of  Kentucky.  In  the  spring 
of  186-3,  while  in  the  army,  he  was 
again  taken  down  with  typhoid  fever. 
During  his  former  sickness  he  lay  six 
weeks  and  during  the  latter  he  lay  four 
weeks  at  the  point  of  death.  July  18, 
186.3.  while  in  the  army,  his  residence 
store  and  six  adjacent  houses  filled  with 
goods  and  provisions,  property  valued 
at  $50,000,  were  burned  to  the  gi'ound 
by  the  Union  army.  There  was  noth- 
ing saved  and  no  insurance.  After 
this  loss  he  concluded  to  go  to  Utah, 
and  in  1864  he  started  for  the  west, 
in  company  with  Mrs.  Louisa  Higgin- 
botham,  his  mother-in-law,  and  her 
three  children,  Simon,  Letitia  and 
Frank  and  his  own  child,  Dettie,  and 
other  families  from  Virginia.  Arriv- 
ing at  Omaha  they  bought  three  ox- 
wagons  and  six  yoke  of  cattle,  two 
cows  and  goods  and  provisions,  and  left 
Omaha  June  4,  1864,  in  an  independent 
company.  The  Indians  were  hostile 
that  year  and  their  train  was  attacked 
two  or  three  times,  but  none  of  the 
emigrants  were  killed,  neither  did  they 
lose  any  stock  or  goods.  They  ar- 
rived in  Salt  Lake  City  Aug.  31,  1864. 
Bro.  Peery  first  settled  in  Mill  Creek, 
Salt  Lake    county,     where  he     taught 


school,  and  in  1865  he  went  to  Big  Cot- 
tonwood, where  he  bought  Dr.  Lee's 
farm  and  worked  the  farm  for  two 
years.  April  10,  1865,  he  married  Le- 
titia Higginbotham,  sister  of  his  former 
wife,  and  who  is  still  living.  In  Octo- 
ber, 1866,  he  moved  to  Ogden,  where  he 
taught  school  in  the  winter  of  1866-67. 
March  24,  1867,  he  commenced  clerking 
for  Bishop  Chauncey  W.  West  in  his 
store.  In  November,  1867.  having  sola 
land  and  collected  detts  in  Virginia, 
he  bought  the  merchandise  of  Bishop 
West  and  went  into  partnership  with 
Lester  J.  Herrick.  Their  business  was 
very  prosperous.  In  March,  1869,  he 
and  Bro.  Herrick  sold  their  merchan- 
dise to  the  Z.  C.  M.  I.,  and  Pres.  Brig- 
ham  Young  selected  Elder  Peery  as 
manager  of  the  Ogden  branch.  After 
making  a  visit  to  Virginia  in  1872,  El- 
der Peery  bought  the  Weber  grist  mills 
and  adjacent  lands  of  William  Jen- 
nings and  refitted  the  mills.  Feb.  19, 
1881,  a  number  of  prominent  citizens 
met  at  Bro.  Peery's  residence  in  Ogden 
to  take  the  initial  step  for  the  organi- 
zation of  the  Ogden  Herald  Company. 
Elder  Peery  was  elected  president  of 
the  company.  New  presses,  type,  etc., 
were  subsequently  purchased  and  the 
first  number  of  the  "Ogden  Daily 
Evening  Herald"   was  issued     May     2, 

1881.  Aug.  5,  1873,  Bro.  Peery  sustained 
a  heavy  loss  by  fire  during  a  terrible 
conriagration.  The  amount  of  the  loss 
was  about  $30,000.  In  October,  1875,  he 
was  called  on  a  mission  to  the  Southern 
States  and  labored  in  Texas,  Tennessee, 
and  Virginia.  March  27,  1877,  he  was 
ordained  one  of  the  presidents  of  the 
76th  quorum  of  Seventy.  May  27,  1877, 
he  was  chosen  president  of  the  Weber 
Stake  of  Zion  by  Pres.  Brigham  Young, 
which    position    he    held    until    Oct.    19, 

1882.  He  wa  3  sent  as  a  representative 
from  Weber  county  to  the  legislature 
of  Utah  during  the  sessions  of  1878,  1880, 
1882  and  1884.  June  7,  1882,  he  was 
appointed  by  the  Utah  Territorial  con- 
vention as  a  delegate  to  Washington. 
D.  C,  to  labor  for  the  admission  of 
Utah  as  a  State.  Later,  he  went  to 
Washington  as  a  delegate  on  state- 
hood with  Pres.  Geo.  Q.  Cannon  and 
others.  In  July,  1882,  while  he  was 
in  Virginia,  the  Wet)er  mill,  storehouse, 
flour,  merchandise,  etc.,  burned  with  a 
10S.-3  of  $60,000,  with  no  insurance.  He 
rebuilt  the  Weber  mills,  now  called  the 
Phoeniz    Mills,      In      partnership     with 


758 


LATTER-DAY    SAINT 


James   Mack,    of   Ogden;    Fob.    12,    ISbD, 
he  was  elected  mayor  of  Ogden  city  and 
was  again  re-elected  to  that  office  Feb. 
9,    1885.        In    September,      1883,      Pres. 
Peery  was  made  a  director  of  the  First 
National    Bank    of    Ogden.       April    15, 
1887,    he    was    elected    president    of    the 
Ogden    Chamber     of     Commerce.        In 
June,  1887,  he  was  chosen  a  member  of 
the  Utah  constitutional  convention.    In 
November,   1888,  he  was  made  a  direc- 
tor of  the   Deseret     National   Bank   of 
Salt  Lake   City;   and     he     was  elected 
president   of   the   First   National   Bank 
of  Ogden,  Oct.  9,  1888,  holding  that  po- 
sition  until  Jan.   11,   1894,   when   he   re- 
signed.      Dec.   20,   1888,   he  Avas  elected 
director    of    Thatcher    Bros.    Bank    of 
Logan.       At   the   time  of  his  death   he 
was  a  director  of  the  Deseret  National 
Bank,    the   Deseret   Savings    Bank   and 
the  Thatcher  Brothers  Bank.      After  a 
lingering  sickness  Elder  Peery  died  at 
his    residence   at   Ogden    Sept.    17,    1901. 
At  the  time  of  his  death,  the  following 
appeared  in  the  "Deseret  News:"    "Mr. 
Peei-y  was  a  Virginian  of  the  old  school 
and    cherished    the    courtly    traits    and 
traditions  of  his  chivalrous  people.  His 
generous    hospitality      was      proverbial 
throughout  the  State,  and  while  he  has 
entertained  at   his   ample   board   many 
of  the  great  men  and  women  of  the  na- 
tion,   the  old   friend,    though   a  humble 
farmer,   was   never  forgotten,   and   the 
door  of  his  palatial  home  swung  open 
to  welcome  him  as  freely  as  to  make 
access  for  the  celebrities  of  the  nation. 
Mr.  Peery  was  a  man  of  wide  reading, 
and  it  has  often  been  wondered  where 
he    found    time    to   accumulate    such    a 
volume   of  general     and     accurate   in- 
formation in  the  midst  of  a  most  active 
business  career.       His  intelligence  was 
far  above  the  average,  and  his  charac- 
teristic comments  on  public  characters, 
current  events  and  every  other  subject, 
that  the  world  gives  serious  attention 
to,   carried   with   them   so  much  charm 
that  the   social   hours  spent   with   him 
were  keenly  enjoyed.      Much  of  his  life 
was  given  up  to  the  pursuit  of  a  for- 
tune.     He  had  a  hard  and  discourag- 
ing  battle   with    fate   in    the   form     of 
fire.       Three  times  he  was  burned  out 
and  saw  the  accumulation  of  years  go 
up  in  smoke.      But  he  had  a  great  fac- 
ulty for  overcoming  such  disasters.  His 
6trong  heart  grew     stronger     and   his 
clear  brain  grew  clearer  under  misfor- 
tune,   and    when   he   sank   to   his   final 


sleep,  he  had  the  satisfaction  of  know- 
ing that  he  was  leaving  to  his  family 
between  a  half  and  three-quarters  of  a 
million  dollars.  He  was  one  of  the  most 
extensive  property  owners  in  Ogden 
and  interested  in  so  many  enterprises 
that  it  would  be  hard  to  compute  his 
wealth  with  a  greater  degree  of  accu- 
racy. He  was  a  man  who  was  de- 
voted to  his  friends  and  his  family, 
who  in  turn  reciprocated  his  affection." 

MAUGHAX,  Peter,  presiding  Bishop 
and  president  in  Cache  valley  from 
1859  to  1871,  was  the  fourth  son  of  AVil- 
liam  and  Martha  Maughan,  and  was 
born  May  7,  1811,  at  Breckenridge,in  the 
parish  of  Farley,  county  of  Cumber- 
land, England.  In  1829  he  married 
Miss  Ruth  Harrison,  who  died  in  1S41, 
leaving  him  six  small  children.     Early 


in  1838  he  was  baptized  by  Isaac  Ru.^- 
sell,  and  in  the  spring  of  1841  he  was 
ordained  an  Elder  by  Brigham  Young. 
He  emigrated  with  his  children  to 
America  in  1841,  crossing  the  ocean  in 
the  ship  "Rochester,"  together  with 
Pres.  Brigham  Young  and  others  of  the 
Apostles  who  were  returning  home.  Ht 
remained  a  short  time  in  Kirtland, 
Ohio,  and  then  removed  to  Nauvoo, 
where  he  married  Mary  Ann  Weston 
Davis,  a  native  of  FJngland,  where  he 
then  lived  till  the  spring  of  1844,  as- 
sisting in  building  the  Temple  and  the 
city.  In  1846,  together  with  the  rest 
of  the  Saints,  he  became  an  exile  foi 
the  sake  of  his  religion,  and  went  into 
the   wilderness.       He   arrived     in     Salt 


BIOGRAPHICAL,    ENCYCLOPEDIA. 


759 


Lake  City  Sept.  17,  1850,  and  was  short- 
ly afterwards  sent  to  Tooele  valley  to 
help  establish  settlements  there.  When 
Tooele  county  was  organized  in  April, 
1851,  he  was  appointed  county  clerk  and 
assessor,  which  offices  he  held  till  1853. 
He  was  also  chosen  one  of  the  select- 
men of  the  county,  and  appointed  city 
recorder  for  Tooele  city.  Having-  as- 
sisted in  forming  the  settlement  of  E. 
T.  City  he  was  appointed  presiding  El- 
der at  that  place  in  October,  1854.  In 
the  fall  of  1856  he  was  called  to  es- 
tablish settlements  in  Cache  valley, 
which  he  did  most  successfully,  and 
he  presided  over  the  same  as  president 
and  presiding  Bishop  until  his  death, 
which  occurred  at  Logan,  April  24,  1871. 
(See  Tullidge's  Histories,  Vol.  2,  Bio.  p. 
34.) 

HYDE,  William,  first  Bishop  of 
Hyde  Park,  Cache  county,  Utah,  was 
born  Sept.  11,  1818,  in  the  town  of  York, 
Livingston  county.  New  York,  son  of 
Heman  Hyde  and  Polly  W.  Tilton. 
When  he  was  seven  years  old  his  father 
left  the  town  of  York  and  settled  in 
the  town  of  Freedom,  Cattaraugus 
county,  in  the  same  State.  That  be- 
ing a  new  country,  he  cleared  the  tim- 
ber from  the  land  and  improved  a  large 
farm.  He  also  carried  on  a  consider- 
able business  in  wool  warding  and  cloth 
dressing.  In  1830-31  the  family,  which 
in  respectability  and  wealth  occupied 
a  good  social  position,  first  heard  of  the 
Book  of  Mormon  and  of  the  great  lat- 
ter-day work,  through  Warren  A.  Cow- 
dery,  whose  farm  joined  theirs. 
Through  his  brother  Oliver  he  obtained 
some  proof  sheets  of  the  Book  of  Mor- 
mon, which  were  also  read  with  great 
interest  by  Mr.  Heman  Hyde.  In  1833 
Elders  were  preaching  through  the 
country,  and  Heman  Hyde  and  his  son 
William,  hearing  the  gospel,  believed 
it  and  were  baptized  April  7,  1834.  Soon 
afterward  they  were  followed  by  the 
whole  family,  which  in  February,  1836, 
moved  to  Kirtland,  Ohio.  In  the 
spring  of  1838  William  left  his  father's 
house  and  traveled  1800  miles  to  the 
State  of  Missouri,  where  he  located  in 
the  town  of  Far  West.  There  he  suf- 
fered with  the  Saints  in  their  terrible 
persecutions,  and  left  Far  West  in  De- 
cember, 1838,  for  Quincy,  Ilijnois.  with 
the  satisfaction  that  he  had  done  all 
in  his  power  for  the  protection  and  good 
of  his  people.       Here  he  found  his  pa- 


rents, who  had  left  Kirtland  in  Sep- 
tember and  gone  into  Missouri,  but 
were  soon  compelled  by  the  mob  to 
leave.  In  October,  1839,  he  cast  his 
lot  with  his  people  as  one  of  the  found- 
ers of  the  city  of  Nauvoo,  where  he,  at 
a  conference  of  the  Saints,  was  or- 
dained an  Elder,  and  on  the  6th  of  the 
following  month,  with  Elder  Dusette 
for  a  companion,  he  started  on  his  first 
mission.  In  accordance  with  the  an- 
cient apostolic  method,  he  traveled 
without  purse  and  scrip,  and  preached 
the  gospel  through  the  States  of  Illi- 
nois, Indiana  and  Michigan.  After  an 
absence  of  about   three  months  he  re- 


turned to  Nau-voo.  At  a  conference 
held  in  that  city  April  7,  1840,  he  was 
ordained  a  Seventy,  and  soon  after- 
wards he  started  on  a  mission  to  the 
State  of  Maine,  in  company  with  Elder 
Herrrett.  He  visited  Kirtland  and 
preached  in  the  Temple.  Traveling 
and  preaching,  as  opportunity  offered, 
he  and  his  companion  arrived  on  the 
Fox  Islands,  off  Penobscot  bay,  in  the 
State  of  Maine.  There  they  were  very 
successful  in  proselyting  to  the  truth, 
and  there  also  Elder  Hyde  and  his  com- 
panion had  an  attack  of  the  typhus 
fever.  He  recovered,  but  his  compan- 
ion died.  He  continued  his  labors  in 
the  State  of  Maine  until  March  28,  1840, 
when  he  commenced  his  return  journey 
to  Nauvoo.  Falling  in  with  a  com- 
pany of  traveling  Saints  he  journeyed 
with  them  a  few  days,  and,  for  the  first 
time,  saw  Miss  Elizabeth  H.  Bullard, 
whom  he  afterwards  married.     He  ar- 


760 


LATTER-DAY    SAINT 


rived  at  Qulncy,  111.,  April  30,  1841.  Near 
this  place  his  father  resided,  and  with 
him  he  remained  the  most  of  the  sea- 
son. Feb.  23,  1842,  he  maxried  Miss 
Bullard,  his  farmer  traveling  acquaint- 
ance. The  following  summer,  in  con- 
nection with  his  father,  he  labored  to 
make  a  home  in  the  new  city  of  Nau- 
voo.  At  the  October  conference,  of  the 
same  year,  he  was  again  called  to  la- 
bor m  the  ministry.  On  the  23rd  of 
the  month,  after  talking  leave  of  family 
and  friends,  in  company  with  Benjamin 
S.  Wilber,  he  traveled  to  the  State  of 
Vermont,  as  usual  preaching  and  bap- 
tizing by  the  way.  He  visited  the  old 
family  home  in  that  State  and  found 
many  relatives,  to  whom  he  delivered 
the  message  of  saltation.  In  April, 
1843,  he  parted  with  his  companion  and 
returned  to  Nauv'oo,  where  ho  arrived 
about  the  middle  oi'  June.  On  his  way 
home  he  Visited  that  ever  memorable 
spot,  the  hiU  Cumorah.  But  a  short 
lime  was  allotted  him  in  which  to  en- 
joy the  pleasure  of  home,  for  he  start- 
ed on  a  mission  to  the  State  of  New 
York  Sept.  23,  1843.  He  was  again  emi- 
nently successful  In  his  labors.  Leam- 
iiig  through  a  notice  in  the  "Times  and 
Seasons'  that  he  had  hi-fn  appointed 
a  mission  to  Vermont,  in  company 
with  Elder  Erastus  Snow,  he  started 
for  his  new  field  of  labor  May  5,  1844. 
At  the  town  of  Lynden,  on  the  last  day 
of  June  and  the  first  of  July,  a  con- 
ference of  the  Saints  was  held.  In  which 
they  were  instructed  as  to  the  course 
they  should  puisue  in  the  ensuing 
l>i-esi(lential  elec'ion.  Thus  was  Bro. 
Hyde,  in  connection  with  many  other 
Elders,  identified  with  the  political 
moves  of  the  Prophet  Joseph  just  be- 
foie  his  death.  He  and  Elder  Snow, 
feeling  impressed  that  serious  trouble 
was  upon  the  Saints  in  Nauvoo,  de- 
termined to  return  to  that  place.  On 
the  8th  of  July  Elder  Hyde  parted  with 
the  Saints,  crossed  the  Green  Moun- 
tains and  reached  Whitehall  on  the  9th. 
There  they  learned  of  the  assassination 
«if  Joseph  and  Hyrum  Smith.  At  Buf- 
falo Elder  Hyde  fell  in  with  six  of  the 
Apostles  who  were  also  on  their  way 
to  Nauvoo  to  "comfort  Zion"  in  its  hour 
of  peril.  He  arrived  there  on  the  6th 
of  August.  In  the  stirring  events  which 
followed  he  sustained  the  ouorum  of 
the  Apostles  as  the  legitimate  head  of 
the  Church.  At  the  following  October 
conference  he  was  ordained  one  of  the 


presidents  of  the  8th  quorum  of  Sev- 
enty. In  January,  1845,  he  was  sent 
in  the  interests  of  the  Church  to  the 
States  of  Mississippi  and  Alabama.  He 
was  absent  about  two  months.  He 
spent  a  part  of  the  ensuing  season  In 
laboring  on  the  Temple,  in  which  he 
received  the  blessings  of  the  faithful, 
and  afterwards  assisted  in  bestowing 
them  upon  others,  until  Feb.  8,  1846.  In 
company  with  his  parents  and  other 
relatives,  he  left  Nauvoo  May  18,  1846, 
and  followed  the  trail  of  the  traveling 
"Camps  of  Israel"  to  Council  Bluffs, 
where  he  arrived  on  the  12th  of  July. 
He  was  in  time  to  prove  his  patriotism 
by  joining  that  immortal  body  of  men, 
the  Mormon  Battalion,  and  was  mus- 
tered into  service  in  the  company  of 
Captain  Jesse  D.  Hunter  as  second  ser- 
geant on  the  16th  of  July.  On  the 
same  day  the  company  was  marched 
eight  miles  to  the  Missouri  river.  On 
the  17th  he  returned  to  the  camp  in 
which  his  family  was  located,  and  in 
describing  the  situation,  he  says:  "The 
thoughts  of  leaving  my  family  at  this 
critical  time  are  indescribable.  Far 
from  the  land  which  we  had  once  called 
civilized,  with  no  dwelling  save  a 
wagon,  with  the  scorching  mid-summer 
sun  beating  upon  them,  with  the  pros- 
pect of  the  cold  December  blast  finding 
them  in  the  same  place.  My  family  at 
this  time  consisted  of  a  wife  and  two 
children,  the  eldest  of  which  was  but 
three  and  a  half  years  old,  and  the  situ- 
ation of  my  wife  was  such  as  to  re- 
quire, if  ever,  the  a.ssistance  and  watch- 
care  of  her  companion."  July  31st  the 
Battalion  commenced  its  march  for 
Fort  Leavenworth, where  it  arrived  Au- 
gust 1st.  On  the  13th  of  August  Bro. 
Hyde,  and  his  comrades,  commenced 
their  historic  march  to  the  Pacific  coast 
with  the  thermometer  at  101  degrees  in 
the  shade  and  130  degrees  in  the  sun. 
From  this  time  until  the  Battalion  was 
mustered  out  of  service,  at  Los  An- 
geles, California,  July  16.  1847,  the  per- 
sonal history  of  Bro.  Hyde  is  included 
in  its  general  history.  He  was  one  with 
many  of  his  companions  who  were  de- 
sirous at  once  of  returning  to  their 
families  and  to  the  body  of  the  Church. 
On  the  20th  of  July  they  organized  into 
companies  of  hundreds  and  fifties  for 
the  purposes  of  defense  and  assistance 
in  traveling  homeward.  Bro.  Hyde 
was  chosen  captain  of  the  first  fifty. 
They  started  on   their  journey  on   the 


BIOGRAPHICAL    ENCYCLOPEDIA. 


761 


23rd,  crossed  the  Sierra  Nevada  Moun- 
tains Sept.  5th,  and  on  the  7th  met 
Captain  Brown,  who  was  in  charge  of 
the  detachment  which  returned  from 
Santa  Fe  to  winter  at  Pueblo.  He  came 
direct  from  Great  Salt  Lake  valley  and 
brought  letters  to  most  of  the  brethren, 
and  also  a  letter  of  counsel  from  the 
heads  of  the  Church.  By  letters  from 
his  family  Elder  Hyde  learned  the  sad 
news  of  the  death  of  his  only  sister,  at 
Council  Bluffs,  from  a  lingering  sick- 
nes  caused  by  exposure.  As  if  to 
measurably  compensate  for  his  grief, 
he  also  learned  that  a  son  had  been 
born  to  him.  On  ttie  3rd  of  October  he 
reached  Fort  Hall,  about  two  hundred 
miles  north  of  Great  Salt  Lake  valley, 
and  over  seven  hundred  miles,  by  the 
route  the  party  had  traveeld  from  Sut- 
ter's Fort.  From  there,  without  so 
much  as  an  Indian  trail  to  guide  them, 
they  arrived  at  the  camp  of  the  Saints, 
in  Great  Salt  Lake  valley,  Oct.  12,  1847. 
Elder  Hyde  did  not, like  some  of  his  com- 
panions, find  his  family  there,  and  de- 
termined at  once  to  cross  the  plains  to 
Winter  Quarters,  where  it  had  re- 
mained. After  all  his  toils,  he  rested 
but  two  days  and  these  were  days  of 
preparation.  Oct.  ]4)th  he  left  the  Val- 
ley, in  company  with  sixteen  others,  for 
the  Missouri  river.  The  party  passed 
Fort  Bridger  on  the  19th,  having  trav- 
f  led  118  miles.  On  the  20th,  as  a 
forerunner  of  the  coming  winter,  the 
pnow  fell  two  inches.  On  the  5th,  6th 
and  7th  of  November  the  weather  was 
exceedingly  cold,  making  it  necessary 
lo  use  great  exertions  to  keep  from 
freezing.  On  the  8th  they  reached  Fort 
Laramie,  where  they  were  very  hospit- 
ably received.  When  they  left  the  tim- 
ber on  the  Platte  river  on  the  11th,  the 
snow  was  from  eight  to  twelve  inches 
deep.  There  were  200  miles  to  travel 
with  only  such  fires  as  could  be  made 
\\ith  "buffalo  chips"  obtained  from  un- 
der the  snow.  On  the  19th  they  came 
to  timber.  The  weather  was  now 
stormy  and  cold  and  extremely  un- 
pleasant even  to  men  inured  to  hard- 
ship. Arriving  at  the  south  fork  of  the 
Platte  it  was  impossible  to  cross  at  the 
usual  ford  on  account  of  high  water 
and  running  ice.  The  party  were 
therefore  compelled  to  travel  twelve 
or  fifteen  miles,  over  very  bad  ground, 
to  the  forks  of  the  stream.  There  much 
difficulty  was  encountered.  Elder  Hyde 
first  crossed  both  streams  on  foot.     In 


one  he  had  to  swim.  The  water  was 
extremely  cold  with  ice  running.  After 
all  the  hardships  that  it  would  seem 
men  could  possibly  endure,  the  party 
reached  Winter  Quarters  on  the  11th  of 
December,  a  bitter  cold  day.  This  party 
was  the  first  of  the  Battalion  that  re- 
turned to  that  place.  On  the  12th  El- 
der Hyde  crossed  the  Missouri  river  to 
Council  Point  where  he  found  his  fami- 
ly and  father's  house.  It  took  him  some 
time  to  recover  from  the  hardship  and 
hunger  he  had  endured.  In  the  spring 
of  1849  he  started  with  his  family,  In 
company  with  his  brother  Rosel,  for 
Great  Salt  Lake  valley.  He  was  ap- 
pointed captain  of  a  company  of  sixty- 
three  wagons,  under  Mr.  Gully,  the 
captain  of  the  hundred.  With  the  ex- 
ception that  several  of  the  company 
died  with  the  colera  in  the  forepart  of 
the  journey,  the  trip  was  ordinarily 
successful.  Elder  Hyde  arriving  in  the 
Valley  Sept.  22,  1849.  For  some  time 
after  his  arrival  he  was  employed  by 
the  pioneer  firm  of  Livingston  and  Kin- 
kead.  At  a  special  conference  of 
the  Church  held  in  Salt  Lake  City  Aug. 
28,  1852,  he  was  called  to  go  on  a  mis- 
sion to  Australia.  On  the  20th  of  Oc- 
tober he  took  leave  of  his  family  and 
started  on  his  long  journey,  by  what 
was  then  known  as  the  southern  route 
to  California.  Dec.  3rd  he  arrived  at 
the  camp  of  the  Saints,  at  San  Bernar- 
dino, California.  On  the  17th  he  left 
San  Bernardino.  After  a  nine  days" 
voyage  from  San  Pedro,  he  arrived  in 
the  city  of  San  Francisco.  After  spend- 
ing some  time  in  obtaining  funds  to 
meet  the  further  expenses  of  the  jour- 
ney, he,  with  the  Elders  destined  for 
the  same  field  of  labor  sailed  frojn  San 
Francisco  Feb.  2,  1853.  After  a  prosper- 
ous voyage  and  several  days  spent  in 
quarantine,  on  acount  of  there  having 
been  smallpox  on  board  the  vessel  dur- 
ing the  voyage,  Elder  Hyde,  with  his 
missionary  companions,  arrived  in  the 
port  of  Sydney,  New  South  Wales, April 
0,  1853,  There  he  labored  faithfully 
and  \\  ith  gratifying  results,  under  Pres. 
Augustus  Farnham.  in  the  duties  of  his 
calling.  At  a  conference  of  the  Saints 
held  in  Sydney,  Jan.  1,  1854,  he  was 
called  to  take  charge  of  a  company  of 
Saints  who  were  soon  to  start  for  Zion. 
Some  change  appeared  necessary,  as 
his  health  was  failing  through  exces- 
sive labors  and  the  heat  of  the  clim- 
ate.     The  company  about  to  emigrate 


762 


LATTER-DAY    SAINT 


were  from  the  district  where  Elder 
Hyde  had  principally  labored.  "Zion's 
Watchman,"  the  organ  of  the  Saints 
in  New  South  Wales,  speaking  of  those 
about  to  emigrate,  said:  "The  company 
is  under  the  charge  of  Elder  William 
Hyde,  who  during  the  past  year  has 
labored  faithfully,  diligently  and  per- 
severingly  in  the  Hunter's  river  dis- 
trict. His  labors  have  been  blessed; 
many  obeyed  the  gospel,  and  are  gath- 
ering with  him.  He  goes  hence  with 
the  full  confidence  and  approbation  of 
all  true  Saints."  He  sailed  from  New 
Castle  on  the  barque  "Julia  Ann,"  with 
a  company  of  63  Saints,  March  22,  1854. 
The  voyage  was  a  prosperous  one.  Af- 
ter being  at  sea  about  three  months  the 
company  was  safely  landed  at  San  Pe- 
dro, California  Elder  Hyde  went  at 
once  to  the  colony  of  Saints  at  San  Ber- 
nordino,  and  engaged  teams  to  bring 
the  emigrants  to  that  place.  A  descrip- 
tion of  his  journey  home  across  the 
desert  is  best  given  in  the  following 
extract  from  his  journal:  "I  remained 
in  San  Bernardino,  until  the  27th  of 
July,  then  left  for  Great  Salt  Lake  val- 
ley, in  company  with  the  mail  carriers. 
We  had  mules  for  both  riding  and 
packing.  The  weather  was  excessive- 
ly hot,  and  my  health  being  much  im- 
paired, I  soon  discovered  that  I  could 
accomplish  the  journey  only  through 
much  suffering.  On  the  fifth  day  of 
our  travels  it  seeemed  that  I  must  give 
over,  as  my  body  was  racked  with  the 
most  excruciating  pain,  accompanied 
with  a  scorching  fever.  We  traveled 
55  miles.  O,  may  it  never  be  my  lot 
to  experience  another  such  a  day!  Be- 
fore we  came  to  our  place  of  encamp- 
ment, I  became  so  exhausted  that  I  fell 
from  my  mule,  and  was  hardly  sensible 
that  I  was  falling,  until  I  struck  the 
ground.  The  brethren  In  the  company 
supposed  that  my  journey  had  ended. 
On  the  evening  of  the  sixth  day  we 
were  attacked  by  a  company  of  some 
thirty  or  forty  Indians  near  Resting 
Springs.  We  haA  a  severe  round  with 
them,  and  succeeded  in  getting  away, 
but  not  without  the  loss  of  one  mule 
and  one  of  the  mail  bags.  Brother 
Powell  was  severely  wounded  in  the  hip 
with  an  arrow;  my  riding  mule  was 
badly  wounded,  and  an  arrow  passed 
through  my  outer  clothes,  but  there 
was  none  to  touch  my  body.  I  arrived 
safely  at  home  on  the  14th  of  August, 
but  in  a  very  feeble     state     of  health. 


Found  my  family  well  and  in  every 
way  comfortable."  For  some  time  af- 
ter Elder  Hyde's  arrival  home,  his 
health  was  too  feeble  for  him  to  per- 
form much  manual  labor.  In  the  au- 
tumn of  1855  he  moved  his  family  to 
Salt  Lake  City,  and  followed  the  occu- 
pation of  salesman  until  the  spring  of 
1857.  His  health  being  much  improved 
he  concluded  to  again  try  the  cultiva- 
tion of  the  soil.  For  this  purpose  he 
sold  his  home  in  Salt  Lake  City,  and 
moved  to  Lehi,  Utah  county.  The  same 
year  he  was  chosen  as  a  president  of 
the  44th  quorum  of  Seventy,  which  was 
organized  in  Lehi.  In  October,  1857, 
he  was  assigned  to  the  command  of  one 
hundred  men,  which  were  a  part  of  the 
"Mormon"  forces  that  occupied  the 
mountain  defiles  in  order  to  check  the 
advance  of  Buchanan's  army.  This 
service  occupied  about  two  months.  In 
the  spring  of  1859  he  was  summoned  to 
serve  as  a  juryman  in  the  court  of  the 
notorious  Judge  Cradlebaugh.  April 
6,  1860,  Elder  Hyde  commenced  to  move 
his  family  and  effects  to  Cache  valley. 
It  might  be  considered  a  mission  given 
him  by  Joseph  Young,  then  senior  pres- 
ident of  the  Seventies, as  he  was  to  have 
the  oversight  of  the  Seventies  in  Cache 
county.  He  arrived  at  his  destination 
On  the  16th  of  April.  Here  his  labors 
as  a  "Mormon"  pioneer  culminated  in 
the  founding  of  the  settlement  of  Hyde 
Park  the  ensuing  summer.  The  Stake 
authorities  organized  the  settlement  on 
the  1st  of  July,  with  Wm.  Hyde  as  act- 
ing Bishop.  He  often  exercised  his 
calling  as  an  Elder  in  preaching  in  the 
other  settlements  of  Cache  county  in 
company  with  Apostle  Ezra  T.  Benson 
and  his  presiding  Bishop.  His  long 
varied  experiences  made  him  a  most 
efficient  leader  of  the  people  in  develop- 
ing the  resources  of  a  new  country.  In 
September,  1862,  he  was  very  efficient 
in  assisting  General  Benson,  as  his  ad- 
jutant, in  organizing  the  militia  of 
Cache  Military  District.  Dec.  30,  1862, 
a  mass  meeting  was  held  in  Logan, 
at  which  seven  delegates  were  chosen 
to  meet  in  a  convention  to  be  held  in 
Salt  Lake  City  Jan.  20,  1863,  for  the- 
purpose  of  forming  a  State  constitution, 
and  of  making:  other  necessary  ar- 
rangements for  the  admission  of  Utah 
into  the  Union.  Among  the  men.  se- 
lected for  this  purpwse  was  Wm.  Hyde. 
In  the  election  of  State  officers  to  act 
in   case   Utah   became     a  State,   Elder- 


BIOGRAPHICAL    ENCYCLOPEDIA. 


763 


Hyde  was  appointed  judge  of  the  Sth 
judicial  district.  To  assist  in  home 
industries  this  year  he  started  a  wool 
carding  machine,  which, with  the  neces- 
sary plant,  cost  about  three  thousand 
dollars.  His  family  also  encouraged 
home  manufactures  among  the  people 
by  clothing  themselves  with  the  work- 
manship of  their  own  hands.  Home 
manufactures  weer  an  important  fac- 
tor in  sustaining  a  family  in  those 
primitive  times.  Elder  Hyde  was  also 
successful  as  a  farmer.  In  the  spring 
of  1861  he  was  chosen  to  take  charge 
of  the  train  of  teams  made  up  in  Salt 
Lake  City,  for  the  purpose  of  going 
to  the  Missouri  river  to  assist  the  emi- 
gration in  crossing  the  plains.  Foi 
this  purpose  he  left  home  April  19,  1864, 
and  arrived  at  Wyoming,  Neb.,  with 
his  train  on  the  3rd  of  July.  After 
waiting  seven  weeks,  his  was  the  fifth 
train  to  start  on  the  return  trip.  After 
traveling  fifty  miles  he  was  notified  by 
telegram  from  Pres.  Brigham  Young, 
on  account  of  Indian  difficulities,  to 
await  the  sixth  company,  which  was 
still  behind.  The  combined  train  made 
a  successful  trip  and,  on  arriving  in 
Salt  Lake  City,  were  warmly  welcomed 
by  several  hundred  citizens.  Oct.  30, 
1S64,  Elder  Hyde  arrived  at  his  home 
in  Hyde  Park.  He  found  his  family 
in  a  prosperous  condition,  and  more  es- 
pecially as  a  son  was  born  to  him 
about  a  week  before  his  return.  In  four 
years,  under  his  guidance,  Hyde  Park 
became  a  very  thriving  settlement  of 
some  forty  families.  The  Territorial 
legislature  of  1865-66  appointed  him 
probate  judge  of  Cache  county.  In  the 
fall  of  1865  Cache  county  was  organized 
into  a  military  district,  with  Apostle 
Ezra  T.  Benson  as  brigadier-general, 
and  Wm.  Hyde  as  adjutant  and  chief 
of  staff.  General  Benson  and  Bishop 
Maughan  had,  for  several  years,  been 
members  of  the  Territorial  legislature, 
and,  during  their  absence.  Bishop 
Hyde  presided  over  the  affairs  of  Cache 
county.  In  1866  he  entered  into  co- 
partnership with  Thos.  E.  Ricks  and 
Wm.  Hendricks,  and  they  built  a  sub- 
stantial grist  mill,  at  a  cost  of  $27,000. 
In  the  meantime  the  firm  did  a  consid- 
erable business  in  merchandising.  In 
the  autumn  of  1868  Elder  Hyde  en- 
gaged, with  Apostle  Benson  and  others, 
in  grading  one  hundred  miles  of  the 
Central  Pacific  Railroad.  This  fur- 
nished lucrative  employment  to     many 


of  the  citizens  of  Cache  valley.  Dec. 
6,  1868,  while  employed  on  the  railroad, 
he  was  seriously  injured  by  a  kick  from 
a  horse  over  the  left  temple,  which 
fractured  his  skull.  From  this  he  suf- 
fered much  for  about  three  weeks,  and 
he  was  under  the  necessity  of  i-emain- 
ing  at  home  the  most  of  the  following 
winter  and  spring.  March  25,  1869,  the 
Hyde  Park  branch  of  Zion's  Co-opera- 
tive Mercantile  Institution  received  its 
first  stock  of  goods  and  commenced 
business,  having  been  previously  or- 
ganized with  Wm.  Hyde  as  president. 
In  February,  1870,  he  was  elected  pro- 
bate judge  of  Cache  county  for  the  sec- 
ond term,  in  the  fall  of  the  same  year, 
at  a  three  days'  muster  of-  the  militia 
of  Cache  county,  he  was  unanimously 
elected  brigadier-general,  which  raised 
him  to  the  command  of  Cache  Military 
District.  Aug.  23,  1871.  a  railroad  com- 
pany was  organized  for  the  construc- 
tion of  a  railroad  from  Ogden,  ^Veber 
county,  to  Logan,  Cache  county,  and 
thence  on  to  Soda  Springs.  Gen.  Hyde 
was  elected  one  of  the  board  of  direc- 
tors of  the  company.  In  February, 
1S72,  when  delegates  to  another  con- 
vention were  elected  for  the  purpose  of 
taking  preliminary  steps  for  the  ad- 
mission of  Utah  into  the  L^nion,  Judge 
Hyde  was  again  sent  from  Cache  coun- 
ty. At  the  general  conference  held  in 
Salt  Lake  City  Oct.  7.  1872,  Elder  Hyde 
was  ordained  a  High  Priest  and  ap- 
pointed Bishop  of  Hyde  Park.  At  a 
conference  of  the  Church  held  in  Lo- 
gan, June  27,  1873,  he  was  ordained  a 
Patriarch,  under  the  hands  of  the  First 
Presidency  and  the  Apostles.  Bishop 
Hyde  died  March  2.  1874.  He  was  an 
efficient  public  servant  and  truly  a  i-ep- 
resentative  man  among  his  people.  Jus- 
tice, humanity  and  uprightness  were 
prominently  developed  in  his  life's  la- 
bors. He  was  a  firm  believer  in  the 
principle  of  celestial  marriage,  having 
married  five  wives  and  being  the  father 
of  twenty-five  children.  As  president, 
Bishop,  general,  judge,  husband  and 
father,  he  was  kind,  courteous  and  con- 
sistent; as  a  Saint,  the  embodiment  of 
humility.  (Culled  in  part  from  the 
works   of   Edward   W.   Tullidge.) 

MORGAN,  Thomas,  vice-president  of 
the  Logan  Temple,  is  the  son  of  Samuel 
Morgan  and  Elizabeth  Beddis,  and  was 
born  March  11,  1S37,  at  Woodside,  Glou- 
cester, England.  He  wasc  baptized  into 


764 


LATTER-DAT    SAINT 


the  Church  March  13.  1854,  by  Thomas 
Morgan,  and  later  in  that  year  he  was 
ordained  a  Teacher  and  a  Priest. 
In  1855  he  was  ordained  an  Elder  by 
David  B.  Dille,  and  called  to  assist  in 
the  presidency  of  the  Viney  Hill 
branch.  In  1856  he  was  appointed  to 
preside  over  the  Woodside  branch. 
March  21,  1857,  he  married  Mary  Eliza- 
beth Tingle,  and  on  March  28th  they 
sailed  for  America  on  the  ship  "George 
Washington."  After  landing  at  Bos- 
ton they  went  to  Cheshire,  New  Haven 
county,  Conn.,  where  they  remained 
till  1862,  when  they  emigrated  to 
Utah  and  settled  in  Logan,  Cache 
county.  Elder  Morgan  was  ordained  a 
Seventy  May  7,  1876,  by  Francis  Gun- 
nell,  and  on  May  31,  1877,  he  was  or- 
dained to  the  office  of  a  High  Priest  by 
Milton  D.  Hammond  and  set  apart 
as  first  counselor  in  the  Bishopric  of 
the  Fourth  Ward,  Logan,  in  which  ca- 
pacity he  is  still  laboring.  In  1886  he 
\v?.s  called  to  labor  in  the  Logan  Tem- 
ple and  on  Feb.  23,  1898,  he  was  set 
apart  as  first  assistant  to  Pres.  Mar- 
riner  W.  Merrill  of  the  Logan  Temple. 
Since  July  11,  1898,  he  has  served  as 
vice-president  of  the  Logan  Temple 
Association.  Bro.  Morgan  was  elected 
a  member  of  the  Logan  city  council  in 
1&86,  and  again  in  1892,  in  which  capaci- 
ty he  served  with  credit  and  ability. 

JLEWIS,  Benjamin  Marion,  Bishop 
of  the  Fiist  Ward,  Logan,  Cach.e  coun- 
ty, Utah,  from  1861  to  1901.  is  the  son 
of  Neriah  and  Rebecca  Lewis  and  was 
born  March  20,  1841,  at  Carlinville,  Ma- 
coupin county,  111.  Elder  Lewis  writes 
in  a  short  life  sketch  prepared  for  this 
book:  "When  I  was  about  four  years 
nld  my  parents,  who  had  joined  the 
''hurch,  went  to  Nauvoo,  111.,  and  I  re- 
member visiting  the  Temple  there.  To- 
gether with  my  parents  I  started  for 
the  West,  in  company  with  other,  ex- 
iled Saints.  My  father  stopped  and 
vorked  in  several  places,  till  the  spring 
of  1851,  when  we  started  across  the 
plains  for  the  valley  of  the  Great  Salt 
Lake.  We  were  about  six  months  on 
the  plains,  and  arrived  in  Salt  I^ake 
' 'ity  in  October,  1851,  in  Capt.  James 
''ummings'  company.  After  living  in 
Salt  Lake  City  about  two  years,  we 
moved  to  Centerville,  Davis  county, 
where  I  wa.s  ordained  to  the  lesser 
F'riesthood.  In  1855  I  lived  in  Herri- 
man,   Salt   Lake   county,   whei>e  I  took 


an  active  part  in  Ward  affairs.  While 
residing  in  the  16th  Ward,  Salt  Lake 
City,  m  1856,  I  was  ordained  a  Seventy 
and  received  my  endowments.  Dur- 
ing the  winter  of  1859-60  I  made  a  trip 
to  California  for  merchandise,  and  on 
returning  to  Utah  I  went  to  Logun, 
Cache  county.  In  1860  I  was  chosen 
captain  of  a  company  of  minute  men 
to  guard  the  interests  of  the  settlers 
against  the  Indians.  I  was  engaged 
more  or  less  in  this  work  for  many 
years.  April  14,  1861,  I  was  chosen  to 
preside  over  the  Saints  in  the  First 
Ward,  Logan,  as  Bi-shop.  I  married 
Barbara  Y.  Crockett  in  the  Logan  Tem- 
ple April  27,  1862.  In  the  year  1863  I  was 
set  apart  as  a  president  in  the  64th 
quorum  of  Seventy.  For  several  years  I 


served  as  president  of  the  United  Or- 
der in  the  First  Ward,  Logan.  I  did 
considerable  work  on  the  Central  Pa- 
cific and  the  Utah  Northern  railroads. 
In  1863  I  was  appointed  road  supervisor 
and  served  several  terms  in  that  capa- 
city and  also  as  water  master.  For  a 
number  of  years  I  was  a  member  of  the 
Logan  city  council  in  the  early  days. 
About  1875  I  had  charge  of  a  company 
of  men  who  worked  at  cutting  and 
sawing  logs  for  use  in  erecting  the  Lo- 
gan Tabernacle.  I  also  assisted  in  the 
erection  of  the  Logan  Temple.  In  1901, 
after  having  presided  over  the  First 
Ward  for  about  forty  years,  I  resigned 
my  position  as  Bishop  and  was  chosen 
to  act  as  a  counselor  in  the  presidency 
of  the  High  Priests'  quorum  of  the 
Cache   Stake   of  Zion.       On   being     re- 


BIOGRAPHICAL    ENCYCLOPEDIA. 


765 


leased  from  the  Bishopric,  the  Saints  of 
the  First  Ward  tendered  me  a  grand 
reception  in  the  Opera  House  and  pre- 
sented me  with  a  gold  watch.  I  have 
always  taken  a  great  interest  in  Tem- 
ple work,  and  have  performed  ordi- 
nances for  hundreds  of  my  kindred." 
Having  married  Eliza  Ann  Jinks  as  a 
plural  wife  July  15,  1885,  Bishop  Lewis 
was  arrested  on  the  charge  of  "adul- 
tery," and  after  trial  and  conviction 
he  served  five  months'  imprisonment  in 
the  Utah  penitentiary  in  1893  and  1894. 
Bishop  Lewis  is  the  father  of  17  chil- 
dren. He  is  a  firm  and  staunch  Lat- 
ter-day Saint  and  has  endeavored  un- 
der all  circumstances  to  do  his  duty. 

FARREtiL,  George  Lionel,    Bishop 
of  Smithfield,  Cache  county,  Utah,  from 
1880  to  1890,  is  the  third  son  of  William 
Farreli  and  Alice  Sadler  Bird,  and  was 
bom  Feb.  16,  1829,  in  Hewelsfield,  Glou- 
cestershire,   England.       His  opportuni- 
ties for  gaining  a  scholastic  education 
were  very  limited,  as  he,  at  the  age  of 
about  nine   and   a  half  years,    had     to 
help  support  the  family,   and  was  ap- 
prenticed   to    learn    the    tailor's    trade. 
After   seven    years    in    the   tailor   shop, 
finding  the  work  too  confining,  he  found 
employment    as   a    gardener   and    nur- 
seryman.      Having   heard    the    gospel, 
and    being   converted    to   its    truth,    he 
was  baptized   March  1,   1850.    by   Elder 
James   Edmonds,     and     in     September 
following  he    was      ordained      to    the 
Priesthood  and  sent  out  to  work  as  a 
missionary.      In  January,  1853,  he  was 
ordained   an   Elder  by  John   Van   Cott 
and  in  February  he  set  sail  for  Ameri- 
ca on   board   the  ship   "International." 
Owing   to   sickness     and    other   causes 
Bro.  Farreli  was  unable  to  proceed  to 
the   Valley  at  once,   on   his  arrival   in 
America,  in  consequence  of  which     he 
secured    employment    for    his    mother, 
his  sister   (who   had   accompanied   him 
from  England)  and  himself    in     Iowa. 
While  yet  In  the  east  a  sad  event  oc- 
curred in  Bro.  Farrell's  life:  Jane  Wil- 
liams, his  affianced  wife,  died  in  March, 
1854.    In  the  spring  of  1859  he  was  able 
to  emigrate  to  Zlon  with  his  relatives. 
On    arriving   In     Utah     he     settled    In 
Farmlngtcn,   Davis  county,     where  he 
remained  one  year  and  then  moved  to 
Logan,    Cache   county,    where   he    pro- 
ceeded to  build  himself  a  home.  Apos- 
tles Ezra  T.   Benson  and  Orson  Hyde 
came   to  Logan  In   November,  and  on 


the  9th  of  the  month  ordained  and  set 
apart  Wm.  B.  Preston  as  Bishop,  and 
Geo.  L.  Farreli  as  Ward  clerk.  In  De- 
cember, 1859,  Elder  Farreli  was  chosen 
to  be  tithing  clerk  in  Cache  valley.  In 
1874-76  he  filled  a  mission  to  England, 
where  he  baptized  nearly  one  hundred 
souls,  and  organized  a  number  of 
branches  and  Sunday  schools.  He  la- 
bored in  the  Nottingham  conference, 
first  as  a  traveling  Elder  and  later  as 
conference  president. On  his  return  from 
this  mission  (in  1876)  he  was  ordained  a 
High  Priest  atid  set  apart  to  preside 
over  the  High  Priests'  quorum  of 
Cache  Stake,  and  he  was  also  called  to 
preside  over  the  Y  M.  M.  I.  A.  in  the 
Cache  Stake  of  Zion;  this  latter  po- 
sition he  held  for  four  years.  He  was 
ordained  a  Bishop  and  set  apart  to 
preside  over  the  Smithfield  Ward.Cache 


4^ 


county,  in  May,  1880,  which  position  he 
filled  till  April  30,  1890,  when  he  re- 
signed and  was  ordained  a  Patriarch 
by  Apostle  Francis  M.  Lyman,  In 
which  capacity  he  is  still  laboring.  In 
military  affairs  Elder  Farreli  served 
for  many  yeai-s  In  the  Nauvoo  Legion, 
and  rose  from  one  rank  to  another  till 
he  became  lieutenant-colonel  of  the 
regiment-  In  1860  he  was  elected 
county  recorder  of  Cache  county  and 
held  that  office  until  1874.  He  be- 
came a  life  member  of  the  Deseret 
Agricultural  and  Manufacturing  Socie- 
ty July  1,  1864.  He  was  appointed  post- 
master of  Logan  Jan.  4,  1867,  and  held 
that  position  till  1874.  By  the  forego- 
ing it   will   be   seen   that   Bishop   Far- 


766 


LATTER-DAY    SAINT 


rell's  life  has  been  a  most  active  and 
interesting  one,  both  ecclesiastically, 
civilly,  as  well  as  in  a  military  capa- 
city. 

JACKSON,  Henry  Clark,  a  Patri- 
arch in  the  Hyrum  Stake  of  Zion,  is 
the  third  son  of  Robert  Jackson  and 
Hannah  Clark  and  was  born  June  3, 
]S19,  at  Gainsboroug-h,  Lincolnshire, 
England.  As  a  youth  he  was  appren- 
ticed to  learn  the  blacksmith's  trade, 
which  he  successfully  completed  and 
became  an  expert  at  that  business.  He 
Iwas  a  member  of  the  Primitive  Meth- 
(odist  Church  and  often  occupied  the 
jiulpit  as  a  lay  preacher.  On  hearing 
the  gospel  preached  in  1846  he  became 
(Dnvinced  of  its  truth  and  was  bap- 
tized into  the  Church  Sept.  19,  1846,  by 


ift* 


Elder  Geo.  Robbins  and  was  at  the 
same  time  ordained  to  the  office  of  a 
Priest.  In  1848  he  left  his  native  land 
for  America,  landing  in  St.  Louis,  Mo. 
He  remained  in  St.  Louis,  working  at 
his  trade,  till  1850,  when  he  went  to 
<;'ouncil  Bluffs,  Iowa,where  he  remained 
till  1»52  In  that  year  he  crossed  thQ 
plains  in  Capt.  James  C.  Snow's  com- 
pany, arriving  in  the  Valley  Oct.  7, 
1852.  He  located  In  Salt  Lake  City, 
where  he  followed  his  trade,  and  also 
traveled  considerably  in  northern  Utah. 
In  1865  he  removed  to  Old  Paradise, 
<"'ache  county  (now  Avon).  Bro.  Jack- 
son was  ordained  an  Elder  by  Jas.  Ure 
in  1847,  and  on  Feb.  15,  1853,  he  was 
ordained  to  the  office  of  a  Seventy  by 
Alexander     McRae,     June    5,     1877,     he 


was  ordained  a  High  Priest  and  set 
apart  to  act  as  first  counselor  to  Bishop 
Orson  Smith  of  the  Paradise  Ward,  by 
Apostle  Moses  Thatcher,  and  on  May 
8,  1898,  he  was  ordained  to  the  office 
of  a  Patriarch  by  Pres.  Joseph  F. 
Smith;  this  last  office  he  is  still  mag- 
nifying. Elder  Jackson  has  always 
been  an  active  and  energetic  Church 
member.  He  labored  as  a  teacher  in 
Richard  Ballantyne's  Sunday  school  in 
the  14th  Ward,  Salt  Lake  City,  was  for 
many  years  a  president  in  the  36th 
quorum  of  Seventy  and  from  1877  to 
1884  he  served  as  first  counselor  in  the 
Paradise  Ward  Bishopric.  From  April 
1873,  to  1876  he  officiated  as  acting 
Bishop  of  that  Ward.  He  has  also 
presided  over  the  High  Priests'  quo- 
rum of  Paradise  since  1894.  Bro.  Jack- 
son married  Ann  Oades  Feb.  3,  1843, 
with  whom  he  had  six  children,  five 
of  whom  are  living.  He  yielded  obe- 
dience to  the  law  of  plural  marriage 
May  4,  1861,  by  marrying  Mary  Gil- 
more  White,  the  issue  of  which  union 
is  five  children,  two  of  whom  are  dead. 
He  has  been  an  enterprising  and  thrif- 
ty citizen,  always  having  been  to  the 
front  in  promoting  home  industries  and 
in  developing  the  country's  resources. 
He  has  successfully  followed  his  trade 
as  a  skilled  blacksmith  during  a  large 
portion  of  his  life.  In  1860,  together 
with  another  brother,  he  built  a  saw 
mill  in  Old  Paradise,  and  in  1865  he 
built  a  flouring  mill  in  the  same  place 
where  he  conducted  a  prosperous  mill- 
ing business  for  many  years.  In  mili- 
tary affairs  he  served  as  a  captain  of 
lancers  and  did  active  service  in  the 
Echo  canyon  war  of  1857-58,  in  heading 
off  Johnston's  army.  Civilly  he  has 
served  nine  years  as  justice  of  the 
peace  in  Paradise. 

LiARSEN,  John  Christian,  Bishop 
of  the  Coveville  Ward,  Cache  county, 
Utah,  is  the  son  of  Christian  J.  Lar- 
sen  and  Barbara  D.  J.  Olsen,  and  was 
born  Jan.  13,  1855,  at  West  Weber,  We- 
ber county,  Utah.  He  was  baptized 
by  his  father  when  quite  young.  In 
1857,  with  his  father's  family,  he  moved 
south  to  Ephraim,  Sanpete  county,  and 
later  to  Spring  City;  from  there  they 
went  back  to  Logan,  Cache  county,  in 
1868,  where  young  John  lived  till  1882, 
when  he  moved  to  what  is  now  known 
as  Coveville  (then  part  of  Richmond). 
Here   he   has   resided   ever   since.       He 


BIOGRAPHICAL    ENCYCLOPEDIA. 


767 


was  ordained  a  Deacon  when  a  boy: 
later,  he  was  ordained  to  the  office  of 
an  Elder  by  Chas.  Lundberp,  and  he 
was  ordained  a  High  Priest,  and  set 
apart  to  preside  as  IMshoj)  of  the  Cove- 
ville  Ward.  Nov.  27,  1S82.  by  Bishop 
\Vm.  B.  Preston.  He  is  still  efficiently 
filling  this  responsible  calling.  Bishop 
Larsen  married  Susannah  TitensonFeb. 
7.  1S77,  with  whom  he  has  had  seven 
<hildren,  five  of  whom  are  living.  He 
yielded  obedience  to  the  law  of  i^lural 
marriage  Nov.  24.  18S1.  by  marrying 
Mary  Ellen  Titenson.  the  issue  of  which 
union  is  eight  children;  all  of  whom  are 
living  except  one.  Later,  he  also  mar- 
lied  Emma  J.  Comish,  who  has  borne 
him  one  child.  Though  living  con- 
tinuously with  his  wives,  he  was  never 
arrest'^d  during  the  anti-polygamy 
raid,  but  in  January,  1889,  he  sur- 
1  endered  himself  voluntarily  to  the  offi- 
cers and  was  tried  in  the  District  Court 
at  Ogden  for  unlawful  cohabitation.  He 
was  acquitted  through  lack  of  evidence. 
Bishop  Larsen  is  a  man  of  deep  religi- 
ous conxictions,  and  has  always  dis- 
charged his  duties  in  the  Church  in  the 
face  of  all  obstructions.  As  one  of 
the  early  settlers  of  Coveville  he  has 
done  much  to  develop  the  industries 
and  resources  of  that  settlement.  He 
is  a  successful  and  thrifty  farmer. 

ANDERSON.  John  H.,  Bishop  of 
Mendon,  Cache  county,  Utah,  was  born 
Sept.  24,  1864.  The  years  of  his  boy- 
hood were  spent  upon  the  farm,  where 
he  worked  diligently  throughout  the 
summer  in  order  to  obtain  means  to 
attend  school  in  winter.  When  but 
eighteen  years  of  age  he  was  called  to 
the  mission  field  in  Sweden,  where  he 
acquired  a  thorough  knowledge  of  the 
Swedish,  language,  learning  to  write, 
read  and  speak  it  proficiently.  After 
his  return  home  he  accepted  a  posi- 
tion in  a  local  branch  of  Z.  C.  M.  1., 
where  his  business  ability  soon  made 
him  conspicuous.  In  1893  he  was 
placed  in  charge  of  a  branch  store  of 
the  institution,  which  he  conducted  sat- 
isfactorily in  every  way,  until  the  lo- 
cal branch  was  closed.  In  1897  he  en- 
tered business  on  his  own  account, 
opening  a  general  merchandise  estab- 
lishment, which  to-day  is  one  or  the 
leading  mercantile  houses  in  Logan.  He 
has  held  prominent  ecclesiastical  posi- 
tions and  is  an  active  participant  in 
public  matters,  though  not  at  all  osten- 


tatiou.s.  Aug.  3,  1896.  he  was  ordained 
a  High  Priest  and  set  apart  as  an  al- 
ternate High  Councilor  in  the  Cache 
Stake  of  Zion,  which  position  he  held 
till  April  26,  1890,  when  he  was  ordained 
a  Bishop  and  set  apart  to  preside  over 
the  Mendon  Ward,  in  which  capacity 
he  is  still  laboring  John  H.  Anderson 
is  one  of  the  self-made,  energetic  young 
men.    who  are  making     their   influence 


felt  in  the  community.  Born  of  hum- 
ble but  respectable  parents,  he  has 
gradually  fought  his  way  up  from  a 
plowboy  to  the  front  ranks.  He  is 
possessed  of  excellent  judgment,  has 
an  unimpeachable  character,  and  is  re- 
ferred to  by  many  of  his  friends  of 
matuier  years,  who  rely  on  his  judg- 
ment  and   sterling   sense   of   honor. 

SCHOW,  August  S.,  counselor  to 
Bishop  Thos.  H.  Merrill  of  Richmond, 
Cache  county,  Utah,  was  born  in  Smaa- 
lenenes  amt,  Norway,  June  7,  1857.  Be- 
coming converted  to  "Mormonism,"  he 
was  baptized  into  the  Church  Feb.  1, 
3875,  by  Peter  Andersen.  Shortly  af- 
ter joining  the  Church  he  was  ordained 
to  the  Priesthood  and  appointed  to 
travel  as  a  local  missionary,  in  w-hich 
capacity  he  labored  successively  in 
Drammen,  Stavanger,  Arendal,  and 
Trondhjem  till  May  22,  1880,  whan  he 
left  Norway  and  went  to  Copenhagen, 
Denmark,  Here  he  remained  till  Au- 
gust, 1880,  when  he  emigrated  to  Utah. 
He  located  in  Richmond,  Cache  county, 
where  he  has  resided  ever  since.  Feb. 
9,   1881,   he  married   Maria  M.   Frances. 


768 


LATTER-DAY    SAINT 


During  1889-91  he  filled  a  successful 
mission  to  Scandinavia,  where  he  la- 
bored first  In  Drammen  and  Trond- 
hjem,  In  Norway,  and  later  as  presi- 
dent of  the  Copenhafjen  conference,  in 
Denmarlt.  April  3,  1900,  he  was  chosen 
and  set  apart  as  a  couns»elor  In  the 
Uichmond    Ward    Bishopric,    which    po- 


sition he  at  present  fills.  In  civil  life 
Elder  Schow  is  a  thrifty  and  enter- 
prising citizen;  he  has  served  two  terms 
as  chairman  of  the  local  school  board, 
two  terms  as  a  city  councilman,  and 
two  terms  as  mayor  of  Richmond  city, 
all  of  which  offices  he  has  filled  with 
marked  efficiency. 

WIDTSOE,  John  A.,  a  prominent 
Elder  in  the  Church,  and  a  resident  of 
Logan,  Cache  county,  Utah,  is  the  son 
of  John  A.  Widtsoe  and  Anna  C.  Gaar- 
den,  and  was  born  Jan.  31,  1872,  on  the 
island  of  Froen,  Trondhjem  amt,  Nor- 
way. He  was  baptized  April  3,  1884, 
by  Elder  Anthon  L.  Sltanchy,  and  in 
1884  he  emigrated  to  Utah,  together 
with  his  mother  and  younger  brother, 
and  located  in  Logan,  Cache  county. 
From  the  time  he  first  became  connect- 
ed with  the  Church,  he  has  taken  an 
active  part  in  its  affairs,  and  has  al- 
ways been  a  zealous  worker  in  what- 
ever capacity  he  has  been  called  to 
serve.  Brother  Widtsoe  was  from  early 
youth  possessed  of  a  keen  desire  for 
knowledge,  and  at  an  early  age  he  be- 
came a  student  in  the  B.  Y.  College  at 
Logan,  from  which  schoool  he  gradu- 
ated   in    1891.       He    then   entered    Har- 


vard University,  Cambridge,  Ma.ss., 
and  In  1894  graduated  with  the  highest 
honors.  During  1894-98  he  gave  in- 
structions as  professor  of  chemistry  in 
the  Agricultural  College,  Logan.  Aug. 
5,  1898,  he  was  ordained  to  the  office 
of  a  Seventy  and  set  apart  to  do  mis- 
sionary work  in  connection  with  his 
studies  in  Euro{)e.  He  entered  the 
University  of  Gijettingen,  Germany,  and 
after  applying  himself  diligently  to  his 
studies  he  graduated  from  that  institu- 
tion, with  the  degrees  of  A.  M.  Ph.  D. 
in  1899.  Elder  Widtsoe  also  made  trijis 
to  Denmark,  Norway,  Switzerland  and 
F"'rHnce    in    the    inteiests   of   his   studies 


while  abioarl.  un  his  return  to  Utah, 
in  1900,  he  was  made  director  of  the 
experiment  station  of  the  State  Agricul- 
tural College,  Logan.  His  special 
branch  of  study  is  chemistry,  and  he 
has  already  earned  a  splendid  record 
in  that  field.  A  number  of  his  experi- 
ments and  researches  have  attracted 
the  attention  of  many  scientific  men  at 
some  of  the  leading  institutions  of 
learning. 

HARRISON,       Edwin      Daniel.       a 

High  Councilor  in  the  Pocatello  Stake 
of  Zion,  is  the  son  of  James  H.  Har- 
rison and  Angeline  Parry, and  was  born 
in  London,  ICngland,  Jan.  21,  1860.  He 
was  baptized  Aug.  7,  1873,  by  his  father 
Jas.  H.  Harrison,  and  confirmed  by 
John  Squires.  He  was  ordained  a  Dea- 
con in  1874,  ordained  an  Elder  July  8, 
1880;  ordained  a  Seventy  Jan.  6,  1884. 
by  A.  M.  Leddingham,  and  ordained  a 


BIOGRAPHICAL    ENCYCLOPEDIA. 


769 


High  Priest  and  a  High  Counciloi*  Aug. 
7,  1898,  by  Apostle  Heber  J.  Grant.  Ed- 
win's parents  emigrated  to  Utah  in 
1862,  and  lived  in  Salt  Lake  City  for 
three  years,  when  they  moved  to  Lo- 
i^an;  thence  they  removed  to  Malad. 
Idaho,  in  1868.  In  1872  the  family 
moved  back  to  Salt  Lake  City,  settling 
in  the  10th  Ward,  where  his  parents 
have  resided  ever  since.  On  account 
of  the  many  moves  made  by  his 
father's  family,  Edwin  received  but  a 
scanty  scholastic  training.  At  the  age 
of  sixteen  he  became  an  apprentice  to 
the  watchmaker's  trade,  being  en- 
gaged by  George  C.  Ferguson  for  four 
years.  July  8,  1880,  he  manied  Miss 
Ellen  Simmons,  daughter  of  George 
Simmons  and  Charity  Waller.  In  1881 
they    moved     to     Logan,    L'tah,    where 


Elder  Harrison  was  engaged  bj'  Thomas 
B.  Cardon  as  a  jeweler.  This  posi- 
tion he  held  for  fourteen  years,  the 
last  three  years  of  which  he  was  locat- 
ed in  Pocatello,  Idaho,  managing  a 
branch  store.  In  1896  he  went  on  a 
mission  to  Great  Britain,  being  absent 
twenty-seven  months.  He  labored  with 
signal  success  in  the  Newcastle  and 
the  Birmingham  conferences.  Upon  his 
return  home,  to  Pocatello,  Idaho,  he 
engaged  in  the  jewelry  business  for 
himself,  and  has  been  very  successful 
in  that  avocation.  He  has  a  family  of 
eight  children — three  sons  and  five 
daughters.  When  the  Pocatello  Stake 
of  Zion  was  organized  Aug.  7,  1898,  he 
was  selected  as  a  member  of  the  High 
Council,    and   on    Nov.    6,    1898,    he    was 

Vol.  1,  No.  49. 


chosen  as  second  assistant  to  Stake 
superintendent  of  Sunday  schools  (Ly- 
sander  C.  Pond).  He  was  advanced 
to  the  position  of  first  assistant  Stake 
superintendent   June    10,    1901. 

MENDEXHAL.L,      AVilliani     Henry 

second  counselor  to  Pres.  Lewis  S. 
Pond  of  the  Bannock  Stake  of  Zion,  is 
the  son  of  Thomas  and  Louisa  Menden- 
hall,  and  was  born  Nov.  21,  1873,  near 
Preston,  Oneida  county,  Idaho.  At 
the  age  of  ten  years  he  was  baptized 
into  the  Church,  and  on  Aug.  8,  1891, 
he  was  ordained  to  the  Aaronic  Priest- 
hood by  Pres.  Geo.  C.  Parkinson.  He 
was  ordained  an  Elder  Sept.  17.  1893, 
by  Bishop  Lorenzo  L.  Hatch,  and  three 
days  later  (Sept.  20th)  he  married  Nao- 
mi Herd.  Nov.  11,  1893,  .he  was  or- 
dained a  Seventy  and  set  apart  for  a 
mission  to  the  Sandwih  Islands  by 
Apostle  Heber  J.  Grant.  On  this  mis- 
sion he  labored  on  most  of  the  Islands 
of  the  group,  and  was  successful  in 
learning  the  language.  He  also  re- 
ceived many  testimonies  of  the  truth  of 
the  gospel.  After  returning  home  in 
1897,  he  was  appointed  to  act  as  coun- 
selor in  the  superintendency  of  the  Y. 
M.  M.  I.  A.  of  the  Oneida  Stake.  In 
July,  1897,  he  moved  from  Franklin  to 
Gentile  valley,  Idaho,  to  engage  in  the 
mercantile  business.  Oct.  27,  1897,  he 
was  ordained  a  Bishop  and  set  apart  to 
preside  over  the  Mound  Ward,  Oneida 
Stake,  by  Apostle  Marriner  W.  Mer- 
rill, in  which  capacity  he  faithfully  la- 
bored till  Oct.  27,  1901,  when  he  was 
chosen  as  second  counselor  to  Lewis  S. 
Pond,  president  of  the  Bannock  Stake 
of  Zion,  being  set  apart  to  that  posi- 
tion by  Apostle  Abraham  O.  Woodruff. 

HOGSTED,  Victor  C,  Bishop  of 
Salem,  Fremont  county,  Idaho,  is  the 
son  of  Hans  Christian  Sorensen  Hog- 
sted,  and  was  born  on  the  Atlantic 
ocean  April  18,  1865,  while  his  parents 
were  en  route  to  Salt  Lake  City  from 
Denmark.  After  arriving  in  Utah,  his 
parents  located  in  Huntsville,  Weber 
county,  where  they  resided  till  Victor 
was  eleven  years  old.  Feb.  5,  1885, 
when  scarcely  twenty  years  of  age,  he 
married  Lovina  N.  Lee  in  the  Logan 
Temple,  and  the  following  fall  went  as 
a  missionary  to  Scandinavia.  He  la- 
bored in  Denmark,  mostly  in  the  Aal- 
borg  conference.  While  absent  on  this 
mission    his   wife    died    (June   29,    1886). 

Dec.  7,  1901. 


770 


LATTER-DAY    SAINT 


After  filling  an  honorable  mission,  on 
whih  he  gave  entire  satisfaction  to 
those  who  had  called  him,  he  returned 
home  in  November.  1887.  Dec.  17.  1890, 
he  married  Ada  Martin  in  the  Logan 
Temple.  In  1894  he  moved  to  Salem. 
Fremont  county,  Idaho,  where  he  still 
resides.  PJlder  Hogsted  labored  for 
two  years  in  the  interest  of  the  religion 
classes  of  the  Fremont  Stake,  and  w^as 
for  many  years  a  Stake  home  mission- 
ary. He  also  served  as  a  president  in 
the  85th  quorum  of  Seventy,  which  po- 
sition he  held  till  he  was  ordained  a 
Bishop  and  set  apart  to  preside  over  the 
Salem   Ward,    in   which   capacity   he   is 


now  serving.  Bro.  Hogsted  was  elected 
to  represent  Fremont  county  in  the 
senate  of  the  fifth  session  of  the  Idaho 
legislature,  and  so  well  and  efficiently 
did  he  serve  his  constituency  that  he 
was  re-elected  again  as  a  member  of 
the  sixth  session.  He  is  an  energetic 
worker  both  in  religious  and  secular 
affairs,  and  his  affable  and  kind 
manner  wins  friends  for  him  every- 
where. 

HOSKINS,  Olivrr  Croinwrll,  first 
president  of  the  Malad  Stake  of  Zion, 
is  the  son  of  Elza  Hoskins  and  Mary 
Hall,  and  was  born  May  17,  1827,  at 
Georgetown,  Vermillion  county,  111. 
He  was  married  Jan.  18,  1846,  and  he 
year  following  they  moved  to  Nau- 
voo.  III.,  arriving  there  after  the  Saints 
had  made  their  exodus  to  the  west.  In 
1849  he  went  to  Garden  Grove,  Iowa, 
where  he  was  baptized  into  the  Church 


about  April,  1851,  by  Chas.  Hale  and 
on  the  same  day  he  was  ordained  a 
Priest.  He  emigrated  to  Utah  in 
18fi2  and  located  in  South  Cottonwood, 
Salt  Lake  county,  where  he  labored  as 
a  Ward  Teacher.  In  1863  he  moved 
to  Kaysville,  Davis  county,  where  he 
took  an  active  part  in  Church  work. 
He  Avas  ordaine  an  Elder  in  the  spring 
of  1864  by  William  Folsom,  and  a  High 
Priest  in  1873  by  Pres.  Lorenzo  Snow. 
In  1868  he  moved  to  Portage,  Box  Elder 
county,  and  in  1869  he  was  set  apart  by 
Pres.  Lorenzo  Snow  to  act  as  presid- 
ing Elder  in  the  Portage  branch  of  the 
Church.  Oct.  23,  1887,  he  was  ordained 
a  Bishop  and  called  to  preside  over  the 
Portage  Ward,  which  position  he  held 
till  Jan.  12,  1888,  when  he  was  set  apart 
as  president  of  the  Malad  Stake,  by 
Pres.  Lorenzo  Snow,  in  which  capacity 
he  served  till  March,  1902.  During  1876- 
77  he  filled  a  mission  to  the  United 
States,  laboring  mostly  in  the  States  of 
lov.a,  Missouri  and  Kansas.  Pres.  Hos- 
kins has  also  filled  several  missions  in 
the  different  Stakes  of  Zion  and  among 
the  Indians  in  diffeient  localities.  For 
having  yielded  obedience  to  the  prin- 
ciple of  plural  marriage  he  served  a 
term  of  imprisonment  in  the  Utah  pen- 
itentiary from  Jan.  25,  1889,  to  April 
10,   1889. 

AVELiLING.  Milton  Holmes,    second 

ijresident  of  the  Malad  Stake  of  Zion, 
was  born  Jan.  25,  1876,  in  Farmington, 
Davis  county,  Utah,  son  of  Job  Well- 
ing and  Emma  Holmes.  He  was 
raised  and  partly  educated  in  his  na- 
tive town,  finishing  his  education  in  the 
LTniversity  of  Utah.  He  was  baptized 
in  Farmington  when  eight  years  old 
by  Elder  Jonathan  D.  Wood,  and  was 
ordained  successively  to  the  offices  of 
Deacon  and  Priest.  He  was  an  ac- 
tive Sunday  school  worker  for  a  num- 
ber of  years.  In  1895  he  was  ordained 
an  Elder,  and  in  1896-98,  after  being 
ordained  a  Seventy  by  J.  Golden  Kim- 
ball, he  filled  a  mission  to  the  Southern 
States,  laboring  in  Tennessee  and 
North  Carolina,  most  of  the  time  as  a 
counselor  to  the  president  of  the  East 
Tennessee  conference.  After  his  re- 
turn home  he  taught  school  in  Box  El- 
der county,  Utah,  and  on  Dec.  26,  1900, 
he  married  Bracie  Richards,  and  lo- 
cated at  Fielding.  Box  Elder  county, 
where  he  still  resides.  At  the  re-or- 
ganization of  the  Malad  Stake  of  Zion, 


BIOGRAPHICAL    ENCYCLOPEDIA. 


771 


at  Pontage,  March  22,  1902,  he  was 
ordained  a  High  Priest  and  set  apart 
as  president  of  the  Malad  Stake  of 
Zion  by  Apostle  John  W.  Taylor. 

GIBBS,  'William  Henry,  first  coun- 
selor in  the  presidency  of  the  Malad 
Stake  of  Zion,  is  the  son  of  John  Dug- 
gan  Gibbs  and  Julia  Ann  Tompkins  and 
Avas  born  Feb.  7,  1851,  at  Haverford, 
AVest  Pembrokeshire,  South  Wales.  He 
was  baptized  Feb.  22,  1859,  by  John  D. 
Gibbs,  and  confirmed  a  member  of  the 
Church  by  John  Griffiths.  As  a  boy 
he  attended  a  private  school  most  of  the 
time  till  1863,  when  he  emigr.ated  to 
America  with  his  parents,  crossing  the 
ocean  in  the  ship  "Cynosure."  On 
landing  in  New  York  they  proceeded  to 
Florence,      Neb.,       from     whence     they 


crossed  the  i)lMins  in  Thos.  E.  Ricks' 
Compan>'  and  arrived  in  Salt  Lake  City 
Oct.  4.  ise:].  His  parents  settled  in 
Willard,  P.ox  Elder  county,  where  Wil- 
liam woi'ked  at  farming  during  the 
summer  and  attended  school  in  the 
winter.  In  the  spring  of  1868  he  went 
to  Portage,  Rox  Elder  county,  where 
he  broke  the  ground  for  a  farm,  and 
has  lived  there  ever  since.  He  was 
ordained  a  High  Priest  and  set  apart 
as  second  counselor  to  Bishop  Oliver 
C.  Hoskins  of  the  Portage  Ward,  by 
Elijah  A.  Box  Oct.  23,  1877.  In  1884-87 
he  filled  a  mission  to  the  Southern 
States,  where  he  performed  a  good 
work  in  North  Carolina.  Oct,  12,  1888, 
he  was  sustained  and  set  apart  as 
second    counselor     to     Pres.    Oliver    C. 


Hoskins  of  the  Malad  Stake  by  Geo. 
Dunford,  which  position  he  filled  till 
the  Stake  presidency  of  Malad  Stake 
was  reorganized  in  March,  1902,  when 
he  was  set  apart  as  first  counselor  to 
Pres.  Milton  H.  Welling  by  Apostle 
Rudger  Clawson.  Bro.  Gibbs  has  effi- 
ciently filled  many  positions  of  respon- 
sibility and  trust  in  the  Sunday  school, 
in  the  Y.  M.  M.  I.  A.  and  other  or- 
ganizations. He  has  also  taken  quite 
an  interest  in  civil  affairs,  having 
served  as  constable  for  four  years,  jus- 
tice of  the  peace  for  six  years,  school 
trustee  for  ten  years,  etc.  He  was  a 
member  of  the  constitutional  conven- 
tion of  1895,  and  a  representative  in 
the  first  State  legislature  of  Utah  from 
P.OX  Elder  county;  in  the  discharge  of 
these  duties  he  manifested  much  abili- 
ty. Elder  Gibbs  married  Letetia  John 
Feb.  f),  1872,  which  union  has  been 
blessed  with  thirteen  children,  four  of 
\\  honi  are   dead. 

BKAMWELL,  Franklin  Stevon.son, 

jnesident  of  the  Union  Stake  of  Zion 
(in  Oregon),  is  the  son  (jf  Geo.  Walter 
and  Maiy  Ann  Bramwell,  and  was  born 
in  Sheffield,  Yoikshire,  England,  June 
8.  1860.  "WMth  his  i)arents  he  emigrat- 
ed to  Utah  in  1S70,  and  located  in  Og- 
den.  Weber  county.  Later,  Franklin 
moved  to  Plain  city,  where  he  was  very 
active  in  training  Church  choirs  and 
Itrass  bands.  Dec.  16,  1880,  he  married 
iOmily  Neal  Iggison.  During  1886-88 
he  filled  a  successful  mission  to  Eng- 
land. Immediately  on  his  leturn  home 
he  was  called  by  the  Priesthood  to  lo- 
cate in  the  Bannock  Stake  (now  Fre- 
mont), Idaho,  where  he  was  appointed 
to  labor  especially  in  the  interest  of 
music  and  the  Sunday  schools.  In  Au- 
gust, 1888,  he  was  ordained  a  High 
Priest  by  Apostle  Lorenzo  Snow  and 
set  apart  as  a  member  of  the  High 
Council  of  the  Bannock  Stake.  Bro. 
Biarnwell  organized  the  brass  band  of 
Re.\burg,  which  was  for  several  years 
considered   the  best   band  in   Idaho.     In 

1893  he  was  appointed  clerk  of  the  dis- 
trict  court,   in   Fremont  county,   and   in 

1894  he  was  re-elected  to  that  office. 
In  1896  he  was  called  to  open  a  mis- 
sionary field  in  Montana,  and  was  the 
first  Elder  to  preach  the  gospel  in  that 
State  after  the  Hying  visit  made  by 
Apostle  Matthias  F.  Cowley  and  Elder 
Edward  Stevenson.  The  missionary 
work    in    Montana    proving    successful. 


772 


LATTER-DAY    SAINT 


an  independent  mission  was  estab- 
lished in  that  State  in  1898  with  Frank- 
lin S.  Bramwell  as  its  president;  later, 
the  Western  States  mission  and  the 
Montana  missions  were  merged  into 
one  field  and  called  the  Northwestern 
States  Mission,  with  Elder  Bramwell  as 
president.  This  mission  made  almost 
phenomenal  progress;  in  fact,  it  in- 
creased so  rapidly  in  membership, part- 
ly by  conversion     and     partly  by  im- 


migration of  Saints  from  other  parts 
of  the  country,  that  on  June  9, 
1901,  the  Union  Stake  of  Zion  was 
organized  out  of  a  part  of  the 
mission,  with  Elder  Bramwell  as  Stake 
president.  He  is  at  present  serving  in 
that  capacity,  and  also  presides  over 
the  Northwestern  States  mission.  He 
says:  "I  have  now  spent  practically 
fifteen  years  in  the  missionary  field  and 
am  not  tired  yet." 


would  often  gather  round  him  the  mem- 
bers of  his  family  and  teach  them  to 
shun  evil,  to  be  honest  and  truthful, 
associate  with  no  bad  companions,  and 
with  picture  and  narrative  show  them 
the  results  of  doing  right  and  wrong. 
Thus  were  Hyrum  and  the  other  chil- 
dren made  the  companions  of  their  pa- 
rents, friends  unto  whom  they  could 
go  at  all  times,  and  pour  out  the  in- 
most secrets  of  their  hearts  in  full 
confidence.  Hyrum  grew  up,  develop- 
ing to  a  marked  degree  the  boundless 
love  and  impartial  affection  which  he 
had  been  accustomed  to  see  his  father 
and  mother  mete  out  to  their  children, 
and  his  father  to  his  wives.  Until  he 
left  the  paternal  roof  of  his  parents  he 
would   be   visited   by   that   ever   loving 


SMITH,  Hyrum  Mack,  junior  mem- 
ber of  the  Council  of  Twelve  Apostles, 
is  the  eldest  son  of  Pres.  Joseph  F. 
Smith  and  Edna  Lambson,  and  was 
born  March  21,  1872,  in  Salt  Lake  City, 
Utah.  In  his  youth  he  was  very  care- 
fully guarded  by  his  mother,  who  was 
loath  to  let  him  go  out  of  her  sight, 
and  who  never  permitted  him  or  his 
younger  brothers  to  go  beyond  the  con- 
fines of  the  garden  gate  alone.  Long 
after  he  reached  the  age  of  hundreds 
of  the  boys — and  girls,  too — that  we  now 
see  playing  in  the  streets  until  late  at 
night,  he  was  safely  tucked  into  bed. 
His    father,    Pres.     Joseph     F.    Smith, 


father  who  must  still  kiss  him  and 
tuck  the  covers  snugly  around  him. 
Even  to-day,  whenever  father  and  son 
meet,  in  the  home,  on  the  street,  in  the 
office,  it  matters  not  where,  they  meet 
with  an  affectionate  and  holy  kiss. 
Hyrum  was  taught  to  love  his  home, 
and  there  he  could  always  be  found 
when  no  duty  called  him  away.  He 
attended  the  public  schools,  and  later 
the  Latter-day  Saints'  College,  from 
which  he  graduated  in  June,  1894.  On 
the  15th  of  November,  1895,  he  married 
Miss  Ida  Bowman,  of  Ogden,  and  on  the 
evening  of  the  next  day  he  departed  on 
a  mission  to  Great  Britain.      Upon  ar- 


BIOGRAPHICAL,    ENCYCLOPEDIA. 


773 


riving  at  Liverpool  he  was  appointed 
to  labor  in  the  Leeds  conference,  where 
he  engaged  in  regular  missionary  work. 
In  October,  189G,  he  was  called  to  pre- 
side over  the  Newcastle  conference, 
which  position  he  held  until  he  was 
honorably  released  to  return  home  in 
February,  1898.  Upon  arriving  home 
he  was  at  once  set  apart  as  a  home 
missionary.  He  also  acted  as  assistant 
teacher  and  as  corresponding-  secretary 
'if  the  24th  quorum  of  Seventy.  He 
was  employed  at  Z.  C.  M.  I.,  where  he 
remained  until  Oct.  30,  1901.  When  the 
Salt  Lake  Stake  was  divided  he  be- 
came a  resident  of  Granite  Stake.  Here 
also  he  labored  as  a  home  missionary 
and  later  was  called  to  act  as  Stake 
secretary  of  the  Sunday  schools,  which 
office  he  filled  to  the  satisfaction  of 
the  Stake  authorities.  He  was  called 
by  the  quorum  of  Twelve  Apostles  to 
become  one  of  that  body,  on  Oct.  24. 
1901,  and  was  ordained  to  that  high  and 
holy  calling  by  his  father  on  the  same 
day.  Hyrum  M.  Smith  is  a  young- 
man  who  has  striven  to  profit  by  the 
excellent  teachings  received  from  his 
parents.  He  gives  them  and  the  Lord 
the  credit  for  enabling  him  to  say  that 
up  to  the  present  he  has  never  tasted 
tea,  coffee,  tobacco  nor  intoxicating 
drinks  of  any  kind;  that  he  has  never 
taken  the  name  of  God  in  vain,  nor  be- 
fouled his  mouth  with  profanity;  that 
he  has  never  In  his  life  spoken  disie- 
spectfullj'-  of  his  parents,  but  that  he 
honors  and  loves  them  with  all  his 
?ouI;  that  he  has  always  defended  tht- 
principles  of  the  gospel  and  the  ser- 
vants of  the  Lord;  that  he  has  a  testi- 
mony for  himself  that  God  lives,  and 
that  Joseph  Smith  was  the  Prophet 
through  whom  he  restored  the  gospel 
of  Jesus  Christ  in  these  latter  days, 
and  that  he  hopes,  by  the  help  of  the 
Lord,  to  ever  be  found  working  dili- 
gently or  battling-,  if  need  be,  in  de- 
fense of  the  truth.— Matthias  F.  Cow- 
ley. 

CALDER,  David  O.,  first  counselor 
in  the  presidency  of  the  Salt  Lake  Stakf 
of  Zion  from  1S77  to  1884,  was  born 
June  18,  1823.  at  Thurso,  Caithness, 
Scotland.  Ke  was  baptized  into  the 
••Mormon"  Church  in  August,  1840, when 
Orson  Pi-att  was  in  Scotland  opening 
that  mission.  He  was  educated  for 
business    in   the    service    of   the    Union 


Canal  Company;  and  having  risen  very 
rapidly,  step  by  step,  in  the  outdoor 
and  office  departments  of  this  com- 
pany's service,  he  was  appointed  by 
the  directors  to  the  office  of  manager 
of  the  intermediate  stations  of  the  ser- 
vice between  Edinburgh  and  Glasgow, 
Avith  headquarters  at  Falkirk.  He  left 
Scotland  for  Utah  in  January,  1851,  ac- 
companied by  his  mother  and  her  fami- 
ly, and  crossed  the  Atlantic  in  the  ship 
"George  W.  Bourne,"  which  sailed  from 
Liverpool  to  New  Orleans;  and  after 
two  years'  detention  in  Cincinnati, 
Ohio,  in  consequence  of  the  sickness 
and  death  of  his  eldest  sister,  he  ar- 
rived in  Salt  Lake  City  in  1853,  and 
settled  "over  Jordan."  In  1855  he  en- 
tered   the    service    of    the    Trustee-in- 


Trust  of  the  Church  as  bookkeeper,  was 
appointed  chief  clerk  in  May,  1857,  and 
retained  the  office  till  December,  1867. 
The  excellent  business  capacity  of  Da- 
vid O.  Calder  was  early  recognized  by 
Pres.  Brigham  Young,  whose  knowl- 
edge of  men  is  proverbial;  and  the 
President's  confidence  in  his  integrity 
was  equal  to  his  estimate  of  the  abili- 
ty of  his  chief  clerk.  While  in  the 
service  of  the  Trustee-in-Trust  he  or- 
ganized the  entire  system  of  accounts 
and  records  in  all  the  departments  of 
the  Church.  He  also  held  the  office  of 
Territorial  treasurer  from  1859  to  1870. 
After  the  close  of  his  service  In  the 
office  of  the  Trustee-in-Trust,  Elder 
Calder  became  connected  with  the  rail- 


774 


LATTER-DAT    SAINT 


road    business.      for     which     his   early 
training:   eminently   qualified    him.     He 
was   general      freight     and      passenger 
agent  of  the  Utah  Central  and  South- 
ern   railroads    for    two    years,    and      he 
f)rganized       these       departments       and 
trained      the      employees.        The    many 
years  of  constant   business  application 
at  length  wore  greatly  upon  Elder  Cal- 
<ler's  enduring  constitution  and  for  his 
relief  as   well  as   for  his  usefulness  he 
was  sent  to  labor  in  the  British  mission, 
his  native  Scotland  being  chosen  as  the 
field  of  his  ministry.       His  former  ac- 
(|uaintance  with  many  of  the  principal 
business  men  of  Edinburgh  and   Glas- 
gow was  now   turned   to  good  account 
in    enlarging   the   public     view     of   the 
"Mormon"    people,     and     in   correcting 
many  misrepresentations  of  them  which 
everywhere  have  prevailed.     On  his  re- 
turn  from   Europe,   in   1873,   Elder  Cal- 
der   was   appointed    by   Pres.    Brigham 
Young  business  manager  and  managing 
editor  of  the  Deseret  News  Publishing 
Establishment.      lender      his    adminis- 
tration,   the    publishing   department   of 
the   Church   obtained   a   financial   pros- 
perity and  an  efficient  business  system 
that    entitled    him    to    full    credit    of   a 
successful    journalistic    manager.        He 
remained  in  this  position  for  four  years, 
during  which     time     he   published    the 
standard  works  of  the  Church,  and  put 
the  paper  mill  in  a  prosperous  financial 
condition.      Elder  Calder  was  elected  a 
director    of    Z.    C.    M.    I.,    Oct.    5,    1875, 
which  oflice  he  held  until  his  death.  By 
the    appointment     of     Pres.      Brigham 
Young,    he    was   elected    secretary    and 
treasurer  of  the  institution,  Oct.  5,  1876, 
and    he   held    that    responsible    position 
for  several   years,     contributing  not  a 
little  to  the  increased  prosperity  of  the 
colossal   establishment,   and   sustaining 
his  character  as  a  first-class  business 
officer.      Oct.  5,  1878,  he  resigned  as  sec- 
retary and  treasurer  of  Z.  C.  M.  I.,  be- 
cause his  large  music  business  demand- 
ed his  personal  attention.       Elder  Cai- 
der   inaugurated     the     class     teaching 
movement    of    Utah    Territory,    and    it 
was    vigorously    sustained    by    him    for 
several   years,   till  the  heavy  stroke  of 
the  death  of  five  of  his  children  at  one 
time  deprived   him  of  that  enthusiasm 
so  essential  to  the  sustaining  of  a  musi- 
cal   society;    but     he   continued    in    the 
musical    business    till    his    death.        In 
I860  he  started  the  first  music  store  in 
Utah,    and     the     business   steadily   in- 


creased until,  at  his  death,  it  was 
twenty  times  larger  than  at  the  com- 
mencement. Relative  to  the  co-opera- 
tive movement  of  the  Saints  and  its 
ultimate  social  aims.  Elder  David  O. 
Calder  was  esteemed  as  one  of  its  most 
conscientious  advocates  and  an  earnest 
worker  in  its  behalf.  From  his  long 
administration  in  the  business  depart- 
ment of  the  Church  as  the  chief  clerk 
of  the  Trustee-in-Trust,  he  very 
naturally  took  a  deep  and  sterling  in- 
terest in  the  establishment  and  per- 
fecting of  those  systems  most  proper 
for  the  community.  His  life-work, 
since  his  arrival  in  Utah,  had  been  al- 
most that  of  one  of  the  Church  Apos- 
tles so  far  as  faithful  and  eflScient  la- 
bor was  concerned.  He  also  served 
the  public  in  an  official  capacity.  He 
was  a  city  councilor  in  Salt  Lake  City 
from  Nov.  23,  1875,  to  February,  1880, 
at  which  date  he  was  elected  to  the  of- 
fice of  an  alderman  of  the  city.  As 
one  of  the  directors  of  Z.  C.  M.  I.,  he 
was  a  very  proper  and  competent  per- 
son who  thoroughly  understood  its 
aims.  Elder  Calder  had  great  or- 
ganizing ability  and  he  possessed  the 
soundness  of  mind  and  farsight  so 
characteristic  of  Scotland's  business 
class  of  men  wherever  met.  He  was 
a  firm  believer  in  the  mission  of  Joseph 
the  Prophet,  ooth  religiously  and  so- 
cially, and  therefore  he  was  earnest 
for  the  perfection  of  the  co-operative 
movements  of  Utah,  but  Elder  Calder 
was  the  reverse  of  the  fanatic,  and  was 
not  a  great  enthusiast.  "Whatever  he 
undertook  in  life  was  upon  the  solid 
basis  of  true  principles,  and  by  the 
measurement  of  the  rule  of  sound,  com- 
mon sense.  Elder  Calder  died  at  his 
home  in  Salt  Lake  City  July  3.  1884. 

POX,  Jesse  Williaiiis.  a  High 
Councilor  in  the  Salt  Lake  Stake  of 
Zion  from  1878  to  1894,  was  the  son  of 
Samuel  Fox  and  Lucy  Williams,  and 
was  born  March  31,  1819,  at  Adams, 
Jefferson  county.  New  York.  He  re- 
ceived an  academic  education  and  be- 
came a  school  teacher.  He  was  bap- 
tized into  the  Church  July  10,  1844,  in 
New  York  State  by  Elijah  Williams, 
and  arrived  in  Nauvoo  just  in  time  to 
see  the  remains  of  the  two  martyrs,  in 
which  city  he  remained  and  taught 
school  for  some  time.  He  left  Nauvoo 
in  1846  and  went  to  Winter  Quarters  in 
1847,  but  was  sent  from  there  by  Pres. 


BIOGRAPHICAL    ENCYCLOPEDIA. 


775 


P.righam  Young  on  a  mission  to  his 
old  home  in  New  York.  He  was  in 
the  company  of  Saints  which,  when 
crossing-  the  plains  in  1849, was  attacked 
by  cholera  on  its  journey  to  Utah,  sev- 
eral of  his  companions  falling  a  prey 
to  the  scourge.  In  crossing  the  plains 
he  served  as  a  secretary  of  the  com- 
pany. He  taught  school,  first  at  Man- 
ti  and  later  in  Salt  Lake  City,  in  the 
University  of  Deseret,  together  with 
Orson  Pratt.  He  surveyed  the  sites 
and  set  the  stakes  for  the  Salt  Lake, 
Manti  and  Logan  Temples,  and  sur- 
veyed the  greater  portion  of  Salt  Lake 
City,  Provo,  Fillmore,  Manti,  Ogden, 
Brigham  City,  Logan  and  many  other 
towns.  He  accompanied  Pres.  Brigham 
Young  on  many  of  his  early  tours  in 
the   Territory,    locating   cities   and   set- 


tlements. He  succeeded  Wm.  Lem- 
mons  as  surveyor  of  Salt  Lake  City, 
serving  in  that  capacity  for  over  twen- 
ty years.  He  was  also  appointed  sur- 
veyor-general of  Utah  by  the  Utah 
legislature — a  position  which  he  held 
for  many  years,  until  the  office  was  dis- 
continued. He  located  and  surveyed 
the  principal  canals  in  Utah  and  was 
appointed  chief  engineer  of  the  old 
Utah  Central  and  Utah  Southern  rail- 
roads. In  1882  he  visited  his  old  home 
in  New  York,  visiting  relatives,  etc. 
He  was  always  distinguished  for  his 
gentle  and  kind  spirit,  and  command- 
ed to  a  singular  degree  the  affection  of 
his  old-tim^  pupils.  This  was  well 
illustrated  when,  on  one  occasion,  he 
was  taken  prisoner  by  the  terrible  In- 


dian chief,  Blackhawk,  who  had  been  a 
pupil  of  his  when  a  lad  in  Manti.  In- 
stead of  destroying  him. he  ordered  that 
his  old  teacher  should  not  only  be  per- 
mitted to  ontinuec  his  journey  un- 
harmed, but  gave  him  an  escort  to  a 
point  of  safety.  Elder  Fox  was  among 
the  first  who  were  called  to  work  in 
the  Salt  Lake  Temple  after  its  dedi- 
cation, and  he  continued  in  that  labor 
till  the  time  of  his  death.  In  the  spring 
of  1849  he  married  Eliza  J.  Gibbs,  who 
bore  him  four  children,  two  of  whom 
(Jesse  W.  and  Lucy  Georgiana)  are 
living.  He  married  Elizabeth  Foss 
Cowley  in  1870,  the  fruits  of  which 
union  was  one  child  (Lottie),  who  also 
survived  him.  For  many  years  Elder 
Fox  served  as  the  senior  president  of 
the  76th  quorum  of  Seventy.  He  was 
ordained  a  High  Priest  by  Pres.  John 
Taylor,  Nov.  11.  1874,  and  later  (Sept. 
18,  1878)  set  apart  as  an  alternate  mem- 
ber of  the  High  Counsil  of  the  Salt 
Lake  Stake  of  Zion.  In  1887  he  be- 
came a  regular  member  of  said  council. 
Elder  Fox  died  in  Bountiful,  Davis 
county,  Utah,  April  1,  1894,  and  his 
funeral  was  conducted  in  the  Assembly 
Hall,  in  Salt  Lake  City,  April  4,  1894. 

CliARK,  John,  a  High  Councilor  in 
the  Salt  Lake  Stake  of  Zion,  was  born 
in  Chilton,  Berkshire,  England,  April 
8,  1834,  and  emigrated  to  America  with 
his  parents  in  1835.  Soon  afterwards 
his  mother  died,  and  his  father  joined 
the  "Mormon"  Church,  and  removed  to 
Nauvoo,  111.,  where  John  was  baptized 
in  the  Mississippi  river,  when  about 
nine  years  old.  His  father  died  in 
1849,  and  two  years  later  John  came  on 
to  Great  Salt  Lake  valley.  He  located 
in  the  Fifteenth  Ward,  Salt,  Lake  City, 
where  he  resided  for  many  years.  Dur- 
ing the  "Buchanan  war"  he  took  an 
active  part  in  defending  the  rights  of 
the  Saints.  He  was  a  member  of  Col. 
Robert  T.  Burton's  command  that  went 
east  as  far  as  Devil's  Gate  to  watch 
the  movements  of  the  army.  Exposed 
to  peril,  hardships  and  cold,  he  re- 
mained in  the  mountains  most  of  the 
following  winter.  During  the  Indian 
difficulties  in  Sanpete  county,  years 
later,  he  again  took  an  active  part,  and 
while  at  home  has  figured  prominently 
in  public  affairs  generally.  For  a 
number  of  years  he  held  the  rank  cfi 
major  in  the  Nauvoo  Legion.  In  1873- 
74  he  filled  a  mission  to  Great  Britain, 


776 


LATTEK-DAY    SAINT 


labored  for  some  time  as  president  of 
the  Sheffield  conference  and  subse- 
cjuently  had  charge  of  the  business  de- 
jiartment  of  the  Liverpool  office,  under 
the  direction  of  Pres.  Jos.  F.  Smith. 
In  1869  he  was  appointed  to  fill  an  un- 
expired term  in  the  Salt  Lake  City 
council,  after  which  he  was  elected  a 
member  of  that  body  regularly  in  1870, 
1872,  1880,  1882,  1884,  1886  and  1888.  He 
has  also  served  three  terms  as  a  mem- 
ber of  the  Utah  legislature,  namely  in 
1884,  1886  and  1888.  In  1897  he  was 
elected  mayor  of  Salt  Lake  City  on  the 
(.'itizen's  ticket,  which  position  he  filled 
with  efficiency  and  dignity  and  gave 
satisfaction  to  all  concerned  by  the 
straightforward    manner    in    which    he 


conducted  the  affairs  of  the  city.  He 
performed  the  duties  of  clerk  of  the 
Fifteeenth  Ward  for  over  twenty  years, 
and  for  nearly  fifteen  years  he  acted 
is  one  of  the  presidents  of  the  10th 
quorum  of  Seventy.  In  May,  1887,  he 
was  ordained  to  the  office  of  a  High 
Priest  and  set  apart  to  act  as  an  al- 
ternate member  of  the  High  Council. 
He  has  also  labored  as  a  home  mis- 
sionary in  the  Salt  Lake  Stake  for 
many  years.  Elder  Clark  is  widely 
known  as  a  successful  business  man, 
having  been  in  the  mercantile  business 
since  1852.  For  many  years  he  was 
assistant  superintendent  and  treasurer 
of  the  Z.  C.  M.  I.,  and  is  now  the  senior 


member  and  manager  of  the  wholesale 
firm  of  Clark,  Eldredge  &  Co.,  which  is 
doing  a  very  extensive  business 
throughout  this  whole  intermountain 
country. 

SMITH,  Klias  A.,  a  member  of  the 
High  Council  of  the  Salt  Lake  Stake  of 
Zion,  is  the  son  of  Elias  and  Lucy  B. 
Smith  and  was  born  in  Salt  Lake  City, 
Utah,  March  21,  1857.  He  was  bap- 
tized when  about  eight  years  old,  and 
later  received  the  Priesthood.  Nov.  11, 
1884,  he  was  ordained  a  High  Priest  by 
Pres.  John  Taylor  and  was  afterward 
called  to  act  as  a  member  of  the  High 
Council  of  the  Salt  Lake  Stake,  which 
position  he  still  holds.  In  1883  he  was 
elected  probate  judge  of  Salt  Lake 
county,  to  which  position  he  was  re- 
peatedly re-elected  and  served  in  that 
capacity  until  1889.  During  the  sessions 
of  the  Utah  legislature  of  1886  and  1888 
he  served  as  a  member  of  the  council 
and  was  elected  president  of  that  body 
the  last  term.  From  Jan.  1,  1889,  to 
Jan.  1,  1891,  he  served  as  a  selectman 
of  Salt  Lake  county.  At  the  organiza- 
tion of  the  Deseret  Savings  Bank,  June 
20,  1889,  he  was  chosen  as  cashier  of 
that  institution  and  is  at  present  occu- 
pying that  responsible  office. 

MOYLE,  James,  an  alternate  mem- 
ber of  the  High  Council  in  the  Salt 
Lake  Stake  of  Zion  from  1887  to  1890, 
was  the  son  of  John  Rowe  Moyle  and 
Phillipa  Beer,  and  was  born  in  Rosem. 
county  of  Cornwall,  England,  Oct.  31, 
1835.  His  grandfather,  James  Moyle, 
was  a  commissioned  officer  in  the  Brit- 
ish army  and  so  also  was  his  great- 
grandfather (William  Beer)  on  his 
m.other's  side.  The  occupation  of  John 
R.  Moyle,  father  of  the  subject  of  this 
sketch,  was  that  of  mason  and  stone- 
cutter, and  his  son  James  was  brought 
up  to  the  same  business.The  father  and 
family  joined  the  Church  in  the  coun- 
ty of  Devonsl^^e,  in  February,  1852,  and 
James  emigrated  to  America  in  1854, 
crossing  the  Atlantic  in  the  ship  "John 
M.  Wood,"  which  sailed  from  Liverpool 
March  12,  1854,  and  arrived  in  New 
Orleans  May  2,  1854.  From  New  Or- 
leans he  continued  the  journey  to  the 
valleys  of  the  Rocky  Mountains  and 
arrived  at  Salt  Lake  City,  Sept.  30,  1854. 
In  a  few  days  after  his  arrival  he  was 
employed  by  Pres.  Brigham  Young  to 
work   on    the     basement     of   the   Lion 


BIOGRAPHICAL    ENCYCLOPEDIA. 


777 


House.  After  its  completion  he  went 
to  work  on  the  Temple  Block.  July 
22,  1856,  he  married  Elizabeth  Wood, 
daughter  of  Daniel  and  Mary  Snyder 
AVood.  In  December,  1856,  he  bought 
I'loperty  in  the  Fifteenth  Ward,  where 
his  home  ever  remained,  and  there  his 
children  wei-e  all  born.  In  the  fall  of 
1S57.  at  the  time  of  the  Buchanan  ex- 
pedition, Elder  Moyle  went  out  with 
the  Utah  militia  to  repel  invasion.  He 
left  the  city  with  others  for  Echo 
canyon  in  a  severe  snow  storm,  and 
remained  in  that  service  until  the  mili- 
tia troops  were  called  in  for  the  sea- 
.<=on  to  winter,  after  Johnston  and  his 
army  had  gone  into  their  winter  quar- 
ters. In  the  spring  of  1858,  when  the 
Iieople  of  the  "northern  settlements  made 


their  temporary  exodus  into  the  south- 
ern settlements.  Elder  Moyle  moA^ed  his 
wife  to  Springville,  Utah  county,  while 
he  himself  was  detailed  as  one  of  the 
guard  to  stay  in  Salt  Lalte  City  and 
burn  it  if  necessary;  which  would  cer- 
tainly have  been  accomplished  had  the 
compact  made  between  Buchanan's 
peace  commissioners  and  the  leaders  of 
the  Church  been  broken  by  General 
Johnston  and  his  army.  After  this 
militia  service  James  Moyle  was  elected 
captain  of  ten,  and  subsequently  he 
received  a  commission  from  Governor 
Alfred  Cumming  as  captain  of  a  com- 
jjany  in  the  Nauvoo  Legion.  In  the 
spring  of  1859  he  became  a  contractor 
and  builder,  and  erected  a  number  of 
stores  and  public  buildings  in  Salt 
Lake   City.       After   finishing   the     city 


jail  he  erected  the  rock  work  of  the 
principal  bridges  on  the  western  divi- 
sion of  the  Union  Pacific  railroad,  and 
also  constructed  the  large  Union  Pa- 
cific "roundhouse"  at  Evanston,  Wyo- 
ming. He  continued  to  work  for  that 
railroad  company  until  1875,  when  he 
was  called  by  Pres.  Brigham  Young 
to  take  charge  of  the  builders  and 
stone-cutters  on  th  e  Temple  Block. 
This  position  he  held  until  1886,  when 
he  was  appointed  general  superinten- 
dent of  works  on  the  Temple  Block,  a 
post  filled  by  him  to  the  entire  satis- 
faction of  all  concerned.  In  the  early 
part  of  1886  he  was  indicted  for  unlaw- 
ful cohabitation,  and  was  one  of  the 
victims  of  the  illigal  segregation  re- 
gime which  was  finally  terminated  by 
a  decision  of  the  Supreme  Court  of 
the  LTnited  States.  Three  indictments 
were  found  against  him  for  one  offense. 
He  was  tried  on  one  of  them,  and  when 
the  case  came  on  for  hearing,  he  went 
upon  the  stand  and  testified  in  behalf 
of  the  prosecution,  admitting  that  he 
had  two  wives  and  had  lived  with  them. 
March  1,  1886,  he  was  sentenced  to  the 
full  term  prescribed  by  the  law,  im- 
prisonment for  six  months  and  a  fine 
of  $300  and  costs.  Up  to  the  month  of 
May,  1887,  Elder  Moyle  had  been  for  a 
number  of  years  one  of  the  presidents 
in  the  2nd  quorum  of  Seventy.  On  said 
date  he  was  ordained  a  High  Priest  and 
set  apart  as  an  alternate  High  Coun- 
cilor in  the  Salt  Lake  Stake  of  Zion. 
In  that  capacity,  as  in  all  others  he 
was  called  to  fill,  he  was  active  and 
diligent  in  the  performance  of  his  du- 
ties. In  his  capacity  as  superinten- 
dent on  the  Temple  Block  Brother 
Moyle  had  an  average  cf  one  hundred 
men  under  his  control,  the  number  oc- 
casionally running  as  high  as  one  hun- 
dred and  fifty.  By  them  he  was  uni- 
versally held  in  the  highest  esteem. 
Such  was  the  wisdom  and  judgment  of 
his  management  that  any  little  diffi- 
culty that  might  occur  among  the 
workmen  needed  no  reference  to  his 
superiors  in  office,  as  he  was  al- 
ways equal  to  the  labor  of  adjusting 
them  himself.  Though  Elder  Moyle 
received  but  a  common  English  school 
education,  he  was  always  of  a  studious 
oisposition;  and,  priding  himself  in  the 
knowledge  that  his  ancestors,  on  both 
sides,  were  of  the  educated  classes,  he 
diligently  cultivated  his  inherent  desire 
for    learning.       He    was    well    read    in 


778 


LATTER-DAY    SAINT 


geology,  chemistry  and  mineralogy, 
and  the  geological  formation  of  rocks 
commanded  his  special  attention.  He 
was  a  man  of  intellectual  type  and  in 
his  habits  was  always  studious.  In 
keeping  with  his  own  native  desire  for 
mental  culture  and  acquirement  of 
knowledge,  Elder  Moyle  had  a  great 
desire  to  educate  his  children.  As  an 
example  of  this,  he  kept  his  son,  James 
H.  Moyle,  at  the  Deseret  University  for 
three  years,  and  then  sent  him  to  the 
University  of  Michigan,  where  he  also 
spent  three  years.  Elder  Moyle  died  in 
Salt  Lake  City,  Utah,  Dec.  8.  1890.  At 
the  time  of  his  demise,  the  "Deseret 
News"  said  editorially:  "Brother 
James  Moyle  goes  behind  the  vail  with 
a  clear  record  for  uprightness  and  hon- 
esty. His  character  for  integrity  was 
stainless  and  he  carries  with  him  not 
only  the  deep  love  of  his  family,  but 
the  esteem  and  friendship  of  all  who 
knew.  him.  He  leaves  twelve  children 
and  two  grandchildren  to  continue  his 
name  on  the  earth,  while  eleven  have 
preceded  him  to  the  spirit  world."  Both 
his  wives,  Elizabeth  Wood  and  Mar- 
garet Connell,  also  survived  him.  His 
funeral  services  were  held  in  the  As- 
sembly Hall,  Salt  Lake  City,  on  which 
occasion  several  of  the  leading  breth- 
ren in  the  Church  bore  testimony  to 
his  unflinching  integrity  and  faithful- 
ness. Brother  Moyle  was  five  feet  ten 
inches  in  height,  square  shouldered 
and  muscular.  His  features  were 
rugged  and  strong,  indicating  at  a 
glance  that  he  was  a  man  of  character. 
His  eyes  were  dark  and  deep  set,  char- 
acterized by  a  thoughful  expression. 

HINCKLEY.      Byrant      Stringbain, 

an  alternate  High  Councilor  in  the  Salt 
Lake  StaJce  of  Zion,  is  the  son  of  Ira 
Nathaniel  Hinckley  and  Angelina  No- 
ble, and  was  bom  July  9,  1867,  at  Coal- 
ville, Summit  county,  Utah.  He  re- 
sided with  his  parents  at  Cove  Creek 
Fort  from  1867  to  1871.  and  in  Salt  Lake 
City  from  1871  to  1874,  when  he  moved 
to  Fillmore,  Millard  county,  where  he 
resided  for  13  years.  At  the  age  of 
eight  years  he  was  baptized  by  Patri- 
arch John  Ashman,  and  became  a 
prominent  worker  in  the  first  primary 
association  organized  in  Fillmore.  He 
labored  as  Deacon,  Teacher,  and  Priest 
respectively,  and  subsequently  became 
a  member  of  the  42nd  quorum  of  Sev- 
enty.     March  12,  1901,  he  was  ordained 


a  High  Priest  and  set  apart  as  an  al- 
ternate High  Councilor  in  the  Salt  Lake 
Stake.  Brother  Hinckley  attended  the 
district  schools  in  his  native  town  un- 
til about  1884,  when  he  entered  the 
Brigham  Young  Academy  at  Provo, 
from  which  institution  he  graduated  in 
1889.  In  November,  1892,  he  graduat- 
ed at  the  Ea.stman  National  College, 
Poughkeepsie,  New  York.  In  May, 
188."),  he  received  the  degree  of  B.  Pd. 
from  Brigham  Young  Academy  and  B. 


"^^1 


D.  from  the  general  board  of  C  jrch 
schools.  He  was  engaged  as  teacher 
in  the  Brigham  Young  Academy  in 
1893  and  continued  in  that  position  un- 
til March  5,  1900,  when  he  accepted  the 
principalship  of  the  Latter-day  Saints' 
Business  College  of  Salt  Lake  City. 
June  28,  1893,  he  married  Miss  Christina 
Johnson,  of  Provo,  Utah.  In  April, 
1900,  he  was  called  to  be  a  member  of 
the  general  board  of  Y.  M.  M.  I.  A.,  in 
which  capacity  he  is  still  laboring. 

ANDERSON,  James  Henry,  a  prom- 
inent Elder  in  the  Salt  Lake  Stake  of 
Zion,  was  born  in  Salt  Lake  City,  Utah, 
Feb.  11,  1857,  son  of  James  Anderson 
and  Catharine  M.  Cowley.  His  early 
school  training  was  by  his  mother,  and 
in  the  district  schools.  In  1869  and  1870 
he  was  a  student  at  the  Deseret  Uni- 
versity, leaving  that  institution  in  1871 
to  enter  the  employ  of  the  "Deseret 
News."  He  served  an  apprenticeship 
in  the  composing  departments,  and  be- 
came an  expert  book  and  job  printer. 
In  1877  he  was  associated  with  John  E. 
Callister  and  Emmett  D.  Mousley  in 
starting  the  Star  printing  office,  with- 
drawing in  October  of  that  year  to  be- 
come   the    foreman      of      the    "Deseret 


BIOGRAPHICAL    ENCYCLOPEDIA. 


779 


News"  book  and  job  printing  depart- 
ments. He  acted  in  that  position  over 
seven  years,  during'  which  period  many 
important  publications,  In  English  and 
other  languages,  were  printed  under 
his  supervision.  In  February,  1885,  he 
was  made  city  editor  of  the  "Deseret 
News,"  which  position  he  filled  with 
marked  success  until  August,  1890, when 
he  was  called  on  a  mission  to  Europe. 
His  services  in  the  local  department  of 
the  "Deseret  News"  editorial  woik  cov- 
ered most  of  the  period  of  anti-"Mor- 
mon  prosecution  under  the  Edmunds 
and  Edmunds-Tucker  laws,  and  gave 
to  him  a  valuable  experience.  On  his 
return  from  Europe  in  1892  he  was  as- 
sociated for  a  time  with  Bishop  Orson 
F.  Whitney,  on  Volume  II  of  the  His- 


tory of  Utah,  and  in  the  spring  of  1893 
he  again  became  connected  with  the 
"Deseret  News"  editorial  department. 
From  then  until  the  beginning  of  1901, 
he  continued  with  the  "Deseret  News," 
being  variously  engaged  in  every  de- 
partment of  editorial  work.  Jan.  4, 
1901,  he  retired  from  the  "Deseret 
News"  and  on  January  7th  assumed  the 
duties  of  county  commissioner  in  Salt 
Lake  county,  to  which  position  he  had 
been  elected  in  November,  1900.  He 
was  chosen  chairman  of  the  board  of 
commissioners,  which  place  he  now  oc- 
cupies. His  work  in  public  office  has 
been  characterized  by  the  same  faith- 
ful care  and  attention  that  were  given 
his  previous  labors.  Elder  Anderson 
is  of  a  thoughtful,  reserved  disposition, 
not  given  to  ostentation.      He  was  well 


trained  by  his  parents  in  temperate, 
religious  habits,  and  followed  closely 
the  parental  Instruction  and  example. 
In  February,  1864,  he  united  with  the 
Sunday  school  in  the  Sixth  Ward,  Salt 
Lake  City,  and  has  retained  his  mem- 
bership ever  since,  being  a  diligent 
worker  in  the  Sunday  school  cause,  for 
years  past,  as  a  theological  class  teach- 
er. In  1873  he  became  associated  with 
mutual  improvement  work  in  his  Ward, 
and  has  shown  active  interest  therein 
ever  since.  At  the  age  of  eight  years, 
he  was  baptized  into  the  Church  by  his 
father.  In  1871  he  was  ordained  a  Dea- 
con, two  years  later  a  Priest,  and  on 
Feb.  6,  1876.  a  Seventy.  In  1881  he 
married  Mary  A.  Abbott,  a  native  of 
Abergavennj',  England.  In  1893  h& 
was  made  one  of  the  seven  presidents 
of  the  2nd  quorum  of  Seventy,  and 
when  the  110th  quorum  of  Seventy  was 
organized  in  1897  he  was  chosen  its 
senior  president.  From  1875  to  1890  he 
acted  as  clerk  of  the  6th  Ward.  Elder 
Anderson  always  has  been  energetic 
in  his  efforts  to  promote  the  dissemina- 
tion of  useful  knowledge.  In  promul- 
gating the  principles  of  the  gospel  he 
has  been  especially  active  among  the 
youth  residing  in  his  vicinity.  In  the 
autumn  of  1884  he  was  called  as  a 
home  missionary  in  the  Salt  Lake 
Stake  of  Zion,  and  until  his  release  in 
1890  to  go  on  a  foreign  mission  he  kept 
every  appointment  made  for  him.  In 
September,  1890,  he  went  to  Indian  Ter- 
ritory, visiting  at  Manard,  the  head- 
quarters of  that  mission,  with  his 
brother  Franklin  M.,  who  was  a  mis- 
sionary in  that  field.  He  then  jour- 
neyed to'  Great  Britain,  where  he  was 
appointed  as  a  traveling  Elder  in  the 
London  conference.  His  labors  there 
were  in  the  Kent,  Whitechapel  and 
North  London  districts.  In  December. 
1890,  he  was  called  to  Liverpool,  and 
from  that  time  until  his  return  home, 
in  October,  1892,  Elder  Anderson  con- 
ducted the  editorial  work  of  the  "Mil- 
lennial Star;"  he  also  wrote  several 
tracts,  and  spent  much  of  his  time  in 
traveling  and  preaching.  He  visited 
every  conference  in  the  British  Mission, 
and  in  July,  1892,  he  made  a  trip  to 
France.  On  his  return  to  Utah  he 
again  became  a  home  missionary  in  the 
Salt  Lake  Stake  of  Zion,  and  was  ac- 
tively engaged  till  a  long  and  severe 
illness  in  1898  necessitated  his  release. 
Since   1900,    when   his  health   improved. 


780 


LATTER-DAY    SAINT 


he  has  done  considerable  public  speak- 
ing, chiefly  as  a  mutual  improvement 
lecturer.  In  August,  1898,  he  accom- 
panied Apostle  Francis  M.  Lyman  on 
the  latter's  tour  of  the  Stakes  of  Zion 
in  central  and  southern  Utah.  As  a 
public  speaker,  Elder  Anderson  is  clear, 
earnest  and  logical.  The  same  char- 
acteristics mark  his  writings,  most  of 
which  consist  of  magazine  and  news- 
paper articles.  His  most  elaborate 
literary  production  is  his  historical  and 
descriptive  sketch  of  the  Temple  in 
Salt  Lake  City,  first  published  in  "The 
Contributor"  in  1893,  and  recognized 
as  an  authoritative  statement  of  facts 
connected  with  the  building  o£  that 
sacred   edifice. 

REISER,      Albert     Schneider,     an 

active  Elder  in  the  Sixth  Ward,  Salt 
Lake  City,  Utah,  is  the  son  of  Henry 
Reisef  and  Magdalena  Schneider,  and 
was  born  in  Salt  Lake  City,  Utah, 
March  1,  1871.  His  education  was  ob- 
tained in  the  district  schools,  the  Des- 
eret  University,  and  the  Salt  Lake 
Business  College.  He  has  always  taken 
an  active  part  in  Church  work.      When 


only  15  years  of  age  he  was  made  pres- 
ident of  the  Y.  M.  M.  I.  A.  in  the  6th 
Ward,  Salt  Lake  City.  At  the  age  ol 
17  he  left  ifor  a  mission  to  Europe 
where  he  labored  for  thirty  months  in 
Germany  and  Switzerland.  He  was 
one  of  the  Elders  who  opened  up  the 
present  fruitful  field  for  missionary  la- 
bor in  the  Kingdom  of  Saxony.  Since 
his  return   home  he  has  kept  busy  la- 


boring in  various  ecclesiastical  posi- 
tions in  the  6th  Ward,  where  he  re- 
sides. At  present  he  is  acting  as 
president  of  the  Y.  M.  M.  I.  A.,  clerk 
of  the  Ward,  teacher  in  the  Sabbath 
school,  and  a  president  in  the  110th 
quorum  of  Seventy.  In  1895  he  mar- 
ried Nellie  Hamer,  a  daughter  of  Ma- 
jor Samuel  Hamer  of  the  early  Utah 
militia.  In  civil  affairs  Elder  Reiser 
has  taken  much  interest  in  politics,  and 
was  elected  to  the  office  of  city  auditor 
in  1899,  and  so  well  did  he  perform  the 
duties  of  that  office  that  he  was  re- 
elected in  the  year  1901,  receiving  the 
largest  vote  cast  for  any  candidate 
dui'ing  that  election  and  he  is  now  serv- 
ing in  that  capacity. 

THOMAS,      Richard      Kendall,       a 

prominent  Elder  in  the  Seventh  Ward, 
Salt  Lake  City,  was  born  June  30,  1844, 
at  Saint  Columb,  county  of  Cornwall. 
England.  He  was  baptized  into  the 
Church  by  Elder  John  Alford  in  1859. 
When  about  sixteen  years  of  age,  he 
was  ordained  to  the  Priesthood  and  sent 
out  to  do  missionary  work.  In  May, 
1863,  he  together  with  other  Saints 
sailed  from  Liv'erpool  for  America,  and 
was  made  clerk  of  the  company  by 
Pres.  Geo.  Q.  Cannon.  He  crossed  the 
plains   in   Captain    Rosel    Hyde's   com- 


])any,  and  on  arriving  in  the  Valley  he 
located  in  Salt  Lake  City.  During  the 
winter  of  1863-64  he  worked  at  copying 
parts  for  the  Salt  Lake  Theater,  and 
in  the  spring  of  1864  he  was  employed 
as  salesman  in  a  store  in  Logan,  Cache 


BIOGRAPHICAL.    ENCYCLOPEDIA. 


181 


county.  In  the  spring  of  1865  he  mar- 
ried and  went  to  Richmond,  Cache 
county,  where  he  ooened  up  a  store 
for  B.  H.  Young.  Later,  he  became  a 
clerk  in  Z.  C.  M.  I.,  Salt  Lake  City, 
and  in  the  fall  of  1870  he  became  an 
employee  of  Walker  Bros.,  and  acted  as 
buyer  and  manager  of  their  dry  goods 
department.  In  1885  he  commenced 
business  on  his  own  account  by  open- 
ing the  R.  K.  Thomas  Dry  Goods  Co. 
in  Salt  Lake  City,  and  he  is  still  suc- 
cessfully conducting  that  business.  El- 
der Thomas  is  the  only  one  of  his  fa- 
ther's family  who  has  accepted  the 
g-ospel,  and  he  has  always  taken  a 
quiet  and  consistent  interest  in  Church 
work,  being  at  present  a  member  of  a 
quorum  of  Seventy  and  also  a  member 
of  the  Salt  Lake  Stake  Board  of  Edu- 
cation. In  civil  life  he  has  been  elect- 
ed, by  the  people,  to  serve  two  terms  in 
the  State  senate,  and  in  the  discharge 
of  the  duties  connected  therewith  he 
has  made  an  excellent  record  and 
proven  himself  an  efficient  legislator. 

WOOLLEY,  Samuel  Amos,  fourth 
Bishop  of  the  Ninth  ^''ard.  Salt  Lake 
City,  was  the  son  of  John  Woolley  and 
Rachel  Dilworth,  and  was  born  in  New 
Lynn,  Chester  county,  Penn.,  Sept.  11, 
1825.  In  a  biographical  sketch  pre- 
pared for  publication  Bishop  Woolley 
wrote:  "My  mother  died  in  1826  and 
my  father  passed  away  in  1832,  leaving 
i'even  children,  of  whom  I  was  the  old- 
est. W^e  first  heard  the  gospel 
preached  bj'  Geo.  A.  Smith  and  Lo- 
renzo D.  Barnes  in  April,  1836.  In  the 
fall  of  1837  my  brother  Edwin  D.  went 
to  Kirtland,  Ohio,  and  on  returning  he 
brought  with  him  Joseph  Smith,  sen., 
the  Prophet's  father,  who  remained 
with  us  during  the  winter,  to  escape 
the  persecutions  of  the  mobs  which 
were  at  that  time  harrassins  the 
Saints.  Together  with  my  brothers 
Edwin  D.  and  John  M.,  I  started  for  the 
gathering  place  of  the  Saints  in  the 
fall  of  1839,  but  on  reaching  Quincy, 
111.,  we  met  the  Prophet  and  the  Patri- 
arch and  were  advised  to  stop  at  that 
place  for  the  winter,  which  we  did,  and 
1  worked  at  chopping  and  hauling 
wood.  In  April,  1840,  we  moved  to 
Nauvoo  (then  called  Commerce),  but 
as  we  enjoyed  very  poor  health,  we 
went  back  to  Ohio  in  the  fall.  Oct.  7, 
1840,  I  was  baptized  by  Almon  W. 
Babbitt.       Returning  to  Nauvoo  in  the 


fall  of  1841,  I  obtained  work  at  the  stone 
quarry,  and  was  one  of  the  first  to 
quarry  stone  for  the  Nauvoo  Temple. 
During  a  conference  meeting  held  in 
Nauvoo  in  the  spring  of  1843  an  officer 
came  to  arrest  Joseph  the  Prophet; 
but  in  order  to  prevent  him  from  do- 
ing so  a  number  of  boys,  including  my- 
self, commenced  whittling  sticks  and 
whistling,  and  every  time  the  officer 
neared  the  house  where  the  Prophet 
was,  we  would  stand  in  front  of  him 
and  whittle  and  whistle.  The  result 
of  this  was  that  he  did  not  arrest  Jo- 
seph Smith  that  day.  During  the 
troublous  times  of  1844  I  sers^ed  as  a 
city  guard  in  Nauvoo.  After  the  mar- 
tyrdom of  Joseph  and  Hyrum  Smith 
I  was  present  at  the  important  meet- 
ing where  Pres.  Brigham  Young     first 


spoke  to  the  Saints  of  Joseph's  death, 
and  I  received  a  testimony  that  the 
mantle  of  Joseph  had  fallen  upon  Brig- 
ham  Young's  shoulder,  for  when  he 
spoke  it  seemed  as  if  Joseph  himself 
were  speaking,  his  voice  and  gestures 
being  exactly  like  those  of  the  mar- 
tyred Prophet.  March  6,  1845,  I  was 
ordained  a  Priest  by  Bishop  Edward 
Hunter,  and  on  Oct.  8,  1845,  I  was  or- 
dained a  Seventy  in  the  4th  quorum 
by  Moses  Martin.  I  married  Catharine 
Elizabeth  Mehring  May  21,  1846,  and  in 
June  we  crossed  the  Mississippi  river, 
leaving  Nauvoo  for  the  unknown  west. 
In  the  spring  of  1848  I  crossed  the  plains 
in  Pres.  Brigham  Young's  company 
which  arrived  in  the  Valley  in  Septem- 
ber, 1848.      Pres.  Brigham  Young  hav- 


782 


LATTER-DAY    SAINT 


ing  decided  to  build  up  settlements  in 
Iron  county,  he  called  me  to  accom- 
pany Geo.  A.  Smith  and  others  to 
settle  what  is  now  known  as  Parowan, 
Iron  county.  We  arrived  there  in 
January,  1851.  qct^J19^  1852,  I  left  for  a 
mission  to  Hindoostan  via  San  Francis- 
co and  arrived  at  Calcutta,  India,  April 
■JJ^  1852.  where  I  remained  till  Aug.  24, 
1853.  After  having  traveled  in  many 
different  places,  and  not  meeting  with 
much  success,  I  left  Calcutta  on  board 
the  ship  "John  Gilpin"  to  return  home, 
and  after  a  pleasant  voyage  landed  in 
Hoston,  U.  S.  A.,  Feb.  12,  1855.  My 
health  being  very  poor  I  could  not 
irops  the  plains  that  season;  conse- 
•  luently.  I  remained  in  the  east  and 
was  appointed  president  of  the  Dela- 
ware conference,  by  Pres.  John  Tay- 
lor, which  position  I  held  till  April 
".t.  1856,  when  1  left  for  Salt  Lake  City, 
"Where  I  arrived  August  15th,  having 
been  absent  nearly  four  years.  I  was 
ordained  a  High  Priest  and  set  apart 
as  first  counselor  to  P>ishop  John  M. 
AVooIley  of  the  Ninth  Ward,  by  P.ishop 
Kdward  Hunter.  Oct.  21,  isr,6.  Duiiii?, 
the  Johnston  army  troubles  in  Is.'iT  I 
served  as  a  guai-d  in  Echo  canyon.  At 
the  time  of  the  "move"  south,  in  isr.s. 
]  was  called  by  Pres.  Biigham  Young 
lo  go  to  Pai'owan  with  the  necessary 
nuu'hinery  foi-  making  pails,  and  there 
I  )>egan  the  business  of  making  pails 
and  successfully  conducted  it  till  1S60. 
when  I  returned  to  Salt  Lake  City.  In 
1861  I  went  east  on  a  business  tiip 
for  Pres.  Young,  and  retuined  in  charge 
of  a  company  of  Saints,  mostly  Scan- 
dinavian emigrants,  arriving  in  the 
Valley  Set)t.  22,  1861.  After  the  de- 
mise of  Bishop  John  M.  WooUey  of 
the  Ninth  Ward,  in  August,  1864,  I  was 
appointed  to  iireside  as  acting  Bishop 
over  that  "Ward,  and  I  labored  in  that 
capacity  till  Nov.  21,  1872,  when  I  was 
ordained  a  Bishop  by  Edward  Hunter 
and  set  apart  to  preside  as  such  over 
the  Ninth  Ward.  I  married  Francis 
Ann  Phillips  Feb.  9,  1867.  In  1869-70  1 
filled  a  mission  to  the  States,  laboring 
in  Ohio,  Pennsylvania,  Kentucky  and 
^Michigan,  till  March  1870,  when  I  re- 
turned to  T'tah  on  accMjunt  of  my  son 
Samuel  Henrys  death."  Bishop  Wool- 
ley  continued  to  labor  faithfully  with- 
out faltering,  for  the  furtherance  of  the 
interests  of  the  Church  of  God,  and  for 
the  spread  of  the  gospel  on  the  earth, 
till   March  23,  1900,   when   he  died   sud- 


denly at  his  home  in  the  Ninth  Ward, 
Salt  Lake  City.  Bishop  Woolley  was 
the  father  of  twenty-one  children,  ten 
of  whom  survived  him.  Up  to  the  time 
of  his  demise,  his  grandchildren  num- 
bered   twenty-eight. 

WOOIiLKV,  John  Mills,  third  Bish- 
op of  the  Ninth  Ward,  Salt  Lake  City, 
was  the  son  of  John  Woolley  and  Ra- 
chel Dilworth  and  was  born  in  New 
Lynn,  Chester  county,  Penn.,  Nov.  20, 
1822.  He  removed  to  Ohio  in  1833  and 
subsequently  to  Commerce,  Hancock 
county.  111.,  where  he  was  baptized  by 
Elder  Almon  W.  Babbitt  Oct.  7,  1840.  At 
the  April  conference  held  in  Nauvoo 
in  1842  he  was  ordained  an  Elder  and 
went  on  a  mission  to  Kentucky,  Ten- 
nessee and  other  States;  he  returned 
to  Nauvoo  in  1843.  In  April  of  that  year 
he  wa.s  ordained  a  Seventy,  and  became 


a  member  of  the  4th  quorum.  By  the 
counsel  of  Heber  C.  Kimball  he  started 
June  1."),  1843,  on  another  mission,  this 
time  going  to  the  Eastern  States.  He 
labored  jirincipally  in  (Connecticut,  and 
Massachusetts,  and  returned  to  Nau- 
voo in  November,  1844.  During  the 
\\  inter  of  1844-45  he  worked  on  the  Nau- 
voo Temple.  Jan.  9,  1846,  he  married 
Maria  L.  Dewey,  and  subseriuently  ha 
married  two  other  wives.  At  the  time 
of  the  general  exodus  from  Nauvoo  in 
1846.  he  came  west  and  arrived  in  Great 
Salt  Lake  valley  in  the  fall  of  1847,  in 
Geo  B.  Wallace's  fifty.  In  1848  Elder 
Woolley  built  the  first  house  in  the 
Ninth  Ward,  Salt  Lake  City,  on  the 
sr)ot    where    the    family    residence    still 


BIOGRAPHICAL    ENCYCLOPEDIA. 


783 


f^tands.  Fur  a  number  of  years  he  was 
engaged  in  the  lumber  business,  being 
the  owner  of  a  saw  mill  in  Little  Cot- 
tonwood canyon.  June  3,  1856,  he  was 
ordained  a  Hig-h  Priest  and  set  apart  to 
ai-t  as  first  counselor  to  Bishop  Seth 
Taft  of  the  Ninth  Ward,  and  in  October 
following-  he  was  appointed  Bro.  Taft's 
successor  in  the  Bishopric,  being  or- 
dained a  Bishop  Oct.  21,  1856.  This 
oih'o  he  magnified  until  the  time  of  his 
death,  A\hich  occurred  in  Salt  Lake 
City  Aug.  IS,  1S64,  as  a  result  of  an 
accident  which  occurred  two  days  pre- 
vious in  Cottonwoood  canyon.  While 
he.  in  company  with  several  of  his 
workmen,  were  examining  a  bridge  at 
the  foot  of  one  of  the  "run  ways,"  near 
his  mill,  some  of  the  men  on  the  moun- 
tain abo\e  rolled  a  large  log  on  the 
"slide"  ^^■hich  came  down  with  alarm- 
ing velocity  to  the  place  where  he  was 
standing,  and  striking  a  pile  of  loose 
rocks  at  the  base  of  the  slide,  and 
scattered  them  in  every  direction  with 
great  force,  one  of  which  struck  the 
Bishop  on  the  side  of  the  neck  and  face, 
prostrating  him  to  the  earth  in  a  state 
of  insensibility.  He  never  again  re- 
gained consciousness.  Bishop  Woolley 
was  a  prompt  and  energetic  man  in  all 
his  official  doings.  His  mind  was  rich- 
ly stored  with  the  "goood  things  of  the 
kingdom."  He  was  brilliant  in  thought 
and  (luick  to  perceive  the  revelations 
and  whisperings  of  the  spirit.  At  his 
death  he  left  thiee  wives  and  nine  chil- 
dren. 

MOY'LE,  James  H.,  an  active  I<]lder 
of  the  Twelfth  AVard,  Salt  Lake  City, 
was  born  Sept.  IT.  1858,  in  Salt  Lake 
City.  Utah,  the  son  of  James  Moyle  and 
Elizabeth  Wood.  He  was  educated  in 
the  district  schools  of  Salt  Lake  City, 
and  in  tiie  University  of  Utah,  from 
which  institution  he  graduated  in  1879. 
Having  been  ordained  to  the  office  of  a 
Seventy,  he  yierfoi'med  a  mission  to  the 
Southern  States  in  1879-81;  he  labored 
successfully  in  North  Carolina,  most  of 
the  time  as  pi-esident  of  a  conference. 
After  returning  home,  in  1881,  he  again 
entered  the  I'tah  University,  and  in 
1882  he  entered  the  I^niversity  of  Michi- 
gan, as  a  student  in  the  literary  de- 
partment, and  later  in  the  department 
uf  law.  He  graduated  in  June,  1885, 
and  was  admitted  to  practice  law  in 
the  supreme  courts  of  Michigan  and 
Utah.       In   Sejitember,  1885,  he  became 


as.-^istant  attorney  of  Salt  Lake  City 
and  deputy  county  attorney  of  Salt 
Lake  county.  He  was  elected  attorney 
of  Salt  Lake  county  in  1886  and  re- 
elected in  1888,  at  which  time  he  was 
also  elected  a  member  of  the  legislature 
of  Utah.  He  was  made  chairman  of 
a  committee  appointed  by  the  legisla- 
ture in  1888,  to  visit  the  several  reform 
schools  of  the  United  States  to  obtain 
information  upon  which  to  erect  and 
establish  a  reform  school  for  Utah, 
After  the  reform  school  in  Ogden,  We- 
ber county, was  erected  in  1889,he  served 
three  terms  on  the  board  of  trustees, 
the  last  term  of  which  he  acted  as 
president  of  the  board.  In  all  his  pub- 
lic positions  Brother  Moyle  has  dis- 
charged his  duties  in  a  very  efficient 
manner.       At  the  time  of  the  anti-po- 


lygamy raids,  when  "Mormons"  were 
ariested  by  the  score  for  conscience 
sake.  Elder  Moyle  was  an  able  de- 
fender of  their  rights  in  the  courts.  He 
is  one  of  the  leading  lawyers  of  Utah, 
and  is  retained  as  attorney  by  a  num- 
ber of  the  foremost  business  firms  of 
the  State.  Besides  following  his  profes- 
sion he  is  \ery  much  interested  in  vari- 
ous business  enterprises,  and  is  a  di- 
rector in  the  Consolidated  Wagon  and 
Machine  Co.,  Deseret  Live  Stock  Co. 
Utah  Commercial  and  Savings  Bank, 
etc.,  etc.  He  has  always  taken  an  ac- 
tive part  in  politics  and  stands  high  in 
the  councils  of  his  party.  In  the  days 
of  the  "People's  Party"  in  Utah,  he 
was  a  member  of  the  city  and  territo- 
rial   central      committees.        Since     the 


784 


LATTER-DAY    SAINT 


division  on  naiional  party  lines  he  has 
been  a  Democrat,  and  has  efficiently 
served  as  a  member  and  as  chairman  of 
the  State  committee  of  that  party.  In 
1900  he  was  the  nominee  of  his  party 
for  governor  of  Utah.  Brother  Moyle 
has  continually  taken  a  lively  interest 
in  Church  affairs,  and  has  always  been 
a  consistent  Latter-day  Saint.  He  was 
baptized  when  eight  years  old,  and  at 
the  age  of  16  he  was  ordained  an  El- 
der, and  one  year  later  to  the  office  of 
a  Seventy.  In  November,  1887,  he 
married  Alice  E.  Dinwoodey  in  the 
Logan  Temple,  which  union  has  been 
blessed  with  five  children. 

NELSON,  Joseph,  President  of  the 
Salt  Lake  Business  College,  was  born 
Dec.  30,  1861,  in  Moroni,  Sanpete  coun- 
ty, Utah,  third  child  of  Jens  C.  Niel- 
sen and  Annie  M.  Anderson.  He  was 
baptized  into  the  Church  May  6,  1S70; 
ordained  a  Teacher  Nov.  11,  1877,  and 
ordained  to  the  office  of  an  Elder  by 
Karl  G.  Maeser,  Nov.  25,  1885.  Until 
he  was  twelve  years  old,  he  worked  on 
the  farm,  attending  the  district  school 


in  the  winter.  From  that  time  until 
he  was  twenty,  he  spent  most  of  his 
time  timbering  in  the  canyons.  He  en- 
tered the  B.  Y.  Academy  at  Provo  Dec. 
8,  1881,  and  he  usually  refers  to  that 
day  as  "the  day  I  was  born."  He  con- 
tinued at  the  B.  Y.  Academy,  making  a 
specialty  of  mathematics,  until  the  fall 
of  1888,  when  he  began  teaching  in  the 
Salt  Lake  Stake  Academy  (later  the 
Latter-day  Saints'  College,  and  now  the 


Latter-day  Saints'  TJniver.sity).  He  re- 
mained with  this  institution  continu- 
ously until  Feb.  1,  1900,  devoting  his 
energy  principally  to  teaching  his  fa- 
vorite subject,  mathematics.  As  the 
out-growth  of  a  course  in  bookkeeping, 
of  which  he  had  been  the  teacher,  he 
began  regular  business  college  work  in 
1896,  with  an  enrollment  in  this  depart- 
ment of  thirty-six  students.  From  that 
time  until  the  present  he  has  been  prin- 
cipally engaged  in  business  college 
work.  The  advancement  of  that  de- 
partment under  his  direction  was  phe- 
nomenal. By  the  liberal  investment 
of  his  own  means,  coupled  with  such 
assistance  as  the  College  board  could 
give,  the  department  increased  in  three 
years,  from  thirty-six  to  over  three 
hundred  students,  and  during  that  time 
the  most  commodious  and  elegant 
quarters  in  the  city  were  obtained  for 
the  school  and  fitted  up  by  Elder  Nel- 
son. Feb.  1,  1900,  he  secured  control 
of  the  Salt  Lake  Business  College.  The 
advancement  of  this  school  under  his 
direction  has  been  most  marked.  Whilr' 
not  the  pioneer  in  business  college  work 
in  Utah,  he  enjoys  the  distinction  of 
being  among  the  first  who  successful! >• 
conducted  such  work,  and  of  standing 
in  the  very  foremost  rank  of  business 
college  men  in  the  entire  country.  He 
is  a  member  of  the  National  Business 
Teachers'  Federation,  and  has  a  per- 
sonal acquaintance  with  the  leading 
business  college  men  of  the  United 
States.  His  work  has  been  character- 
ized by  skill,  thoroughness,  energy 
and,  in  fact,  everything  that  can  be 
summed  up  in  the  western  term 
"push."  Besides  his  work  as  a  teach- 
er, he  has  been  engaged  in  timbering 
contracting,  sheep  raising,  and,  to  a 
considerable  extent,  in  mining.  He 
married  Leonora  Smith,  daughter  of 
Pres.  Joseph  F.  Smith,  June  14,  1893,  by 
whom  he  has  four  children. 

MERRILL,  Joseph  Francis,  first 
assistant  superintendent  of  the  Y.  M. 
M.  I.  A.  of  the  Salt  I^ake  Stake  of 
Zion,  is  the  son  of  Apostle  Marrinei 
W.  Merrill  and  Maria  L.  Kingsbury, and 
was  born  at  Richmond,  Cache  county. 
Utah,  Aug.  24,  1868.  He  was  baptized 
into  the  Church  July  22,  1877.  His  first 
ordination  to  the  Priesthood  was  to  the 
office  of  a  Teacher,  and  on  Sept.  22, 
1889,  he  was  ordained  an  Elder  by  his 
father;    he    received    the    Priesthood    of 


BIOGRAPHICAL    ENCYCLOPEDIA. 


785 


a  Seventy  Sept.  23,  1898,  under  the 
hands  of  Apostle  Heber  J.  Grant. 
Brother  Merrill  was  brought  up  on  his 
father's  farm  in  Richmond,  where  he 
attended  the  common  schools  till  1887, 
when  he  entered  the  University  of  Des- 
eret  as  a  normal  student.  He  gradu- 
ated from  that  institution  in  1889,  and 
in  the  fall  of  the  same  year  he  became 
a  student  in  the  University  of  Michi- 
gan, graduating  in  1893  with  the  de- 
gree of  Bachelor  of  Science.  The 
summer  of  1892  he  spent  as  a 
student  at  Cornell  Univei'sity,  and 
in  the  summer  of  1894  he  stud- 
ied at  the  University  of  Chicago. 
In  1893-95  he  was  assistant  professor 
of  chemistry  and  physics  in  the  Uni- 
versity   of    Utah.        During   1896-97      he 


studied  physics  and  electrical  engineer- 
ing, in  the  Johns  Hopkins  University, 
Baltimore,,  Md.,  and  in  the  University 
of  Chicago.  After  his  return  to  Utah 
he  resumed  teaching  again  in  the  Uni- 
versity of  Utah;  but  after  being  elected 
Fellow  in  Physics  in  the  Johns  Hop- 
kins University  he  went  east  once  more 
and  further  continued  his  studies,  till 
1899,  when  he  took  the  degree  of  Doc- 
tor of  Philosophy  from  the  Johns  Hop- 
kins institution.  An  abstract  of  his 
doctorate  thesis  was  published  in  the 
"Physical  Review"  for  Feb.  1899.  A 
later  article  by  Dr.  Merrill,  embodying 
the  results  of  original  research  was 
published  in  the  same  journel  for 
March,  1900,  an  abstract  of  which  ar- 
ticle was  also  published  in  the  "Physi- 
kalische   Zeitshrift"   of   Germany.   Doc- 

Vol.  1,  No.  rO. 


tor  Merrill  is  now  professor  of  physics 
and  electrical  engineering  in  the  Uni- 
versity of  Utah,  and  is  also  principal 
of  the  State  School  of  Mines,  a  depart- 
ment in  the  University.  During  his 
stay  in  Michigan,  in  1892-93,  he  acted 
as  presiding  Elder  of  the  "Mormon 
Colony"  at  Ann  Arbor.  In  November, 
1897,  Elder  Merrill  was  chosen  as  first 
assistant  superintendent  of  the  Y.  M. 
M.  L  A.  of  the  Salt  Lake  Stake  of  Zion. 
which  position  he  still  holds.  He  mar- 
ried Annie  Laura  Hyde,  a  daughter  of 
Alonzo  E.  and  Annie  Taylor  Hyde,June 
9,1898,which  union  has  been  blessed  with 
two  children.  During  1898-99  Brother 
Merrill  and  his  wife  labored  as  regular- 
ly apointed  misisonaries  in  Baltimore 
Elder  Merrill  is  looked  upon  as  a  con- 
scientious Latter-day  Saint  and  as  a 
.scholar  of  imminent  ability. 

PARK,    John  Rockey.    a   prominent 
Latter-day    Saint    educator,    was    born 
May   7,    1833,    at   Tiffin.    Seneca   county 
Ohio,  son  of  John  Park  and     Elizabeth 
AVaggoner.       He     attended    the    public 
schools  of  his  native  town,  was  a  stu- 
dent from  his  boyhood  up,  and  gradu- 
ated   from    a    number     of    institutions 
among  them  being  the  Ohio  Wesleyan 
University,    in    Delaware.       He    subse- 
'luently  completed  a  course  in  medicine 
in   New  York,     but  after  practicing  in 
his  native   town   for  a   short  time      he 
yielded    to   the   master   impulse   of   his 
nature  and  entered  the  school  room  as 
a   teacher.       In   1861   he   came   to   Utah 
and  settled  in  Draper.Salt  Lake  county 
vvhere  he  was  converted   to   "Mormon- 
ism,"  and  was  baptized  in  March    1S6-? 
by  Absolom  W.  Smith.       Subsequently' 
he  was  ordained  to  the  office  of  a  Sev- 
enty.     Soon  after  his  arrival  in  Draper 
he    commenced    teaching    school    there 
and  awakened  such  ambition  for  edu- 
cation among   the  youth   of  that   place 
that   it   still   lives  and   will   perhaps   be 
transmitted  from  generation  to  genera- 
tion for  many  years  to  come.       In  1869 
he  was  tendered  the  presidency  of  the 
University    of   Deseret,    which    position 
he    held    for   nearly    twenty-five   years. 
With  paternal   love  he  has  shaped  the 
destinies  of  hundreds  of  Utah's  vnuth, 
and  was  never    so  happy  as  when  en- 
couraging    struggling     ambition.        In 
1895    he    received    the      nomination      of 
State  superintendent  of  public  instruc- 
tion   at   the   hands   of     the   Republican 
party  and  was  elected.       He  filled  that 

Dec.  14,  1901. 


78(3 


LATTER-DAY    SAINT 


position,  as  he  did  all  others,  with  sig- 
nal ability,  oftentimes  working  labori- 
ously when  he  should  have  been  in  bed. 
Although  he  was  never  married, his  was 
a  strong  paternal  nature.  Seven  chil- 
dren were  taken  into  his  household  and 
were  raised  in  an  atmosphere  of  tender 
affection.  His  adopted  family  con- 
sisted of  David  R.  Allen  (professor  in 
the  Utah  University),  John  Held  and 
his  sister  Hortense,  Rosa  Zender  Roy- 
lance  (wife  of  Professor  Roylance,  of 
the  University  of  Utah),  and  Louis  and 
Eliza  Gottlieb.  The  latter  was  drowned 


in  City  creek  when  about  14  years  of 
age.  His  pupils  are  numbered  among 
the  most  prominent  citizens  in  the 
State  of  Utah  and  the  west.  Elder 
Park  died  in  Salt  Lake  City  Sept.  30, 
1000  At  the  time  of  his  demise  the 
'Deseret  News"  said:  "Dr.  Park's  life 
was  well  rounded  out, and, measured  by 
the  influence  he  wrought  upon  the 
youth  of  Utah,  and  the  things  that  he 
accomplished,  his  was  a  career  that 
7Tiight  well  excite  the  envy  of  most  men 
mufh  more  full  of  years." 

STEAVART,      Samuel    White,       an 

active  worker  in  the  Latter-day  Saint 
Y.  M.  M.  I.  A.  cause,  is  the  son  of  Bishop 
Isaac  M.  Stewart  and  Elizabeth  White, 
who  were  pioneers  of  Salt  Lake  valley, 
and  was  born  at  Draper,  Salt  Lake 
county,  in  1867.  His  boyhood  days  were 
spent  unon  his  father's  farm,  where 
he  early  learned  the  lessons  of  indus- 
try and  perseverance.  He  attended 
the  district  schools  of  his  native  town 


and  later  completed  a  thorough  course 
of  study  at  the  University  of  Deseret, 
after  which  he  taught  in  the  public 
schools  of  the  State  for  three  years. 
He  subsequently  entered  the  Ann  Arbor 
school  of  law  at  the  University  of 
Michigan,    from    which    institution     he 


graduated  in  1892.  Returning  to  Salt 
Lake  City  he  entered  upon  the  prac- 
tice of  his  profession  and  for  six  years 
was  the  senior  member  of  the  well- 
known  law  firm  of  Stewart  &  Stewari. 
In  1894  he  married  Ella  M.  Nebeker, 
daughter  of  George  and  Maria  L.  Neb- 
eker. In  1898  he  was  elected  a  mem- 
ber of  the  third  State  legislature  and 
v.^as  chairman  of  the  judiciary  commit- 
tee of  the  lower  house  of  that  body. 
In  1900  he  was  elected  judge  of  the 
third  judicial  district  court,  which  po- 
sition he  now  occupies.  Judge  Stew- 
art is  a  man  of  strong  character  and 
ability  and  has  always  been  an  active 
and  consistent  member  of  the  Church. 
He  was  a  home-missionary  in  the  Salt 
Lake  Stake  for  a  number  of  years  and 
has  taken  an  active  interest  in  mutual 
improvement  work. 

STEWART,       Willinin     3fittei),     a 

prominent  Latter-day  Saint  educator,  is 
the  son  of  Isaac  M.  Stewart  and  Eliza- 
beth White,  and  was  born  at  Draper, 
Salt  Lake  county,  Utah,  Sept.  5,  1859.  He 
was  baptized  when  eight  years  old  and 
was  ordained  a  Deacon  the  same  year, 
and  he  subseo.uently  held  the  offices  of 
Teacher,  Priest  and  Elder,  sucessive- 
ly,   and   in  1885  was  ordained  a  Seven- 


BIOGRAPHICAL    ENCYCLOPEDIA. 


787 


ty.  He  always  took  an  active  interest 
in  children  and  devoted  many  years  to 
the  Sabbath  school,  as  teacher,  assist- 
ant superintendent  and  as  a  Sabbath 
school  missionary.  The  greater  part 
of  his  youth  was  spent  at  home  working- 
on  his  father's  farm  in  the  summer,  and 
attending  the  district  school  in  the  win- 
ter, being  one  of  Dr.  John  R.  Park's 
lirst  pupils  in  Utah.  Under  the  influ- 
ence of  his  father,  who  took  a  great  in- 
terest in  education,  he  made  up  his 
mind  to  become  a  teacher.  While  still 
a  student  in  the  district  school  he  was 
employed  to  teach  school  in  West  Jor- 
dan, Salt  Lake  county.  When  twenty 
years  old,  he  entered  the  Uni- 
versity of  Deseret  and  was  graduated 
from  several  of  its  courses.  Later,  he 
received   a   master's     degree     from  the 


same  institution.  After  his  graduation, 
he  was  engaged  to  teach  in  his  native 
town  and  has  since  remained  a  teacher. 
In  1884  he  married  Sarah  E.  Taylor, 
daughter  of  Abram  Taylor  and  Char- 
lotte Tabberer.  In  1885  he  was  elected 
superintendent  of  schools  for  Salt  Lake 
county,  and  was  trice  re-elected.  He 
was  apointed  and  served  three  terms 
as  regent  of  the  University  of  Utah. 
In  1887  he  was  elected  director  of  the 
National  Educational  Association  for 
Utah,  and  the  next  year  he  took  a  large 
delegation  of  Utah  teachers  to  the  con- 
vention of  the  same  association  in  San 
Francisco,  Cal.  Prof.  Stewart  be- 
came a  member  of  the  faculty  of  the 
T:fniversity  of  Utah  in  1888,  taking 
charge  of  the  normal  school  and  occu- 


1  lying  the  chair  of  pedagogy.  In  1899 
hf-  entered  the  graduate  school  of  the 
<  "hicago  University,  devoting  himself 
mainly  to  the  study  of  education.  He 
has  been  an  aggressive  advocate  of  in- 
dustrial education  and  has  labored  to 
incorporate  manual  training,  domestic 
science,  and  kindergarten  into  the  com- 
mon school  curriculum.  In  1901  he  was 
elected  president  of  the  State  Teachers' 
Association. 

KING,  William  Henry,  a  promi- 
nent Elder  in  the  Church,  is  the  son  of 
William  King  and  Josephine  Henry, 
and  was  born  June  3,  1862,  in  Fillmore 
Millard  county,  Utah.  Upon  his  fathar's 
side  he  is  a  descendant  of  the  notable 
New  England  Hancock  and  King  fam- 
ilies. His  mother  is  directly  descended 
from  the  historic  Creighton  family  of 
Ireland  and  the  Henrys  of  Scotland. 
In  his  boyhood  days  Bro.  King  worked 
on  the  ranch  and  farm  and  -attended 
the  district  school.  He  became  a 
student  in  the  Brigham  Young  Acade- 
my and  graduated  with  high  credits 
from  that  institution.  In  1880  he  was 
called  to  go  on  a  mission  to  Great  Brit- 
ain and  for  nearly  three  years  he  la- 
bored energetically  in  the  missionary 
field.  On  his  return  home  he  was 
elected  to  various  county  and  muni- 
cipal -positions  in  Millard  county.  In 
1885  he  was  elected  to  the  Territorial 
legislature  and  re-elected  in  1887.  In 
the  meantime- he  attended  the  Univer- 
sity of  Michigan,  from  which  he  was 
graduated  with  honor  in  1887.  He 
moved  to  Provo,  Utah  county,  in  1889, 
and  entered  actively  upon  the  practice 
of  law.  In  April,  1889,  he  married  An- 
nie Lyman,  daughter  of  Apostle  Fran- 
cis M.  Lyman.  Bro.  King  took  an  ac- 
tive part  in  the  organization  of  the 
Democratic  party,  and  prior  thereto  he 
had  advocated  a  division  upon  national 
party  lines  as  a  means  of  preventing 
hostile  congressional  legislation  against 
the  "Mormons."  He  was  elected  to 
the  Territorial  legislature  in  1891,  and 
was  made  president  of  the  council 
While  residing  in  Utah  county  he  held 
various  official  positions,  and  in  1894 
he  was  appointed  associated  justice  of 
the  Supreme  court  of  Utah,  which  office 
he  held  till  1896.  In  that  year  he  be- 
came a  resident  of  Salt  Lake  City, 
where  he  entered  upon  the  practice  of 
his  profession.  At  the  November  elec- 
tion,   in    1896,    he   was   elected   a   repre- 


788 


LATTER-DAY    SAINT 


sentative  to  Congress.  In  1898  he  was 
a  candidate,  before  the  State  legisla- 
ture, for  United  States  senator,  but  a 
deadlock  ensued  and  no  one  was  elect- 
ed. He  was  again  elected  in  April, 
1900,  as  a  member  of  Congress.  Elder 
King  has  always  been  known  as  a  con- 
sistent member  of  the  Church,  and  on 
all  occasions  his  voice  has  been  raised 
in  behalf  of  his  religious  views.  He  was 
ordained  an  Elder  in  1880  by  Apostle 
Orson  Pratt,  subsequently  he  was  or- 
dained a  Seventy  and  served  as  one  of 
the  presidents  of  the  42nd  quorum  of 
Seventy.  Later  he  was  ordained  to  the 
office  of  a  High  Priest  and  acted  for  a 
number  of  years   as   a  member   of  the 


High  Council  in  both  Millard  and  Utah 
Stakes.  He  was  also  a  very  active 
worker  in  the  mutual  improvement 
cause  in  Millard  Stake.  For  about 
fifteen  years  he  has  served  as  a  home 
missionary.  Brother  King  is  a  man  of 
high  intellectual  attainments  and  in 
discharging  the  duties  of  his  different 
public  positions  he  has  made  a  brilliant 
record.  As  a  Latter-day  Saint  he  has 
ever  been  ready  to  give  a  reascm  for  his 
belief  and  both  at  home  and  abroad  he 
has  been  a  willing  champion  for  the 
truth.  As  a  public  speaker  and  lec- 
turer he  ranks  high,  being  logical  in 
his  thoughts  and  eloquent  and  forceful 
in  his  delivery. — P.  P.  J. 

CHRISTEXSEX,  David  Henry,  su- 
perintendent of  Salt  Lake  City  schools, 
is  the  son  of  Herman  J.  Christensen 
and   Anne    Poulson.    and    was   born     at 


Manti,  Sanpete  county,  Utah,  March 
28,  1869.  In  a  brief  autobiography  pre- 
pared for  this  book,  Elder  Christensen 
writes;  "My  parents  arrived  in  Utah 
in  the  early  fifties,  crossing  the  plains 
with  ox-teams.  They  were  among  the 
first  settlers  in  Sanpete  valley.  I  en- 
tered the  public  schools  at  the  age  of 
six  years.       In   1881  I  moved   with   my 


jTiDthcr  and  family  to  San  Louis  val- 
ley, in  southern  Colorado.  I  was  bap- 
tized m  1883  by  Elder  Howard  Coray: 
ordained  a  Deacon  in  1884;  ordained  an 
Elder  in  1894,  and  ordained  a  Seventy 
Oct.  20,  1S97,  by  Seymour  H.  Young. 
During  our  resilience  in  Colorado  I 
worked  ou  the  farm  both  summer  and 
winter.  In  1887  I  came  to  Utah  and 
entered  the  normal  department  of  th" 
University  of  Deseret,  from  which  in- 
stitution I  graduated  in  1890,  and  re- 
ceived an  appointment  as  principal  of 
Payson  city  schools.  I  was  chosen  ti> 
fill  an  unexpired  term  as  superintendent 
of  Utah  county  schooU-  i-i  1S94,  and  was 
afterward  elected  to  that  position  for 
two  successive  terms.  When  the  first 
State  board  of  education  was  created. 
I  was  appointed  bv  Gov.  Heber  M. 
Wells  as  one  of  the  two  members,  not 
ex-officio.  and  was  reappointed  at  th.- 
expiration  of  the  first  term.  At  tht 
establishment  of  the  branch  normal 
school  at  Cedar  City,  in  1897,  I  was 
elected  to  the  principalship,  but  re- 
signed later  v.ithout  having  acted,  a^ 
I  had  decided  to  go  to  Germany  for 
several  years  to  study  the  school  sys- 
tem  and    follow   a    course   of  advanced 


BIOGRAPHICAL    ENCYCLOPEDIA. 


789 


work  In  psychology  and  general  tMliua- 
tion.  While  in  preparation  for  this 
trip  I  received  a  call  to  go  on  a  mission 
ro  (Germany,  and  left  Salt  Lake  City 
Oct.  25,  1897.  I  spent  two  months  trav- 
fling  in  England.  Scotland  and  Ireland, 
incidentally  studying  the  educational 
facilities  in  those  countries.  When  I 
arrived  in  Bern,  Switzerland,  T  was  ap- 
l.ointed  to  labor  as  president  of  the  Ber- 
lin conference,  where  I  remained  tU 
January,  1900.  Avhen  I  was  transferred 
to  the  Frankfort  conference,  on  account 
of  failing  health.  Aug.  1,  1900,  I  was 
released  from  my  mission,  and  after 
spending  several  weeks  in  traveling  in 
southern  and  western  Europe,  I  entered 
the  university  of  Goettingen,  as  a  regu- 
lar student."  While  in  Germany  Elder 
rhri^tensen  made  the  schools  of  that 
land  his  special  study.  He  returned 
to  America  in  March,  1901,  and  spent 
=ome  time  visiting  the  schools  in  the 
large  cities  of  the  east,  and  was  mak- 
ing preparations  to  enter  the  Univer- 
sitv  of  Chicago,  when  he  was  appoint- 
ed by  the  board  of  education  to  the  po- 
sition of  superintendent  of  the  Salt 
Lake  Cfty  schools,  which  position  he 
has  fil'ed  with  credit  and  ability.  He 
married  Katie  Dean,  of  Salt  Lake  City, 
daughter  of  Joseph  and  Amelia  Dean, 
June  20,  1894;  the  issue  of  this  union  is 
two  children. 

ALSTON,  Thomas,  clerk  of  the 
Granite  Stake  of  Zion,  is  the  third  son 
of  James  Alston  and  Ann  Molyneux, 
and  was  born  at  Southport,  Lancashire. 
England,  Oct.  24,  1857.  Upon  the  death 
of  her  husband,  in  '  May,  1863,  his 
mother  determined  to  emigrate  to  Utah, 
she  having  been  a  member  of  the 
Church  of  Jesus  Christ  of  Latter-day 
Saints  for  many  years.  With  a  small 
company  of  Saints  passage  was  taken 
oa  the  ship  "David  Hoadley"  in  the 
spring  of  1865,  and  after  a  long  and 
tedious  sea  voyage  and  wearisome 
journey  across  the  plains  with  ox- 
teams,  the  family  arrived  in  Salt  Lake 
City  in  November  of  said  year.  March 
21,  1S6T,  Thomas  was  baptized,  and  on 
Feb.  15,  1875,  he  was  ordained  an  Elder 
by  William  J.  '"mith.  He  attended  the 
district  scho^.is  of  Salt  Lake  county 
and  the  University  of  Deseret,  and  at 
the  age  of  sixteen  years  commenced 
teaching  in  the  19th  District  school. 
Salt  Lake  City,  as  assistant  to  Lucius 
W.  Peck.  When  eighteen  years  old 
he  acepted  the  position  of  principal  of 


the  Huytsville  school,  in  Summit  coun- 
ty. I'tah.  Dec.  26,  1878,  he  married 
.Miss  Mary  Ellen  Holt,  of  Hoytsvllle, 
by  w  horn  he  has  had  thirteen  children, 
in  1SS3  he  was  elected  county  clerk 
of  Summit  county,  which  position  he 
held  until  1SS8.  He  was  ordained  a 
Seventy  by  Thomas  Copley.  In  the 
winter  of  1888-89  he  worked  in  the  office 
of  George  M.  Cannon,  recorder  of  Salt 
Lake  county.  In  April,  1889,  he  was 
called  to  take  a  mission  to  Great  Brit- 
ain, where  he  labored  in  the  Liverpool 
conference  and  office  for  two  years,  un- 
der the  direction  of  Apostles  George 
Toasdale  and  Brigham  Young;  he  act- 
eel  as  president  of  the  Liverpool  confer- 
ence for  about  six  months  in  the  latter 
part  of  1890.  Upon  returning  from  his 
mission  he  entered   the  office  of  Presi- 


dent Wilford  Woodruff  as  assistant  to 
Secretary  George  P.eynolds  and  re- 
mained there  two  years,  when  he  was 
transferred,  in  May,  1893,  to  the  Salt 
I>ake  Temple  and  labored  as  assistant 
recorder  therein  until  1898.  Nov.  1, 
1891,  upon  the  organization  of  the  105th 
quorum  of  Seventy,  in  the  Sugar  House 
Ward,  he  was  chosen  a  member  of  the 
council  of  said  quorum  and  held  that 
position  until  he  was  ordained  a  High 
Priest  in  1900.  When  the  Granite 
Stake  was  organized  in  January,  1900, 
he  was  chosen  and  set  apart  as  Stake 
clerk  and  clerk  of  the  High  Council, 
which  position  he  still  holds.  At  the 
regular  election  in  November,  1900,  he 
was  elected  county  recorder  of  Salt 
I^ake  county,  in  which  position  he  is 
giving  general  satisfaction. 


790 


LATTER-DAY  SAINT 


CANNON,  John  Moiisley,  a  High 
Councilor  in  the  ttranite  Stalie  of  Zion, 
is  a  son  of  Angus  M.  Cannon  and  Sarah 
M.  Mousley,  and  was  born  at  St. 
Oeorge,  Washington  county,  Utah, 
Sei)t.  24,  1865.  He  was  baptized  into 
the  Church  Sept.  24.  1873.  His  ordina- 
tions to  the  Piieslhood  aie  as  follows: 
He  was  ordained  a  Deacon  Nov.  11, 
1881,  by  George  H.  Taylor;  a  Teacher 
Oct.  17,  1884,  by  Thos.  Taylor;  a  Priest 
Nov.  13,  188r..  by  Geo.  H.  Taylor,  an 
Elder  June  .30.  1888,  by  John  M.  Whit- 
aker;  a  Seventy  Oct.  12,  1891,  by  Homer 
Duncan,  and  a  High  Priest  Feb.  8,  1900. 
by  Apostle  Francis  M.  Lyman.  He  at- 
tended the  district  schools  at  Salt  Lake 
City  until  fourteeen  years  of  age.  and 
then  followed  faiming  and  carpentering 
until  he  was  twenty,  during  which  time 


he  studied  the  common  biaruhes  of 
education  together  with  his  sister  Ann. 
For  about  two  years  he  at- 
tended the  University  of  Utah, 
l)ursuing  higher  mathematics  and 
histoiy.  At  the  age  of  twen- 
ty-three he  entered  the  University 
of  Michigan  at  Ann  Arbor,  and  gradu- 
ated as  Bachelor  of  Law  in  June  1890, 
since  which  time  he  has  followed  said 
profession  in  Salt  Lake  City.  Elder 
Cannon  has  filled  several  special  mis 
sions,  all  of  which,  however,  were  of 
short  duration.  July  18,  1893.  he  mar- 
ried Zina  Hennion,  who  has  borne  him 
five  children.  He  was  set  apart  to 
serve  as  a  High  ("ouncilor  in  the  Gran- 
ite Stake  of  Zion.  Feb.  S,  1900.  by  Apos- 
tle Francis  M.  Lyman,  whi<h  position 
h*^  still  ocr-ui)ies. 


WHITAKEK,  John  Mills,  first  coun- 
selor in  the  Bishopric  of  Sugar  House 
Ward,  Salt  Lake  county,  Utah,  is  the 
son  of  Thos.  W.  Whitaker  and  Eliza- 
beth Mills,  and  was  born  Oct.  16.  1863, 
at  Centerville,  Davis  county,  Utah. 
Karly  in  life  he  learned  the  trade  of  a 
carpenter,  and  assisted  his  father  in  the 
erection  of  public  and  private  build- 
ings in  Eagle  Rock  (Idaho),  Ogdt^n, 
and  Salt  Lake  City.  He  acquired  a 
common  school  education,  and  gradu- 
ated from  the  University  of  Utah  as 
a  normal,  and  while  attending  the  Uni- 
versity for  several  subsequent  years  he 
taught  shorthand,  typewriting  and 
commercial  letter-writing.  Sept.  22, 
1896,  he  was  united  in  marriage  to  Ida 
O.  Taylor,  daughter  of  the  late  Presi- 
dent John  Taylor  and  Mary  Ann  Oak- 
ley, and  he,  has  a  family  now  of  four 
girls  and  one  boy.  Two  boys  and  one 
girl  have  died.  In  1887  he  established 
the  Salt  Lake  Stake  Library  and  Free 
Reading  Room.  For  several  years  he 
was  private  secretai-y  and  reporter  for 
Church  Historian  Franklin  D.Richards; 
i^eneral  secretary  and  treasurer  of  the 


First  Council  of  Seventies,  and  general 
secretary  of  the  Deseret  Sunday  School 
Union  Board  for  nearly  ten  years,  hold- 
ing both  positions  jointly,  until  Dec. 
1,  1897,  when  he  left  for  a  mission  to  the 
Eastern  States.  Here  he  labored  first 
as  niesident  of  the  New  Jersey,  and 
later  of  the  New  England  conference, 
and  the  last  year  as  second  counselor 
to    the    r)resident    of    the    mission,    dur- 


BIOGRAPHICAL    ENCYCLOPEDIA. 


:9i 


ing  which  time  he  visited  and  wrote 
up  the  history  of  each  conference,  and 
later  he  wrote  the  general  history  of 
the  mission.  He  also  visited  and  con- 
versed with  leading  men  in  the  various 
large  cities  of  the  east,  including  edi- 
tors of  many  of  the  great  newspapers, 
who  willingly  published  favorable  state- 
ments on  the  doctrines,  aims  and  pur- 
poses of  the  Latter-day  Saints.  In  the 
spring  of  1900  he  returned  home  and 
was  appointed  clerk  of  the  Board  of 
Public  Works  for  Salt  Lake  City.  From 
his  youth  up  he  has  taken  an  active 
interest  in  the  Sunday  school  and  Y. 
M.  M.  I.  A.,  having  served  as  secre- 
tary, instructor  and  president  in  those 
organizations.  He  was  baptized  and 
confirmed  a  member  of  the  Church 
when  eight  years  of  age  by  Thomas 
W.  Whitaker.  He  was  ordained  a 
Teacher  Sept.  2,  1883,  by  Nathan 
Cheney;  a  Priest,  Sept.  27,  1884,  by 
Thomas  W.  Whitaker;  an  Elder  Feb. 
28,  1886,  by  John  E.  Woolley;  a  Seventy 
March  12,  1900,  by  Jacob  Gates,  and  be- 
came a  president  in  the  105th  quorum 
of  Seventy  Nov.  1,  1891.  He  was  or- 
dained a  High  Priest  and  set  apart  as 
second  counselor  in  the  Bishopric  of 
Sugar  House  Ward  June  17,  1900,  by 
Apostle  Heber  J.  Grant,  and  as  first 
counselor,  in  the  same  Ward,  Jan.  12, 
1902,  by  Apostle  Mathias  F.  Cowley. 

HAMILTON.  James  Campbell, Bish- 
op of  Mill  Creek  (Granite  Stake),  Salt 
Lake  county,  Utah,  is  the  son  of  James 
L.  Hamilton  and  Mary  A.  Campbell, 
and  was  born  Jan.  10,  1846,  at  War- 
wick, Canada.  He  moved  with  his 
parents  to  Nauvoo,  111.,  in  1846,  and 
later,  the  same  year,  went  with  the 
Saints  to  Council  Bluffs,  Iowa.  In  the 
spring  of  1852  he  started  to  cross  the 
plains,  together  with  his  parents,  and 
arrived  in  the  "Valley  in  October  of 
that  year.  They  settled  at  what  is 
now  known  as  Mill  Creeek,  Salt  Lake 
county,  where  James  has  continued  to 
reside  ever  since.  He  was  ordained 
an  Elder  in  1867  by  John  D.  T.  McAl- 
lister. Nov.  28,  1870,  he  married  Isa- 
bella H.  Hill  in  the  Endowment  House. 
In  1876  he  was  ordained  a  Seventy, 
which  office  he  held  till  March  30,  1884, 
when  he  was  ordained  a  High  Priest 
and  a  Bishop  by  Pres.  Joseph  F.  Smith, 
and  set  apart  to  preside  over  the  Mill 
Creek  Ward.  Elder  Hamilton  has 
faithfully     and     diligently     labored   in 


that  capacity  up  to  the  present  time. 
He  married  Mary  B.  White  March  4, 
1885,  in  the  Logan  Temple.  Oct.  12,  1888, 
he  was  sentenced  to  75  days'  imprison- 
ment and  fined  $150  for  "unlawful  co- 
habitation;" again,  on  Nov.  8,  1890,  he 
was  sentenced  to  pay  a  fine  of  $100  for 
the  same  "offense."  Bishop  Hamilton 
has    been    an    eyewitness    to   the    great 


change  in  Utah — the  transformation  of 
the  country  from  a  barren  wilderness 
to  a  fruitful  garden— but  he  has  always 
been  one  of  those  who  by  hard  efforts 
have  helped  nature  to  bring  that  change 
about.  He  is  open-hearted  and  gen- 
erous, and  is  loved  like  a  father  by  the 
Saints  over  whom  he  presides.  He  is 
the  father  of  twenty  children,  eleven 
sons  and  nine  daughters. 

HlLIi,  William  Hood,  first  coun- 
selor to  Bishop  Jas.  C.  Hamilton,  of 
Mill  Creek  Ward,  Salt  Lake  county, 
Utah,  is  the  son  of  Alexander  Hill  and 
Agnes  Hood,  and  was  born  Feb.  21,  1840, 
in  Toronto,  Canada.  In  1841  he  emi- 
grated to  Nauvoo,  111.,  with  his  pa- 
rents, and  later  they  moved  to  Quincy, 
111.,  where  they  lived  till  April,  1849, 
when  they  left  for  the  west.  The 
Hamilton  family  crossed  the  plains 
with  ox-teams,  and  after  arriving  in 
the  Valley  Oct.  3,  1849,  they  located  at 
Mill  Creeek,  Salt  Lake  county.  Hei-e 
William  was  raised  under  circum- 
stances that  made  him  familiar  with 
the  privations  and  hardships  of  pioneer 
life.      In  September,  1857,  he  was  called 


792 


LATTER-DAY    SAINT 


to  <io  service  in  llu'  Buchanan  war.  in 
preventing  the  Johnston  ainiy  fiom  en- 
tering Great  Salt  Lake  valley.  While 
still  doin.t?  duty  as  a  "minute  man"  in 
lsr)S,  he  married  Mary  C.  Sorensen.  He 
moved  to  Mendon,  Cache  county,  in 
1S60,  where  he  took  an  active  |)ait  in 
defending  the  settlers  against  the  In- 
dians, and  passed  through  many  ex- 
citing encounters  with  the  "red  men." 
In  18t>2  he  returned  to  Mill  Creeek, 
where  he  located  on  a  farm,  on  which 
he  has  lesided  ever  since.  In  1866  he 
was  ."igain  called  to  do  militaiy  duty, 
in  the  Hlackhawk  war,  in  Sanpete  coun- 
ty. Feb.  14,  l!<70,  he  took  to  wife  Eliz- 
abeth Ann  Hamilton,  and  in  1888  he 
was  arrested  on  the  chaige  oi  unlaw- 
ful cohabitati<m,  tried  and  found  guil- 
ty and  sentenced  to  seventy-five  days' 
imprisonment  ;;nd  to  pay  a  finv-  of  $l.'iO. 


Ever  fcince  his  baptism  by  Hishop  Joel 
H.  Johnson  and  his  confiimation  as  a 
member  of  the  Church  by  Alexander 
Hill  in  April,  1850,  Elder  Hill  has  al- 
ways filled  positions  in  the  Church. 
In  1889  he  left  home  for  a  mission  to 
Great  Britain,  where  he  labored  faith- 
fully  until  he  received  an  honorable  re- 
lease. He  had  served  as  a  |)resident 
in  the  61st  <iuorum  of  Seventy,  and  as 
superintendent  of  the  Mill  Creek  Sun- 
day school  for  some  time,  when  he,  on 
Jan.  28,  1900,  was  ordained  a  High 
Priest  by  Apostle  Francis  M.  Lyman 
and  set  apart  to  act  as  first  counselor 
to  Bishop  Jas.  C.  Hamilton,  of  Mill 
Creek  Ward.  He  is  still  occupying  that 
responsible  position. 


EliDKEDGK        Ben        Redtield,       a 

prominent  Elder  in  the  Church,  was 
horn  in  Salt  Lake  City,  May  4,  1866, 
son  of  Horace  S.  Eldredge  and  Chloe 
A.  Itedfield.  In  his  youth  he  attended 
the  school  in  the  Social  Hall  and  the 
district  schools,  and  later  the  Universi- 
ty of  Deseret.  At  the  age  of  sixteen 
he  entered  the  employment  of  Clark, 
Eldredge  &  Co.  and  continued  with 
them  the  greater  part  of  the  next  five 
years.        In    1887      he      married      Lizzie 


^H' 

**'^m 

^ 

mm     ^ 

y^L 

v^^yfl 

HR 

X 

^pKi'-*  '-aras 

fesiKP^J*^ 

R^^^^H 

Sharp,  a  daughti-i-  of  Hon.  James  Sharp. 
In  1891,  1892  and  189:5  he  was  engaged 
ill  the  hardware  business  at  Provo.Utah 
county,  under  the  name  of  "Hen  It. 
Eldredge"  and  afterwards  "Eldredge 
Brotheis."  June  16,  1894.  he  left  Salt 
Lake  City  for  a  mission  to  England, 
where  he  spent  one  year  in  the  Birm- 
ingham confeience  as  traveling  Elder 
in  the  Woicester  and  North  Hampton 
distiicts,  and  the  second  year  of  his 
mission  was  spent  as  president  of  the 
London  conference.  He  leturned  home, 
in  July,  1896.  He  holds  the  office  of 
a  Se\enty;  and  for  several  years  was 
one  of  the  council  in  the  8th  quorum: 
at  present  he  holds  a  similar  ))Osition 
in  the  61st  (nu)rum.  Aftei-  returning 
from  his  mission  he  spent  a  year  with 
Z.  C.  M.  I.  and  then  took  a  position 
with  Clark,  Eldredge  &  Co.  as  traveling 
salesman.  In  1900  he  was  elected  as- 
sessor of  Salt  Lake  county,  which  of- 
fice he  still  holds.  At  !>resent  he  is 
living  on  a  farm  in  Mill  Creek.  Since 
he  was  a  boy  he  has  given  more  or  less 
attention  to  farming  and  stock-raising. 


BIOGRAPHICAL  ENCYCLOPEDIA. 


793 


and  has  gained  a  well  earned  reputa- 
tion as  a  breeder  of  Devon  cattle.  He 
was  called  to  Chicago,  in  1893,  to  act  as 
a  judge  at  the  Columbian  World's  Fair 
of  cattle  in  the  Devon  classses. 

FlTZGKRALD,JainesWalter\Vatls- 
worth,  second  counselor  to  Pres 
Hyrum  Goff,  of  the  Jordan  Stake  of 
Zion,  is  the  son  of  Perry  Fitzgerald 
and  Agnes  Wadsvvorth,  and  was  born 
in  Draper,  Salt  Lake  county,  Utah.  He 
was  baptized  Oct.  1,  1865,  by  Absolom 
W.  Smith  and  confirmed  the  same  day 
by  Wm.  R.  Terry.  June  24,  1867,  he 
was  ordained  a  Deacon  by  Henry  Day. 
He  attended  the  district  school  at  Dra- 
per under  Dr.  John  R.  Park  and  James 
Z.    Stewart,    till    he    was    16    years    old, 


During  the  October  conference,  in  1901, 
he  came  to  Utah  to  make  a  report  of 
the  Northern  States  mission,  and  while 
there  he  was  called  to  act  as  second 
lounselor  to  Pres.  Hyrum  Goff  of  the 
Jordan  Stake;  he  was  set  apart  to  that 
position  by  Pres.  John  R.  Winder.  In 
consequence  of  this  calling  he  was  re- 
leased from  his  mission  to  the  North- 
ern States,  and  entered  upon  the  duties 
of  his  new  office.  Bro.  Fitzgerald  is 
extensively  engaged  in  farming  and 
stock-raising,  being  one  of  the  most 
successful  men  in  that  business  in 
Utah. 

STKWART,  Isaac-  Mittoii,  Bishop 
of  Draper,  Salt  Lake  county.  Utah, 
from  1856  to  1890,  was  the  son  of  Bick- 
ley  Stewart  and  Alice  Hopkins  and 
was  born  at  Burlington,  New  Jersey. 
March  14.  181-5.  He  was  of  Scotch- 
Drish  descent  and  his  father  was  a  sol- 
(Mer  of  the  lievolution  under  George 
Was-hinglon.  His  father  died  when 
Isaac  was  but  a  lad,  and  the  family 
moved  to  Illinois,  where  ISaac  (then  a 
young  man)  became  acquainted  with 
Joseph  Smiths  mission  and  embraced 
the  go.^pel.      In  1843  he  marrie  1  Matilda 


when  he  was  given  a  position  as 
school  teacher  at  Union  Fort,  Salt  Lake 
county.  In  1875-76  he  attended  the 
Brighnm  Young  College  at  Logan,  and 
in  1877  he  was  a  student  at  the  Uni- 
versity of  Deseret.  The  following  five 
years  he  followed  school  teaching.  In 
November,  1SS2,  he  was  ordained  an 
Elder  by  James  Jensen,  and  on  the 
.30th  of  that  month  he  married  Leah  J. 
Day.  daughter  of  Henry  Day  and  Leah 
Rawlins.  Feb.  20,  1887,  he  was  ordained 
a  Seventy  by  Apostle  Abraham  H.  Can- 
non. In  November,  1899,  he  left  home 
fof  a  misison  to  the  Northern  States. 
During  the  first  six  months  of  this 
mission  he  labored  as  a  canvassing  El- 
der, then  he  became  a  branch  presi- 
dent, and  finally  was  chosen  president 
of    the    Northern      Illinois      conference. 


Jiine  Downs.  He  shared  the  early  per- 
secutions of  the  Saints,  and  was  on 
guard  near  <.*arthage  when  the  Prophet 
Josei)h  and  Patriarch  Hyrum  were 
murdered.  Being  driven  with  the 
Saints  from  Illinois,  he  moved  to 
Kanesville,  Iowa,  where  he  remained 
until  the  spring  of  1852,  when  he  crossed 
the   plains   in   a   company   of  which   he 


794 


LATTER-DAT    SAJNT 


was  appmnted  catptain.  ? 

tlie  Valley  he  located  at  -whai  was  then 
called  Soath  "Willow  Creeek,  now  Dra-. 
per.  Salt  Lake  county.  In  October,  1S56. 
be  vas  set  apart  to  act  as  Bishop  of 
Drapo*  "Ward,  in  which  capacity  he 
saved  faitlifnny  until  his  deaths  which 
oecniied  at  Draper  March  Is.  ISdO.  In 
ISC  he  maried  Elizabeth  "niiite  and 
Rmma.  Uoyd,  w^th  whom  he  had  a 
laxse  family,  b^ng  the  fatbo*  of  twen- 
ty children  and  bavins  ogfaty  grand- 
duldren.  Thirteen  of  bis  childr^i  are 
now  living.  They  are:  James  Z. 
Stewart  of  Logan;  Isaac  J.  Stewart  of 
Richfield;  Joshua  B.  Stewart.  "WiUiazn 
M.  Stewart.  Samuel  \r.  Stewart, Charles 
BL  Stewart.  Barnard  J.  Stewart,  all  of 
Salt  Lake  CSty:  Mary  Ann  Ballantyne. 
Logan;  Aliee  C.  Stringf^low.  Draper; 
EKrabeth  Fife.  Ogden;  Eliza  J.  Fife. 
Salt  Lake  C5ty:  LoeUa  E.  Lindsay. 
Mottpdler,  Idaho,  and  Nettie  P.  Stew- 
art. Salt  Lake  C3ty.  Bi^aop  Stewart 
served  three  suecessive  terms  (nine 
years)  as  county  selectman  of  Salt 
Lake  oounty,  and  was  prominently  as- 
sociated with  Judge  'EbBS  Smith. 
SUbap  Benb^  Milla-.  Jesse  \r.  Fox 
and  Ksbop  An^ibald  Gardim-.  in  the 
coBstruetion  c€  the  varions  canals  taken 
Cram  the  Jordan  river  in  the  southern 
part  of  Salt  Lake  county.  He  wa= 
strong  and  caicrgctic  in  mind  and  bf>c: 
and  had  a  progressive  dispositicm.  al- 
ways faking  an  active  interest  in  edr- 
catiaa.  It  was  largely  through  hi^ 
influeaee  that  Dr.  J<rtm  R.  Fazk  was 
entplayed  and  retained  in  educati<Kia. 
wmk  in  rrtah.  Bishop  Stewart  was  a 
typical  eaamirte  of  a  sturdy  iMooeer. 
honest  and  upright  in  every  particular. 
His  li£e  and  intefests  were  centered  in 
his  rdigions  faith. 

CX>]CER,  George,  a  pmninent  El- 
der in  Ldii,  Utah  oounty.  Utah,  was 
bom  Oct.  17.  1839.  at  Farrington,  Gor- 
ney.  Somersetshire.  TingUtna  At  the 
age  of  IC  years  he  moved  to  South 
ITales.  where  he  CoHoved  the  pursuit 
or  minfng  for  nineteen  years,  dtmn^ 
wUcb  time  be  was  a  victim  of  a  ntun- 
ber  oC  erplosioas.  In  the  year  iSS» 
he  was  baptized  and  confirmed  a  nmn- 
ber  of  the  CInreii.  aad  two  years  later 
■Mnied  Maxr  Ann  Smith.  Oct.  29. 
UM.  he  was  oidained  a  Teaefaer:  June 
2.  liS».  he  was  oidaiaed  a  Priest,  and 
in  April.  167.  be  was  ofdained  an  El- 
der.     During  the  first  ten  years  of  hie 


membo^hip  in  the  Church  he  labored 
very  energetically  as  a  local  mission- 
ary. He  emigrated  to  Utah  in  1866. 
settling  in  Lehi,  his  present  home.where 
he  has  followed  the  vocation  of  farm- 
ing and  stock-raising.  Bro.  Comer  as- 
sisted in  the  constructicm  of  the  Provo 
Bench  canal:  was  a  sub-contractor  on 
the  Union  Pacific  and  Ut^h  Central 
railroads  and  also  quarried  rock  for 
the  Provo  Woolen  Mills.  In  early  days 
he  w^as  a  member  of  the  Xauvoo  Le- 
gion. He  was  ordained  a  Seventy  Jan. 
31.  1S72.  and  from  18S1  to  1895  he  was 
engaged  almost  incesantly  as  a  mis- 
sionary, first  as  a  missionary  in  the 
Southern  States,  later  as  a  home  mis- 
sionary and  still  later  (1881- S2  as  a 
missimiary  in  England.  He  is  a  mem- 
ber of  the  Genealogical  Society  of  Utah. 


and  has  already  on  record  at  the  Tem- 
ple 1,122  names.  EHder  Comer  has  been 
an  ardent  worker  in  tlie  Lehi  Sunday 
school  for  over  thirty  years  and  is  the 
fa.ther  of  12  children;  he  also  has  4S 
grandchildren.  He  has  now  passed  the 
71st  mile-stone  of  his  life's  joumey.and 
«till  bears  a  strong  and  faithful  testi- 
mony to  the  truth  of  the  gospel  of 
Jesus  Christ,  as  taught  by  the  Latter- 
day  Saints.  For  the  past  twenty  years 
he  has  had  cha.rge  of  the  baptisms  in 
Lehi.  having  officiated  in  that  ordi- 
nance for  hundreds  of  people. 

SNOW,  James  Ghaney.  president 
of  the  UtaJi  (or  Provo)  Stake  of  Zion 
from  ISSS  to  1K8,  was  bom  Jan.  11.  1817. 
in    the   town   of   Chesterfield,    Cheshire 


BIOGRAPHICAL    ENCYCLOPEDIA. 


:96 


county.  New  Hampshire,  son  of  Gard- 
ner Snow  and  Sarah  Hasiing^.  He 
was  reared  from  a  child,  eighteeen 
months-  old,  to  manhood  in  the  State 
of  Vermont.  He  was  baptized  into  the 
Church  Oct.  19,  1833,  was  ordained  a 
Teacher  June  23,  1834,  and  ordained  a 
Priest  Nov.  23,  1834.  In  the  year  1836 
he  filled  a  mision  to  the  New  Eng^land 
States,  where  he  baptized  many,  among 
whom  Elizabeth  Cluff  and  Lucy  Smith. 
April  20,  1837,  he  received  a  patriarchal 
blessing  in  the  Kirtland  Temple  under 
the  hands  of  Patriarch  Joseph  Smith. 
sen.  In  1838  he  married  Eliza  Ann 
Carter  at  Kirtland,  Ohio,  and  with  his 
wife  he  traveled  to  Missouri  in  the 
Kirtland  camp;  thence  went  to  Illinois 
and  setteld  in  Nauvoo,  where  he  be- 
came a  member  of  the  Nauvoo  Legion. 


May  17,  1844.  he  left  his  home  in  Illinois 
to  go  on  a  special  mission,  on  "which 
he  was  instructed  also  to  electioneer 
for  Joseph  Smith,  who  was  a  candidate 
for  the  presidency  of  the  United  States. 
A  response  to  this  call  required  a  great 
sacrifice  on  Elder  Snow's  part  as  his 
family,  consisting  of  a  wife  and  four 
children,  were  in  poor  circumstances; 
they  had  not  even  flour  in  the  house  at 
the  time,  but  his  wife  told  him  to  go 
and  do  his  duty,  and  God  would  pro- 
vide: -and  so  he  did.  Elder  Snow  ar- 
rived at  Maddison.  Ind.,  June  24.  1844, 
after  walking  52  miles.  At  that  place 
he  was  joined  by  Dominicus  Carter: 
and  the  two  Elders  started  out  to- 
gether without  purse  or  scrip,  and  God 


blessed  them.  On  the  27th  of  Jur.-. 
the  very  day  on  which  Joseph  and  Hy- 
rum  Smith  were  martyred.  Elder  Snow- 
was  preaching  at  Milroy,  Rush  county, 
Ind.  After  the  martyrdom  the  Elders 
went  fort  to  comfort  the  Saints  in  the 
freshness  of  their  grief  over  their 
martyred  Prophets.  Bro.  Snow,  to- 
gether with  other  missionaries-,  was 
called  home  shortly  after  the  martyr- 
dom, and  he  was  present  at  the  meet- 
ing when  the  mantle  of  Joseph  fell  upon 
Brigham  Young — an  event  of  which  he 
often  testified  afterwards.  Together 
with  his  family  he  left  Nauvoo  in  184'>. 
to  go  to  the  Valleys  of  the  Mountain.-. 
They  remained  at  Council  Bluffs  until 
1852,  when  they  started  across  the 
plains  with  Brother  Snow  as  captain 
of  the  company.  After  enduring  the 
hardships  and  privations  of  a  long  anrl 
toilsome  journey  they  arrived  in  Salt 
Lake  City  Oct.  9,  1852.  Later  in  the 
fall  Brother  Snow  and  family  moved  to 
l^rovo.  Utah  county,  and  in  1853  lie  was 
appointed  president  of  the  L'tah  Stake 
of  Zion.  which  position  he  held  until 
1858.  when  he  resigned.  In  the  ^piin? 
of  1857  he  aceompanied  the  First 
Presidency  on  a  mountain  trip  throosh 
northern  L'tah  and  into  Oregon.  Elder 
Snow  held  many  responsible  civil  po- 
sitions in  the  community.  Thus  be 
served  as  a  member  of  the  Utah  legis- 
lature in  1S56.  and  was  appointe«i 
United  States  deputy  martial  in  18SS. 
In  1858  he  was  elected  surveyor  of  Utah 
county:  and  he  was  re-elected  to  that 
position  in  1860.  In  the  fall  of  ISfiS  he 
moved  to  southern  L'tah.  where  he  re- 
mained till  1880.  when  he  located  at 
Pettyville.  vhere  he  died  AiNril  38.  18S4. 
aged  67  years.  3  months  and  19  daysL 
His  body  was  taken  to  Manti  for  in- 
terment. Elder  Snow  was  loved  and 
respected  by  all  who  knew  him  and  re- 
mained firm  and  faithful  in  the  Church 
till  the  last.  He  was  the  father  o£ 
twenty  children. 

BERG.  Ole  Hendrik^ifn,  a  High 
Councilor,  in  the  Utah  Stake  of  Zion. 
was  born  in  Smaalenene.  Smaalenenes 
amt.  Norway.  When  fifteen  years 
old  he  moved  to  Christiana,  where  he 
learned  the  cabinet  maker's  trade.  He 
was  baptized  into  the  Church  in  Octo- 
ber. 1861.  and  soon  afterwards  oniained 
to  the  Priesthood,  and  sent  to  Odalen. 
Kongsvinger  and  Solor.  to  labor  as  a 
missionarv.     Suh.-«-.iuentlv.    he   wa:s  or- 


796 


LATTER-DAY    SAINT 


dained  an  Elder,  and  called  to  go  to 
Rlaor  to  preside  over  the  branch  of  the 
Church  at  that  place;  still  later,  he  la- 
bored as  a  traveling  Elder  in  the  Dram- 
men  and  Roken  branches.  In  1864  he 
was  called  to  Denmark,  and  appointed 
to  labor  in  the  Oernes  (Islands)  con- 
ference, first  as  a  traveling  Elder  and 
finally  as  conference  president.  Bro. 
Berg  emigrated  to  Utah  in  1866  and  lo- 
cated at  Provo.  Utah  county,  where 
he  has  continued  to  reside  ever  since. 
During  1SS9-91  h«  filled  a  successful 
mission  to  Norway,  where  he  presided 
most  of  the  time  over  the  Christiania 
conference.  Elder  Berg  has  always 
been  an  energetic  worker  in  the 
Church,  both  at  home  and  abroad.    Be- 


sides .sc  Tving  as  a  member  of  the  High 
Council  of  Utah  Stake,  he  is  also  presi- 
dent of  Scandinavian  meetings  in  that 
Stake.  Jn  civil  affairs  he  has  held  a 
number  of  offices.  He  has  served  as  a 
member  of  a  board  of  educati  m,  as  city 
councilman,  county  coroner,  etc.  Since 
his  arrival  in  Utah  he  has  mostly  fol- 
lowed contracting  and  building,  in 
which  capacity  he  has  erected  many 
tine  structures  in  and  about  Provo  city. 
At  present  he  is  conducting  the  lead- 
ing undertaking  establishment  in 
I'rovo. 


BEKG,  Henry  W.,  a  missionary 
w  ho  died  abroad,  was  born  Aug.  8,  1878, 
in  Provo,  Utah  county,  Utah,  son  of  Ole 
H.  Berg  and  Anna  Maria  Nielsen.  He 
was  baptized  when  eight  years  of  age, 
and  his  education  was  obtained  in  the 


I)ublic  schools  and  in  the  B.  Y.  Aca- 
demy, at  Provo.  Oct.  14,  1899,  he  left 
home  for  a  mission  to  Scandinavia.  On 
arriving  at  the  mission  headquarters  in 
Copenhagen,  Denmark,  he  was  ap- 
pointed to  labor  in  Norway,  and  the 
Christiania  conference  became  his  spe- 
( ial  field  of  operation.  He  was  assigned 
to  \vork  in  the  Ejdsvold  branch.  While 
engaged  in  the  ministry  in  the  province 
of  Hedemarken,  he  contracted  a  severe 
cold,  which  settled  on  his  lungs  and 
turned  into  consumption,  from  the  ef- 
fects of  which  he  died  at  Christiania, 
Feb.  21,  1900,  making  him  the  first  mis- 
sionary from  Zion  to  lay  down  his  life 
while  enegaged  in  the  ministry  in  Nor- 
way. His  body  was  shipped  home  in 
charge  of  Elder  Jacob  Olsen  and  in- 
terred in  the  Provo  cemetery,  April  2, 
1900.  The  funeral  services  over  his 
remains  were  held  in  the  tabernacle  at 
Provo,  and  were  very  impressive;  it 
was  one  of  the  largest  funerals  ever 
witnessed    in    that   city. 


BIOGRAPHICAL    ENCYCLOPEDIA. 


797 


GARDNKR,  Henry,  second  counse- 
lor in  the  presidency  of  the  Nebo  Stake 
of  Zion  (Utah  county,  Utah),  is  the 
son  of  Archibald  Gardner  and  Sorine 
Torgesen,  and  was  born  May  15,  ISoS, 
at  Spanish  Fork,  Utah  county,  Utah. 
His  mother  accepted  the  gospel  in  Nor- 
way, being  one  of  the  first  members  of 
the  first  branch  established  in  that 
country,  in  Osterrisor.  Henry  spent  his 
youth  at  farming  and  saw-milling.  He 
was  ordained  an  Elder  Jan.  27,  1874,  by 
Pres.  Angus  M.  Cannon,  and  a  Seventy 
June  19.  1897.  by  Jacob  Gates.  March 
22,  1882.  he  married  Elizabeth  Martell, 
and  in  1886  he  was  elected  a  member 
of  the  city  council  of  Spanish  Fork.  He 
was  set  apart  for  a  mission  to  the 
Southern  States  by  Apostle  Heber  J. 
Grant,  and  left  Salt  Lake  City,  to  fill 
said  mission.  Nov.  6,  1888.  He  labored 
principally  in  the  South  Alabama  con- 
ference, part  of  the  time  as  president 
of  the  same.  On  his  return  home,  Dec. 
1,  1890,  he  was  called  to  labor  as  a  home 
missionary  in  the  Utah  Stake  of  Zion. 
Dec.  20,  1891,  he  was  ordained  a  High 
Priest  and  Bishop  and  set  apart  to  pre- 
side over  the  Spanish  Fork  First  Ward, 
by  Apostle  John  W.  Taylor.  In  Febru- 
ary, 1891,  he  was  elected  marshal  of 
Spanish  Fork,  and  in  November,  1899, 
he  was  elected  mayor  of  the  same 
municipality.  During  the  session  of  the 
Utah  State  legislature  of  1900  and  19  H, 
he  served  as  a  member  of  the  House 
of  Representatives.  At  the  organiza- 
tion of  the  Nebo  Stake  of  Zion,  Jan. 
20,  190],  he  was  chosen  and  set  apart 
as  second  counselor  in  the  presidency 
of  that  Stake. 

MOOKK  John,  a  prominent  Elder 
in  Spanish  Fork,  Utah  county,  Utah,  is 
the  son  of  Thomas  Moore  and  Ann 
West,  and  was  born  in  Burro  wash, 
Derbyshire,  England,  Oct.  4,  1838.  His 
father  and  mother  died  when  he  was 
but  a  young  lad,  and  he  was  cared  for 
by  his  grandparents  on  his  mother's 
side.  They,  having  previously  accepted 
the  gospel,  emigrated  to  America  in 
1851,  taking  John  with  them.  They 
remained  in  St.  Joseph,  Mo.,  till  June, 
1853.  (where  several  of  his  relatives 
died),  when  he  started  for  the  Valley, 
arriving  in  Salt  Lake  City,  Sept.  17, 
1853.  John  lived  there  till  1856,  when 
he  went  to  Spanish  Fork,  Utah  coun- 
ty, where  he  has  lived  ever  since.  He 
was   baptized   in    September,   1854,     and 


ordained  a  Priest  the  same  year.  He 
was  ordained  an  Elder  in  1858,  a  Sev- 
enty March  10,  1873,  and  a  High  Priest 
Feb.  7,  1901.  He  has  served  as  a  mem- 
ber of  the  city  council  of  Spanish  Fork, 
and  for  25  years  he  has  been  connected 
with  the  Spanish  Fork  Co-operative  In- 
stitution, having  held  various  positions 
therein.  At  present  he  is  secretary  and 
treasurer  of  that  instituion.  From 
April,  1891,  to  April.  1893,  he  filled  a 
successful  mission  to  England  and 
Scotland.  He  married  Caroline  Hicks 
in  1860,  with  whom  he  has  raised  three 
sons  and  five  daughters,  all  of  whom 
are  living  and  are  married. 

JORGEXSEX,  Johan  Gnstav,   an  ac 

live  Bolder  in  the  Church,  was  born 
in  Drammen,  Norway,  January  25. 
1837.  He  was  left  an  orphan  at 
seven  years  of  age  to  battle  with 
the  world  alone,  and  his  school 
advantages  were  indeed  limited.  Hi.s 
guardians  apprenticed  him  to  learn  the 
cooper  trade,  of  which  he  was  master 
when    the    gospel    message    found    him. 


He  was  baptized  by  Hans  O.  Magleby 
Jan.  30,  1858,  and  shortly  afterwards 
was  set  apart  as  a  local  missionary,  in 
which  capacity  he  labored  most  of  the 
time  until  1863,  when  he  emigrated  to 
Utah,  crossing  the  plains  with  ox 
teams.  At  Florence,  Neb.,  while  en 
route,     he     married     Sorine     Knudsen 


798 


LATTER-DAY    SAINT 


Staalesen,  a  widow  with  four  children, 
who  was  emigrating  to  Utah  from 
Stavanger,  Norway.  They  located  at 
Ephraim,  and  their  union  was  blessed 
with  five  children.  In  1869  he  married 
Annette  Matilda  Jensen,  who  bore  him 
fourteen  children.  Elder  Jorgensen 
took  an  active  part  in  pioneer  work 
and  in  fighting  the  Indians  in  Sanpete 
and  Sevier  counties.  He  resided  in 
Ephraim,  Koosharem  and  Salina,  and 
in  each  place  was  an  active  citizen.  He 
also  served  a  term  of  imprisonment  in 
the  Utah  penitentiary  for  what  he  be- 
lieved to  be  a  divine  principle;  and 
from  18S9  to  1891  he  labored  as  a  mis- 
sionary in  his  native  land.  He  was 
an  ardent  worker  in  the  Church,  and 
could  always  he  found  laboring  in  the 
Ward  choirs  and  performing  his  other 
duties  in  the  Priesthood.  His  greatest 
desire  was,  that  his  children  should  be 
Latter-day  Saints  in  very  deed,  and  he 
lived  to  see  most  of  them  active  work- 
ers in  the  Church.  Bro.  Jorgensen  died 
at  his  home  in  Salina,  Sevier  county, 
Utah,  March  19.  1901.  Both  of  his  wives 
and  fourteen  children  (eight  sons  and 
six  daughters)  survived  him. 

PETERSON,  Peter,  Bishop  of  In- 
dianola,  Sanpete  County,  Utah,  is  the 
son  of  Andrew  Peterson  and  Anna  Ma- 
rie Hansen,  and  was  born  at  Fairview, 
Sanpete  county,  Utah,  Sept.  27,  1860. 
He  was  baptized  May  30,  1869,  by  Hen- 
ry Sanderson.  After  being  ordained 
a  Deacon  and  serving  in  that  capacity 
for  a  number  of  years  he  was  ordained 
an  Elder  by  Wm.  Carter.  Dec  11, 
1878,  he  married  Celestia  Mellissa  Ter- 
ry. He  was  ordained  a  Seventy  by 
Henry  W.  Sanderson  Aug.  24,  1884;  la- 
ter, he  became  secretary  of  the  26th 
quorum  of  Seventy  and  then  a  member 
of  the  council.  Bro.  Peterson  labored 
several  years  as  a  Ward  teacher,  also 
as  a  Sunday  school  worker  in  Fairview. 
Oct.  9,  1888,  he  w^s  set  apart  for  a  mis- 
sion to  the  Southern  States,  where  he 
labored  as  a  traveling  Elder  and  later 
as  president  of  the  Virginia  conference. 
In  1890  he  filled  a  short  mission  in  Utah 
Stake,  in  the  interest  of  the  Sunday 
school  cause.  April  4,  1892,  he  was 
ordained  a  High  Priest  and  Bishop  and 
set  apart  to  preside  over  the  Indianola 
W^ard,  by  Pres.  Geo.  Q.  Cannon.  He 
is  still  serving  in  that  capacity,  and  is 
also  Ward  clerk  and  a  teacher  in  the 
Sabbath    school.        Bishop    Peterson    is 


the  father  of  eight  children,  all  of 
whom  ai-e  living;  they  are,  Mary  Ma- 
liah,  Saiah  Celestia,  Andrew  Lysander, 
Aiaminta,  Lucile  Hortense,  Lavin  Vail 
and   Eva   Mirl. 

AIjGEH,  Samuel,  \.,  a  prominent 
lOlder  in  Cleveland  Ward,  Emery  coun- 
ty, Utah,  is  the  son  of  John  Alger  and 
Sarah  Pulsipher,  and  was  born  April 
26,  1858,  at  Payson,  Utah  county,  Utah. 
In  1862  he  went  with  his  parents  to  St. 
George.  Samuel  was  called  by  Apos- 
tle Erastus  Snow  to  go  with  Jacob 
Hamblin  to  locate  and  build  a  new 
road  thi-ough  the  country  south  of  St. 
George  by  way  of  what  is  now  known 
as  Pierce's  ferry,  on  the  Colorado  river, 
to  the  settlements  on  the  Little  Colo- 
rado river,  Arizona,  in  1876.  This  la- 
bor he  performed  successfully.  In  1880 
he  went  to  Arizona,  where  he  remained 
four  years.  Feb.  3,  1884,  he  married 
Ruth  Elmina  Pace  and  returned  to 
Utah  the  same  year.  He  settled  in 
Emery  county,  where  he  took  an  active 
part  in  building  the  Cleveland  canal. 
His  was  one  of  the  two  first  families  to 
settle  at  Cleveland.  When  a  branch 
of  the  Church  was  organized  there  in 
1886,  he  was  called  to  preside  over  the 
same.  He  served  in  that  calling  till 
1890,  when  he  went  on  a  mission  to  the 
Southern  States.  Here  he  labored  in 
the  East  Tennessee  conference  till  1892, 
when  he  returned  home.  In  the  fall  of 
1895  he  was  chosen  and  set  apart  as  a 
president  in  the  81st  quorum  of  Seven- 
ty, which  position  he  has  held  ever 
since.  Bro.  Alger  has  labored  as  a 
Ward  teacher,  a  home  missionary,  a 
Sunday  school  teacher,  and  otherwise 
been  actively  engaged  in  Church  work. 

SNOW,  Edward  Hunter,  presi- 
dent of  the  St.  George  Stake  of  Zion, 
is  the  son  of  Apostle  Erastus  Snow  and 
Julia  Josephine  Spencer,  and  was  born 
at  St.  George,  Washington  county. 
Utah,  June  23,  1865.  As  a  boy  he 
worked  on  the  farm  in  the  summer  and 
atended  the  district  school  in  the  win- 
ter. He  became  a  student  at  the  B. 
Y.  Academy,  Provo,  in  1882,  and  con- 
tinued there  for  three  years.  In  Sep- 
tember, 1885,  he  married  Hannah  Nel- 
son, of  St.  George,  and  during  the  win- 
ter of  1885-86  he  taught  In  the  district 
school.  During  1886-88  he  served  as  a 
missionary  in  the  Southern  States  mis- 
sion.      After  returning  from   this  mis- 


BIOGRAPHICAL    ENCYCLOPEDIA. 


799 


sion  he  acepted  the  position  of  tith- 
ing clerk  of  the  St.  George  Stake.  He 
also  gerved  as  telegraph  operator  in 
St.  George.  In  1899-1901  he  labored  in 
the  Eastern  States  mission,  first  as  a 
counselor  in  the  presidency  of  that  mis- 
sion, and  later  as  the  president,  in 
which  capacity  he  performed  excellent 
work.  At  the  conference  held  June 
14th  and  15th,  1901,  in  St.  George  he 
wa?  chosen  and  sustained  as  president 
of  St.  George  Stake,  in  which  position 
he  is  at  present  laboring.  Bro.  Snow 
has  always  been  an  efflcient  worker  in 


the  Y.  M.  M.  I.  A.  and  is  a  member  of 
the  general  Church  board  of  mutual 
improvement  tvork.  In  civil  life  Elder 
Snow  has  held  a  number  of  respon- 
sible positions  such  as  city  recorder, 
•"ity  councilman,  member  of  the  consti- 
tutional convention,  which  framed  the 
State  constitution,  senator  in  the  State 
I'-gislature,  etc.  In  the  discharge  of 
the  duties  of  these  offices  he  has  shown 
much  ability  and  strength  of  chaiacter. 

WOOIvLKY,  Edwin  Gordon,  an  al- 
ternate High  Councilor  in  the  St. 
George  Stake  of  Zion,  is  the  son  of 
Edwin  Dilworth  Woolley  and  Louisa 
Chapin  Gordon,  and  was  born  in  Nau- 
voo.  111.,  July  30,  1845.  Elder  Woolley 
writes:  "My  mother  died,  when  I  was 
about  four  years  old,  in  Galesburg,  III. 
I  was  then  cared  for  by  my  grand- 
mother, as  my  father  had  already  gone 
to  Great  Salt  Lake  valley.  In  1849  my 
father  came  east  and  took  me  to  the 
Valley  with  him  on  his  return,  where  I 


was  raised  by  his  wife  Mary  Wicker- 
sham  Woolley.  The  first  twelve  or 
fourteen  years  of  my  life,  after  com- 
ing to  Salt  Lake  valley,  were  spent  in 
attending  the  primitive  schools  of  that 
(lay;  and  after  reaching. an  age  to  be  of 
.'service,  I  worked  in  the  fields  during 
the  farming  season  and  also  hauled 
lumber  and  wood  from  the  mountains. 
I  well  remember  the  trying  times  of 
the  so-called  "Mormon  Rebellion,"  and 
also  have  a  lively  recollection  of  the 
"grasshopper  wars"  and  the  "hard 
times,"  when  people  had  little  to  eat, 
excepting  segoes,  artichokes  and  other 
roots.  At  the  age  of  19  years  I  opened 
a  school  in  the  vestry  of  the  13th  Ward 
assembly  rooms,  where  I  taught  quite 
a  large  number  of  pupils.  Subse- 
(luently  I  learned  the  builder's  trade 
under  Folsom  and  Romney.  In  1865  I 
accompanied  my  father  and  others  on 
a  trip  through  southern  Utah.  During 
the  winter  of  1866-67  I  made  a  trip  to 
I>iis   Angeles,    California,    for   merchan- 


'li.se.  I  was  an  active  member  of  the 
Tabernacle  choir  in  Salt  Lake  City  for 
many  years,  and  also  took  part  in  the 
theatricals  of  those  earlier  days.  In 
1867.  together  with  others,  I  was  called 
to  go  south  and  assist  in  the  upbuild- 
ing of  the  "Dixie"  country.  My  brother 
and  I  stopped  in  St.  George,  Washing- 
ton county,  where  I  followed  my  trade 
as  a  carpenter  and  builder.  June  23, 
1S69.  I  was  appointed  U.  S.  Deputy 
Collector  of  Internal  Revenue  for  the 
southern  district  of  Utah,  to  fill  the 
vacancy  caused     by     the     death  of  my 


800 


LATTER-DAY    SAINT 


brother  Franklin.  The  settlers  were 
considerably  harrassed  by  the  Navajo 
Indians,  and  I  participated  in  many 
expeditions  against  them.  Oct.  8,  1^69, 
I  married  Mary  Lavinia  Bently  in  the 
Endowment  House,  Salt  Lake  City. 
During  the  same  year  I  was  appointed 
clerk  of  the  High  Council  of  the  St. 
George  Stake,  which  position  I  held 
till  May,  1876,  when  I  left  for  a  mis- 
sion to  the  States.  Later,  I  served  as 
an  alternate  High  Councilor.  In  1871- 
72  I 'served  as  assessor  and  collector  of 
St.  George  city,  and  served  also  as  as- 
sessor and  collector  of  Washington 
county.  For  a  number  of  years  I  fol- 
lowed merchandising  very  successfully, 
being  engaged  for  myself,  and  also 
holding  a  number  of  important  posi- 
tions in  different  companies.  In  1888  I 
moved  with  my  family  to  Salt  Lake 
City.  Among  the  political  positions 
I  have  held  I  may  mention  those  of 
justice  of  the  peace,  city  recorder, 
prosecuting  attorney,  member  of  a  con- 
stitutional convention,  member  of  the 
Territorial  legislature,  probate  judge, 
etc.,  etc.  I  am  the  father  of  eleven 
children,   eight  of  whom  are  living." 

HENRIE,  James,  first  president  of 
the  Panguitch  Stake  of  Zion,  was  born 
Sept.  18,  1827,  in  Ohio,  second  son  of 
Wm.  Henrie  and  Myra  Maynell.  He 
came  to  Utah  in  1849  and  married 
Rhoana  Hatch  in  1852.  After  residing 
in  Bountiful,  Davis  county,  for  some 
time  he  moved  to  Panaca,  Lincoln 
county,  Nev.,  where  he,  in  1869,  was 
ordained  to  the  office  of  a  Bishop  by 
Apostle  Erastus  Snow  and  set  apart  to 
preside  over  the  Panaca  Ward.  He 
removed  to  Panguitch  in  1871,  where  he 
acted  for  some  time  as  a  counselor  to 
Bishop  Geo.  W.  Sevy;  and  when  the 
Panguitch  Stake  of  Zion  w-as  organized 
in  April,  1877,  he  was  chosen  and  set 
apart  to  act  as  its  president.  He  filled 
that  important  position  for  five  years, 
or  until  1882,  when  he  resigned  on  ac- 
count of  ill  health  and  defective  hear- 
ing. Having  yielded  obedience  to  the 
principle  of  plural  marriage  by  taking 
three  wives,  he  was  arrested,  during 
the  anti-polygamy  raid,  on  the  charge 
of  unlawful  cohabitation,  and  fined 
$300.  Elder  Henrie  is  the  father  of 
thirty  children;  part  of  his  family  re- 
side at  Panguitch,  Garfield  county,and 
part   at   Fredonia,    Arizona. 


SEVY,  George    Washington,      firs^t 

counselor  in  the  presidency  of  the 
Panguitch  Stake  of  Zion  from  1877  to 
1878,  is  the  son  of  George  Sevy  and 
Hannah  Libby,  and  was  born  Feb.  2'.. 
1832,  in  Leroy,  Genesee  county,  New 
York.  He  emigrated  to  Great  Salt  Lake 
valley  about  1849  and  located  in  Span- 
ish Fork,  Utah  county,  where  he  was 
baptized  May  3,  1853,  by  Stephen  Mark- 
ham  and  subsequently  took  to  wife 
Phebe  M.  Butler.  In  1861  he  was  called 
on  a  mission  to  southern  Utah  and  be- 
came one  of  the  first  settlers  of  New 
Harmony,  Washington  county.  In 
1871  he  was  appointed  to  take  charge 
of  the  re-settling  of  Panguitch  and 
preside  over  the  settlement.  He  act- 
ed as  Bishop  of  Panguitch  for  nine 
years,  and  when  the  Panguitch  Stake 
of  Zion  was  organized  in  April,  1877. 
he  was  chosen  as  first  counselor  to 
James  Henrie,  president  of  the  Stake, 
which  position  he  occupied  until  Dec.  1. 
1878.  In  the  meantime  he  continued 
to  act  in  his  calling  as  Bishop.  In  187". 
he  went  to  Pototoe  valley  and  assisted 
in  forming  what  is  now  the  flourish- 
ing settlement  of  Escalante.  In  187S 
he  participated  in  an  expedition  to  the 
San  Juan  river,  in  southern  Utah,  and 
helped  to  open  that  country  for  settle- 
ment. He  built  a  boat  for  crossing 
the  Colorado  river  at  that  celebrated 
point  known  as  the  "Hole  in  the  Rock.  " 
and  was  one  of  four  men  who  in  De- 
cember, 1879,  explored  the  country  for 
a  wagon  road  from  the  crossing  of  the 
Colorado  to  the  site  of  Bluff  City,  on  thi 
San  Juan  river.  In  1887  he  moved  ti 
Mexico  and  settled  in  Colonia  Juarez, 
over  which  Ward  he  presided  faithful- 
ly as  Bishop  for  twelve  years.  Bishop 
Sevy  is  the  husband  of  three  wvef- 
and  has   thirty-one  children. 

HOUSTON,  James,  second  counsel- 
or to  Pres.  David  Cameron  of  the  Pan- 
guitch Stake,  is  the  son  of  James 
Houston  and  Margaret  Crawford,  and 
was  born  Feb.  6,  1850.  in  Salt  Lake 
City,  Utah.  He  was  baptized  at  the 
age  of  eight  years  by  his  father,  James 
Houston.  His  early  boyhood  was  spent 
in  Salt  Lake  City,  where  he  attended 
the  common  schools,  till  he  was  eleven 
years  old.  He  then  mbved  with  his 
parents  south  to  Washington  county. 
They  located  in  St.  George  and  were 
among  the  first  settlers  of  that  place. 


BIOGRAPHICAL    ENCYCLOPEDIA. 


801 


where  young  James  was  raised  to  man- 
hood. At  the  ag-e  of  about  twenty- 
one  years  he  went  to  Panguitch, where 


he  has  resided  ever  since.  Having 
previously  received  the  lesser  Priest- 
hood, he  was  ordained  an  Elder  in  No- 
vember, 1875,  and  he  was  ordained  a 
High  Priest  and  set  apart  to  act  as  a 
High  Councilor  In  the  Panguitch  Stake 
in  1878  by  Apostle  Erastus  Snow.  For 
a  number  of  years  he  served  as  super- 
intendent of  nautual  improvement  work 
in  the  Panguitch  Stake.  During  1884- 
85  he  labored  as  a  missionary  in  the 
Northwestern  States.  After  his  return 
from  this  mission  he  was  chosen  t<> 
serve  as  counselor  in  the  Panguitch 
Ward  Bishopric,  in  which  capacity  he 
acted  till  he  was  called  to  the  position 
of  second  counselor  to  David  Cameron, 
president  of  the  Panguitch  Stake.  He 
was  set  apart  to  that  position  by  Apos- 
tle Abraham  O.  Woodruff.  Elder 
Houston  married  Rebecca  Lucy  Cooper 
in  1875;  she  bore  him  two  children,  and 
died  in  December,  1879.  In  April,  1882, 
he  took  to  wife  Saraji  Le  Fevre,  who 
has  borne  him  eight  children.  Brother 
Houston  has  been  an  earnest  worker 
for  the  upbuilding  and  developing  of 
the  country  where  he  resides;  for  many 
years  he  has  served  as  a  selectman  in 
Iron  and  Garfield  counties. 

SMITH,  Silas  Sanford.  president 
of  the  San  Luis  Stake  of  Zion  from 
1883  to  1892,  is  the  son  of  Silas  Smith 
and   M.ary   Aikens,   and   was   born   Oct. 


26,  1830,  in  Stockholm,  St.  Lawrence 
county.  New  York.  In  1836,  he  re- 
moved with  his  parents  to  Kirtland, 
Ohio,  and  in  1838  the  family  went  to 
Missouri.  Here  the.v  were  confronted 
with  the  exterminating  order  of  Gover- 
nor Lilburn  W.  Boggs,  and  turned  back 
by  the  mob.  (See  sketch  of  Jesse  N. 
Smith,  page  316.)  Subsequently  Silas 
S.  shared  in  the  persecutions  in  Illinois, 
and  finally  came  to  the  Valley  in  1847, 
crossing  the  plains  in  Perregrine  Ses- 
sions' company  of  fifty.  After  win- 
tering in  the  "Old  Fort,"  Silas  S.  built 
a  house  on  North  Temple  street,  in  the 
17th  Ward.  In  1849  he  located  on  Gro- 
ver  creek,  near  Farmington,  Davis 
county,  and  in  1850  and  1851  he  raised 
two  crops  near  Centerville.  In  July,1851. 
he  married  Clarinda  Ricks,  and  in  the 
fall  of  that  year  he  removed  to  Iron 
county  and  thus  became  one  of  the 
early  settlers  of  Parowan.  During 
the  Indian  war  of  1853  he  performed 
efficient  military  service,  first  as  or- 
derly sergeant  and  afterwards  as  lieu- 
tenant, captain  and  major.  In  May. 
1854,  agreeable  to  a  call  from  the 
Church    authorities,    he    started      on      a 


e^ 

_-^B'^ 

.,: 

^P 

t'\\ 

^^^^^^^^^^|^H^^e<J 

feSLA^SMB^ 

mission  to  the  Sandwich  Islands,  where 
he  presided  over  the  conference  on  the 
island  of  Hawaii,  and  was  afterwards 
counselor  in  the  presidency  of  the  mis- 
sion; he  returned  home  in  November, 
1856.  In  the  spring  ot  1857  he  settled 
in  Paragoonah,  Iron  county,  where  he 
presided  as  Bishop  for  several  years. 
In  1859  he  was  first  elected  a  member 
of  the  Utah  legislature,  after  Avhich  he 


Vol.  1,  No.  51. 


Dec.  21,  1901. 


80i 


LATTER-DAY    SAINT 


served  almost  continuously  in  that 
body  for  twenty  years;  his  last  term 
was  in  1878,  when  he  served  as  a  mem- 
ber of  the  council.  In  Iron  county  he 
served  consecutively  as  U.  S.  deputy 
marshal  under  Marshal  Jos.  L.  Hey- 
wood,  selectman,  probate  judge,  pro- 
secuting- attorney,  etc.  In  April,  1879, 
under  appointment  by  the  Church  au- 
thorities, he  led  an  exploring  company 
consisting  of  about  twenty-five  men  to 
.southeastern  Utah,  with  a  view  to  find- 
ing suitable  locations  for  settlements. 
He  selected  the  present  site  of  Bluff 
City  and  other  places,  and  subsequent- 
ly led  a  company  of  settlers  into  San 
Juan  valley  by  way  of  Potato*  valley. 
When  the  Saints  who  had  settled  in 
Conejos  county,  Coolrado,  were  or- 
ganized as  the  San  Luis  Stake  of  Zion 
in  1883.  Silas  S.  Smith  was  called  by 
the  presidency  of  the  Church  to  go 
there  and  preside.  On  his  arrival  in 
Colorado,  he  found  that  the  colonies  of 
the  Saints  in  Conejos  county  were  lo- 
cated on  State  lands  which  had  been 
withdrawn  from  the  general  land  office 
on  the  applications  of  the  general  land 
board,  and  the  surveyor  had  returned 
them  to  the  public  domain  as  mineral 
lands.  It  required  some  five  years  of 
incessant  labors  on  the  part  of  Pres. 
Smith  and  his  colonizers  to  get  good 
titles  to  these  lands.  During  the  po- 
lygamy agitation  the  "Mormon"  set- 
tlers were  not  received  with  favor  by 
the  other  settlers  in  the  valley  and 
many  requests  were  made  by  men  of 
influence  to  prevent  the  Saints  from 
settlinn:  and  buying  lands  there.  This 
prejudice  against  them,  coupled  with 
the  fact  that  there  was  no  prosnect  in 
sight  of  their  reeciving  a  clear  title  to 
their  land,  was  for  a  long  time  a  great 
drawback  to  the  prosperity  of  the  set- 
tlements. Bro.  Smith  finally  purchased 
at  public  sales  over  20,000  acres  of  land, 
the  purchases  being  made  in  40-acre 
tracts.  After  obtaining  the  titles  and 
becoming  firmly  implanted  in  the  val- 
ley, the  settlers  became  very  prosper- 
ous and  prejudice  gave  way  to  a  spirit 
of  liberality.  Not  only  is  this  spirit 
now  manifested  by  State  officials,  but 
by  the  citizens  generally.  Elder  Smith 
])repided  over  the  San  Luis  Stake  un- 
til 1832,  when  he  was  honorably  re- 
leased Pres.  Smith  is  universally 
known  throughout  the  Church  as  a 
missionary  explorer,  pioneer,  legisla- 
tor,   military    officer    and    civil    officer, 


and  his  services  will  always  live  in  the 
hearts  of  the  people  in  whose  interest 
he  has  spent  his  entire  life.  He  has 
been  a  genuine  frontiers  man,  having 
made  homes  in  35  different  localities. 
During  the  Blackhawk  war  he  had 
charge  of  a  large  body  of  militia  and 
superintended  the  breaking  up  of  many 
of  the  southern  settlements  in  1866. 
When  a  fort  was  established  on  the 
Sevier  river  about  that  time,  it  was 
named  Fort  Sanford  in  his  honor.  Dur- 
ing that  war  he  twice  rode  200  miles  in 
24  hours.  Altogether  he  served  ten 
years  in  the  military  service  on  the 
frontiers.  As  early  as  1853  Elder  Smith 
obeyed  the  principle  of  plural  marriage 
by  taking  to  wife  Sarah  Ann  Ricks. 
Both  his  wives  died  in  1864,  leaving 
him  eight  children.  Quite  recently 
Pres.  Smith  left  Colorado,  returning  to 
ITtah,  and  is  now  a  resident  of  Layton, 
Davis  county. 

SMITH.  William  Reed,  president  of 
the  Davis  Stake  of  Zion  from  1877  to 
1894,  was  born  Aug.  11,  1826,  near 
Farmersville,  Ontario,  Canada.  His 
father  was  a  native  of  the  New  Eng- 
land States,  but  removed  to  Canada, 
where  he  married  Mary  Reed,  mother 
of  Pres.  Smith,  who  was  the  daughter 
of  Major  Reed  of  the  British  army. 
Pres.  Smith  was  the  youngest  of  nine 
children  and  was  left  an  orphan  in  his 
early  childhood.  Fortunately  he  found 
a  good  home  with  a  Quaker  family  by 
the  name  of  Parish.  From  the  time  he 
was  three  years  old  until  he  was  six- 
teen he  was  kindly  cared  for  by  this 
good  family.  In  the  fall  of  1837  the 
Parishes,  with  three  of  their  sons  and 
their  families,  came  to  the  United 
States,  settling  in  Stark  county,  Illi- 
nois. About  this  time  large  numbers 
of  the  members  of  the  Church  were 
moving  into  and  building  up  the  city  of 
Nauvoo,  and  it  was  then  that  Wm.  R. 
Smith  became  interested  in  "Mormon- 
ism."  In  1841  he  was  baptized  into 
the  Church,  and  during  the  same  year 
several  of  the  Parishes  also  became 
members.  After  joining  the  Church 
Bro.  Smith  took  up  his  residence  in 
Nauvoo,  where  he  remained  for  a  year 
and  a  half,  during  the  whole  of  which 
time,  however,  he  was  in  a  feeble  con- 
dition from  frequent  and  severe  at- 
tacks of  chills  and  fever.  At  the  ex- 
piration of  this  time  he  returned  to 
Stark    county,    where    he    engaged      in 


BIOGRAPHICAL    ENCYCLOPEDIA. 


803 


stock-raising-  until  1849,  when,  in  com- 
pany witla  Austin  Grant,  he  started  for 
the  Rocky  Mountains,  arriving  there 
the  same  year.  In  1850  he  went  to 
California,  where  he  spent  considerable 
time  in  stock  and  mining  business.  He 
made  some  money  and,  returning  to 
Utah,  settled  in  Centerville,  Davis 
county,  where  he  continued  in  the 
stock  business,  and  there  he  made  his 
home  up  to  the  time  of  his  death.  He 
subsequently  took  large  herds  of  stock 
to  California, where  he  disposed  of  them 
advantageously.  In  the  spring-  of  1855 
he  was  ordained  Bishop  of  Centerville, 
and  in  1857  was  made  captain  of  the 
(-'arson  colony  which  left  Carson  valley 
near  the  middle  of  September  and  ar- 
rived in  Salt  Lake  City  during  the  fol- 
lowing- month,  after  a  very  successful 
journey.  Elder  Smith  resumed  his 
duties  as  Bishop  of  the  Centerville 
Ward,  and  under  his  immediate  direc- 
tion the  people  moved  during  the  Utah 
war  of  that  period  (1858)  to  Spanish 
Fork,  but  returned  to  their  homes  af- 
ter peace  had  been  declared.  In  the 
fall  of  1859  he  was  elected  a  member 
of  the  legislative  council,  to  fill  the  un- 
expired term  of  Charles  C.  Rich.  He 
was  subsequently  elected  thi-ee  times  a 
member  of  the  House  of  Representa- 
tives, and  afterwards  (in  1878)  he  was 
again  elected  to  a  seat  in  the  council. 
In  1874  he  was  elected  probate  judge 
of  Davis  county  and  held  that  office 
for  nine  years.  In  June,  1877,  he  was 
called  and  set  apart  to  act  as  president 
of  the  Davis  Stake  of  Zion,  a  position 
he  held  until  the  end  of  his  busy  and 
useful  life.  He  also  served  as  a  mis- 
sionary abroad  and  was  at  home  a  most 
ardent  and  faithful  worker.  In  all  of 
his  offices  of  trust,  both  civil  and  eccle- 
ciastical,  he  exhibited  untiring  energy, 
excellent  judgment  and  first-class  abil- 
ity. He  died  at  his  home  in  Center- 
ville Jan.  16,  1894,  after  a  long-  and  se- 
vere illness,  resulting  from  stricture  of 
the  bowels.  He  was  ever  known  as 
one  of  the  solid  conservative  men  of 
the  Territory,  and  left  a  large  and  well 
respected  family  to  mourn  his  death. 

SMITH,  Lot,  president  of  the  Little 
Colorado  Stake  of  Zion  from  1878  to 
1887,  was  born  May  15,  1830,  in  "Wil- 
liams to.vnship,  Oswego  county.  New 
York,  son  of  Wm.  O.  Smith  and  Rhoda 
Hough.  He  joined  the  Church  at  an 
early   day,    and    marched    to   California 


as  a  member  of  the  famous  Mormon 
Battalion.  After  his  arrival  in  Great 
Salt  Lake  valley,  he  became  a  resident 
of  Farmington,  Davis  county,  where  he 
lived  for  many  years.  He  was  or- 
dained a  Seventy  at  an  early  day  and 
was  for  a  long  time  a  president  of  the 
74th  quorum  of  Seventy.  In  1869-71 
he  filled  a  mission  to  Great  Britain.  In 
the  absence  of  a  biographical  sketch  of 
Lot  Smith  we  copy  the  following  from 
an  article  written  soon  after  his  death 
by  an  intimate  friend,  Elder  C.  L. 
Christensen,  a  Navajo  interpreter  and 
Indian  missionary:  "For  the  consola- 
tion of  his  family  and  friends  I  wish 
to  say,  there  never  was  a  man  that 
held  the  life  and  liberty  of  man  more 
sacred    than    did    Lot    Smith.       During- 


the  Echo  Canyon  v^ar  he  played  a 
brave  and  noble  part,  and  did  it  well 
under  th-e  circumstances.  He  had  in- 
structions from  Pres.  Brigham  Young 
to  'shed  no  blood,'  and  not  even  to  fire 
a  gun  unless  absolutely  in  self-defense. 
Lot  was  so  prompt  in  carrying  out  this 
advice  that  several  men  in  his  charge 
left  him  and  went  home,  they  having 
a  desire  of  gaining  fame  otherwise 
than  according-  to  the  advice  that  Lot 
held  and  kept  most  sacred.  I  am  con- 
scientious before  God  in  saying-  that  he 
shed  no  blood  while  he  lived,  except  it 
may  have  occurred  in  fighting  the  Ute 
Indians,  during  the  battle  near  Provo 
city  in  an  early  day,  with  which  all 
are  familiar  who  read  the  history  of 
Utah.  Lot  served  his  country  in  the 
fear  of  God  and  with  good  will  to  man 


804 


LATTER-DAY    SAINT 


in  the  Mormon  Battalion.  He  was, 
perhaps,  the  youngest  man  that  bore 
arms  in  that  military  body,  being  only 
sixteen  years  of  age,  but  being  large  in 
stature  he  was  accepted.  He  gave  the 
following  acount  of  himself,  which  I 
think  worth  reading:  'One  day  when 
we  had  marched  a  long  distance  with- 
out water,  and  nearly  famished,  we  be- 
held a  dry  lake  at  a  distance,  some- 
times called  a  mirage.  It  looked  so 
much  like  a  lake  of  water  to  those  who 
never  saw  one  that  we  had  full  assur- 
ance of  speedy  relief.  It  no  doubt  had 
this  effect,  at  least  it  stimulated  us  to 
press  on.  but  to  our  horror  it  was  only 
dry  land,  and  we  traveled  fully  six 
miles  across  this  delusion  and  still 
found  no  water,  and  night  had  fully 
come.'  The  writer  does  not  remember 
whether  it  was  a  willow  or  wire  grass 
patch  that  gave  them  occasion  to 
still  hope,  but  'digging  down  about 
eight  feet,'  Lot  said,  'we  found  abund- 
ance to  supply  all  our  wants.  After 
this  was  attended  to,  I  was  selected  to 
go  back  with  a  keg  of  water  on  a  mule 
to  help  those  who  had  fallen  by  the 
way,  who  numbered  quite  a  few.  I  had 
instructions  not  to  give  any  one  any 
water  till  I  got  back  to  the  last  man. 
and  then  I  was  to  work  back  to  the 
company,  having  very  particular  in- 
structions how  to  administer  this  sa- 
cred, life-saving  fluid.  I  soon  met  a 
man  who  was  anxiously  enquiring  for 
water,  distance,  etc.  I  nut  him  off. 
also  the  second,  third  and  fourth.  I 
think,  but  from  this  on  I  could  no 
longer  stand  their  pleadings.  I  wa- 
tered them  all  and  had  some  left,  so  I 
had  a  drink  when  I  got  through  a  dis- 
tance of  twelve  or  fourteen  miles.  I 
was  careful  in  giving  them  water, 
though  many  drank  quite  heartily.  The 
Lord  surely  blessed  my  little  keg  of 
water  in  a  marvelous  manner.  For 
my  disobedience  to  orders  I  was  tied 
behind  a  wagon  and  made  to  walk  in 
trying  circumstances  which  rather  hu- 
miliated me.  but  I  felt  I  could  not  have 
done  less.  This  was  the  act  of  a  small 
ofTinial  by  the  name  of  Dykes.'  When 
God  rewards  those  who  give  the  least 
of  his  children  a  drink  of  water.  I  think 
this  hero  will  not  be  tied  behind  a 
wagon.  I  have  traveled  hundreds  of 
miles  with  this  good  man.  If  any  were 
sick  he  was  sympathetic  and  ready  to 
help:  if  any  wagons  were  stalled  he 
was  the  first  to  roll  up  his  sleeves  to 


lift,  dig  and  push.  If  animals  were 
sick  he  was  an  expert.  He  was  ex- 
tremely fond  of  a  good  horse.  When 
camping  time  came,  noon  or  night,  ani- 
mals were  the  first  to  receive  his  atten- 
tion; then  meals  were  attended  to.  and 
all  must  fare  alike.  He  would  always 
call  the  camp  to  order  and  have  prayer 
offered  to  God,  and  if  he  himself  did 
the  praying,  it  was  an  earnest,  thought- 
ful appeal  to  his  Heavenly  Father;  but 
he  never  slighted  his  brethren:  they, 
too,  must  take  their  turn.  He  was 
very  kind,  though  he  could  not  look 
upon  the  deeds  of  his  fellowmen  Avith 
the  charity  and  forbearance  that  some 
men  can.  He  rebuked  rather  shar])ly. 
being  of  a  quick  temper,  or.  rather,  he 
hastily  put  his  foot  down  on  all  man- 
ner of  iniquity,  and  his  rebukes  weri- 
generally  kindly  received,  as  all  knew 
they  were  intended  to  elevate  and  bet- 
ter mankind.  And  this  is  how  his 
friends  looked  upon  him.  His  earnest 
desire  was  to  have  all  things  go  right, 
and  nothing  short  of  this  would  satisfy 
him;  hence  his  peculiar  mode  was  con- 
sidered and  his  advice  generally  ad- 
hered to.  The  poor  he  never  passed 
by  unnoticed  or  uncared  for.  Feed, 
grain,  seed  grain,  flour  and  other  pro- 
visions have  been  amply  furnished  by 
him  to  hundreds  without  any  return. 
He  was  kind  to  the  stranger  and  am- 
ply adapted  to  entertain  them:  Jew  or 
Gentile,  all  were  treated  kindly.  He 
was  very  interesting  and  entertaining, 
both  in  public  and  in  private,  and  any 
one  could  depend  upon  him  for  sound 
doctrine.  He  was  a  wise  man  in  gen- 
eral things,  though  he  had  not  much 
school  learning,  but  the  book  of  nature, 
both  in  regard  to  man  and  beast,  and 
all  the  wonders  of  God  were  studieil 
by  him  and  his  experience  was  world 
wide.  He  enjoyed  life  well.  He  had 
the  thorns  and  the  thistles,  the  ups  and 
the  downs  and  many  -')re  trials,  but 
he  despised  none  of  God's  dealings, 
but  a  treacherous  man  was  to  him  a 
loathing  and  the  only  thing  I  have  ever 
known  him  to  hate.  Brother  Lot  was 
tried  sorely  in  the  latter  part  of  his 
life,  and  none  but  the  angels  can  tell 
this  story  correctly.  He  had  his  leg 
crushed  into  a  pulp  in  a  horse  power, 
and  had  a  whole  year  or  more  of  suf- 
fering through  this  painful  calamity. 
This  had  somewhat  of  a  tendency  to 
impair  his  once  strong  memory.  He 
lost  two  beautiful  boys  in  the  last  few 


BIOGRAPHICAL    ENCYCLOPEDIA, 


805 


years;  one  was  drowned  and  one  scald- 
ed with  lye  water  till  he  died.  An  ene- 
my of  his  hired  a  man  to  kill  him, 
but  failed,  and  various  and  rapid  were 
his  trials.  He  was  a  good  provider  and 
has  a  number  of  his  children  on  a  fair 
way  to  becoming-  thoroughly  educated. 
He  was  a  large  man  in  stature,  over 
six  feet  in  height  when  in  the  prime 
of  life,  but  was  not  quite  so  tall  lat- 
terly. He  weighed  from  200  to  21.5 
pounds.  He  drank  no  tea  nor  coffee, 
used  no  tobacco  and  drank  no  liciuor. 
While  with  him  in  St.  George,  I  have 
seen  him  refuse  to  drink  a  drop  of 
wine  with  his  old-time  friends.  He 
never  profaned,  and  always  rebuked 
those  that  did.  However,  he  would 
sometimes  treat  a  household  of  those 
who  desired  it  to  the  amount  of  .$40  to 
$50.  He  was  a  good  frontiersman,  ac- 
tive and  ambitious  and  performed  no- 
ble Avork  at  Sunset  in  the  interest  of 
the  Arizona  mission  and  its  final  suc- 
cess. His  policy  toward  the  Indians 
was  that  of  Brigham  Young:  'Feed 
them,  not  fight  them.'  and  many  were 
the  good  and  instructive  lettei's  he  re- 
ceived from  Pres.  Young  in  that  early 
day  which  he  would  read  in  public  and 
always  advise  the  people  to  carry  them 
out  punctually.  Lot  said  at  one  time 
in  my  hearing:  'AH  who  feel  like 
cursing  an  Indian  and  saying  that  the 
only  good  Indian  is  a  dead  one,  are  re- 
leased to  go  home.'  He  meant  all  he 
said,  and  hundreds  of  Indians  came 
down  and  farmed  at  Sunset,  and  he 
was  not  a  whit  behind  in  showing  them 
all  about  farming.  He  visited  the  dif- 
ferent tribes  often  and  always  enquired 
of  their  welfare  and  asked  if  any  of 
our  people  were  intruding  on  their 
rights,  often  enquiring  if  we  were  wel- 
come in  their  land.  He  was  a  fairly 
good  Spanish  interpreter  and  always 
gave  them  good  advice,  encouraging 
them  to  allegiance  to  this  great  govern- 
ment, etc.  He  was  kind  to  them,  feed- 
ing them  and  aiding  them  otherwise 
and  he  stood  high  with  the  Navajo 
chiefs.  "When  Sunset  was  abandoned 
he  moved  in  part  to  Moencoppy,  where 
he  found  a  different  stripe  of  Navajoes, 
a  people  who  know  no  law.  a  people 
who  were  not  subdued  by  the  govern- 
ment at  the  last  big  fight.  They  hid 
up  near  the  Navajo  Mountains  where 
live  those  who  committed  the  depreda- 
tions in  southern  Utah  and  killed  Whit- 
more  and  Geo.  A.  Smith,  jun.,  and  stole 


many   sheep   and   horses.       The   writer 
has  seen  many  mares,  valued  at  from 
$100  to  $250   each,   stolen   in   Utah,   and 
came  nearly  loosing  his  life  for  making 
mention  of  this  fact  at  one  time.  While 
I  lived  at  Moencoppy  eight  years,  I  saw 
them  let  their  sheep  into  gardens  and 
orchards,  breaking  fruit  trees  till  they 
died,  and  all  we  could  do  was  only  to 
plead    with    them       kindly,    sometimes 
with   good   effect   for  a  time,   but   soon 
this  failed,  and  they  would  steal  fruit, 
melons,  grain  in  the  shock,  corn  in  the 
field,   ride   on   our  horses,   stealing  the 
bells  from  their  necks,   the  hobbles  of 
their  legs,    etc.,   breaking  the   dams   in 
our    reservoirs,     destroying    our    crops 
and  causing  the  loss  of  our  water,  and 
a  hundred  other  things.       Brother  Lot 
Smith  passed  through  all  this  and  more 
also,  and  I  will  assure  the  reader  that 
Lot    Smith   died    defending   the    right." 
Lot    Smith    was     killed    by   Indians    at 
Tuba  City,  Arizona,  June  21,  1892.     The 
folloAving     statement     concerning     his 
tragic    death    is    culled    from,   a     state- 
ment made  by  G.  W.  Palmer,  of  Farm- 
Ington,  Davis  county,  and  published  in 
the   "Deseret  News"    (weekly).  Vol.   45, 
p.   230:       A  short  time  pi'evious  to  the 
unfortunate  event,  a   "Gentile"     trader 
came     to     the     neighborhood     of     Lot 
Smith's  residence,  at  Tuba,  Arizona,  to 
obtain   the  wool  clip     from   the  Nava- 
jos's    sheep.       He     ingratiated   himself 
with    the    Indians,      and     among   other 
things    told    them    they    had    as    much 
right  to  the  grazing  lands  outside  their 
reservation  as  the  white  men  had,  and 
their  sheep  were  as  free  to  pasturage  as 
the  white  men's  cattle.       The  Navajos, 
particularly   the   young  bucks,   became 
very  saucy  and  brought  their  sheep  off 
the    reservation,    intruding     upon      the 
lands  taken  up  by  white  settlers.      This 
man  has  the  reputation  of  having  incit- 
ed Indians  to  drive  off  a  rancher,  some 
time  ago,  that  they  might  have  a  good 
place  at  which  to  wash  and  shear  their 
sheep  so  that  he  could  get  the  wool.  On 
the  morning  of  the  day  when  the  shoot- 
ing occurred,   an     Indian     told   a  man 
named  D.  Claws  and  others,  five  miles 
from  Tuba,  that  "may  be,  pretty  soon, 
Navajos  kill  and  clear  out  some  white 
men."  and  that  they  had  "talked  about 
it  two  days."       Claws  laughed  at  him 
and   made   fun   of     his     threat,  and  he 
said,    "We   kill    one    white   man,     any- 
how."      Two   hours     after     this.      Lot 
Smith  was  shot.       It  appears  that  the 


806 


LATTER-DAY    SAINT 


Indians  had  let  down  the  bars  of  his 
pasture  and  turned  in  their  sheep.  Lot 
went  on  horseback  to  his  grazing 
grounds  and  tried  to  turn  the  sheep 
out,  but  they  "bunched"  up  and  he 
could  not  succeed.  He  went  back  to 
the  house  and  returned,  this  time  hav- 
ing a  revolver  in  his  belt.  He  got  off 
his  horse  and  tried  again  to  drive  them 
out,  but  failing  again  he  became  angry 
and  drawing  his  pistol,  fired  twice  into 
the  flock,  killing  six  sheep.  In  a  mo- 
ment half-a-dozen  Navajos.  who  had 
been  riding,  arose  and  fired  at  his  cows, 
shooting  five,  and  other  Indians  ap- 
peared in  the  hills.  Lot  started  back 
home  on  horseback.and  had  just  passed 
a  point  where  there  was  a  large  rock, 
when  an  Indian,  who  had  been  riding 
up  on  the  hill  with  a  rifle  on  his  shoul- 
der and  had  watched  for  him  till  he 
passed  this  rock,  fired  from  behind  it, 
striking  Lot  in  the  back,  the  ball  going 
through  his  body  in  a  slanting  direc- 
tion. The  wounded  man  rode  on,  and 
seeing  a  white  man  at  a  distance, 
beckoned  to  him.  The  blood  was  run- 
ning- in  a  stream  as  he  rode  rapidly  to 
his  house.  He  alighted,  entered,  un- 
buckled his  belt  and  went  into  another 
room  without  a  word.  The  man  he 
beckoned  soon  arrived,  and  when  he 
and  the  family  went  into  the  room  the 
stricken  man  exclaimed,  "This  is  the 
last  of  me."  His  dying  words  were: 
"God  bless  the  wives  and  children." 
The  older  Navajoes  greatly  deplored 
the  act,  which  had  taken  from  them  a 
good  friend.  Elder  Smith  was  shot 
about  4  o'clock  p.  m.  and  died  at  10 
o'clock  the  same  night.  He  left  a 
large  family  and  a  wide  circle  of  friends 
to  mourn  his  loss.  His  body  rested  in 
a  quiet  corner  in  Tuba  City,  Arizona, 
about  ten  years.  But  according-  to 
the  wish  of  his  children  his  remains 
were  exhumed  and  shipped  to  Farming- 
ton,  Davis  county,  Utah  (where  he  had 
spent  many  years  of  his  life),  and  there 
interred  with  appropj-iate  ceremonies 
April   8,    1902. 

MORVK,  Jo.seph,  a  Patriarch  in  the 
Church,  was  born  Jan.  17,  1812,  In  Lon- 
don, England,  son  of  Joseph  Home  and 
Maria  Maidens.  When  he  was  six 
years  old  his  parents  emigrated  to 
Canada  and  settled  at  a  place  called 
Little  York,  now  the  city  of  Toronto. 
They  were  of  the  poorer  class  of  people, 
the  father  being  a  shoemaker  by  trade, 
and  as  there  were  very  few  schools  in 


the  country  districts,  where  they  dwelt, 
the  boy  Joseph  had  but  little  opportuni- 
ty for  education.  About  the  year  1822 
the  family  moved  eight  miles  into  the 
timbered  country  to  open  up  a  farm, 
and  there  his  time  was  spent  clearing 
land  and  farming  until  he  was  twenty- 
four  years  of  age,  when  he  married.  The 
lady  who  became  his  wife  was  Miss 
Mary  Isabella  Hales,  like  himself  a  na- 
tive of  England,  but  at  that  time  a 
resident  in  his  neighborhood.  The 
date  of  their  marriage  was  May  9,  1836. 
Two  months  later  the  young  couple 
were  baptized  into  the  Church  of  Je- 
sus Christ  of  Latter-day  Saints.  In  the 
spring  of  1837  they  became  acquainted 
with  the  Prophet  Joseph  Smith,  and  in 


the  following  yeai-  moved  to  Far  West, 
Missouri,  where  they  passed  through 
the  mobocratic  troubles  of  that  period, 
and  from  1839  to  1842  resided  at  Quincy. 
III.,  prior  to  moving  up  to  Nauvoo.  Soon 
after  settling  at  the  latter  place  Bro. 
Home  engaged  in  the  mei-cantile  busi- 
ness, which  he  continued  as  long  as  he 
remained  there.  He  was  ordained  a 
Seventy,  and  shortly  afterwards  set 
apart  as  one  of  the  presidency  of  the 
28th  quorum  of  Seventy.  He  left  Nau- 
voo in  February,  1846,  in  the  first  com- 
pany of  Saints  that  started  for  the 
West.  His  family  then  sonsisted  of 
himself,  his  wife  and  three  children — 
boys.  His  daughter.  Elizabeth  Ann. 
was  born  at  Mount  Pisgah  as  they  jnui- 
neyed.  They  also  brought  with  them 
a  man    and    his   wife   and   a     boy    who 


BIOGRAPHICAL   ENCYCLOPEDIA. 


807 


drove  one  of  their  teams.  They  spent 
the  next  winter  on  the  Missouri  river, 
and  on  the  15th  of  June,  1847,  resumed 
their  westward  journey  from  Winter 
quarters,  in  the  immigration  that  fol- 
lowed immediately  behind  the  pioneers. 
Bishop  Edward  Hunter  was  captain  of 
the  company  in  which  they  traveled, 
and  under  him  Bro.  Home  was  captain 
of  the  first  fifty.  They  arrived  in  Salt 
Lake  valley  on  the  6th  of  October,  the 
same  year.  Up  to  the  spring  of  1849, 
Bro.  Home  and  his  family  lived  in  the 
Old  Fort,  and  then  moved  into  the 
Fourteenth  Ward.  In  August,  1850,  he 
was  called  by  Pres.  Brigham  Young 
as  one  of  a  committee  of  four  to  ex- 
plore Sanpete  valley,  his  associates  be- 
ing William  W.  Phelps,  Dimmick  B. 
Huntington  and  Ira  Willis.  While  on 
this  trip  he  with  Messrs.  Phelps  and 
Willis  ascended  Mount  Nebo,  so  named 
by  Judge  Phelps.  They  located  the  site 
of  Manti,  and  dedicated  the  whole  val- 
ley for  settlement  by  the  Latter-day 
Saints.  In  November  of  the  same  year 
Bro.  Home  accompanied  Parley  P. 
Pratt's  exploring  expedition  to  the  Rio 
Virgen  river,  returning  in  February, 
1851.  In  the  fall  of  that  year  he  was 
one  of  a  company  called  to  go  with 
George  A.  Smith  to  Iron  county,  where 
they  founded  the  settlement  of  Paro- 
wan.  From  1854  to  1858  he  superin- 
tended the  tithing  labor,  team  work, 
etc.,  on  the  Temple  block  at  Salt  Lake 
City,  and  during  the  latter  year  was 
called  by  Pres.  Young  to  take  charge 
of  a  company  of  men  and  go  to  the  Rio 
Virgen,  there  to  make  and  work  a  cot- 
ton farm.  This  occupied  two  years.  In 
1861  and  1862  he  had  charge  of  a  com- 
pany of  men  and  reams  and  went  back 
to  the  Missouri  river  for  emigrants. 
While  Salt  Lake  City  was  yet  in  its  in- 
fancy he  was  elected  a  member  of  the 
city  council  and  held  that  position  un- 
til the  year  1858.  In  1878  he  was  elected 
justice  of  the  peace  for  the  second  pre- 
cinct, holding  that  office  for  six  years. 
He  was  city  pound  keeper  for  four 
years  and  for  several  years  acted  as 
city  watermaster,  also  serving  in  the 
capacity  of  school  trustee.  In  1852  he 
became  a  counselor  to  Bishop  Abraham 
Hoagland  of  the  Fourteenth  Ward,  and 
held  that  position  until  the  spring  of 
1861.  On  June  4.  1873,  he  was  made  a 
member  of  the  High  Council  of  the  Salt 
LaJce  Stake  of  Zion,  and  acted  in  that 
capacity    until    March     18,    1890,    when 


owing  to  a  defect  in  his  hearing  he  was 
honorably  released  from  that  position. 
On  the  same  day  he  was  ordained  a 
Patriarch  under  the  hands  of  Presidents 
Wilford  Woodruff,  George  Q.  Cannon 
and  Joseph  F.  Smith,  the  seond  named 
being  mouth.  The  venerable  Patriarch 
notes  in  his  journal  that  he  has  done 
work  for  the  living  and  the  dead  in  all 
the  Temples  that  have  been  reared  by 
the  Latter-day  Saints.  Up  to  1888  he 
continued  to  reside  in  the  Fourteenth 
Ward,  but  during  that  year  moved  into 
a  new  home  that  he  had  built  in  the 
Eighteenth  Ward.  Patriarch  Joseph 
Home  died  at  his  home  in  Salt  Lake 
City  on  the  27th  day  of  April,  1897.  He 
was  the  father  of  twenty-five  children, 
fifteen  of  them,  including  three  pairs  of 
twins,  being  the  children  of  his  first 
wife,  Mary  Isabella  Hales,  and  the  re- 
maining ten  the  children  of  his  second 
wife,  Mary  P.  Shepherd,  whom  he 
married  in  1856.— Orson  F.  Whitney. 

HORNE,  Mary  Isabella,  president 
of  Relief  Societies  in  the  Salt  Lake 
Stake  of  Zion,  is  the  daughter  of 
Stephen  and  Mary  Ann  Hales,  and  was 
born  Nov.  20,  1818,  in  Rainham,  county 
of  Kent,  England.      With  her  father's 


family  she  moved  to  Canada  in  183£. 
May  9,  1836,  she  was  married  to  Joseph 
Home  and  in  the  same  month  she  heard 
the  gospel  preached  by  Ajwstle  Parley 
P.  Pratt  and  was  baptized  in  July, 
1836.  Subsequently,  she,  with  her  hus- 
band, gathered  with  the  Saints  in  Far 


808 


LATTER-DAY    SAINT 


West,  Mo.,  and  together  with  the  body 
of  the  Church  passed  through  the  per- 
secutions and  expulsions  from  Missou- 
ri and  Illinois.  In  1847  she  crossed  the 
plains  to  the  Valley  in  Apostle  John 
Taylor's  company,  and  located  in  Salt 
Lake  City,  where  she  lived  till  1858, 
when,  together  with  her  family  she 
moved  to  Parowan,  Iron  county,  but 
soon  moved  back  to  Salt  Lake  City, 
where  she  has  continued  to  reside  ever 
since.  Sister  Home  received  her 
blessings  in  the  Nauvoo  Temple.  She 
has  always  been  a  very  energetic 
worker  in  the  Relief  Society  almost 
from  the  day  of  their  organization.  In 
1853  she  served  as  a  counselor  to 
Phoebe  Woodruff,  president  of  the 
Fourteenth  Ward  Relief  society;  later 
she  became  the  president  of  that  so- 
ciety, which  position  she  held  for  four- 
teen years,  during  which  time  she  ac- 
complished much  good.  When  she  was 
i-eleased  from  this  position  she  was 
chosen  to  preside  over  all  the  Relief  so- 
cieties in  Salt  Lake  Stake.  At  the 
organization  of  the  general  board  of 
Relief  society  work.  Sister  Home  was 
appointed  to  be  treasurer  of  the  board, 
in  which  capacity  she  labored  till  1901. 
Sister  Home  labored  as  a  member  of 
Deseret  Hospital  committee  for  twelve 
years,  and  was  also  counselor  to  Zina 
D.  H.  Young  in  the  silk  association. 
9he  was  called  by  Pres.  Brigham 
Young  to  preside  over  the  meetings  of 
the  Retrenchment  association,  held  in 
the  14th  Ward  assembly  rooms.  Sister 
Home  is  the  mother  of  fifteen  children, 
eight  of  whom  ai'e  living;  she  has  98 
grandchildren,  and  45  great-grandchil- 
dren.     Her  husband  died  April  27,  1897. 

KIMBALL,  Lucy  Walker,  one  of  Zi- 

ons  faithful  Temple  workers,  was  born 
April  30,  1826,  at  Peacham,  Caledonia 
county.  Vermont,  daughter  of  John 
Walker  and  Lydia  Holmes.  She  was 
baptized  by  Eider  Abraham  Palmer,  at 
Ogdensburgh,  N.  Y.,  while  in  her  ninth 
year.  In  1838  she  removed  with  her 
parents  and  the  Ogdensburgh  branch  of 
the  Church  to  Missouri, passing  through 
Kirtland,  Ohio,  which  had  just  been 
evacuated  by  most  of  the  Saints.  Be- 
fore crossing  the  line  into  Caldwell 
county.  Mo.,  the  little  company  of 
Saints  from  Ogdensburgh,  traveling  in 
reven  wagons,  was  surrounded  by  a 
mob,  consisting  of  about  forty  men  with 
painted  faces,  who  searched  the  wagons 


thoroughly,  took  away  all  the  arms  and 
ammunition  which  they  could  find,  and 
ordered  some  of  the  women  and  chil- 
dren out  into  the  snow,  among  whom 
was  Lucy's  mother,  a  frail  and  delicate 
woman.  All  this  happened  on  a  cold 
and  unpleasant  day,  early  in  the  morn- 
ing. The  company  then  continued  the 
journey  until  they  reached  a  point 
within  five  miles  of  Haun's  Mill,  where 
they  formed  a  camp.  Brother  Walker 
then  proceeded  to  the  mill  to  counsel 
with  Pres.  Joseph  Young  and  some 
other  brethren  who  were  stopping  there 
temporarily.  This  was  on  Oct.  30,  1838, 
the  memorable  day  on  which  the  mas- 
sacre took  place.  During  the  shooting 
Bro.  Walker  was  wounded  in  the  arm, 
and  subsequently  suffered  considerable 


from  the  effects  thereof.  Immediately 
after  the  masacre  a  young  man  came 
running  across  the  prairie  to  the  little 
camp  of  immigrants  and  told  them 
what  had  happened  at  the  mill,  adding 
that  the  mob  would  soon  also  attack 
them.  Upon  hearing  this,  some  of  the 
women  picked  up  their  babes  and  tried 
to  wade  through  the  deep  snow,  to- 
wards the  neighboring  woods,  but  after 
suffering  almost  beyond  description 
from  cold  and  exposure  they  were 
obliged  to  return  to  the  wagons  and 
trust  in  God  for  protection.  The  next 
morning  early  a  young  oflJlcer,  with  a 
pleasant,  open  face,  came  riding  into 
the  camp  and  told  the  travelers  that 
the  mob  was  coming  down  to  destroy 
them,  but  if  they  would  consent  to  fol- 
low him,  he  would  lead  them  to  a  place 


BIOGRAPHICAL  ENCYCLOPEDIA. 


809 


of  safety.  At  first  they  were  not  in- 
clined to  believe  him,  but  finally  con- 
cluded to  follow  him  and  risk  the  conse- 
quences. The  young-  man,  who  ap- 
peared not  to  be  in  sympathy  with  the 
mob,  then  led  the  little  company  on  a 
back  trail  to  a  secluded  place,  where 
they  scattered  and  found  temporary 
shelter  among  the  settlers.  In  a  cou- 
ple of  weeks,  Bro.  Walker,  who  had 
been  reported  killed,  rejoined  his  fami- 
ly, and  the  following  spring  most  of 
the  little  party  continued  their  journey 
until  they  reached  Quincy,  111.  In  the 
spring  of  1840  the  Walker  family  re- 
moved to  Nauvoo,  where  they  became 
intimately  acquainted  with  Pres.  Jo- 
seph Smith  and  lived  in  his  family  for 
a  number  of  years.  May  1,  1843,  Sister 
Lucy  was  married  to  the  Prophet  as  a 
plural  wife.  After  the  martyrdom  of 
Joseph  and  Hyrum  Smith  she  lived  with 
her  eldest  brother,  William,  and  in  1846 
left  Nauvoo  to  come  west.  After 
spending  two  seasons  at  Winter  Quar- 
ters she  arrived  in  Great  Salt  Lake  val- 
ley in  1848,  in  the  company  of  Heber  C 
Kimball,  to  whom  she  was  married  in 
1S45,  and  subsequently  had  nine  children 
by  him.  She  resided  in  Salt  Lake  City 
until  1868,  when  she  accompanied  her 
husband  to  Provo.  Soon  afterwards 
Pres.  Kimball  died,  but  she  remained  in 
Utah  county  for  several  years,  where 
Fhe  took  an  active  part  in  the  Provo 
Fourth  Ward  Female  Relief  Society, 
lining  also  many  important  positions 
of  trust.  She  now  resides  with  her 
youngest  daughter  in  the  Ninth  Ward, 
Salt  Lake  City,  and  is  one  of  the  work- 
ers of  the  Salt  Lake  Temple.  Previoi^ 
to  the  opening  of  said  Temple  she  was 
a  worker  in  the  Temple  at  Logan. 

ROUND Y,  Elizabeth  Jefford  Drake, 

a  diligent  worker  in  the  Relief  Societies 
of  the  Church  for  many  years,  was  born 
March  16,  1830,  in  the  town  of  Axmin- 
ster.  Devonshire,  England,  the  only 
child  of  George  Merley  Drake  and  Han- 
nah Jefford.  Her  father  was  a  de- 
scendant from  the  family  of  Sir  William 
and  Sir  Francis  Drake.  When  aboui 
ten  years  old  she  was  deprived  of  her 
father's  loving  care  and  left  solely  for 
love  and  comfort  to  her  mother  who, 
being  an  invalid,  could  not  pay  proper 
attention  to  her  child.  Her  father 
had  taught  her  to  read  the  Holy  Scrip- 
tures and  by  this  she  grew  to  have 
iaith  in  God  and  his  son  Jesus  Christ. 


Elizabeth  was  raised  in  the  Episcopa- 
lian church,  and  when  yet  very  young 
she  saw  that  the  teachings  of  the  Sa- 
vior were  not  practiced  by  that  church 
as  she  thought  they  ought  to  be.  In 
her  prayers  she  began  to  plead  with 
God  to  show  her  how  "to  be  good,"  and 
7io\V  to  serve  him.  At  twelve  years 
old  she  had  a  vision  of  truth  and  error, 
in  which  the  Savior  appeared  and  told 
her  to  follow  his  teachings,  in  which 
case  all  would  be  well  with  her.  This 
vision  was  repeated  three  times,  the 
last  time  when  she  was  nearly  twenty 
yeaVs  old.  She  had  enauired  into  the 
creeds  of  the  different  churches  near 
her  home,  but  could  not  believe  any 
of  them,  and  on  the  vision  being  re- 
peated the  third  time  she  decided  to 
leave   home  and  .go  to   London,   where. 


among  so  many  people,  she  thought  she 
would  surely  find  some  who  served  God 
aright.  In  December,  1851,  she  at- 
tended a  meeting  of  the  Aldenham 
Street  branch  of  the  Church  of  Jesus 
Christ  of  Latter-day  Saints;  Elder  Ja- 
cob Gates  was  the  preacher  on  that 
occasion,  and  in  his  sermon  he  por- 
trayed the  vision  she  had  seen,  and  the 
last  words  of  his  discourse  were  al- 
most the  identical  words  which  the 
Savior  had  uttered  to  her  in  the  vision. 
At  the  close  of  the  meeting  she  gave 
her  name  in  for  baptism,  and  she  was 
acordingly  baptized,  Dec.  31,  1851.  Al- 
though young  and  unacquainted  with 
the  doings  of  the  people  of  the  world, 
she  was  assailed  on  every  hand,  and 
persecutions    came    from    all    she    held 


810 


LATTER-DAY    SAINT 


dear;  her  mother  refused  to  acknowl- 
edgre  her  as  her  child,  unless  she  would 
give  up  the  new  faith  she  had  es- 
poused; but  nothing  daunted  she  was 
firm  and  bid  her  mother  farewell,  tell- 
ing her  that  as  she  had  put  her  hand 
to  the  true  gospel  plough,  she  would  by 
the  help  of  God  hold  on  to  it.  After 
joining  the  Church  she  became  ac- 
quainted with  Henry  Richard  Ballam, 
one  of  the  nriost  brilliant  speakers 
among  the  Elders  of  the  London  con- 
ference, to  whom  she  was  united  in 
marriage,  July  13,  1852.  She  was  brut- 
ally treated  by  her  husband,  scarcely 
ever  being  free  from  bruises  caused  by 
his  blows.  He  was  excommunicated 
from  the  Church  in  1854,  for  adultery. 
In  the  spring  of  1856  Sister  Elizabeth 
waa  at  Liverpool  ready  to  emigrate  to 
America;  but  her  husband  plead  with 
Apostle  Franklin  D.  Richards  to  re-ad- 
mit him  into  the  Church  and  counsel 
his  wife  to  return  to  him.  Brother 
Richards  did  so,  but  promised  Eliza- 
beth, that  if  she  would  remain  faithful 
and  prayerful,  her  husband  should 
never  have  power  to  strike  her  again; 
and  if  he  did  not  keep  his  covenant, 
she  should  be  delivered  from  him  with- 
in a  year.  All  this  happened  as  Elder 
Richards  had  predicted.  Her  husband 
never  beat  her  again,  although  he  oth- 
erwise continued  to  abuse  her.  As^ 
sisted  by  some  of  the  brethren,  she  was 
enabled  to  emigrate  to  America  in  1857, 
when  she  and  her  little  daughtei 
crossed  the  Atlantic  in  the  ship  "Tus- 
carora,"  which  landed  in  Philadelphia 
July  3.  1857.  Abotit  three  months  later 
she  gave  birth  to  another  daughter. 
After  a  sojourn  in  Philadelphia  of  about 
two  years,  she  came  to  the  Valley,  with 
her  children,  in  1859.  Having  married 
Daniel  Davis,  a  resident  of  Washing- 
ton, D.  C,  in  1860,  she  returned  east; 
and  while  her  husband  served  in  the 
army  she  was  appointed  to  a  clerkship 
in  the  office  of  General  F.  E.  Spinner, 
U.  S.  treasurer,  which  position  she  held 
until  the  advent  of  the  notorious  Col- 
lum  bill,  when  she  resigned  for  the  pur- 
pose of  devoting  her  time  in  the  de- 
fense of  her  people.  She  succeeded  In 
geting  the  signature  of  fifty-six  ladies 
(whose  friendship  she  had  made 
through  her  association  with  them)  to 
a  petition,  protesting  against  the  con- 
templated anti-Mormon  legislation. 
She  also  obtained  help  for  the  Saints 
against   the     Cragln     bill   through   the 


Hon.  Charles  Sumner.  Much  good  was 
done  by  her  testimony  in  removing 
prejudice  from  the  hearts  of  many  who 
had  believed  the  false  reports  circulat- 
ed against  the  Saints.  In  1870  she  re- 
moved from  Washington  to  Salt  Lake 
City.  During  the  time  her  husband 
served  in  the  army  he  became  very 
dissipated,  which  compelled  her  to  ob- 
tain a  divorce.  In  1874  Sister  Elizabeth 
took  the  lead  in  arranging  the  first  cele- 
bration in  honor  of  the  Prophet  Joseph 
Smith's  birthday.  The  party  was  held 
in  the  14th  Ward  Assembly  hall  and 
was  approved  by  Pres.  Brigham  Young 
who  spent  the  winter  at  St.  George. 
Apostles  Orson  Pratt  and  John  Taylor 
were  numbered  among  the  guests  on 
that  occasion.  Since  that  time  Sister 
Roundy  has  been  persevering  in  her 
efforts  to  have  the  Prophet's  birthday 
anniversary  remembered  among  the 
Saints;  and  after  twenty-seven  years' 
persistent  effort  and  waiting  she  has 
lived  to  see  it  universally  honored 
amongst  the  Saints.  When  Pres.  Brig- 
ham  Young  was  sent  to  the  Utah  peni- 
tentiary for  so-called  contempt  of  court 
by  Chief  Justice  James  B.  McKean  in 
1871,  Sister  Elizabeth  suggested  the 
getting  up  of  a  memorial  to  Gov.  Ax- 
tell.  This  was  sanctioned  by  Pres. 
Geo.  A.  Smith.  Sister  Eliza  R.  Snow  and 
Sister  Elizabeth  commenced  drafting 
the  address  at  12  o'clock  midnight,  and 
by  10  o'clock  the  next  morning  they  had 
obtained  over  eight  hundred  signa- 
tures, of  which  Sister  Elizabeth  had  se- 
cured the  greatest  part.  Before  noon 
on,  that  day,  together  with  Sister  M. 
Isabella  Home,  she  waited  upon  Gov- 
ernor Axtell.at  his  rooms  in  the  Towns- 
end  House,  and  presented  the  memorial 
in  behalf  of  the  ladies  of  Salt  Lake 
City.  They  had  the  pleasure  of  the  full 
approval  of  his  Excellency,  and  he 
thanked  them  for  their  confidence  in 
him  and  for  their  kind  feelings  toward 
Pres.  Young.  This  same  summer  Pres. 
Young  and  Mrs.  Eliza  R.  Snow  called 
on  Elizabeth  to  get  up  an  excursion  to 
Haight's  Grove,  near  Farmington.  Eliz- 
abeth called  on  Sister  Wilmarth  East 
to  assist  her.  This  excursion,  which 
was  the  first  that  had  been  conducted 
by  a  woman  in  Utah,  was  a  success  in 
every  paxtlcular.  Elizabeth  having 
lived  In  Washington  and  knowing  the 
prejudice  of  the  people  in  the  east,  ad- 
vised that  the  sisters  of  the  "Mormon" 
Church  should  get  up  a    memorial     to 


BIOGRAPHICAL    ENCYCLOPEDIA. 


811 


Congress  in  their  own  name  and  ask 
for  their  rights  as  American  citizenb, 
and  declare  their  allegiance  to  the  Con- 
stitution of  their  country,  as  well  as 
their  belief  in  the  revelation  of  God 
and  the  divinity  of  celestial  marriage. 
Many  of  the  sisters  thought  that  this 
could  not  be  done  successfully,  but 
when  Pres.  Young  heard  of  it,  he  said, 
"Do  it  by  all  means."  Sister  Elizabetti 
was  the  first  woman  sent  by  Pres. 
Young  to  visit  the  settlements  of  the 
Saints,  call  meetings  and  read  the  mem- 
orial to  the  sisters  and  get  their  sig- 
natui-es;  she  visited  fifty-four  settle- 
ments on  this  mission.  Sister  Eliza  R. 
Snow  and  some  other  sisters  also  as- 
sisted, and  the  memorial  was  presented 
to  Congress  with  over  twenty-six  thou- 
sand signatures  in  December,  1875.  In 
the  same  winter  Sister  Elizabeth  was 
appointed  by  Pres.  Young  to  act  on  the 
Ladies'  Centennial  Committee,  of  which 
Sister  Eliza  R.  Snow  was  made  presi- 
dent. The  fair  was  held  in  the  Old 
Constitution  Building,  Salt  Lake  City, 
and  was  successful.  At  the  close  of 
the  fair,  in  1876,  the  sisters  were  called 
to  open  a  store  for  the  sale  of  home 
industries.  A  company  was  organized 
for  that  purpose  in  October,  1876.  Eliza 
R.  Snow  was  elected  president,  Priscil- 
la  M.  Staines  vice  president,  Elizabeth 
J.  Davis  secretary  and  business  man- 
ager, Bathsheba  W.  Smith  treasurer. 
The  store  was  called  The  Woman's 
Commission  Store.  Sister  Elizabeth 
entered  into  the  celestial  order  of  mar- 
riage by  becoming  the  plural  wife  of 
Bishop  Jared  Curtis  Roundy,  Jan.  17, 
1879.  During  the  raid  which  followed 
a  few  years  later  she  had  to  leave  home 
and  wander  as  an  exile  among  stran- 
gers, under  which  circumstances  her 
husband  died  May  24,  1897,  in  St.  Da- 
vid, Arizona.  When  sixty-two  years, 
old,  she  took  her  first  lessons  in  oil 
painting  and  has  improved  her  talents 
in  this  direction  to  the  astonishment 
of  all  who  know  her.  She  also  enjoyed 
the  privilege  of  an  intimate  acquaint- 
ance with  Zion's  gifted  poetess.  Sister 
Eliza  R.  Snow.  It  was  her  hands  thav 
waited  on,  soothed  and  comforted  Sis- 
ter Eliza  the  last  year  she  was  spared 
to  the  Saints.  In  November,  1887,  Sis- 
ter Eliza,  who  was  very  sick  and  to  all 
appearances  had  but  a  few  hours  to 
live,  reciuested  that  a  certain  brother 
be  sent  for  immediately  to  come  and 
administer  to  her  the  ordinance  of  heal- 


ing. Sister  Elizabeth,  after  trying  in 
vain  to  get  one  of  the  brethren  to  re- 
spond, volunteered  to  go  herself,  to 
which  Sister  Eliza  consented,  provided 
another  sister  remained  with  her  in  the 
meanwhile.  Sister  Elizabeth  obtained 
a  horse  and  buggy  of  Bishop  Jacob 
Weiler,  with  which  she  started,  after 
receiving  Sister  Eliza's  blessing  and 
being  told  by  her  that  she  should  go 
in  peace  and  return  in  safety, — adding, 
"and  I  will  be  here  when  you  return." 
Upon  enquiry  she  soon  learned  that  the 
brother  wanted  lived  at  E.  T.  city, 
twenty-five  miles  away.  She  was  ad- 
vised to  go  back  and  not  start  that 
night,  as  it  was  then  past  5  o'clock,  but 
she  thought  Sister  Eliza  was  too  sick 
foi-  delay,  and  consequently  she  started 
for  the  west,  not  being  acquainted  with 
the  road.  In  driving  through  four 
sheep  herds,  she  got  off  on  the  wrong 
road  and  went  four  miles  out  of  her 
way;  but  through  the  blessing  of  God 
she  arrived  at  the  place  of  her  destina- 
tion at  half-past  twelve  midnight.  At 
about  4  o'clock  in  the  morning,  Sister 
Elizabeth  started  for  the  city,  accom- 
panied by  the  brother  wanted  and  ar- 
rived at  the  Lion  House  at  a  quarter 
to  S  o'clock  in  the  morning.  Sister  Eliza 
lived  one  month  and  four  days  after 
that.  Sister  Roundy  is  still  vigorous 
in  mind  and  body,  and  her  highest  am- 
bition is  to  spend  the  remainder  of  her 
days  on  the  earth  in  promoting  the  v.el- 
fare  of  Zion  and  her  people. 

HAKES,  Mabel  Ann  Morse,  Stake 
president  of  Relief  Societies  in  the 
Maricopa  Stake,  is  the  daughter  of 
Justus  Morse  and  Elizabeth  Towne,  and 
was  born  at  Goodhope,  McDonough 
county.  111.,  April  10,  1840.  Her  parents 
were  members  of  the  Church  prior  to 
her  birth,  and  in  her  early  childhood 
she  passed  through  many  of  the  perse- 
cutions of  the  Saints  in  those  days.  In 
184.5  her  mother  died,  leaving  Mabel  a 
inere  child.  She  crossed  the  plains  in 
1850,  in  a  company  led  by  Apostles  Ly- 
man and  Ricks,  spending  the  winter  in 
Gi-eat  Salt  Lake  valley.  She  continued 
on  to  California  in  1851,  where  she  was 
baptized  Jan.  1,  1852,  by  Wm.  J.  Cox, 
and  where  she  remained  till  1857,  when 
&he  returned  to  Utah.  March  29.  1857. 
she  was  married  to  Pres.  Collins  R. 
Hakes,  Chas.  C.  Rich  performing  the 
cei-emony.       With    her     husband      she 


812 


LATTER-DAY    SAINT 


moved  to  Arizona  in  1883,  locating-  at 
what  is  now  known  as  Mesa  city,  Mari- 
copa county,  where  she  continues  to 
reside.  In  the  fall  of  1883  the  plague 
of  smallpox  broke  out  in  Mesa  and  a 
number  of  people  died  with  that  dread 
disease,  among  whom  were  a  number  of 
Sister  Hakes'  relatives.  Sister  Hakes 
has  led  an  active  life  in  the  Church, 
having  always  taken  an  especial  inter- 
est in  Relief  Society  w-ork.  Soon  after 
her  return  to  Utah  from  California  she 
was  called  to  act  as  a  counselor  in  the 
Relief  Society  at  Kanosh,  Millard  coun- 
ty.      In   1885  she  wa's  called  to  preside 


over  the  Mesa  Ward  Relief  Society. 
This  position  she  held  till  about  1890, 
when  she  was  made  a  counselor  in  the 
Stake  organization,  and  about  two 
years  later  she  was  called  to  the  posi- 
tion of  president  of  the  Relief  Societies 
in  Maricopa  Stake,  in  which  capacity 
she  is  at  present  diligently  laboring. 
Sister  Hakes  writes:  "I  have  a  fami- 
ly of  twelve  children,  six  of  whom  have 
passed  to  the  great  beyond,  but  I  know 
that  both  my  dead  and  living  children 
were  and  are  faithful  workers  in  the 
kingdom  of  God,  for  which  I  am  truly 
grateful.  I  have  31  grandchildren  and 
six  g^reat-grandchildren." 

ASPER,  William,  first  counselor  in 
the  presidency  of  the  High  Priests' 
quorum  of  the  Salt  Lake  Stake  of  Zion, 
is  the  son  of  George  Asper  and  Salome 
Firestone  and  was  born  April  15,  1836,  at 
Newville,  Cumberland  county,  Penn.  He 
was  baptized  May  31,  1861,  having  heard 


the  gospel  about  one  year  previous. 
Soon  afterwards  he  emigrated  to  Zion, 
arriving  in  Salt  Lake  City  Sept.  12,  1861. 
Bro.  Asper  located  in  Salt  Lake  City, 
where  he  has  continued  to  reside  ever 
since.       He   was   ordained  an   Elder   in 


18G1  and  later  a  Seventy  and  became  a 
member  of  the  8th  quorum  of  Seventy. 
In  1871  he  was  ordained  a  High  Priest 
and  set  apart  to  act  as  first  counselor 
to  Bishop  Alonzo  H.  Raleigh  of  the 
Nineteenth  Ward,  which  position  he 
held  till  1877,  when,  at  the  reorganiza- 
tion of  the  Ward,  he  was  chosen  as 
first  counselor  to  Bishop  Richard  V. 
Morris,  in  which  capacity  he  labored  till 
1881.  During  1881-1883  he  filled  a  mis- 
sion to  the  Southern  States,  where  he 
labored  principally  in  Virginia,  part 
of  the  time  as  president  of  a  confer- 
ence. In  February,  1900,  he  was  called 
to  his  present  position  as  first  counselor 
to  David  McKenzie,  in  the  presidency 
of  the  High  Priests  quorum  of  Salt 
Lake  Stake.  Elder  Asper  has  ahvays 
taken  an  active  interest  in  Sunday 
school  work,  and  w-as  for  a  number  of 
years  superintendent  of  the  Nineteenth 
Ward  Sabbath  school.  June  20,  1863,  he 
married  Ingra  Ahlston,  who  has  borne 
him  seven  children,  four  of  whom  are 
living.  He  married  Adelade  Adelia 
Wilcox  May  14,  1873,  and  Rebecca  Jane 
Noai,  April  23,  1879,  the  issue  of  which 
union  is  five  children,  all  of  whom  are 
living.  Elder  Asper  has  followed  con- 
tracting and  building'  very  successfully 
for  many  years  and  is  to-day  the  senior 
member  of  the  firm  of  Asper,  Noall  and 


BIOGRAPHICAL    ENCYCLOPEDIA. 


813 


Co.  Bro.  Asper  is  a  man  of  strong 
and  marked  character,  and  is  a  hard 
and  earnest  worker  in  everything-  he 
undertakes  to  do;  he  is  entirely  void  of 
all  ostentation  and  unnecessary  show. 

RICHARDS,     Henry     Phinehas,    a 

member  of  the  High  Council  of  the  Salt 
Lake  Stake,  is  a  son  of  Phinehas  Rich- 
ards and  Wealthy  Dewey,  and  was  born 
at  Richmond,  Berkshire  county,  Massa- 
chusetts, Nov.  30,  1831.  He  was  bap- 
tized by  his  father  when  about  eight 
years  old.  In  the  fall  of  1843  he  emi- 
.a:rated  with  his  father's  family  to  Nau- 
voo.  111.,  and  although  quite  young,  was 
ordained  an  Elder  and  identified  with 
the  Elders'  quorum.  He  received  his 
endowments  in  the  Nauvoo  Temple, 
Feb.    7,    1846,   just   before    the   exodus   of 


the  Saints,  and  left  Nauvoo  with  his 
parents  bound  for  the  Rocky  Mountains 
May  19,  1S46.  He  sojourned  for  a  short 
time  at  Winter  Quarters,  and  com- 
menced the  journey  across  the  plains 
July  3,  1848;  he  drove  an  ox-team  for 
Sister  Moss  (whose  husband  was  then 
on  a  mission)  and  had  the  charge  of 
two  teams  all  the  way,  standing  guard 
every  third  night  half  of  the  night;  ar- 
rived in  the  Great  Salt  Lake  valley  Oct. 
19th,  feeling  truly  thankful  that  he  had 
reached  the  place  of  his  destination,  as 
the  labors,  toils  and  fatigues  of  the 
journey  seemed  more  than  could  havb 
been  endured  much  longer  b^'  one  of 
his  years  and  not  of  robust  health.  For 
a  number  of  years  he  contributed  to  the 


support  of  his  parents;  he  also  served 
as  messenger  in  the  House  of  Repre- 
sentatives of  the  Provisional  Govern- 
ment of  the  State  of  Deseret  during  its 
two  first  sessions.  Dec.  30,  1852,  he  was 
united  in  marriage  by  Pres.  Willard 
Richards  to  Miss  Margaret  Minerva 
Kmpey,  who  has  since  borne  him  eight 
children.  April  17,  1854,  he  was  ordained 
a  Seventy  under  the  hands  of  Pres.  Jo- 
seph Young,  sen.,  and  became  a  mem- 
ber of  the  8th  quorum.  May  4,  1854,  he 
started  in  company  with  some  eighteen 
other  Elders  on  a  mission  to  the 
Hawaiian  Islands.  There  he  was  pros- 
pered in  obtaining  a  thorough  knowl- 
edge of  the  language  of  the  natives  and 
labored  successfully  on  the  islands  of 
Hawaii,  Maui,  Molokai,  Lanai,  Oahu 
and  Kauai.  During  his  absence  on  this 
misison,  which  was  of  three  and  a  half 
years'  duration,  his  eldest  child  (a 
daughter)  was  born  June  11,  1854;  con- 
r.equently  she  Avas  nearly  three  and  a 
half  years  old  before  he  had  the  privi- 
lege of  seeing  her.  In  the  spring  of 
1858,  upon  the  approach  of  Johnston's 
army,  he  moved  south  with  the  body 
of  the  Church,  and  located  in  Provo, 
where  his  family  remained  until  word 
was  given  for  all  who  desired  to  do  so 
to  return  to  their  former  homes.  July 
13,  1866,  he  was  duly  commissioned  by 
Gov.  Charles  Durkee  as  1st  aid-de-camp 
on  the  staff  of  the  commander  of  the 
2nd  brigade  of  the  1st  division  of  the 
Utah  militia,  with  the  rank  of  colonel 
of  infantry.  Sept.  11,  1869,  he  was  or- 
dained one  of  the  presidents  of  the  8th 
quorum  of  Seventy-,  which  position  he 
honorably  filled  until  May  9,  1873. 
when  he  was  ordained  a  High  Priest 
and  set  apart  to  act  as  a  High  Coun- 
cilor, under  the  hands  of  Elder  Joseph 
F.  Smith  and  the  presidency  of  the 
Stake.  Dec.  27,  1876,  having  been  called 
at  the  previously  held  semi-annual  con- 
ference, he  started  on  his  second  mis- 
sion to  the  Hawaiian  Islands.  At  San 
Francisco  he  took  passage  on  board  the 
steamship  "City  of  New  York"  and  ar- 
rived at  Honolulu  Jan.  12,  1877.  He 
laboi'ed  on  all  the  principal  islands  of 
the  group,  and  met  many  friends  with 
whom  he  had  formed  an  acquaintance 
over  a  quarter  of  a  century  before.  He 
had  several  very  pleasant  interviews 
with  his  majesty.  King  Kalakaua. 
and  presnted  the  Queen  Kapiolani 
with  an  elegantly-bound  volume  of  the 
Rook  of  Mormon,  published  in  her  own 


814 


LATTER-DAY    SAINT 


language.  He  also  traveled  a  short 
time  with  her  majesty  the  queen  upon 
the  island  of  Hawaii,  ate  at  her  table 
and  assisted  her  on  different  occasions 
in  organizing  her  Hoola  Hooula  La- 
hui.  an  organization  similar  to  the  Re- 
lief Societies  among  the  Latter-day 
Saints.  While  remaining  a  short  time 
at  Laie,  the  native  assessor  and  collec- 
tor of  the  district  assessed  a  personal 
tax  against  Elder  Richards  of  $5,  as  he 
had  usually  done  to  other  Elders,  al- 
though the  law  exempted  Christian 
ministers  of  all  denominations,  who  are 
regularly  engaged  in  their  vocation, 
from  the  personal  tax.  He  demurred 
to  pay  the  tax  on  the  above  grounds, 
and  was  consequently  arrested  and 
brought  before  the  native  judge  of  the 
district,  who  decided  that  he  would 
have  to  pay  the  tax,  as  lie  was  not  a 
Christian  minister.  An  appeal  was 
taken,  and  the  case  heard  before  one 
of  the  judges  of  the  Supreme  Court 
of  the  kingdom,  the  attorney-general  of 
the  Crown  prosecuting.  The  decision 
of  the  lower  court  was  reversed  and  the 
case  decided  in  Elder  Richards'  favor, 
whereby  the  "Mormon"  Elders  were 
placed  on  an  equal  footing  with  min- 
isters of  other  denominations.  (See 
"Deseret  Evening  News"  of  Dec.  17, 
1879.)  Elder  Richards  also  had  several 
interviews  with  his  excellency  J.  Mott 
Smith,  minister  of  the  interior,  and  was 
successful  in  allaying  much  prejudice 
on  the  marriage  question,  and  of  pro- 
curing a  license  to  solemnize  marriages 
throughout  the  kingdom,  which  privi- 
lege had  not  been  granted  to  the  Lat- 
ter-day Saint  Elders  up  to  that  time. 
This  mission  was  of  about  two  and  a 
half  years'  duration,  and  when  he  re- 
turned home  he  brought  four  natives 
of  the  Hawaiian  Islands  with  him.  June 
5,  1S81,  he  was  appointed  superintendent 
of  the  Fourteenth  Ward  Sunday  school, 
which  position  he  occupied  for  many 
years.  Previous  to  this  he  had  filled 
the  position  of  assistant  superintendent 
and  acted  as  teacher  almost  from  the 
time  the  Sunday  schools  were  first  or- 
ganized in  Salt  Lake  City.  For  about 
thirty-five  years  he  was  engaged  in 
mercantile  pursuits,  having  labored  in 
two  or  three  of  the  leading  mercantile 
houses  of  Salt  Lake  City,  but  the  great- 
er r>ortion  of  the  time  with  Z.  C.  M.  I. 
Since  Oct.  7,  1895,  he  has  filled  the  re- 
sponsible position  of  president  of  the 
losepa  Agiicultural  and  Stock  Compa- 


ny (or  the  Hawaiian  colony  in  Skull 
valley).  In  1898-1899  he  acted  as  Oil 
and  Food  Inspector  of  Salt  Lake  City. 
Elder  Richards  is  still  hearty  and 
strong  physically,  and  is  an  active  El- 
der in  the  Church.  He  resides  in  the 
Eighteenth  Ward,  Salt  Lake  City. 

AVIDEKBOKG,  Carl,  a  prominent 
Elder  in  the  Church,  was  born  May  11, 
1814,  in  Gothenburg,  Sweden:  baptized 
by  Svend  Larsen  March  4,  1853,  in  Nor- 
way; labored  a  short  time  as  a  mis- 
sionary in  Norway  and  after  that  for 
several  years  as  translator  and  writer 
at  the  mission  office  in  Copenhagen. 
Denmark;    when    the   American    Elders 


^       jnuro'0^^ 


were  called  home  in  1858,  on  acount  of 
the  Utah  war.  Elder  Widerborg  was 
called  to  preside  over  the  Scandinavian 
Mission;  this  presidency  was  continued 
till  1860,  when  he  emigrated  to  Utah, 
and  located  in  Ogden,  Weber  county. 
In  1864-68  he  filled  a  mission  to  Scandi- 
navia, again  presiding  over  the  mission. 
Soon  after  his  return  he  took  suddenly 
sick  and  died  March  12,  1869,  in  Ogden. 
Elder  Widerborg  was  perhaps  the 
ablest  public  speaker  which  the  Scandi- 
navian mission  has  produced  up  to  the 
present  time. 

MliJKXt^UIST,  Ola  Xilsoii  a  Patri- 
arch in  the  Church,  was  born  Sept.  23, 
1825,  in  Ignaberga,  Malmohus  Ian,  Swe- 
den, baptized  by  William  Andersen,  or- 
dained to  the  Priesthood  and  called  in- 
to the  local  ministry,  in  which  he  la- 
bored about  four  and  a  half  years; 
emigrated  to  Utah  in  1857,  and  located 


BIOGRAPHICAL    ENCYCLOPEDIA. 


815 


in  Goshen.  Utah  county;  filled  a  mis- 
sion to  Scandinavia  in  1859-62,  being 
the  first  of  the  converts  in  Scandinavia 
who  returned  from  Zion  to  preach  in 
his  native  land;  he  labored  as  traveling 
Elder  in  the  mission  and  on  returning 
to  Utah  led  a  large  company  of  emi- 
grating Saints.  He  removed  to  Hy- 
runi.  Cache  county,  where  he  acted  as 


labored  till  April  27,  1900,  when  he 
was  ordained  a  Bishop  and  set  apart  to 
preside   over   that    Ward     by     Apostle 


Bishop  for  many  years;  filled  a  second 
mission  to  Europe  in  1876-78,  presiding 
over  the  Scandinavian  mission.  He  was 
ordained  a  Patriarch  by  Pres.  Brigham 
Young  June  22,  1873,  and  appointed  by 
the  First  Presidency  a  general  mission- 
ai-y  and  Patriarch  in  all  the  Stakes  of 
Zion,  in  1890. 

ANDERSON,  Anthon.  Bishop  of 
the  Second  ward,  Logan,  Cache  county, 
Utah,  was  born  at  Christiansand,  Nor- 
v/ay,  Dec.  2,  1851.  He  emigrated  with 
his  parents  to  Utah  in  186],  and  was 
baptized  Nov.  7th  of  that  year.  March 
21,  1870,  he  was  ordained  to  the  office 
of  an  Elder.  He  married  Mary  Hen- 
derson March  11,  1872,  and  was  ordained 
a  Seventy  and  set  apart  as  a  president 
in  the  64th  quorum  Jan.  7,  1884.  During 
1x85-87  he  filled  a  mission  to  Norway, 
whei-e  he  labored  mostly  in  the  Dram- 
inen  branch,  Christiania  conference.  At 
liome  Elder  Anderson  has  been  a  faith- 
ful Sunday  school  worker,  and  from 
1890  to  1898  he  served  as  superintendent 
of  the  Logan  Fifth  Ward  Sunday 
school.  He  was  ordained  a  High  Priest 
and  set  apart  as  second  counselor  in 
the  Bishopric  of  the  Second  Ward,  Lo- 
gan, Dec.  13,  1899,  in  which  capacity  he 


Francis  M.  Lyman.  Elder  Anderson  is 
still  laboring  in  this  responsible  calling. 
In  civil  life  he  has  held  a  number  of 
important  political  positions,  such  as  a 
city  councilman,  county  treasurer, 
mayor  of  Logan  city,  etc. 

ANDERSON,  Hans,  a  Patriarch  in 
the  Church,  was  a  Scandinavian  by 
birth,  became  a  convert  to  "Mormon- 
ism"  in  his  native  land  and  emigrated 


to  L^tah  at  an  early  day.  He  made  his 
home  in  Logan,  Cache  county,  where  he 
died  Nov.  5,  1891,  aged  82  years. 


81(5 


LATTER-DAY    SAINT 


PEHRSOX,  Krik  Johaii,  a  counselor 
in  the  Bishopric  of  the  Vernon  Ward, 
Tooele  county,  Utah,  was  born  Sept. 
21,  1834,  in  Orebro  Ian.  Sweden.  He 
was  baptized  into  the  Church  Sept.  2. 
1S55,  and  emigrated  to  Utah  in  1861,  and 
located  in  Vernon,  Tooele  county,  where 
he  has  resided  ever  since.  In  1869-70 
he  filled  a  successful  mission  to  Scan- 
dinavia,   where   he   labored   in   Sweden 


pony  express  between  Salt  Lake  City 
and  Flush  valley.  In  1877  he  located 
in  Bountiful,  Davis  county.  In  1867- 
f'9  he  filled  a  mission  to  England,  wher-i 


he  laboi-ed  first  as  a  traveling  Elder  in 
the  Liverpool  conjference,  and  later  a.-< 
president  of  the  Birmingham  confer- 
ence. Jan.  8,  1893,  he  was  ordained  a 
Hish  Priest  by  Abraham  H.  Cannon 
and  set  apart  to  act  as  Bishop  of  the 
South  Bountiful  Ward,  Davis  Stake  of 
Zion,  in  which  capacity  he  is  at  present 
laboring. 


most  of  the  time  as  president  of  the 
Stockholm  conference.  On  returning 
home  he  was  made  leader  of  a  company 
of  emigrating  Saints.  At  home  Elder 
Pehrson  has  labored  many  years  as  a 
member  of  the  Bishopric  of  Vernon 
Ward,  Tooele  Stake,  and  has  proven 
himself  to  be  a  diligent  and  faithful 
worker  in  the  Church. 

KGAX,  Richard  Kra.stus,  Bishop 
of  South  Bountiful,  Davis  county,  Utah, 
is  the  son  of  Howard  Egan  and  Tam- 
son  Parshley  and  was  born  March  29, 
1842,  at  Salem,  Mass.  He  was  with  his 
parents  in  Nauvoo,  111.,  and  went  with 
them  to  Winter  Quarters  after  the  ex- 
odus from  Nauvoo.  In  1848  they  emi- 
grated to  the  Valley  and  located  in 
Salt  Lake  City.  Richard  was  baptized 
by  N.  M.  Whipple,  March  5,  1857.  In 
1857  he  made  a  trip  to  California.  He 
was  one  of  tho.<=e  who  performed  guard 
duty  during  the  "inove"  south  in  1858. 
For  about  sixteen  months  he  rode  the 


MADSEX,  Christian  August,  Bish- 
op of  Gunnison  Ward,  Sanpete  count>'. 
was  born  July  23.  1822,  near  Copenha- 
gen, Denmark;  he  was  baptized  by  El- 
der Ola  N.  Liljenquist  April  16,  1854. 
After  being  ordained  to  the  Priesthood 
he  labored  as  a  local  missionai-y  in 
Sweden  and  Denmark  for  about  three 
years,  first  as  president  of  the  Stock- 
holm conference,  Sweden,  and  later  a,s 
pastor  of  the  Fyen,  Fredericia,  Aarhus 
and  Aalborg  conferences.  In  1858  he 
emigrated  to  Utah  and  located  in  Salt 
Lake  City.  Jan.  22,  1859,  he  was  or- 
dained to  the  office  of  a  Seventy.  Dur- 
ing 1860-62  he  filled  a  successful  mission 
to  Scandinavia,  where  he  labored  as 
pastor  over  the  Aalborg  and  Vendsyssei 
conferences,  and  returned  home  in 
charge  of  the  company  of  emigrants. 
After  his  return  he  settled  in  Gunnison 
Sanpete  county,  where  he  still  resides. 
For  a  number  of  years  he  served  as  a 
member  of  the  High  Council  in  Sanpet>- 
valley,    and    he    was    appointed    acting 


BIOGRAPHICAL    ENCYCLOPEDIA. 


817 


Bishop  of  Gunnison  May  13,  1S76,  which    and   ordained   to   the  Priesthood   in  his 


office  he  held  till  July  4,  1877,  when  he 
was  ordained  a  Bishoii  and  set  apart 
to    preside    over    paid    ^Vard.        He    was 


ordained  a  Patriarch  March  3,  1900.  El- 
der Madsen  has  filled  numerous  posi- 
tions in  a  civil  and  military  capacity 
He  is  a  man  of  superior  intelligence  and 
has  always  been  a  firm  and  faithful 
worker  in  the  Church. 

PRATT,  Moroni  Walker,  Bishop 
of  Fairview  Ward,  Oneida  county, 
Idaho,    was    bo!-n      in      Salt   Lake    Citv, 


Utah,  Oct.  10,  1853,  son  of  Apostle  Par- 
ley P.  Pratt  and  Ann  A.  Walker.  He 
was  baptized  when  about  ten  years  old, 

Vol.    I.    No.    52. 


youth.  He  was  one  of  the  first  settlers 
in  Meadowville,  Rich  county,  Utah, 
where  he  located  in  1869  and  where  he 
acted  as  a  counselor  to  Bishop  Joseph 
Kimball  about  ten  years.  As  a  High 
Priest  he  filled  a  mission  to  the  North- 
western States  in  1882-83,  and  in  1887 
he  changed  his  residence  to  Fairview, 
Oneida  county,  Idaho,  where  he  was 
called  to  preside  as  Bishop;  this  posi- 
tion he  still  occupies. 

FJELDSTKl),     AndreAv     Christian, 

Bishop  of  Centerfield,  Sanpete  county, 
Utah,  was  born  in  Tversted,  Mosbjerg 
parish,  Hjorring  amt,  Denmark,  Oct. 
11,  IS.J.5.  In  1862  he  emigrated  to  Utah 
with  his  parents,  crossing  the  plains  in 


Chr.  A.  Madsen's  company.  The  fami- 
ly located  in  Gunnison,  Sanpete  county, 
in  1863.  Andrew  C.  took  an  active  part 
in  the  Indian  w'ar  in  1865-68,  and  was 
present  when  the  treaty  of  peace  was 
concluded  with  Chief  Blackhawk.  He 
filled  a  mision  to  Denmark  in  1895-97, 
where  he  labored  first  as  president  of 
the  Hjorring  branch  and  later  as  presi- 
dent of  the  Aalborg  conference.  At 
home  he  was  for  years  an  ardent  Sun- 
day school  worker,  and  when  the  Cen- 
terfield Ward  was  organized  Aug.  29, 
1897,  he  was  chosen  to  preside  over  the 
same  as  Bishop,  which  position  he  still 
holds. 

CHRISTIANSEN,  Parley,  Bishop  of 
Mayfield,  Sanpete  county,  is  the  son  of 
Niels  C.and  Dorthea  C.Christiansen, and 

Dec.    28,     1901. 


818 


LATTER-DAY    SAINT 


was  born  Dec.  7,  1857,  in  Salt  Lake  City, 
Utah.  He  removed  with  his  parents 
to  Ephraim,  Sanpete  county,  in  1858, 
where  he  was  baptized  Oct.  27,  1867.  In 
1876  he  went  to  Arizona  as  a  missionary 
settler.  After  returning  to  Utah  he 
was   ordained   an   Elder  April   21,    1881, 


came  a  president  of  the  48th  quorum  of 
Seventy.  In  1871-73  he  filled  a  mission 
to  Scandinavia,  where  he  labored  in 
Denmark  and  Norway,  most  of  the  time 
as  president  of  the  Christiania  confer- 
ence. He  filled  another  mission  to 
Scandinavia  in  1887-89,  during  which  he 
labored  in  the  Aalborg  and  Copenhagen 
conferences,  Denmark,  presiding  over 
the  latter  confei-ence.  At  home  he  al- 
ways took  an  active  part  in  Church  af- 
fairs. He  served  as  tithing  clerk  in 
Manti  for  many  ytars,  and  filled  many 
other  positions  of  responsibility  and 
trust  in  the  community.  From  Febru- 
ary to  July,  1890,  he  served  a  term  in 


and  married  Dorthea  C.  Jensen.  He 
served  the  people  of  Ephraim  as  police- 
man, constable  and  city  marshal  for 
several  years.  Jan.  2,  1885,  he  was 
ordained  a  Seventy  by  John  F.  F.  Do- 
rius,  and  during  1887-88  he  labored  as  a 
missionary  in  the  Northwestern  States. 
In  1890  he  moved  with  his  family  to 
Mayfield,  as  he  had  been  ordained  a 
Bishop  May  18,  1890,  by  Apostle  Heber 
J.  Grant  and  called  to  preside  over  the 
Mayfield  Ward.  Elder  Christiansen 
served  as  a  member  of  the  State  con- 
stitutional convention  in  1895,  and  was 
a  member  of  the  Utah  legislature  in 
1899. 

WKJBV'K.Jen.';  Christian  Aiulcrson, 

a  prominent  Elder  in  the  Church,  was 
born  Sept.  26,  1824.  at  Vejby,  Hjorring 
amt,  Denmark.  He  was  baptized  into 
the  Church  April  16,  1854,  and  was  soon 
afterward  ordained  to  the  Priesthood, 
after  which  he  labored  continuously  as 
a  missionary  in  the  Vendsyssel  con- 
ference for  seven  years,  the  last  three 
years  as  its  president.  He  married  Se- 
cilie  Marie  Pederson  April  13,  1860,  and 
emigrated  to  Utah  in  1862.  He  was 
ordained  to  the  ofiice  of  a  Seventy  Nov. 
16,  1862,  and  set  apart  as  a  president 
in  the  COth  fiunium:   subsequently  he  be- 


ihe  Utah  penitentiary  for  having  mar- 
ried a  second  wife,  and  died  as  the  re- 
.sult  of  hardships  and  exposure  suffered 
during  his  imprisonmnt,  Feb.  25,  1891, 
at  his  home  in  Manti,  Sanpete  county, 
Utah.  Elder  Weibye  was  one  of  the 
best  record  keepers  in  the  Church,  and 
his  private  journals,  which  are  very  full 
find  a.ccurate,  are  now  on  file  at  the 
Uistorian's  Ofiice. 

JKXSKX,  Jens  !ver,  Bishop  of  El- 
.'^inore  Ward,  Sevier  county,  is  the  son 
of  Thomas  C.  Jensen  and  Karen  Marie 
Ivi^-rsen.  and  was  born  in  Jerslev,  Hjor- 
ring amt,  Denmark,  Aug.  8,  1846.  He 
was  baptized  June  5,  1861.  by  Elder 
Niels  Moitensen,  and  ordained  an  Elder 
April  24,  1864.  In  1865  his  parents, 
having  acepted  the  gospel,  emigrated 
to  America,  taking  their  young  children 


BIOGRAPHICAL    ENCYCLOPEDIA. 


819 


with  them.  Jens  remained  in  Den- 
mark, where  he  labored  as  a  mission- 
ary in  the  Vendsyssel  conference  till 
June,  1867,  when  he  emigrated  to  Utah. 


He  married  Ing-er  Jensen,  a  young  lady 
whom  he  had  baptized  into  the  Church, 
prior  to  leaving  for  America.  They 
crossed  the  plains  with  ox-teams  and 
arrived  in  Salt  Lake  City  Oct.  5,  1867. 
Elder  Jensen  located  in  Ephraim,  San- 
pete county,  wliere  he  lived  for  a  num- 
ber of  years  and  then  moved  to  Rich- 
field, Sevier  county.  Later,  he  became 
one  of  the  first  settlers  of  Elsinor-e.  In 
1880-82  he  filled  a  mission  to  Denmark, 
where  he  labored  in  the  Aarhus  confer- 
ence, part  of  the  time  as  president  of 
the  same.  Elder  Jensen  has  always  been 
an  active  worker  in  the  Church,  and 
since  November,  1887,  he  has  presided 
as  Bi.shop  over  the  Elsinore  Ward,  of 
Sevier  Stake  of  Zion. 

SOREXSEX,  John  Peter,  a  promi- 
nent Elder  of  the  Twenty-first  Ward, 
Salt  Lake  City,  Utah,  is  the  son  of 
Peter  Emil  Sorensen  and  Ane  Marie 
Jepsen,  and  was  born  Oct.  17,  1837,  at 
Vestermark  Kjar,  near  Sonderborg',  on 
the  island  of  Als,  Denmark  (now  a  part 
of  Germany).  In  his  youth  he  learned 
the  trade  of  a  ship  carpenter,  and  at 
the  age  of  nineteen  he  went  to  sea  as 
such.  On  his  numerous  voyages  he 
visited  Norway,  Sweden,  Iceland,  Eng- 
land, Italy,  Russia,  Prussia,  Finland, 
Australia,  New  Zealand,  etc.  On  Christ- 


mas eve,  1859,  he  was  shipwrecked  in 
the  English  channel,  but  managed  to 
reach  Margate,  a  small  English  sea- 
port. In  Australia,  where  he  arrived 
in  1860,  he  engaged  in  gold  mining,  ship- 
building ,and  in  teaching  navigation; 
there,  also.he  obtained  a  fair  knowledge 
of  the  English  language.  During  the 
great  gold  excitement  in  New  Zealand, 
in  1861,  he  went  to  that  country,  where 
he  remained  about  nine  years,  following 
mining,  boat  building,  contracting, 
merchandising,  etc.  He  also  spent 
much  of  his  time  prospecting  for  gold, 
with  considerable  success.  In  1870  he 
started  for  Europe  via  America,  but  on 
reaching  the  Hawaiian  Islands  he  re- 
mained at  Honolulu  about  a  year, where 
he  experienced  a  severe  earthquake.  He 
then  went  to  California,  whence  he 
started  overland  for  Europe,  but  on 
reaching  Utah  he  decided  to  remain 
there.  Consequently  he  located  in  Salt 
Lake  City,  where  he  engaged  in  busi- 
ness and  became  part  proprietor  of  the 
Valley  House.  At  first  he  only  paid 
slight   attention    tQ      religious   matters. 


but  became  a  prominent  member  of  the 
Freemasons,  the  Odd  Fellows  and  the 
Knights  of  Pythias..  Up  to  this  time 
he  had  been  a  man  of  the  world  and 
was  considered  by  his  companions  a 
"real  good  fellow."  But  some  time 
during  the  year  1878  he  had  a  dream, 
in  which  he  saw  one  of  his  children 
destroyed.      The  same  night  he  passed 


820 


LATTER-DAY    SAINT 


into  a  trance,  during  which  his  spirit  fed  for  three  weeks  by  an  infidel.  He 
left  the  body,  and  he  was  privileged  to  also  held  a  prolonged  discussion  with 
behold  many'  marvelous  things,  partic-     a  Lutheran  priest.      Meanwhile  he  jour- 

ularly  the  punishment  of  the  wicked. 
Though  his  children  were  all  well  at  the 

time,  36  hours  later  his  eldest  child  was 

a  corpse,   in   fulfilment  of     his  dream. 

For  three  months  after  this  event  he 

had  open  visions  and  spiritual  manifes- 
tations almost     daily.       He     consulted 

Catholic  priests  and  others,  and  fasted 

and  prayed  for  relief;   but  none  came, 

and  no  one  seemed  to  understand  him, 

except  a  few  old  members  of  the  "Mor- 
mon" Church.  After  visiting  and  pray- 
ing in  the  different  sectarian  churches, 

he  at  length  attended  services  in     the 

14th  Ward   meeting   house,   where     his 

spiritual   hearing   was   opened,    and   he 

heard   the  angels  of  God  in  voices     of 

praise  and  rejoicing,   when   he  entered 

the  hall.       Soon   afterwards,    agreeable 

to  his  request,  he  was  baptized  by  Wm. 

W.  Taylor,  April  1,  1S79.  In  consequence 

of  his  joining  the  Church,  he  was  ex- 
pelled   from     the     secret    societies      to 

which   he  had   belonged.       Previous   to 

this  he   (on  Dec.  24.  1872)   had  married 

Eva  Gyllenskog,   a   "Mormon"    girl,   by 

whom  he  has  had  nine  children.  Short- 
ly  after  his   baptism   he   was   ordained 

an  Elder  and  received  his  endowments. 

He  was  ordained  a  Seventy  by  Apostle 

Orson  Pratt  Oct.   9,   1879,  and  a  month 

later  he  left  home  for  a  mission  to  New 
Zealand.     On  arriving  in  Auckland,  he 
was  very  unkindly  received  by  the  in- 
habitants.       One    of      his      missionary 
companions  took  sick  and  went  further 
south;  and  another  became  discouraged 
and  returned  to  Utah,  which  left  Bro. 
Sorensen  a  lone  missionary  in  that  far- 
off  land,  with  four  new  converts,  in  the 
midst  of  a  very  hostile  community.  He 
was   mobbed    repeatedly     and   suffered 
personal     violence    at    different    times. 
He  was,  however,  successful  in  bringing 
a  number  of     honest      souls     into     the 
Church     and       raised     up  a  branch  at 
Auckland.       Subsequently    he    was    in- 
spired  to  go  to  Napier,   where  he  was 
also  subjected  to  personal  violence,but 
succeeded  in  baptizing  a  number  of  peo- 
ple,   and    organizing    branches     of    the 
Church    at     Napier     and      Norsewood. 
While    traveling    through    the    country 
on   that  trip,   with  a  local   Elder   (Jens 
Jensen)  as  a  companion,  he  was  some- 
times obliged  to  sleep  in  stables,  sheds, 
and  barns,  and  on  one  occasion  he  was 


neyed  on     to     Palin'^rston    North  with 
Bro.  John  S.  Ferris,  an  Elder  just    ar- 
rived   from    Utah.        They     were    both 
mobbed  and  ill  treated.      Continuing  his 
labors.  Elder  Sorensen  made  an  extend- 
ed   tour    about    the    island,    preaching 
and  baptizing  wherever  he  had  the  op- 
portunity.      He  also  visited  the  Maori 
prophet   and   his   people     at   Parihake. 
Being  honorably  released  from  his  mis- 
sion, he  left  for  Utah  July  19.  1881,  and 
after  his  arrival  home  he   went   to  St. 
George,   where   he   performed   work  for 
his   deoarted   relatives.       On   returning 
to   Salt   Lake    City   he   engaged    in    the 
furniture  business,   but  in   1883  he  lost 
his  business  in  the  Council  House  fire. 
Yielding  obedience   to   the   principle   of 
plural  marriage,  he  took  Olivia  Monson 
to  wife  in  1882  and  married  Alma  Sa- 
muelson  in  1883.      The  former  has  borne 
him  two  and  the  latter  six  children.  In 
1S86  he  was  arrested  and  tried  on     the 
charge  of  polygamy,  but  was  acquitted 
through    lack    of   evidence.        May     12, 
1887,    he   left  for   a   mission   to   Scandi- 
navia.     After  being  expelled  from  Als, 
his  native  island,  he  was  hunted  like  a 
criminal   for   the  gospel's  sake,   on   the 
island  of  Fyen,   but  he  was  successful 
in  his  missionary  labor  and  also  gath- 
ered much  valuable  genealogy.    In  1889 
he  returned  home,   and  opened  a  farm 
in  West  Jordan.  Salt  Lake  county,  and 
built   a  home   in  the  21st     Ward,   Salt 
Lake   City,   where  he   still   resides.    He 
was    ordained    a    High    Priest    Feb.    27, 
1893,  by  AVm.  C.  Dunbar.       In  civil  life 
he  has  held  a  number  of  positions,  such 
as  appraiser  of  school   lands,   commis- 
sioner to  locate     a     State     experiment 
farm    in    southern     Utah,     and   county 
fruit  tree  inspector  for  Salt  Lake  coun- 
ty.      In  all  of  these  positions  he  made 
a  good   record   as   a  hard   and   earnest 
w'orker.        He    conducted    an    extensive 
furniture  business  and  made  good  pro- 
gress   financially,    until    1894,      when    a 
combination    of      circumstances,      over 
which  he  had  no  control,  brought  him 
reverses.       Elder    Sorensen    is    univer- 
sally known  as     a    zealous  Latter-day 
Saint,  persevering  in  whatever  he  un- 
dertakes to  do.      At  present  he  is  en- 
ergetically engaged  in  eoliciting  means 
for  the  erection  of  the  mission  house  in 
Copenhagen,  Denmark. 


BIOGRAPHICAL,  ENCYCLOPEDIA. 


821 


DAVID  CAMERON. 

Born  Dec.  24,  1838. 
(See  sketch,  p.  542.) 


MAHONRI  M.  STEELE. 

(See  sketch,  p.  543,  and  instead  of  the 
word  "subpoenaed,"  in  the  28th  line  of 
second   column,   read   "so  persecuted.") 


RICHARD    FRY. 
(See  sketch,  p.  474.) 


REUBEN  G.  MILLER. 
(Se«  sketch,  p.  524.) 


822  LATTER-DAY    SAINT    BIOGRAPHICAL     ENCYCLOPEDIA. 


GEORGE  C.  NAEGLE. 
See  sketch,  p.  562.) 


ANDREW  KNUDSEN. 

(See  sketch,  p.  492.) 


THOMAS    ATKIN,    JUN. 
(See  sketch,  p.  546.) 


HOMER    DUNCAN. 
(See  sketch,  p.  622.) 


INDEX. 


*  Denotes  that  Sketch  is  Accompanied  by  Portrait. 


Adams,  Charles,  534. 
Aldrich,   Hazen,   186. 
Alexander,  Johrij  549. 
Algrer,  Samuel  N.,  798. 
Allen,  Andrew  A.,  433. 
Allen,  James,  508. 
Allen,   Rufus  C,   535. 
Allen,  William  C,  571. 
Allred,  Joseph  G.,  560. 
Alston,  Thomas,  789. 
Andersen,  Christine  B.,  507 
Andersen,    Mons,    506. 
Anderson,    Anton,    815. 
Anderson,   Charles  L.,   544. 
Anderson,  Charles  P..  554. 
Anderson,  Christian.  529. 
Anderson,  Edward  H.,  715. 
Anderson,  Hans,  815. 
Anderson,  James  H.,  778. 
Anderson,  John  H.,  767. 
Ashton,  Edward  T.,  685. 
Asper,  William,  812. 
Atkin,  Thos.,  jun.,  546,  822. 
Atwood,  Millen,  633. 
Austin,  Edwin  N.,  452. 
Austin,   Philo  W.,   446. 
Aveson,  Robert,  679. 

B. 

Babbitt.  Almon  \V.,  284. 
Ball,  Elihu  K.,  550. 
Ballantyne.  Richard,  703. 
Ballard,  Henrv.  419. 

Henry  W..  426. 

Melvin   Jos.,    410. 

*  Barnes,  Arthur  F...  650. 

*  Barnes,  John  R.,  464. 

*  Barton,    Isaac,    676. 

*  Barton,    Peter.    463. 

*  Barton,  William  R.,  667. 

*  Bastian,  Gearsen  R..  344. 
Bateman,  Edward  A.,  592. 
Bateman,  Sarnuel,  590. 
Baxter.    John  M.,   331. 
Beal.   Henry,   521. 

*  Beatie,  "U'^alter  J.,  649. 

*  Bebee,  Leroy  'W.,  537. 

*  Beck,  John,  688. 

*  Beckstead,   Gordon   S.,   576. 
Beckstead.    Henry  B.,   593. 

*  Beesley.  Ebenezer,  739. 

*  Bennion,  Heber,  569. 
Bennion  Israel,  547. 
Bennion.  Samuel  R.,  478. 

*  Benson,   Ezra  T.,   99. 

*  Benson.  Jens  Peter,  405. 
Bent,   Samuel,  367. 


Ballard, 
Ballard, 


Berg,  Henry  W.,  796. 
Berg-,  Ole  H.,  795. 
Bernhisel,  John  M..  723. 
Bigler,  Jacob  G..  515. 
Billings,  Titus,  242. 
Bills,  George  W.,   570. 
Bills,  Gordon  S..  5S3. 
Binder,  William  L.  S.,  640. 
Blackburn,   Elias  H.,   491. 
Blake,  Thomas.  584. 
Blake,  William,  476. 
Blood,  William,  465. 
Booth,  John  E.,  494. 
Booth,  Josephine  D.,  503. 
Boynton,  John  F.,  91. 
Bramwell,   Franklin   S.,  771. 
Brandlev,  Theodore,  387. 
Brimhall,  Geo.  H.,  714. 
Brimley,    Richard,   606. 
Brown,  John,  511. 
Brown,  William,  466. 
Bryner,  Casper,  535. 
Buckwalter,  Calvin  S.,  603. 
Buckwalter.  Henry  S.,  604. 
Budge.  William.  451. 
Bull,   Joseph,   653. 
Burgon,  Willard  C,  588. 
Burton,  Charles  S.,  671. 
Burton,  Robert  T.,  238. 
Burton,  William  W..  349. 
Bushman,  John,   553. 
Bushman,  Martin  B.,  507. 
Butler,  Alva,   578. 
Butterfield,  Josiah,  192. 
Butterfield,  Samuel,  583. 
Butterfield.  Thomas,  582. 
Butterfield,  Thomas,  jun.,  5 


Caine.  John  T..  726. 
Calder,  David  6..  773. 
Canister,  Thos.,  527. 
Canister,  Thos.  C,  528. 
Cameron.  David.  542,  821. 
Campbell,  Jonathan,  398. 
Cannon,  Abraham  H.,  167. 
Cannoii,  Angus  M.,  292. 
Cannon,  Carl  John.  4.50. 
Cannon,   Geo.   Mousley,   566. 
Cannon,  Geo.  Q..  42. 
Cannon,   Jno.   M.,   790. 
Cannon,  John  Q..  243. 
Cannon,    Lewis    M..    687. 
Card.    Charles    O.,    296. 
Cardon,    Joseph    E.,    413. 
Cardon,  Louis  S.,  420. 
Careless,  George  E.  P.,  738. 
Carrington,  Albert,  126. 
Chipman,  Washburn,  505. 


82. 


824 


INDEX. 


C'hri.?tensen,  Carl  C.  A..  378. 
Christensen,  David  H..  788. 
Christensen,  Geoige,  370. 
Christensen,  James  M.,  686. 
Christiansen,  Hans  C.  396. 
Christiansen,  Parley.  817. 
<-Mapp,  Benjamin  L.,  195. 
Clark,  John,  775. 
Clark,  John  H.,  444. 
Clark,  John  \V.,  .-)4S. 
Clark,  Thos.  Hf>nry,  .^47. 
Clawson,   Hiram   r?.,   629. 
Clawson,   Rudger,   174. 
Clayton,  William,  717. 
riegg-,  Thomas,  476. 
Clements^  Albert  N..  448. 
('luff,  Benjamin,  475. 
(MufT.  Harvey  H.,  371. 
(Muff,  Henrv,  477. 
Cluff.  William  "W.,  240. 
Coleman,  Geo.,  526. 
Coltrin,  Zebedee.  190. 
Comer,  Geo.,  794. 
Coombs,    Isaiah    M..    495. 
Corrill,  John,  241. 
Cowdeiv,  Oliver.  240 
Cowley,   Matthias  F..  168. 
Crane,  James,  579. 
Crane,  James  S..  5S0. 
Crawford,  John,  391. 
Crockett,  Alvin,  41S. 
Crosby,  Jesse  W.,  jun.,  541. 
Crow.  Chas.  H.,  621. 
Crowther.  James  F.,  553. 
Crump,  William  C,  580. 
Crump,  William  C,  jun.,  569. 
Cummings,  Horace  H.,  713. 
Cummings,    James   D.,    568. 


*  Dahl,  Alexander,  sen..  578. 

*  Daines,   Robert.  426. 

*  Dalton,  John  C.  552. 
Dame,  Wm.  H.,  532. 
Daniels,  James  F.,   498. 
Dansie,  Alfred  .7..  570. 
Davis,    Geo.,    399. 
Davis,  Geo.  W.,  436. 

*  Davis,  Nathan,  647. 

*  Davis,  Nofear.  555. 

*  Daynes,  Joseph  .!.,  746. 
De   St.   Jeor.   Francis.   548. 

■■  Dimond.    Robert  E..  592. 

Dimond,  Wm.  S..  590. 
'■■'  Done,  Willard.  716. 

*  DufRn,  .Tames  G..  527. 

•=  Duncan  Homer.  622.  822. 

*  Dunn,  Charles  O..  429. 

F. 

*  Fcker.sley.    Joseph,    .?46. 
■■'  Epan.  Richard   F..  816. 

■'  Eggertsen.  Simon  P..  jun.,  49.^ 

'■■  Ek.  Carl  A..  68G. 

'■  Eld  red ge.   Alma.   341. 

*  Eldredge,  Bt-n.  R.,  792. 

*  p:idredge.   Horace  S..  196. 

*  Eilwoood.  Robert.  576. 
■'  Emery.   Geo.   R..  644. 

Engberg.  Andreas,  514. 

*  Ericksnn,  Einar.   j25. 
Eiickson.  John.  588. 

"  Ewell.  Francis  M..  525. 

*  Eyring.   Henry.   311. 


Farmer,  Erastus  G.,  447. 
Farnsworth,   Moses   F..   522. 
Farr,    Lorin,    749. 
Farr,  Willard,  555. 
Farrell,  George  L.,  765. 
Felt,  David  P.    689. 
Fernstrom,   Frans  S..  684. 
Fisher,   AVilliam   F.,   447. 
Fitzgerald,  Jas.  W.  W.,  793. 
Fjeldsted,   Andrew  C,   817. 
Fjeldsted,  Christian  D.,  203. 
Fletcher,  Samuel,  471. 
Flygare,  Nils  C,  461. 
Foote,  David,  374. 
Foote,  Wai-ren,   375. 
Forsgren,  Peter  A.,  393. 
Foster,  James,  191. 
Fox,   Isaac  W.,   505. 
Fox,   Jesse  W.,   774. 
Frazier,  Marion,  4^-9. 
Freeman.  Elijah  N..  329. 
Fry.   Richard.  474.  821. 
Fullmer,  David,  289. 


G. 


'■■  Gaelte,  Andreas  O.,  586. 
Gallop,   William,   497. 
Gardner,   Henry,  797. 
Gates,  Jacob,  197. 
Gavlord,  John,  193. 

*  Ge'ddes,  Hugh  S.,  442. 

*  Geddes,  Josenh  S..  439. 

*  Geddes,  William,  462. 
Gee,  Salmon,  192. 

*  Georgeson  (Jorgensen),  Niels.  445. 

*  Gibbons.  Andrew  V..  554. 

*  GiblDons.  William   H..   328. 

*  Gibbs,  William  H.,   771. 
Gifford,  Freeborn  D.,  539. 
Gifford,   Oliver  D.,  538. 
Glazier,  John  W.,  541. 

*  Glines,  .Tames  H..  478. 

*  Goddard,    Geo.,    706. 

*  Goff,  Hyrum,   308. 

*  Goodliffe,  Arnold.  391. 
Gould,  John.  191. 

*  Gov.-ans.  Hugh  S.,  354. 

*  Grant,  Heber  J.,  147. 

*  Grant,  Jedediah  M..  56. 

*  Griffin.  William  H..  404. 

*  Griggs,  Thos.  C,  711. 
Grover,  Joel.  515. 

H. 

*  Haight.  Horton  D.,  302. 

*  Haight,  Bouisa  I>..  303. 

*  Hakes.  Collins.,  R..  5.59. 

*  Hakes,  Mabel  A.  M.,  811. 
Hale.  Alma  H.,  402. 

*  Hamilton.  James  C,  791. 
Hammond,   Francis  A.,  351. 

*  Hammond,  James  T.,  723. 

*  Hammond,  Milton  D.,  428. 

*  Hancock.  Bevi  W..  188. 

*  Hansen,  Hans  C,  442. 

*  Hansen,  Hans  M..  343. 

*  Hansen.  Jens  N..  406. 
Hansen.  John.  585. 
Hardv.  Geo.  W.,  562. 

*  Hardy.  T,eonard  G..  599. 

*  Hardv,  Beonard  W.,  236. 


INDEX. 


825 


Harmon,  Melvin  M.,  535. 
Harriman,  Henry,  193. 

*  Harris,  Martin,  271. 

*  Harrison,  Edwin  D.,  768. 
Harper,  William  T.,  549. 
Hatch,  Abram,  359. 

*  Hatch,  Lorenzo  H..  323. 
Heiner,  Daniel,  475. 

*  Hendrickson,  John  A.,  425. 
Heiner,  Daniel,  475. 

*  Henrie,  James,  800. 
Hess,  John  W..  463. 

*  Heywood,  Joseph  L.,  646. 

*  Hickenlooper,  William  H.,  607 
Higbee,  Elias,  253. 

Higbee.  Isaac,  480. 

*  Hill,  "William  H.,  791. 

*  Hill,  William  J.,  438. 

*  Hinckley,  Bryant  S.,  778. 
Hinckley,  Ira  N.,  528. 

*  Hogsted,  Hans  C.  S.,  457. 

*  Hogsted,  Victor  C.  769. 
Holbrook,    Jean    C,    503. 

*  Hooper,  William  H.,  724. 

*  Home,  Joseph,  806. 

*  Home,  Mary  I.,  807. 
Hoskins,   Oliver   C,   770. 

*  Houston,  James,  800. 

*  Hull.  Thomas.  716. 

*  Hunter,   Edward,   227. 

*  Hunter,  Joseph  S.,  534. 
Hunter,  William  P.,  534. 

*  Huntington,  William,  368. 

*  Hyde,  Annie  T.,  702. 

*  Hyde,  Orson,  80. 
Hyde,  Rosel,  466. 

*  Hyde,  William,  759. 

*  Hyde,  William,  jun.,  421. 

*  Hyde,  William  A.,  313. 


I. 


Inglestrom,   Anders  O.,  455. 

Ipsen,  Alvin.  398. 

Ivins,   Anthony  T\^,   311. 


*  Jack,  William  T.,   304. 

*  Jackson,  Alma  O.,  436. 

*  Jackson,  Henry  C,  766. 

*  Jaques,  John,  254. 
Jenkins,  John,  405. 

*  Jenkins,  Thomas,  604. 

*  Jensen.   Christen,  550. 

*  Jensen,  Denmark,  301. 

*  Jensen,  Hyrum.  399. 

*  Jensen,  James,  310. 

*  Jensen,  James,   565. 

*  Jensen,  James  C.    361. 

*  Jensen,  James  I.,  818. 

*  Jensen,  Jens  Peter,  570. 

*  Jenson.  Andrew,   261. 

*  Jeppson,   JecRe,   395. 

*  John,  David,  488. 

*  Johnson,  James,  441. 

*  Johnson,  John,  495. 
Johnson,  Luke  S.,  85. 
Johnson,  Lyman  E.,  91. 

*  Johnson,   William  D.,   366. 

*  Jones,  Geo.  R.,  684. 
Jones,  Thos.  J.,  532. 
Jones.  Uriah  T.,  533. 

*  Jorgenson,   Enock,   502. 

*  Jorgensen,  Johan  G.,  797. 


K. 

Keetch,  Elijah  C,  451. 

*  Keller,  James  M.,  443. 

*  Kelley,   Charles,  389. 

*  Kesler,  Frederick,  643. 

*  Kimball,   Andrew,   364. 

*  Kimball,  Heber  C,  34. 

*  Kimball,  Jonathan  G.,  210. 

*  Kimball,  Lucy  W.,  808. 

*  King,   William  H.,   787. 
Kingston,  Charles,  331. 

*  Knudsen,  Andrew,  492,  822. 

*  Knudsen,  Christian,  508. 

*  Knudsen,  Mathias,  508. 

*  Kuhre,  William  D.,  585. 


Lambert,  Enhraim,  477. 

*  Lambert,  Geo.  C,  612. 
Larsen,  Christen  G.,  523. 
Larsen,  Christian,  406. 

*  Larsen,  Christian  I.,  423. 

*  liarsen,  Hans  C,  449. 

*  Larsen,  John,  441. 
Larsen,  John  C,  766. 
T..arsen,  Lauritz  E.,  458. 
Larsen,  Ludvig,  575. 
Larson,  John  A.,  587. 
Law,  William,  53. 

*  Layton,  Charles  M.,  367. 

*  Layton,  Christopher,  363. 

*  Layton,  Richard  G.,  560. 
Leithead,  James,  540. 

*  Lemon,  Alexander  A.,  435. 

*  Lesueur,  John  T.,  230. 

*  Lewis,  Benjamin  M..  764. 
Lewis,  Samuel  E.,  557. 

*  Lewis,   William   H.,   298. 

*  Lilienquist,  Ola  N.,  814. 
Lind,  Nils,   310. 
Little,  Jesse  C,  242. 

*  Lund,   Anthon   H..   161. 

*  Lund,   Christian  N.,   339. 

*  Lund,  Louis  P.,  512. 

*  Lybbert,  Christian  F.  B.,  479. 

*  Lyman.  Amasa  M.,  96. 

*  Lyman,  Francis  M.,  136. 

M. 

*  Macfarlane.  Andrew  N.,  681. 

*  Madsen,   Christian  A.,   816. 

*  Maeser,  Karl  G.,  707. 

*  Maiben,  John  B.,   522. 
Mann.   Charles  W.,  467. 
Mansfield.  Matthew  W.,  527. 
Marks,   Vv'illiam,   283. 
Marsh,  Thos.'B.,  74. 

*  Matson.  Peter,  370. 

*  Maughan,  John,  445. 

*  Maughan,  Peter,  758. 

*  Maughan,  William  H.,  437. 
Maxwell.  James,  687. 

*  McAllister.  Duncan  M..  651. 

*  McAllister,  John  D.  T.,  334. 

*  McArthur,  Daniel  D.,  336. 

*  McClellan.  John  J.,  747. 

*  McCullousrh.  William  A.,  496. 
McDonald.  Alexander  F.,  557. 

*  McKinnon,   Archibald,  332. 

*  McKinnon,  Peter,  470. 

*  McLachlan.  ■\,\'illiam,  611. 
McLellin.  William  E.,  82. 

*  McMurrin,  Joseph  W.,  216. 


826 


INDEX. 


*  McNeil,  John,  504. 

*  McRae,  Alexander,  620. 

*  McRae,   Daniel,   567. 
Memmott,   Thos.,   531. 
Mendenhall,  William  H.,  769. 

*  Merrill,  Alma,  400. 

*  Merrill,   Jos.   F.,   784. 

*  Merrill,  Marriner  W.,  156. 

*  Merrill,  Thomas  H.,  402. 
Middleton,  Charles  F.,  460. 
Miles,  Daniel  S.,  192. 

*  Miles,  Samuel,  536. 
Miller,  James  R.,  563. 

*  Miller,  Orrin  P.,  307. 

*  Miller,  Reuben  G..  524,  821. 

*  Miller,  Uriah  G.,  568. 
*•  Miller,  William,  481. 

*  Molen,  Simpson,  M.,  408. 
Moore,  John,  797. 

*  Morgan,  John,  204. 
Morgan,  Joseph  R.,  639. 
Morg-an.  Thomas,  763. 
:^rorley,  Isaac,  235. 

*  Morrell,  Joseph,  407. 

*  Morris,  Elias,  636. 

*  Morris     Nephi    L.,    639. 

'  Morris,  Richard  V.,  675. 
Morris,   Robert,   621. 

*  Mortensen,  Morten  C,  397. 
Mouritzen,  Mouritz,  424. 

*  Movie,  James,  776. 

*  Moyle,  James  H.,  783. 
Vuir,  James  A.,  579. 

*  Murdock,  John  R..  304. 

*  Murdock,  Joseph   R.,   361. 

'  Musser,  Amos  Milton,  381. 

N. 

*  Naegle,  Geo.  C,  562,  822. 
Nebeker,  Geo.,  682. 
Xebeker,  John  L.,  683. 

*  Xeedham.  John,  414. 

*  Nelson,  Joseph.  784. 

*  Nelson,    Nels   August,    571. 

*  Nielson,   Peter  A.,    573. 

*  Nuttall,  Leonard  J.,  355. 
'  Nye,  John,  397. 

O. 

Oldham,  Samuel,  4:Jt. 

'  Orme,  Charles  A.,  546. 

Osmond,  George,  348. 


Page,  Hiram.  277. 

Page,  John  E.,  92. 

Park,  Hamilton   G.,  668. 

Park.  John  R.,  785. 

Parkinson,    Geo.    C,    438. 

Parkinson,  William  C.  305. 

Partridge,  Edward,  218. 

Partridge.  Edward,  jun..  488. 

Parry.  Edwin  F.,  645. 

Patrick.  Robert,  665. 

Patten,  David  W.,  J^. 

Paul.  Joshua  H.,  619. 

Paxman,  James  W.^   517. 

Paxrnan,   AVi'liam,   515. 

Pearson,  Henry.  575. 
'■  Pearson,  Henrv  M..  588. 

Peery,  David  H.,  756. 
'  PehrVon,  Erik  J.,  816. 
'  Pehr.=;on,  John  P..  575. 
'  Penrose.  Charles  W..  256. 


*  Petersen,  Lars  C,  427. 

*  Petersen,  Peter,  798. 

*  Peterson,  Canute,  362. 

*  Pett,  James,  390. 

*  Pettegrew,  David,  618. 

*  Phelps,  Morris,  373. 

*  Pilling,  Richard,  386. 

*  Pitkin,   Geo.  O.,  433. 

*  Pollard,  Joseph,  635. 

*  Pond,  Lewis  S..  301. 

*  Pond,  Lvsander  C,  315. 

*  Pond,  Noah  S.,  314. 

*  Pratt,  Moroni  W.,  817. 

*  Pratt,  Orson,  87. 

*  Pratt,  Parlev  P.,  83. 

*  Preston,  William  B.,  232. 
Priest,  John,  450. 
Pulsipher,  Zera,  194. 
Putnam,   Savannah   C,  471. 

*  Pyper,  Alexander  C,  627. 

*  Pyper,  Geo.  D.,  669. 

Q. 

Quibell,  Joseph  A.,  472. 


R. 


Raleigh.  Alonzo  H.,  672. 
Rasband,  Joseph  A.,  478. 
Rasmussen,  Niels,  596. 
Rasmussen,  Rasmus,  jun.,  443. 
Rasmussen,   Soren,   574. 
Redd.  Wavne  H.,  353. 
Redd,  William  A.,  539. 
Reiser.  Albert  S..  780. 
Reynolds,   George,   206. 
Rich,  Charles  C,  102. 
Rich,   Leonard,   189. 
Richards,  Franklin  D.,  115. 
Richards,  Geo.  F..  544. 
Richards,  Henry  P..  813. 
Richarfis,  Samuel  W.,  7is 
Richards,  Willard,  53. 
Ricks,   Thomas  E.,   455. 
Rigdon,   Sidney,  31. 
Roberts,  Brigham  H.,  205. 
Roberts.   William   D..   498. 
Robinson.   Geo.  W..   252. 
Robison,  Beniamin   H.,  529. 
Robi.son,   "^Mllis   E..   .343. 
Robson,  Charles  I.,  558. 
Rockwood,  Albert  P.,  194. 
Rockwood.  Charles  W.,  454. 
Romney.  Geo.,  678. 
Roskelley,  Samuel,  400. 
Roueche,   John   E.,   434. 
Roueche,  Thomas  P.,  464. 
Roundy,  Elizabeth  J.  D.,  809. 
Roundy.  Sh.adrach,  642. 
Rowberrv.  John.  545. 
Rundquist,  Peter  T..  592. 


*  Sandberg,  Peter  J.,  446. 

*  Sfhaerrer,  John   J.,  .514. 

*  Schow,  Andrew  P.,  543. 

*  Schow,  August  S..  767, 

*  Schulthess,  Arnold  H.,  598. 

*  Seddon,  Samuel  M.  T..  607. 
Seegmillor.  William  H.,  521. 

*  Sessions.   Byron,  300. 
Sevey,  Geo.  W..  800. 

*  Sharp,  John.  677. 

*  Sheets.  Elijah  F.,  614. 
Sherman,  Lyman,  190. 


INDEX. 


827 


Shurtliff,  Lewis  W.,  459. 

Skanchy,  Anthon  L.,  422. 

Skidmore,  William  L..  403. 

Sloan,  James,  254. 

Smart,   Thomas  H.,  589. 

Smart,  William  H.,  360. 

vSmith,  Andrew,   599. 

Smith,  Andrew,  jun.,  602. 

Smith,  Asahel,  182. 

Smith,  Bathsheba  W.,  699. 

Smith,  Benjamin  F..  497. 

Smith,   Elias,  719. 

Smith,  Elias  A.,  776. 

Smith,  Emmaj  602. 

Smith,  Geo.  A.,   37. 

Smith,   Hyrum,   52. 

Smith,  Hyrum  M.,  7,2. 

Smith,  Isaac,  410. 

Smith,  Jesse  N.,  316. 

Smith,  John,  1S2. 
'  Smith,  John,  183. 

Smith,  John  C.  L.,  532. 
'  Smith,  John  Fewson,  688. 
'■  Smith,  John  Henry,  141. 

■  Smith,   Joseph,  jun.,   1. 
Smith,  Joseph,  sen.,  181. 

■  Smith,  Joseph  F.,  66. 

*  Smith,    Lauritz,    573. 
=  Smith.  Lot,  803. 

■■  Smith,  Lucy,  690. 

■  Smith,    Orson.    407. 
Smith.  Samuel  H.,  278. 

''  Smith,  Silas  S.,  801. 

Smith,  Sylvester,  191. 

Sm.ith,  William,   86.- 

Smith,  William  G.,  473. 

Smith,  Wm.  J.,  472. 

Smith,  William  R.,  802. 
■'  Smoot,  Abraham  O.,  485. 
■•  Smoot,  Reed,  178. 
''  Snow,  Edward  H.,  798. 

*  Snow,  Eliza  R.,  693. 

*  Snow,  Erastus,  103. 
■'  Snow,  Jas.  C,  794. 

Snow,  Jeter,  539. 

*  Snow,  Lorenzo,  26. 
Snow,  Oliver  G.,  389. 

*  Snow.  Willard  L..  574.  ' 

*  Solomon,  Alfred,  681. 

-  Sorensen,  John  P.,  819. 

*  Sorensen,    Ole,    523. 
••-  Speirs,  Adam,  618. 

*  Spencer.  Daniel,  286. 
Spencer,  Franklin,  519. 

■■■•  Spencer,   Orson,   337. 

••  Spei'ry,  Harrison,  605. 

"  Steele,  James  E.,  453. 

=■■  Steele,  Mahonri  M.,  543,  821. 

■■'■  Stephens,  Evan,  740. 

■'  Stephenson,   -Anthony,  530. 

*  Stevenson.  Edward,  214. 
Stewart.  David   B.,   541. 

*  Stewart,  Isaac  M.,  793. 

*  Stewart,  James  Z.,  416. 

*  Stewart,    Samuel   AV.,    786. 

-  Stewart.  William  M.,  786. 

-  Stohl,    Ole   N.,    394. 


■''  Tanner,  Henry  S.,  717. 

*  Tanner,   Joseph  M.,   709. 
Tavlor,    Frank   Y.,   563. 

*  Taylor,    Geo.    H.,    634. 

*  Taylor.  John,  14. 


■  Taylor,  John  W.,  151. 
'■  Taylor,  Joseph  E.,  295. 
■■  Taylor,  Thos.  H.,  493. 
■■  Taylor,  William,  564. 

Taylor,  William  W.,  199. 
'  Teasdale,    George,   144. 

Terry,  Joseph,  572. 
'  Terry,  Joshua,  572. 

Tew,  William,  495. 
'  Thatcher,  Moses,  127. 

*  Thoresen,  Ingwald,  C,  430. 

*  Thorn'e,   Joseph  E.,   512. 

*  Thorn,   William,  610. 

'  Thorup,  John  T.,  595. 

''  Thomas,  Richard  K.,  780. 

Thompson,  Robert  B.,   253. 

Thui'ber,  Albert  K.,  519. 

*  Tingey,  Franklin  S.,  650. 
''■  Tingey,  John,  648. 

Tingey,  Thos.,  jun.,  333. 
^  Tobiason.  Theodore.  617. 

*  Tolman,  Jud>^on  A.,  388. 

*  Trane,  Thos.  F.,  506. 

*  Turner,   James,   589. 

*  Turner,   James  F.,   577. 

*  Twitchell,   Willis,   471. 
Tyler,  Robert  M.,  560. 

U. 

*  Udall,  David  K.,  325. 

V. 

*  Van  Cott,  John.  19S. 

W. 

-  Walker,    Don    Carlos,    453. 

*  Walker,  Henson,   508. 

*  Walker,  William  H.,  565. 

*  Wallace,   Geo.  B.,   291. 

*  Wallace,  Henry,  613. 

*  Warburton,  Joseph,  593. 

*  Ward,  Moroni.  459. 

*  Warnick,  Charles  P.,  513. 
Webber,  Thos.  G.,  670. 

*  Webster,  Francis,  533. 

*  Wejbye,   Jens   C.   A.,    818. 

*  Weiler,   Jacob,   601. 
Welling,   Milton   H.,   770. 

*  Wells,    Daniel   H.,   62. 
^^  "\Vells,   Heber  M.,   722. 

Wells,    Junius    F.,    714. 

*  Wells,    Rulon    S.,    212. 

*  ^Vest,  Chauncv  W.,  749. 

*  West,    Jabez   W.,    616. 

*  West,   Josenh   A.,   754. 

*  Whitaker,  John  M.,  790. 

*  White,  Charles  D.,  531. 
Whitmer,   Christian.   276. 

*  Whitmer,    David,    263. 
"Whitmer,   Jacob,    276. 
Whitmer,  John,  251. 
Whitmer,   Mary  M.,   283. 
Whitmer,  Peter,  282. 
Whitmer,  Pete?',  jun.,  277. 

*  Whitney,  Newel  K.,  222. 

*  Whitney,  Orson  F.,  658. 

*  "Widerborg,  Carl,  814. 

*  Widtsoe,  John  A.,  768. 
Wight,   Lyman.   93. 
Williams,  David  J.,  493. 
Williams,   Fred  G.,   51. 

*  Williams,  William  N.,  657. 


828 


INDEX. 


Wilson,   Joseph   E.,   412. 
Wilson,  William  W.,  5S6. 
Wiltbank.  Ellis  W..  555. 
Winder,  John  R.,  244. 
Winter,  Thomas  W.,  606. 
Woodland,  Henry  S.,  315. 
W'oodruff,   Abraham  O.,   172. 
Woodruff,  Newton,  402. 
Woodruff.  Wilford,  20. 
"Woodruff.  Wilford,  jun.,  616. 
Woolley,  Edward  D.,   358. 
"WooUev.  Edwin  D.,  630. 
Woolley,  Edwin  G.,  799. 
Woolley,  John  M.,   782. 
Woolley,  Marcellus  S.,  679. 
Woolley,  Samuel  A.,  781. 
Woolstenhulme,  James,  sen.,  469. 
Workman,  Andrew  J..  538. 


AVright,    John    F.,   431. 
Wright,  Joseph,  467. 


Yeates,  Richard,  421. 
Young-,  Brigham,  8. 
Young,  Brigham,  jun.,  121. 
Young,  John  W.,  42. 
Young,  Joseph,  187. 
Young,  Joseph  A.,  518. 
Young,  Richard  W.,  671. 
Young.   Seymour  B.,  200. 
Young,  Zina  D.  H.,  697. 


*  Zundell,  Isaac  E.  D.,  561. 


INDEX. 


825 


Harmon,  Melvin  M.,  535. 
Harriman,  Henry,  193. 

*  Harris,  Martin,  271. 

*  Harrison,  Edwin  D.,  768. 
Harper,  William  T.,  549. 
Hatch,  Abram,  359.  , 

*  Hatch,  Lorenzo  H.,  323. 
Heiner,  Daniel,  475. 

*  Hendrickson,  John  A.,  425. 
Heiner,  Daniel,  475. 

*  Henrie,  James,  800. 
Hess,  John  W.,  463. 

*  Heywood,  Joseph  D.,  646. 

*  Hickenlooper,  William  H.,  607 
Higbee,  Elias,  253. 

Higbee.  Isaac,  480. 

*  Hill,  ■W^iUiam  H.,  791. 

*  Hill,  William  J.,  438. 

*  Hinckley,  Bryant  S.,  778. 
Hincklev,  Ira  N.,  528. 

*  Hogsted,  Hans  C.  S.,  457. 

*  Hogsted,  Victor  C  769. 
Holbrook,    Jean    C,    503. 

*  Hooper,  William  H.,  724. 

*  Home,  Joseph,  806. 

*  Home,  Mary  I.,  807. 
Hoskins,   Oliver  C,  770. 

*  Houston,  James,  800. 

*  Hull,  Thomas,  716. 

*  Hunter,  Edward,   227. 

*  Hunter,  Joseph  S.,  534. 
Hunter,  TVilliam  P.,  534. 

*  Huntington,  William,   368. 

*  Hyde,  Annie  T.,  702. 

*  Hyde,  Orson,  80. 
Hyde,  Rosel,  466. 

*  Hyde,  William,  759. 

*  Hyde,  William,  jun.,  421. 

*  Hyde,  William  A.,  313. 


Inglestrom,   Anders  O.,   455. 

Ipsen,  Alvin,  398. 

Ivins,   Anthony  W.,    311. 


.Tack,  William  T.,   304. 
Jackson,  Alma  O.,  436. 
Jackson,  Henry  C,  766. 
Jaques,  John,  254. 
Jenkins,  John,  405. 
Jenkins,  Thomas,  604. 
Jensen,  Christen,  550. 
Jensen,  Denmark,  301. 
Jensen,  Hyrum,  399. 
Jensen,  James,  310. 
Jensen,  James,   565. 
Jensen,  James  C.    361. 
Jensen,  James  I.,  818. 
Jensen,  Jens  Peter,  570. 
Jenson.  Andrew,   261. 
Jeppson,   Jeppe.  395. 
John,  David,  488. 
Johnson,  James,  441. 
Johnson,  John,  495. 
Johnson,  Luke  S..  85. 
Johnson,  Lyman  E.,  91. 
Johnson,   William  D.,   366. 
'  Jones,  Geo.  R..  684. 
Jones,  Thos.  J.,  532. 
Jones,  Uriah  T.,  533. 
Jorgenson,   Enock,   502. 
Jorgensen,  Johan  G.,  797. 


K. 

Keetch,  Elijah  C.,  451. 

Keller,  James  M.,  443. 

Kelley,   Charles,  389. 

Kesler,  Frederick,  643. 
■  Kimball,   Andrew,   364. 
■■  Kimball,  Heber  C,  34. 
■■  Kimball,  Jonathan  G.,  210. 
■■  Kimball,  Lucy  W.,  808. 
■■  King,   William  H.,  787. 

Kingston,  Charles,  331. 
'  Knudsen,  Andrew,  492,  822. 
'■  Knudsen,  Christian,  508. 
'  Knudsen,  Mathias,  508. 
''  Kuhre,  William  D.,  585. 

L. 

Lambert,  Ephraim,  477. 

*  Lambert,  Geo.  C,  612. 
Larsen,  Christen  G.,  523. 
Larsen,  Christian,  406. 

*  Larsen,  Christian  I.,  423. 

*  I^arsen,  Hans  C,  449. 

*  I,arsen,  John,  441. 
Larsen,  John  C,  766. 
Tjarsen,  Lauritz  E.,  458. 
Larsen,  Ludvig,  575. 
Larson,  John  A.,  587. 
Law,  William,  53. 

*  Layton,  Charles  M.,  367. 

*  Layton,  Christopher,  363. 

*  I,ayton,  Richard  G.,  560. 
Leithead,  James,  540. 

*  Lemon,  Alexander  A.,  435. 

*  Lesueur,  John  T..  330. 

*  Lewis,  Benjamin  M.,  764. 
Lewis,  Samuel  E.,  557. 

*  Lewis,  William  H.,   298. 

*  Lilienquist,  Ola  N.,  814. 
Lind,  Nils,  310. 
Little,  Jesse  C,  242. 

*  Lund,  Anthon  H.,  161. 

*  Lund,   Christian  N.,   339. 

*  Lund,  Louis  P.,  512. 

*  Lybbert,  Christian  F.  B.,  479. 

*  Lyman,  Amasa  M.,  96. 

*  Lyman,  Francis  M.,  136. 

M. 

*  Macfarlane,  Andrew  N.,  681. 

*  Madsen,   Christian   A.,   816. 

*  Maeser,  Karl  G.,  707. 

*  Maiben,  John  B.,  522. 
Mann.  Charles  W.,  467. 
Mansfield,  Matthew  W.,  527. 
Marks,   V^illiam,   283. 
Marsh,  Thos.  B..  74. 

*  Matson,  Peter,  370. 

*  Maughan,  John,  445. 

*  Maughan,  Peter,  758. 

*  Maughan,  William  H.,  437. 
Maxwell,  James,  687. 

*  McAllister,  Duncan  M.,  651. 

*  McAllister,  John  D.  T.,  334. 

*  McArthur,   Daniel  D.,   336. 

*  McClellan,  John  J.,  747. 

*  McCullough,  William  A.,  496. 
McDonald,  Alexander  F.,  557. 

*  McKinnon,  Archibald,  iJ32. 

*  McKinnon,  Peter.  470. 

*  McLachlan.  William.  611. 
McLellin,  William  E.,  82. 

*  McMurrin,  Joseph  W.,  216. 


826 


INDEX. 


*  McNeil,  John,  504. 

*  McRae,  Alexander,  620. 
»  McRae,   Daniel,   567. 

Memmott,   Thos.,    531. 
Mendenhall,  William  H.,  769. 

*  Merrill,  Alma,  400. 

*  Merrill,   Jos.   F.,   784. 

*  Merrill,  Marriner  W.,  156. 

*  Merrill,  Thomas  H.,  402. 
Middleton,  Charles  F.,  460. 
Miles,  Daniel  S.,  192. 

*  Miles,  Samuel,  536. 
Miller,  James  R.,  563. 

*  Miller,  Orrin  P.,  307. 

*  Miller,  Reuben  G..  524,  821. 

*  Miller,  Uriah  G.,  568. 

*  Miller,  William,  481. 

*  Molen,  Simpson.  M.,  408. 
Moore,  John,  797. 

*  Morgan,  John,  204. 
Morgan,  Joseph  R.,  639. 
Morgan.  Thomas,  763. 
Morley,  Isaac,  235. 

*  Morrell,  Joseph,  407. 

*  Morris,  Elias,  63S- 

*  Morris     Nephi    L.,    639. 

"  Morris,  Richard  V.,  675. 
Morris,   Robert,   621. 

*  Mortensen,  Morten  C,  397. 
Mouritzen,  Mouritz,  424. 

*  Moyle,  James,  776. 

*  Moyle,  James  H.,  783. 
:\Juir,  James  A.,  579. 

*  Murdock,  John  R.,  304. 

*  Murdock,   Joseph  R.,   361. 

*  Musser,  Amos  Milton,  381. 

N. 

*  Naegle,  Geo.  C,  562,  822. 
Nebeker,  Geo.,  682. 
Nebeker,  John  L.,  683. 

*  Xeedham.  John,  414. 

*  Nelson,  Joseph.  784. 

*  Nelson,    Nels   August,    571. 

*  Nielson,   Peter  A.,    573. 

*  Nuttall.  Leonard  J.,  355. 
'■'  Nye,  John,  397. 

O. 

Oldham,  Samuel,   lU*. 

*  Oime,  Charles  A.,  546. 
Osmond,  George,  348. 


Page,  Hiram.  277. 
Page,  John  E.,  92. 
Park,  Hamilton   G.,  668. 
Park.  John  R.,  785. 
Parkinson,    Geo.    C,    438. 
Parkinson,  William  C  305. 
Partridge,  Edward,  218. 
Partridge,  Edward,   jun.,   488. 
Parry,  Edwin  F..  645. 
Patrick.  Robert.  665. 
Patten.  David  W.,  76. 
Paul.  Joshua  H.,  619. 
Paxman,  James  W.^   517. 
Paxrnan,   Wi'liam,    515. 
pparson.  Heni-y,  575. 
Pearson,  Henry  M..  588. 
Peery,  David   H.,  756. 
Pehrson,  Erik  J..  816. 
Pehrson,  John  P..  575. 
Penrose,  Charles  W..  256. 


*  Petersen,  Lars  C,  427. 

*  Petersen,  Peter,  798. 

*  Peterson,  Canute,  362. 

*  Pett,  James,  390. 

*  Pettegrew,  David,  618. 

*  Phelps,  Morris,*373. 

*  Pilling,  Richard,  386. 

*  Pitkin,   Geo.  C,  433. 

*  Pollard,  Joseph,  635. 

*  Pond,  Lewis  S..  301. 

*  Pond,  Lysander  C,  315. 

*  Pond,  Noah  S.,  314. 

*  Pratt,  Moroni  W.,  817. 

*  Pratt,  Orson,  87. 

*  Pratt,  Parlev  P.,  83. 

*  Preston,  William  B.,  232. 
Priest,  John,  450. 
Pulsipher,  Zera,  194./ 
Putnam,   Savannah   C,  471. 

*  Pyper,  Alexander  C,  627. 

*  Pyper,  Geo.  D.,  669. 

Q. 

Quibell,  Joseph  A.,  472. 
R. 

*  Raleigh.  Alonzo  H.,  672. 
Rasband,  Joseph  A.,  478. 

*  Rasmussen,  Niels,  596. 

*  Rasmussen,  Rasmus,  jun.,  443. 

*  Rasmussen.   Soren,   574. 

*  Redd.  Wavne  H.,  353. 

*  Redd,  William  A.,  539. 

*  Reiser.  Albert  S.,  780. 

*  Reynolds,   George,   206. 

*  Rich.  Charles  C,  102. 
Rich,   Leonard,   189. 

*  Richards,  Franklin  D.,  115. 

*  Richards,   Geo.  F..  544. 

*  Richards,  Henry  P..  813. 

*  Richards,  Samuel  W.,  71fi 

*  Richards,  Willard,  53. 
.*  Ricks.   Thomas   E.,   455. 

*  Ri.gdon,   Sidney,  31. 

*  Roberts.  Brigham  H.,  205. 

*  Roberts.   William   D..   498. 
Robinson.    Geo.   W.,   252. 

*  Rnbison,  Benjamin  H.,  529. 

*  Robison,   Willis   E.,    343. 

*  Robson,  Charles  I.,  558. 

*  Rockwood,   Albert  P.,   194. 
Rockwood.  Charles  W.,  454. 

*  Romney.  Geo.,  678. 

*  Roskelley,   Samuel,   400. 

*  Roueche,   John   E.,   434. 

*  Roueche,  Thom.as  F.,  464. 

*  Roundy,   Elizabeth  J.   D.,   809. 

*  Roundy.  Shadrach,  642. 

*  Rowberrv.  John.  545. 
Rundquist,  Peter  T.,  592. 


*  Sandberg,  Peter  J.,  446. 

*  Schaerrer.  John  J.,  514. 

*  Schow.  Andrew  P.,  543. 

*  Schow.  August  S.,  767. 

*  Schulthess.  Arnold  H.,  598. 

*  Seddon,  Samuel  M.  T..  607. 
Seegmiller.  William  H.,  521. 

*  Sessions.   Byron.  300. 
Sevey,  Geo.  W..  800. 

*  Sharp.  John,  677. 

*  Sheets,  Elijah  F.,  614. 
Sherman,  Lyman,  190. 


INDEX. 


827 


Shurtliff,  Lewis  W.,  459. 
Skanchy,  Anthon  L.,  422. 
Skidmore,  William  L,..  403. 
Sloan,  James,  254. 
Smart,  Thomas  H.,  5S9. 
Smart,  William  H.,  360. 
Smith,  Andrew,   599. 
Smith,  Andrew,  jun.,  602. 
Smith,  Asahel,  182. 
Smith,  Bathsheba  W.,  699. 
Smith,  Benjamin  F..  497. 
Smith,   Elias,   719. 
Smith,  Elias  A.,  776. 

■  Smith,  Emma,  692. 

■  Smith,   Geo.  A.,  37. 
'  Smith,   Hyrum,   52. 

■■  Smith,  Hyrum  M.,  7,2. 
^  Smith,  Isaac,  410. 
'■  Smith,  Jesse  N.,  316. 

Smith,  John,  182. 
'  Smith,  John,  183. 

Smith,  John  C.  T^.,  532. 
'  Smith,  John  Fewson,  688. 

*  Smith,  John  Henry,  141. 
'  Smith,   Josevih,  jun..   1. 

Smith,  Joseph,  sen.,  181. 
'  Smith,  Joseph  F.,  66. 
''  Smith,   Lauritz,    573. 
-  Smith,  T.ot,  S03. 
=  Smith,  Lucy.  690. 
'  Smith,    Orson.    407. 

Smith,  Samuel  H.,  278. 

*  Smith,  Silas  S.,  801. 
Smith,  Svlvester,  191. 
Sm.ith,  William.  86. 
Smith,  William  G.,  473. 
Smith,  Y\'m.  J.,  472. 
Smith,  William  R.,  802. 

=  Smoot,  Abraham  O.,  485. 

*  Smoot,  Reed,  178. 

''  Snow,  Edward  H.,  798. 
«  Snow,  Eliza  R.,  693. 

*  Snow,  Erastus,  103. 
■■'■  Snow,  Jas.  C,  794. 

Snow,  Jeter,  539. 

*  Snow,  Lorenzo.  26. 
Snow,  Oliver  G.,  389. 

*  Snow,  Willard  L..  574. 

-  Solomon,  Alfred.  681. 

-  Sorensen,  John  P.,  819. 
"  Sorensen,    Ole,    523. 

"  Speirs,  Adam,  618. 

*  Spencer,  Daniel,  286. 
Spencer,  Franklin,  519. 

*  Spencer.   Orson,   337. 

■"■  Speiry,  Harrison,  605. 
'■■  Steele,  James 'E.,  453. 

*  Steele,  Mahonri  M.,  543,  821. 
'  Stephens,  Evan,  740. 

*  Stephenson.   Anthony,  530. 
■■■■  Stevenson.  Edward.  214. 

Stewart,   David  B.,  541. 

*  Stewart,  Isaac  M.,  793. 

*  Stewart,  James  Z..  416. 

*  Stewart.   Samuel  "W.,   786. 
"  Stewart.  William  M.,  786. 

*  Stohl,   Ole   N.,   394. 


*  Tanner,  Henry  S.,  717. 

*  Tanner,  Joseph  M.,  709. 
Taylor,   Frank  Y.,   563. 

*  Taylor,   Geo.   H.,   634. 

*  Taylor.  John,  14. 


*  Taylor,  John  W.,  151. 

*  Taylor,  Joseph  E.,  295. 

*  Taylor,  Thos.  H.,  493. 

*  Taylor,  William,  564. 
Taylor,  William  W.,  199. 

*  Teasdale,    George,   144. 
Terry,  Joseph,  572. 

*  Terry,  Joshua,  572. 
Tew,'  William,  495. 

*  Thatcher,  Moses,  127. 

*  Thoresen,  Ingwald,  C,  430. 

*  Thome,   Joseph   E.,   512. 

*  Thorn,  William,  610. 

*  Thorup,  John  T.,  595. 

*  Thomas,  Richard  K.,  780. 
Thompson,  Robert  B.,  253. 
Thurber,  Albert  K.,  519. 

*  Tingey,  Franklin  S.,  650. 

*  Tingey,  John,  648. 
Tingey,  Thos.,  jun.,  333. 

*  Tobiason.  Theodore.  617. 

*  Tolman.  Jud>;on  A.,  388. 

*  Trane.  Thos.  F.,  506. 

*  Turner,   James,    589. 

*  Turner,   James  F.,   577. 

*  Twitchell,    Willis,    471. 
Tyler,  Robert  M.,  560. 

U. 

*  Udall,  David  K.,  325. 

V. 

*  Van  Cott.  John,  198. 

W. 

*  Walker,    Don    Carlos,    453. 

*  Walker,  Henson,  508. 

*  Walker,  William  H.,  565. 

*  Wallace,   Geo.  B.,  291. 

*  W^aliace,  Henry,  613. 

*  "Warburton,  Joseph,  593. 

*  Ward,  Moroni,  459. 

*  ^Varnick,  Charles  P.,  513. 
Webber,  Thos.  G.,  670. 

*  Webster,  Francis,  533. 

*  Wejbye,   Jens   C.    A.,    818. 

*  Weiler,   Jacob,    601. 
Welling,    Milton   H.,    770. 

*  Wells,    Daniel    H.,    62. 

*  Wells,    Heber   M.,    722. 
Wells,    Junius    F.,    714. 

*  Wells,    Rulon    S.,    212. 

*  West,  Chauncy  W..  749. 

*  West,    Jabez   "W.,    616. 

*  West,   Joseph  A.,   754. 

*  AVhitaker,  John  M.,  790. 

*  "White,  Charles  D.,  531. 
Whitmer,    Christian.   276. 

*  AVhitmer,    David,    263. 
Whitmer,   Jacob,    276. 
Whitmer,  John,  251. 
Whitmer,  Mary  M.,  283. 
Whitmer,  Peter,  282. 
Whitmer,  Peter,  jun.,  277. 

*  Whitney,  Newel  K.,  222. 

*  Whitnev,  Orson  F..  658. 

*  Widertaorg,  Carl,  814. 

*  Widtsoe,  John  A.,  768. 
Wight.   Lyman.   93. 
AVilliams,  David  J.,  493. 
Williams.  Fred  G..  51. 

*  Williams,  William  N.,  657. 


828 


INDEX. 


Wilson,   Joseph   E.,   412. 
Wilson,  William  W.,  5S6. 
Wiltbank.  Ellis  ^V.,  555. 
Winder,  John  R.,  244. 
^Vinter,  Thomas  W.,  606. 
Woodland,  Henn'  S.,  315. 
W'oodruff,   Abraham  O.,   172. 
Woodruff,  Newton,  402. 
AVoodruff.  Wilford,  20. 
Woodruff.  Wilford,  jun.,  616. 
Woolley,   Edward  D.,  358. 
AVooUey.  Edwin  D.,  630. 
Woolley,  Edwin  G.,  799. 
Woolley,  John  M.,   782. 
'V\'oolley,  Marcellus  S.,  679. 
Woolley,  Samuel  A.,  781. 
AVoolstenhulme,  James,  sen., 
Workman,  Andrew  J..  538. 


469. 


AVright,    John    F.,   431. 
AVright,  Joseph,  467. 

Y. 

Yeates,  Richard,  421. 
Young-,  Brig-ham,  8. 
Young,  Brigham,  jun.,  121. 
Young,  John  W.,  42. 
Young,  Joseph,  187. 
Young.  Joseph  A.,  518. 
Young,  Richard  W.,  671. 
Young,   Seymour  B.,  200. 
Young,  Zina  D.  H.,  697. 


Zundell,  Isaac  E.  D.,  561. 


1 


31197000574969 


OA 


3  1197  00057  4969 


Date  Due 

All  library  items  are  subject  to  recall  at  any  time. 


FEB  0  7  200!. 


Dec  1  7  ?0|17 

DCC  1  ?  /:i 


Jii»>^,'^m 


nr.T  1 4  ?onp 


mxP'/m 


MAR  2^'  ' 


<>f\ii 


FEBOV) 


Mnv  )i?iititi 


ii:  L I  m 


JAN  08  7007 


JAN  0  8  2007 


J^^i^m^ 


JUL  0  5  700? 


ocrzTw 


nrj_?  0 '' 


I9'2007 


Brigham  Young  University 


