*^   j^Jm^  .  ^*  '^B^ 


m 


I 


f 


m 
?) 


A' 


i^^! 


THE  UJ?'!,S^vEEsrrT 


HEBER  J.  GRANT 

Seventh  P^e^^ident  of  the  Church  of  Jesus  Christ  of  Latter-day  Saints 

Born  Nov.  22,  1856 


By 
.a'45lb 

J,^''^  LATTER-DAY  SAINT 


BlOGRAPHICiL  ENCYCLOPEDIi. 


A  Compilation  of  Biographical  Sketches  of  Prominent 

Men  and  Women  in  the  Church  of  Jesus 

Christ  of  Latter-day  Saints 


ANDREW  JENSON. 

ASSISTAITT    ChTTRCH    Hi.   TOHIAN 


VOLUME   III 


Originally  published  by  the  Andrew  Jenson  History  Company 
in   1920 

Exact  photo  reproduction  reprinted  in  1971  by  Western  Epics, 
254  South  Main,  Salt  Lake  City,  Utah  84101 


Copyrighted- 


PUBLISHERS  PRESS 

THE  LIBRARY 

BRIGHAM  YOUNG  UNIVERSITf 

PROVO,  UTAH 


PREFACE. 


The  author  takes  pleasure  in  presenting  to  the  public  the 
third  volume  of  the  Latter-day  Saint  Biographical  Encyclo- 
pedia, which,  like  its  predecessors,  contains  life  sketches  of 
faithful  and  active  members  of  the  Church.  The  original  plan 
has  been  carried  out  in  almost  every  detail.  The  three  volumes, 
for  which  a  common  index  has  been  prepared,  may  be  consid- 
ered the  foundation  of  a  great  literary  work  which  ultimately 
may  contain  sketches  of  all  faithful  men  and  women  who  have 
devoted  their  lives  to  establish  once  more  upon  the  earth  the 
Church  of  our  Lord  and  Savior  Jesus  Christ.  As  we  have  pro- 
ceeded with  our  labors  of  compilation,  we  have  been  pleased  to 
note  on  the  part  of  intelligent  readers  an  increased  interest  and 
appreciation  of  a  publication  of  this  kind,  and  we  feel  assured 
that  the  next  decade  (as  we  approach  the  centennial  year  of 
the  organization  of  the  Church)  will  witness  still  greater 
interest  in  the  same  as  a  work  of  reference.  The  three 
volumes  now  published,  containing  a  vast  amount  of  original 
matter  which  cannot  be  found  elsewhere,  will  be  valuable  as  a 
source  of  information  for  future  historians  and  biographers. 

The  Encyclopedia  is  also  valuable  to  Latter-day  Saints 
from  a  genealogical  standpoint,  as  each  sketch  is  practically  a 
link  in  the  great  genealogical  chain,  which  reaches  as  far  back 
into  the  mysterious  past  as  there  are  records  and  traditions, 
and  points  indefinitely  to  the  great  future ;  the  author  has 
endeavored  in  each  sketch  to  give  the  names  of  both  parents 
and  children. 

The  three  volumes  of  the  Latter-day  Saint  Biographical 
Encyclopedia  now  in  print  contain  about  3,000  biographical 
sketches,  2,500  pages  of  closely  printed  matter  and  2,147  por- 
traits. It  includes  all  the  general  authorities  of  the  Church,  a 
large  percentage  of  the  presidents  of  Stakes  and  Missions, 
Bishops  of  Wards,  martyrs  of  the  Church,  missionaries  dying 
abroad,  members  of  Zion's  Camp  and  the  Mormon  Battalion, 
pioneers,  prominent  members  of  auxiliary  organizations,  etc. 
We  have  on  hand  at  least  ten  thousand  more  sketches  in 
manuscript  form,  which  may  be  made  parts  of  future  volumes. 

In  selecting  material  for  the  Encyclopedia,  merit  and  not 
money  has  been  the  basis  of  operation  :  those  entitled  to  notice, 
rich  or  poor,  living  or  dead,  have  been  considered  alike  in  the 
writing  of  sketches.     The  literarv  work  ha?  been  done  as  a 


IV  PREFACE 

labor  of  love,  the  means  realized  from  the  sale  of  books  having 
all  been  expended  for  printing,  binding,  making  half-tone 
portraits,  traveling,  etc. 

Through  the  generosity  of  President  Heber  J.  Grant  and 
counselors.  Elders  Jesse  Knight,  Jos.  W.  Taylor,  P.  W.  Mad- 
sen,  Thos.  E.  Jeremy,  Wm.  N.  Williams,  Stephen  L.  Chipman 
and  others  we  have  been  enabled  to  defray  the  expenses  of 
printing  biographical  sketches  of  many  faithful  men  and 
women,  long  since  gone  to  the  "great  beyond,"  who  seem  not 
to  have  been  remembered  by  their  relatives. 

Trusting  that  our  efforts  in  compiling  and  editing  the 
Biographical  Encyclopedia  have  not  been  in  vain,  we  now 
dedicate  the  three  volumes  of  the  work  to  the  Latter-day  Saints 
and  their  friends  who  are  students  of  Church  history. 

ANDREW  JENSON. 


LATTER-DAY  SAINT 

Biographical  Encyclopedia. 


ADAMS,  John  Quincy,  Bishop  of 
the  Logan  Fifth  Ward,  and  a  promi- 
nent and  influential  citizen  of  Cache 
valley,  Utah,  was  born  in  Logan, 
Utah,  Dec.  16,  1866,  where  he  has 
resided  during  his  whole  life.  He 
attended  the  common  schools  and 
the  B.  Y.  College  at  Logan  and  was 
among  the  first  to  attend  the  now 
famous  winter  course  of  the  Agri- 
cultural College.  He  was  blessed 
April  4,  18  67,  by  his  father,  Hugh 
Adams;  baptized  July  5,  1877,  by 
C.    L.    Olsen,    and    confirmed   on   the 


same  day  by  Counselor  Robert  Hen- 
derson. He  was  ordained  a  Deacon 
Jan.  25,  1879,  by  Andrew  King;  or- 
dained an  Elder  Dec.  14,  1891,  by 
Bishop  Wm.  Hyde;  ordained  a  Seven- 
ty March  23,  1898,  by  Apostle  John 
Henry  Smith,  and  a  High  Priest 
Jan.    20,    1901,    by    Stake    President 


Joseph  Morrell.  Bishop  Adams  has 
filled  many  positions  of  trust  in  the 
Church.  As  a  boy  he  was  president  of  a 
Deacon's  quorum  for  three  years  and 
later  served  for  one  year  as  president 
of  the  Y. M.M.I. A.  of  the  Logan  Fifth 
Ward.  On  Jan.  20,  1901,  he  was  set 
apart  as  second  counselor  to  Bishop 
Wm.  Hyde  of  the  Logan  Fifth  Ward, 
and  on  July  27,  1902,  he  was  set 
apart  by  Apostle  Marriner  W.  Merrill 
as  first  counselor  to  Bishop  Hyde. 
On  March  2  4,  1907,  he  was  sustained 
as  Bishop  of  the  Logan  Fifth  Ward 
and  on  April  28,  1907,  he  was  or- 
dained and  set  apart  to  that  position 
by  Apostle  George  Teasdale.  During 
the  administration  of  Bishop  Adams 
the  Logan  Fifth  Ward  has  grown  in 
all  of  its  divisions,  and  is  now  one  of 
the  most  prosperous  Wards  in  the 
Church.  It  is  fully  and  completely 
organized  and  a  good  spirit  prevails 
among  the  people,  who  are  loyally 
devoted  to  their  untiring  and  self- 
sacrificing  Bishop,  who  devotes  prac- 
tically all  of  his  time  to  his  labors 
in  behalf  of  the  people.  Bishop 
Adams  has  also  been  successful  in  his 
temporal  affairs.  As  a  young  man 
he  was  one  of  the  pioneers  of  dry- 
farming  in  Cache  county,  and  in  the 
face  of  much  doubt  on  the  part  of  his 
neighbors  he  has  successfully  devel- 
oped and  now  operates  one  of  the 
best  farms  in  Cache  valley.  His  ex- 
ample has  been  followed  by  many  to 
their  great  temporal  good.  Bishop 
Adams  also  took  an  active  part  in 
the  construction  of  the  West  Cache 
Irrigation  Canal,  which  has  brought 
under  irrigation  many  thousands  of 


Vol.  Ill,  No.  1. 


January,  1918. 


LATTER-DAY   SAINT 


acres  of  land  which  formerly  could 
only  be  dry-farmed.  He  served  as 
director  of  the  canal  for  two  terms. 
In  1907  (March  14th)  Governor  John 
C.  Cutler  appointed  Bishop  Adams 
a  trustee  of  the  Utah  Agricultural 
College,  to  which  position  he  has 
been  reappointed  each  succeeding 
term  since  that  time.  He  has  worked 
untiringly  as  a  trustee  and  has  been 
an  important  factor  in  helping  on- 
ward the  work  of  the  Utah  Agri- 
cultural College.  On  March  23,  1898, 
he  left  for  a  mission  to  the  North- 
western States,  from  which  he  re- 
turned March  23,  1900.  From  Jan. 
16,  1913,  to  May  29,  1913,  he  also 
filled  a  short  mission  to  the  Central 
States.  Bishop  Adams  is  an  active 
and  energetic  worker  in  behalf  of 
the  Church  and  the  State,  and  enjoys 
the  confidence  and  respect  of  all  who 
are  acqainted  with  him,  whether  in 
religion,  business  or  politics.  He  is 
an  excellent  representative  of  the 
young  men  of  "Mormonism." 

AHLSTR0M,  John  Godfrey,  third 
Bishop  of  the  St.  John  Ward  (Tooele 
Stake),  Tooele  county,  Utah,  was 
born  Dec.  12,  1850,  at  Malmo,  Swe- 
den, the  son  of  Ola  Ahlstrom  and 
Ingeborg  Monson.  He  emigrated  to 
America  with  his  parents  in  1856, 
crossing  the  Atlantic  in  the  ship 
"Enoch  Train;"  lived  four  years  at 
Burlington,  Iowa,  and  was  baptized 
at  Burlington  in  1856.  His  father 
was  killed  by  a  tree  falling  on  him 
while  working  in  a  forest.  His 
mother  married  again  and  in  18  60 
emigrated  to  Utah,  settling  at  Sham- 
bip  (now  Clover),  but  became  a  resi- 
dent of  St.  John  in  1875.  Bro.  Ahl- 
strom was  ordained  a  Deacon,  a 
Teacher  and  an  Elder  in  succession, 
the  latter  ordination  taking  place  in 
1877  under  the  hands  of  Geo.  W. 
Burridge.  He  was  ordained  a  High 
Priest  in  June,  1888,  by  Apostle 
Francis  M.  Lyman  and  set  apart  as 
first  counselor  to  Bishop  David  H. 
Caldwell.     In  1898  he  was  ordained 


a  Bishop  and  set  apart  to  preside 
over  the  St.  John  Ward,  which  posi- 
tion he  held  until  May  21,  1905.  He 
acted  as  superintendent  of  the  St. 
John  Sunday  School  from  1888  to 
1898,  and  acted  as  president  of  the 
Ward  Y.  M.  M.  I.  A.  three  years. 
He  served  as  U.  S.  mail  carrier  under 
his  own  contract  in  Tooele  county 
for  eighteen  years.  In  1870  (Jan. 
28th)  he  married  Mary  Ellen  Arthur 
(daughter  of  Evan  Arthur  and  Cath- 
erine James),  who  was  born  Dec. 
28,  1850.  The  issue  of  this  mar- 
riage is  eight  children,  namely,  John 
A.,  Minnie  E.,  Mary  Ingeborg,  Cath- 
erine Ann,  Wm.  J.,  Ernest  E.,  Edna 
A.  and  Elmer  H. 

ALLEN,  Jonathan  Alexander,  Bish- 
op of  the  Hubbard  Ward  (St.  Joseph 
Stake),  Graham  county,  Arizona,  was 
born  November  3,  1883,  at  Pine 
Creek,  Arizona,  the  son  of  Jonathan 
A.  Allen  and  Jane  Nielson.  He  was 
baptized  Nov.  29,  18  91,  by  Joseph 
H.  Lee;  ordained  an  Elder  Nov.  3, 
1903,    by    John    B.    Hicks;     married 


Rozilpha  Cheney  March  24,  ld07; 
filled  a  mission  to  Europe  in  1907- 
1909,  laboring  in  France  and  Bel- 
gium. He  left  home  to  fill  said  mis- 
sion March  29,  1907,  and  returned 
Nov.    10,    1909.       While    filling    his 


BIOGRAPHICAL   ENCYCLOPEDIA. 


mission  his  oldest  boy,  Orin,  was 
born  Jan.  15,  1908.  Subsequently 
his  household  has  been  augmented 
by  the  birth  of  two  other  boys,  name- 
ly, Bruce,  born  April  11,  1911,  and 
Rial,  born  Oct.  16,  1913.  Elder 
Allen  was  ordained  a  High  Priest 
and  Bishop  March  15,  1914,  by 
Apostle  Anthony  W.  Ivins  and  set 
apart  to  preside  over  the  Hubbard 
Ward. 

ALiLBED,     Isaac,     a     member     of 

Zion's  Camp,  was  born  June  28,  1813, 
at  Nashville,  Tenn.,  the  son  of  James 
Allred  and  Elizabeth  Warren.  His 
parents  being  members  of  the  Church 
he  was  baptized  Sept.  10,  1832,  by 
Geo.  M.  Hinkle.  In  1834  he  marched 
to  Missouri  as  a  member  of  Zion's 
Camp  and  afterwards  located  in 
Nauvoo,  111.  After  working  on  the 
Nauvoo  Temple  he  received  his  en- 
dowments in  the  same  after  its  com- 
pletion. At  the  age  of  nineteen 
years  he  married  Julia  Ann  Taylor, 
daughter  of  Wm.  Taylor  and  Eliza- 
beth Patrick.  Yielding  obedience  to 
the  higher  law,  he  married  Mary 
Henderson  as  a  plural  wife  in  the 
Nauvoo  Temple  in  1846.  He  spent 
all  his  time  working  for  the  Church 
for  several  years  and  traveled  much 
as  a  preacher  of  the  Gospel  in  dif- 
ferent States.  Participating  in  the 
general  exodus  of  the  saints  from 
Nauvoo  in  February,  1846,  he  spent 
a  short  time  in  the  camp  on  Sugar 
Creek,  Iowa,  after  which  he  crossed 
the  prairies  of  Iowa  to  the  Missouri 
river.  Thence  he  crossed  the  plains 
in  1851  as  captain  of  a  company  of 
saints  and  settled  at  Kaysville,  Davis 
county,  Utah.  He  filled  a  mission  to 
Great  Britain  in  1851-1855,  and 
through  his  labor  in  the  States  and  in 
England  many  converts  were  brought 
into  the  Church.  Soon  after  his  re- 
turn from  this  mission  to  Europe  in 
October,  1855,  he  moved  to  Ogden, 
where  he  resided  with  his  two  fam- 
ilies until  the  time  qf  "the  move"  in 
1858,   when   he  settled   at   Ephraim, 


Sanpete  county,  where  his  parents 
resided.  There  he  remained  till  the 
next  year,  when  he  was  killed  by 
Thos.  Ivie,  who  assailed  him  over  a 
trivial  matter  and  beat  him  with  a 
burning  stick  from  the  camp  fire 
May  11,  1859.  He  died  the  next 
day.  The  difficulty  arose  over  some 
sheep  which  Bro.  Allred  had  in 
charge  and  which  belonged  to  Thos. 
Ivie.  His  murderer  was  tried  and 
condemned  to  death,  but  he  managed 
to  escape  and  went  east.  Pres. 
Young  prophesied  that  Thos.  Ivie 
would  apostatize  from  the  Church  and 
that  buzzards  would  pick  his  bones. 
This  prediction  was  literally  fulfilled, 
as  the  remains  of  Mr.  Ivie  were 
subsequently  found  in  a  corn  field 
nearly  devoured  by  buzzards.  About 
1856  Bro.  Allred  married  Emma 
Dewey.  He  had  ten  children  by  his 
first  wife,  five  by  his  second  wife 
and  two  by  the  third  wife.  All  of 
these  grew  up  to  manhood  and 
womanhood,  except  one,  and  all  have 
distinguished  themselves  as  faithful 
Latter-day  Saints. 

ANDERSEN,  George  David,  Bish- 
op of  the  Thatcher  First  Ward,  Ban- 
nock county,  Idaho,  was  born  Sept. 
2  3,  1861,  at  Richmond,  Cache  county, 
Utah,  the  son  of  Jorgen  Andersen 
and  Mary  Ann  Davis.  He  was  bap- 
tized when  eight  years  old  by  Chris- 
tian H.  Monson;  ordained  succes- 
sively to  the  offices  of  Deacon,  Priest 
and  Elder,  and  ordained  a  High 
Priest  July  28,  1901,  by  Mathias  F. 
Cowley  and  set  apart  as  second  coun- 
selor to  Bishop  Ira  Hogan.  He  was 
sustained  as  a  counselor  to  Bishop 
Nathan  D.  Thatcher,  Aug.  11,  1907, 
and  ordained  a  Bishop  Aug.  11,  1912. 
by  James  E.  Talmage  and  set  apart 
to  preside  over  the  Thatcher  First 
Ward.  From  his  youth  Bro.  Ander- 
sen has  been  an  energetic  and  suc- 
cessful Church  worker,  taking  active 
parts  as  superintendent  of  the  Ward 
Sunday  school  and  Y.  M.  M.  I.  A. 
He  settled  at  Thatcher,  Gentile  Val- 


LATTER-DAY   SAINT 


ley,  Idaho,  in  1894,  and  has  helped 
materially  to  build  up  that  country, 
both  spiritually  and  temporally.  In 
1887  (Dec.  7th)  he  married  Annie 
M.  Hogan  (daughter  of  Goudy  Hogan 
and    Ann    Nelson),    who    was    born 


March  14,  1868,  at  Richmond,  Cache 
county,  Utah.  This  marriage  has 
been  blessed  with  seven  children, 
namely,  Annie  Pearl,  Geo.  Ernest, 
Mary  Zina,  Inez,  Leo  Nels,  Reed  and 
Eva.  Farming  and  stock  raising 
have  been  the  principal  occupations 
of  Bishop  Andersen. 

ANDERSON,  AUce  Brooks,  wife  of 

Andrew  Anderson,  was  born  Feb.  16, 
1835,  at  Bolton,  Lancashire,  England, 
the  daughter  of  Samuel  Brooks  and 
Sarah  Ashley.  Her  father  was  a 
painter  by  trade  and  she  was  one  of 
three  children.  When  seventeen 
years  of  age,  she  became  a  convert 
to  "Mormonism"  by  hearing  Elders 
preach  at  Bolton  and  she  was  bap- 
tized June  2  6,  1849.  Her  parents 
being  highly  prejudiced  against  the 
saints,  she  labored  hard  to  get  the 
consent  of  her  parents  to  be  baptized. 
By  working  as  a  steam  weaver  in  a 
cotton  mill  she  earned  means  where- 
with to  emigrate  to  Zion,  but  ex- 
perienced great  difficulties  in  get- 
ting away  from  home,  as  her  father 


and  mother  objected  seriously  to  her 
going  to  Utah,  but  she  finally  suc- 
ceeded in  getting  away  and  crossed 
the  Atlantic  in  the  ship  "Horizon," 
together  with  nine  hundred  other 
saints.  From  Boston  the  journey 
was  continued  to  Iowa,  whence  she 
crossed  the  plains  in  the  ill-fated 
Capt.  Edward  Martin's  handcart  com- 
pany. She  writes  concerning  this 
journey:  "Some  days  we  traveled 
from  ten  to  fifteen  miles  and  one  day 
we  journeyed  thirty  miles.  Two  per- 
sons were  assigned  to  each  handcart 
and  only  seventeen  pounds  of  bag- 
gage was  allowed  each  passenger. 
Two  ox  teams  accompanying  the 
handcart  company  carried  tents  and 
rations.  We  usually  pitched  our 
tents  at  night  near  water  and 
gathered  buffalo  chips  for  fuel.  Hav- 
ing left  most  of  our  clothes  behind, 
we  were  compelled  to  spread  gunny- 
sacks  on  the  snow  for  bedding.  We 
often  sat  and  held  our  feet  in  our 
hands  at  night  to  keep  them  from 
freezing.  Our  eatables  consisted 
chiefly  of  flour,  tea  and  sugar,  and 


we  had  to  depend  upon  the  killing  of 
buffaloes  for  meat.  We  had  to  wade 
rivers,  and  finally  in  a  very  ex- 
hausted condition  we  were  helped  to 
the  Valley  by  teams  sent  out  to  meet 
us,    but   we   had   spent   three   weeks 


BIOGRAPHICAL   ENCYCLOPEDIA. 


in  the  snow  before  relief  came.  Dur- 
ing that  time,  when  our  cattle  gave 
out,  we  boiled  their  bones  for  soup, 
as  there  was  no  meat.  "We  also 
roasted  raw  hides  and  ate  them.  At 
last  we  found  ourselves  encamped  in 
a  ravine  near  Devils  Gate  with  just 
four  ounces  of  flour  to  each  person 
per  day  for  four  days.  A  great  num- 
ber of  our  people  died,  sometimes 
half  a  dozen  a  day,  and  on  one  occa- 
sion sixteen  persons  were  buried  in 
one  grave.  People  would  walk  until 
exhausted  and  then  drop  down  by 
the  wayside  dead,  leaving  their 
bodies  to  be  eaten  by  wolves,  as  the 
survivors,  on  account  of  the  frozen 
ground,  were  not  able  to  dig  graves 
deep  enough  to  secure  them  from 
ravenous  beasts.  In  their  starving 
condition  both  men  and  women 
seemed  to  become  devoid  of  all  hu- 
man feeling  and  lost  all  affection  for 
each  other.  The  children's  faces 
sometimes  assumed  the  appearance 
of  monkeys,  and  they  would  fre- 
quently grab  pieces  of  food  out  of 
each  others  mouths  and  die  crying 
for  bread.  We  climbed  mountains  to 
get  icicles  off  the  sage  brush  and 
melted  snow  to  obtain  water  where- 
with to  mix  our  flour.  At  Devils 
Gate  the  people  were  called  together 
for  prayer  and  asked  if  they  were 
willing  to  die  if  the  Lord  so  willed 
it,  or  if  they  were  sorry  they  had 
come.  They  all  answered  that  they 
were  willing  to  die  if  the  Lord  so 
willed  it,  but  they  were  not  sorry 
they  had  come.  Almost  at  the  same 
moment  was  witnessed  the  approach 
of  Joseph  A.  Young  on  a  white  horse. 
He  was  hailed  by  us  as  the  arrival 
of  an  angel.  Men  and  women  sur- 
rounded him,  weeping  and  holding 
onto  him,  pleading  with  him  to  save 
them  from  death.  Elder  Young  went 
back  and  reported,  and  the  next 
night  we  received  a  pound  of  flour 
each.  In  traveling  through  Echo 
canyon,  camp  fires  were  built  every 
quarter  of  a  mile  to  thaw  out  those 
who  lingered  behind.     At  last  we  ar- 


rived in  Salt  Lake  City,  Nov.  30, 
1856."  In  Dec,  1856,  Sister  Brooks 
went  to  East  Weber,  Utah,  where 
she  met  Andrew  Anderson,  to  whom 
she  was  married  March  9,  1857,  in 
the  Endowment  House  in  Salt  Lake 
City.  Together  with  her  husband  she 
participated  in  the  "great  move" 
south  in  1858  on  account  of  John- 
ston's army.  They  had  piled  straw 
around  their  homes  before  leaving 
them  with  a  view  to  setting  fire  to 
them,  if  necessary.  After  "the  move" 
the  family  located  at  Hyrum,  Cache 
Valley,  Utah,  where  they  frequently 
were  exposed  to  Indians.  Sister 
Anderson  is  the  mother  of  ten  chil- 
dren, five  boys  and  five  girls;  four 
boys  and  three  girls  are  now  living 
(1918).  While  in  a  starving  and 
freezing  condition  on  the  plains,  and 
also  later  when  passing  through  great 
difficulties.  Sister  Anderson  felt  en- 
couraged in  remembering  a  prophecy 
uttered  by  a  brother  speaking  in 
tongues  in  England,  who  blessed  her 
and  said  she  should  gather  to  the 
land  of  Zion  and  become  a  mother  in 
Israel.  This  prophecy  was  literally 
fulfilled.  Sister  Anderson  died  a 
faithful  Latter-day  Saint  Aug.  24, 
1915,  at  Hyrum,  Cache  county,  Utah. 

ANDERSON,  Anton  Edward,  a  vet- 
eran Elder  of  the  Kaysville  Ward, 
Davis  county,  Utah,  was  born  Aug. 
18,  1839,  in  Vestby,  Praestegjaeld, 
Norway,  the  son  of  Anders  Ander- 
sen and  Ellen  Marie  Bigmuldsen.  He 
was  baptized  May  4.  1865,  by  Chris- 
topher Jensen  Kempe  and  married 
Augusta  Amelia  Anderson,  daughter 
of  Guldbrand  and  Valby  Anderson, 
April  22,  186  6;  she  was  born  March 
11,  1833,  in  Norway.  Together  with 
his  young  wife,  Bro.  Anderson  emi- 
grated to  America  in  18  6  6,  crossing 
the  Atlantic  Ocean  in  the  ship  "Hum- 
boldt," which  sailed  from  Hamburg 
June  2,  18  66,  and  arrived  in  New 
York  July  18,  1866;  they  crossed 
the  plains  in  Capt.  Andrew  H.  Scott's 
company,  which  arrived  in  Salt  Lake 
City  Oct.   8,   1866.     After  a  temper- 


6 


LATTER-DAY   SAINT 


ary  residence  at  Provo   they   moved  ship    "Electric,"    which    sailed    from 

to  Santaquin,  Utah  county,  in  1868,  Hamburg,    April    18,    1863,    and    ar- 

where   Bro.   Anderson's     wife     died  rived    at    New    York   June    5,    1863. 

Sept.   4,   1874,  after  giving  birth  to  After    crossing    the    plains    in    Capt. 

three  sons  who  all  died  in  infancy.  John    F.    Sanders'    company    (which 


In  1875  (March  1st)  Bro.  Anderson 
married  Pernilla  Johnson,  who  has 
borne  her  husband  eight  children. 
Bro.  Anderson  was  ordained  a  Seven- 
ty March  24,  1867,  by  Wm.  Tolbet, 
and  filled  a  mission  to  Minnesota  in 
1877-1878.  In  the  fall  of  1879  he 
moved  with  his  family  to  Fairview, 
and  in  1882  to  Mt.  Pleasant,  San- 
pete county,  Utah.  In  1886  he  moved 
to  Evanston,  Wyoming,  and  in  1889 
he  became  a  resident  of  Kaysville, 
where  he  was  ordained  a  High  Priest 
and  died  May  25,  1906.  While  re- 
siding at  Santaquin  Bro.  Anderson 
acted  as  superintendent  of  the  Ward 
Sunday  school,  and  throughout  his 
entire  life  he  was  an  active  and 
faithful  worker  in  the  Church. 

ANDERSON,      Pernilla      Johnson, 

wife  of  Anton  Edward  Anderson,  was 
born  Sept.  16,  1850,  at  Annelov, 
Skane,  Sweden,  the  daughter  of  Es- 
kild  Johnson,  and  Hanna  Larson. 
She  was  baptized  when  eight  years 
of  age  by  Elder  M.  Rosenberg,  emi- 
grated with  her  parents  to  Utah  in 
1863,    crossing   the   Atlantic   in    the 


4 


arrived  in  Salt  Lake  City  Sept.  5, 
18  63)  she  settled  at  Provo,  but 
moved  in  18  65  to  Santaquin,  where 
she  became  acquainted  with  Bro.  An- 
ton Edward  Anderson,  to  whom  she 
was  married  March  1,  1875.  For 
many  years  Sister  Anderson  has  been 
a  most  faithful  and  devoted  Relief 
Society  worker.  She  is  the  mother 
of  eight  children. 

ANDERSON,  Christian,  Bishop  of 
the  Jameston  Ward  (Shelley  Stake), 
Bingham  county,  Idaho,  was  born 
Jan.  31,  1867,  at  Ephraim,  Sanpete 
county,  Utah,  the  son  of  Christian 
Anderson  and  Annie  C.  Larsen.  He 
was  baptized  Sept.  20,  1875,  by  A.  C. 
Nielsen;  was  ordained  a  Deacon  by 
Cornelius  Collard;  ordained  a  Priest 
by  Geo.  Crowther  Jan.  17,  1886,  and 
ordained  an  Elder  by  the  late  A.  M. 
Baerentsen,  Aug.  26,  1888.  Three 
days  later  (Aug.  2  9,  1888)  he  mar- 
ried Martha  Marie  Christensen  in 
the  Manti  Temple.  This  marriage  has 
been  blessed  with  twelve  children 
namely,  Terrance  C,  Randall  L.,  An- 


BIOGRAPHICAL  ENCYCLOPEDIA. 


ton  F.,  Mable  E.,  Howard  W.  (now 
filling  a  mission  in  Samoa),  Ernest 
D.,  Anna  C.  (deceased),  Chas.  I., 
Martha  L.,  Mary  L.,  Reed  W.,  and 
Edward  W.  For  a  number  of  years 
Elder    Anderson    filled    the    position 


of  Sunday  school  superintendent  in 
the  Taylor  Ward,  Idaho,  and  in  1902 
(Aug.  10th)  he  was  ordained  a  Bish- 
op by  Pres.  Jos.  F.  Smith  and  set 
apart  to  preside  over  the  Taylor 
Ward,  having  previously  acted  as 
counselor  to  Bishop  Wm.  Priest. 
When  the  Jameston  Ward  was  or- 
ganized in  1907,  Bro.  Anderson  was 
set  apart  to  preside  as  Bishop  of 
the  same  by  Apostle  Rudger  Claw- 
son,  Oct.  13,  1907.  Bro.  Anderson 
has  been  active  in  both  ecclesiastical 
and  secular  affairs  from  his  early 
youth.  For  many  years  he  acted  as 
justice  of  the  peace  in  the  Taylor 
precinct,  served  as  a  member  of  the 
school  board  for  fifteen  years,  acted 
as  president  of  the  Idaho  Irrigation 
District  seven  years,  etc.  During  his 
residence  in  the  Snake  River  Valley 
for  25  years  he  has  principally 
been  engaged  in  farming  and  stock- 
raising  and  has  taken  a  most  active 
part  in  building  up  the  country. 

ANDERSON,     Peter,     Bishop     and 
Patriarch    in    the    Millard    Stake    of 


Zion,  Millard  county,  Utah,  was  born 
Dec.  10,  1847,  at  Svendstrup,  Den- 
mark, the  son  of  Jens  Andersen  and 
Anne  Petersen.  He  was  baptized  in 
1856;  emigrated  to  America  with 
his  parents  when  a  boy,  leaving 
Copenhagen,  Denmark,  Dec.  22,  1853, 
and  crossing  the  Atlantic  in  the  ship 
"Jesse  Munn,"  which  arrived  at  New 
Orleans,  Feb.  16,  1854.  After  travel- 
ing up  the  Mississippi  river,  he 
crossed  the  plains  in  Hans  Peter 
Olsen's  company,  which  arrived  in 
Salt  Lake  City,  Oct.  4,  1854.  The 
family  located  at  Fillmore,  Millard 
county,  where  the  father  died  Oct.  18, 
1855,  leaving  the  mother  with  three 
small  boys  without  any  support,  and 
being  unable  to  speak  the  English 
language,  she  passed  through  experi- 
ences which  were  calculated  to  test 
her  faith  to  the  utmost.  In  1857 
she  married  John  Lovell,  a  good  man, 
by  whom  she  had  five  chidlren,  and 
moved  to  Deseret,  being  one  of  the 
first  settlers  of  that  place.  When 
Deseret  broke  up  she  moved  to  Oak 
City    in    the    fall    of    1868.         Peter 


Anderson  was  baptized  in  185  6  by 
Horace  Owens;  was  ordained  a  Priest 
Feb.  2,  1868,  by  John  Lovell;  or- 
dained an  Elder  by  Platte  D.  Lyman; 
ordained  a  High  Priest  and  set  apart 
as  Bishop  of  Oak  Creek  Ward  Dec.  1, 


8 


LATTER-DAY   SAINT 


1880,  by  Apostle  Francis  M.  Lyman. 
He  served  as  Bishop  of  said  Ward 
from  1880  to  1907,  and  was  ordained 
a  Patriarch  in  the  Deseret  Stake  at 
Delta,  Dec.  27,  l'dl4,  by  Apostle  Rud- 
ger  Clawson.  In  1873  (April  14th) 
Elder  Anderson  married  Martha  Ann 
Lovell  who  became  the  mother  of 
nine  children,  namely,  Peter  Edwin, 
John  Lee,  Sylvia  Alice,  Ann  Eliza- 
beth, Martha  Ellen,  Agnes  Eleanor, 
Sarah  Delilah,  Geo.  Hyrum  and 
Joseph  Elmer.  In  1882  (Oct.  9th) 
Bro.  Anderson  married  Annie  Lyman, 
and  the  names  of  her  children  are 
Frederic  Clisbee,  Caroline  Ely,  Lucy, 
Mason  Bldon,  Lois,  Don  Lyman, 
Francis  Ellis  and  Ethelyn.  Patriarch 
Anderson  is  one  of  the  strongest  and, 
most  influential  men  in  Millard  coun- 
ty and  has  gained  a  great  record  for 
usefulness,  stability  and  honesty.  His 
occupation  has  been  that  of  farming, 
fruit-  and  stock-raising  and  mining, 
and  from  the  time  he  first  set  his 
feet  on  the  soils  of  Utah  he  has  been 
in  the  foremost  ranks  laboring  for 
the  upbuilding  and  improvement  of 
the  country. 

ANDERSON,    Peter,    one    of    the 

early  settlers  of  Morgan  county,  Utah, 
was  born  June  25,  1836,  at  Vestre- 
toten,  near  Bergen,  Norway,  the  son 
of  Anders  Peterson  and  Gunnel  Knut- 
son.  Becoming  a  convert  to  "Mor- 
monism"  he  was  baptized  August  5, 

1860,  by  Peter  Olson,  and  emigrated 
with  wife  and  two  children  to  Amer- 
ica in  1861,  crossing  the  Atlantic 
in  the  ship  "Monarch  of  the  Sea" 
which  sailed  from  Liverpool  May  16, 

1861.  He  crossed  the  plains  in 
Samuel  A.  WooUey's  company,  which 
arrived  in  Salt  Lake  City  Sept.  22, 
1861.  •  In  1863  he  settled  at  Peter- 
son, Morgan  county,  Utah,  and  in 
1882-84  he  filled  a  mission  to  Nor- 
way. In  1856  he  married  Martha 
Hansen,  who  bore  her  husband  nine 
children.  In  1884  (Dec.  11th)  he 
married  Dorthea  Maria  Gulbrandsen, 
who  bore  her  husband  six  children. 


Having  thus  yielded  obedience  to  the 
higher  law  of  marriage  and  refusing 
to  forsake  either  wife  or  children. 
Brother  Anderson  was  arrested  on  a 
charge  of  unlawful  cohabitation,  and 
being  convicted  served  six  months  in 


the  Utah  penitentiary,  as  a  result  of 
his  faithfulness  and  honest  convic- 
tions. 

ANDERSON,  Martha  Hansen,  wife 
of  Peter  Anderson,  was  born  Feb. 
27,  1829,  at  Elverom,  Osterdalen, 
Norway,  the  daughter  of  Breda  Han- 
sen and  Ingeborg  Hansen.  Becom- 
ing a  convert  to  "Mormonism"  she 
was  baptized  August  5,  18  60,  by 
Peter  Olsen  and  emigrated  with  her 
husband  to  America  in  1861.  From 
Omaha  to  Salt  Lake  City  she  walked 
all  the  way  and  carried  a  baby  in 
her  arms.  While  crossing  one  of 
the  rivers,  where  the  water  was  very 
deep,  she  had  to  hold  the  baby  above 
her  head,  the  water  reaching  to  her 
shoulders.  As  the  stream  was  about 
to  carry  her  and  the  baby  away,  a 
man  by  the  name  of  Olsen  jumped 
in  the  water  from  the  opposite  bank 
and  saved  them  both.  Sister  Ander- 
son became  the  mother  of  nine  chil- 
dren, five  boys  and  four  girls;  she 
was  an  active  Relief  Society  worker 


BIOGRAPHICAL   ENCYCLOPEDIA. 


and  presided  over  the  Ward  Relief 
Society  at  Peterson  about  six  years. 
She  was  a  remarkable  woman  of 
very  strong  character,  and  in  early 
days  was  often  termed  the  "Good 
Samaritan,"  as  her  house  was  always 


open  to  hungry  and  weary  emigrants 
or  travelers.  Her  house  was  a  typi- 
cal country  hotel,  except  that  she 
never  was  known  to  make  any  charge. 
And  when  the  appreciative  traveler, 
whether  stranger  or  acquaintance, 
would  ask  what  the  bill  was  for  such 
royal  good  treatment,  she  would  in- 
variably answer  with  a  pleasing  and 
welcome  smile,  "Always  care  for 
those  in  need  as  I  have  cared  for 
you  and  thus  your  bill  will  be  paid 
in  full."  Sister  Anderson  died  at 
Peterson,  Morgan  county,  Utah,  April 
15,  1902. 

ANDERSON,  James  Albert,  fifth 
Bishop  of  North  Morgan,  Morgan 
county,  Utah,  was  born  Feb.  22, 1874, 
at  Peterson,  Morgan  county,  Utah, 
the  son  of  Peter  Anderson  and 
Martha  Hanson.  He  was  baptized 
June  17,  1883.  by  Ola  O.  Wald;  or- 
dained a  Teacher  April  2,  1893,  by 
Eli  Whitear,  and  at  the  age  of  twenty- 
one  he  was  ordained  a  High  Priest 
and  set  apart  as  second  counselor  to 


Bishop  Robbins,  of  the  Peterson 
Ward;  subsequently  he  acted  as  first 
counselor  to  Bishop  Ezra  Parrish  of 
the  same  Ward.  After  following  the 
occupation  of  a  farmer  and  ranch- 
man at  Peterson,  Utah,  he  com- 
menced business  as  a  wholesale  pro- 
duce dealer  in  1901,  and  in  1903,  to- 
gether with  others,  he  incorporated 
the  company  known  as  the  Pingree- 
Anderson  Company  and  purchased 
the  flour  mill  at  Morgan  with  a  paid 
up  capital  stock  of  $15,000.  In  1904 
he  incorporated  the  Weber  Valley 
Produce  Company  with  a  paid  up 
capital  stock  of  $5000.  In  1894, 
with  James  Pingree  and  others,  he 
incorporated  the  Morgan  Canning 
Company  with  a  paid  up  capital  of 
$10,000,  and  also  organized  the  First 
National  Bank  of  Morgan,  together 
with  capitalists  from  Ogden.  The 
canning  factory  started  as  one  of  the 
smallest  institutions  of  its  kind  in 
Utah,  but  increased  its  capacity  and 
facilities  for  canning  peas  each  year, 
and  in  1913  the  company  built  a 
large  new  factory  at  North  Morgan, 


which  at  present  is  the  best  equipped 
and  one  of  the  largest  canning  fac- 
tories of  its  kind  in  the  world.  From 
1910  to  1912  he  was  general  man- 
ager and  the  largest  stockholder  of 
the  Blackhawk  Coal  Company,  a  cor- 


10 


LATTER-DAY   SAINT 


poration  with  a  paid  up  capital  of 
half  a  million  dollars.  Brother 
Anderson  was  ordained  a  Bishop 
April  3,  IdlO,  by  Apostle  Orson  F. 
Whitney.  He  has  been  very  ener- 
getic in  his  Ward  duties  since  he 
was  ordained  Bishop  and  has  taken 
the  lead  in  the  erection  of  a  beauti- 
ful gray  stone  meeting  house  at 
North  Morgan,  at  a  cost  of  $18,000. 
Bro.  Anderson  received  a  grammar 
grade  education  in  the  district 
school^  and  attended  the  Brigham 
Young  College  two  years.  He  has 
served  three  terms  in  the  Utah  Legis- 
lature. On  Oct.  10,  1907,  he  married 
Martha  Sophia  Heiner,  who  was  born 
April  26,  1884,  at  Morgan,  Utah.  She 
is  the  daughter  of  Daniel  Heiner  and 
Martha  Stevens.  Bishop  Anderson, 
together  with  his  brother  Joseph  M. 
Anderson,  now  own  and  operate  the 
Morgan   Canning  Company. 

BAJLL,  Samuel  Frederick,  a  Patri- 
arch in  the  Salt  Lake  Stake  of  Zion, 
was  born  April  14,  1849,  at  Stock 
Cross,  Berkshire,  England,  the  son 
of  Samuel  Leonard  Ball  and  Hannah 
Maria  Marshall.  He  was  baptized 
July  2,  1876,  by  Wm.  L.  Binder; 
ordained  a  Priest  April  1,  1877;  or- 
dained an  Elder  Nov.  4,  1877;  or- 
dained a  Seventy  March  31,  1884; 
set  apart  as  a  president  of  the  2nd 
quorum  of  Seventy  Feb.  2  6,  1900; 
ordained  a  High  Priest  May  8,  1904, 
by  Geo.  R.  Emery  and  set  apart  as  first 
counselor  to  Bishop  Theodore  Mc- 
Kean  in  the  Twenty-ninth  Ward.  He 
was  ordained  a  Patriarch  Sept.  28, 
1914,  by  Pres.  Francis  M.  Lyman; 
became  a  member  of  Pres.  Geo.  Q. 
Cannon's  prayer  circle  Nov.  13,  1885; 
was  appointed  second  assistant  sup- 
erintendent of  the  Fifteenth  Ward 
Sunday  School,  Salt  Lake  City,  in 
1891;  moved  to  the  Twenty-second 
Ward  in  1899,  labored  in  that  Ward 
as  first  assistant  Sunday  school  sup- 
erintendent and  afterwards  as  super- 
intendent. After  the  division  of  the 
Twenty-second  Ward  in  1902  he  was 


sustained  as  superintendent  of  the 
Twenty-ninth  Ward  Sunday  school 
and  became  Ward  clerk  in  1903.  Be- 
fore emigrating  from  his  native  land 
Bro.  Ball  acted  as  president  of  the 
Lambeth  branch  of  the  London  con- 
ference three  years  and  baptized 
many  people,  quite  a  number  of 
whom  were  his  own  converts.  He 
emigrated  to  America  in  June,  1881, 
crossing  the  Atlantic  in  the  steam- 
ship "Wyoming,"  and  arrived  in  Salt 
Lake  City  July  15,  1881.  In  March, 
1873,  he  married  Margaret  Porney  at 
Brighton,  England,  a  Baptist  minister 
officiating.  This  marriage  was  blessed 
with  six  children  up  to  the  time  he 


left  London,  one  of  whom  died  on  the 
journey  from  England.  Altogether 
this  wife  has  borne  him  fourteen  chil- 
dren. In  1882  he  married  Ellen 
Maria  Powell,  who  became  the 
mother  of  six  children;  afterwards 
he  married  Maggie  Brown,  who  is 
the  mother  of  four  children.  These 
mothers  are  all  living  as  well  as 
fifteen  children.  Owing  to  his  mar- 
riage relations  he  was  arrested  and 
convicted  of  socalled  unlawful  co- 
habitation and  was  sentenced  to  a 
term  of  six  months  in  the  Utah  peni- 
tentiary March  1,  188  6.  During  the 
time  of  his  imprisonment  Gov.  Caleb 
W.   West   paid   the   brethren   a   visit 


BIOGRAPHICAL   ENCYCLOPEDIA. 


11 


and  offered  them  their  freedom  if 
they  would  promise  to  obey  the  law, 
but  he  was  among  the  49  Elders  who 
replied  in  a  manifesto  that  they 
would  rather  spend  the  remainder  of 
their  lives  in  prison  or  suffer  death 
than  go  back  on  their  wives.  Many 
years  ago  Bro.  Ball  bought  the  old 
Globe  bakery  and  was  in  business  for 
many  years,  passing  through  all  the 
changes  known  to  Main  street  busi- 
ness. Throughout  he  has  been  very 
successful  in  business,  being  an  ex- 
pert in  his  profession,  which  he 
learned  to  a  high  degree  of  perfection 
in  London.  For  many  years  he  has 
had  charge  of  the  commissary  depart- 
ment of  the  Old  Folks'  excursions. 

BARNES,  William  Jeffries,  one  of 

the  early  settlers  of  Kaysville,  Davis 
county,  Utah,  was  born  August  2  0, 
1820,  in  Bedfordshire,  England,  the 
son  of  William  Barnes  and  Elizabeth 
Jeffries.  He  emigrated  to  Utah  in 
1853  and  settled  at  Kaysville,  where 


he  took  an  active  part  in  the  building 
of  the  old  fort,  making  canals  and 
water  ditches,  fighting  grasshoppers 
and  crickets,  building  meeting  houses, 
etc.  He  was  always  an  active  and 
faithful  member  of  the  Church.  Bro. 
Barnes  was  twice  married;  his  first 
wife    Frances    Chapman     (whom    he 


married  in  England)  was  the  mother 
of  eleven  children;  later  he  married 
Mary  Symonds  and  Sarah  Sugden. 
In  1870  he  filled  a  six  months'  mis- 
sion to  the  Muddy  valley,  in  Nevada, 
and  returned  to  Kaysville  when  the 
settlements  on  the  Muddy  were 
broken  up  in  1871.  Here  he  died 
in  November,  1893,  73  years  old, 
leaving  a  large  posterity. 

BARNEY,  Alma,  an  energetic  mem- 
ber of  the  High  Council  of  the 
Panguitch   Stake   and    a   resident   of 


Panguitch,  Garfield  county,  Utah, 
was  born  July  14,  1848,  at  Spring- 
field, 111.,  the  son  of  Henry  Barney 
and  Mary  Lucus.  He  migrated  to 
Utah  with  his  parents  in  18  50  and 
lived  in  Provo  two  years.  The  family 
thence  moved  to  Manti,  Sanpete 
county,  later  to  Parowan,  Iron  coun- 
ty, thence  to  Harmony,  and  still  later 
to  Utah's  Dixie,  where  they  lived  at 
Virgin  City  ten  years;  thence  the 
family  residence  was  changed  to 
Kanarra.  Bro.  Barney  was  baptized 
by  John  D.  Lee  when  eight  years 
old;  was  ordained  successively  to 
the  offices  of  Deacon,  Teacher  and 
Priest,  and  ordained  an  Elder  Oct.  1, 
1871,  by  Ellas  Smith.  From  1872  to 
1884  he  acted  as  president  of  the 
first  quorum  of  Elders  in  the  Pan- 


12 


LATTER-DAY  SAINT 


guitch  Stake.  He  was  ordained  a 
High  Priest  April  3,  1887,  by  John 
Taylor  and  set  apart  as  second  coun- 
selor to  Bishop  Geo.  W.  Sevey.  Sub- 
sequently he  acted  as  first  counselor 
to  Jos.  C.  Davis  of  the  Panguitch 
First  Ward.  In  1894  he  was  chosen 
as  Stake  superintendent  of  Sunday 
schools  and  acted  for  a  number  of 
years  as  a  justice  of  the  peace.  In 
the  early  days  he  took  an  active  part 
in  the  Navajo  and  Black  Hawk  wars. 
In  1871  (Sept.  22nd)  Bro.  Barney 
married  Alice  Ann  Gardner  (daugh- 
ter of  Henry  B.  Gardner  and  Harriet 
Ingram),  who  was  born  August  15, 
1850,  in  Oving,  Sussex  county,  Eng- 
land, and  emigrated  to  Utah  with 
her  mother  in  1854,  crossing  the  At- 
lantic in  the  ship  "Golconda,"  and 
the  plains  in  Daniel  Gam's  company, 
which  arrived  in  Salt  Lake  City,  Oct. 

I,  1854,  She  bore  her  husband  ten 
children,  namely,  Alma,  Harriet, 
George  Henry,  Mary  Alice,  Sarah 
Elizabeth,  Edgar  Lawrence,  Jose- 
phine, Jesse  Newton,  Grace  Odella 
and  Eva  Delilah.  The  family  moved 
to  Panguitch  in  1871,  where  Elder 
Barney  has  lived  ever  since. 

BARRUS,  Ruel,  a  member  of  the 
Mormon  Battalion,  was  born  August 

II,  1821,  at  Villanova,  Chautauqua 
county,  N.  Y.,  the  son  of  Benjamin 
Barrus  and  Betsey  Stebbins.  His 
ancestors  on  both  sides  fought  in 
the  Revolutionary  war,  and  his 
father  also  fought  in  the  war  of 
1812  and  was  wounded  at  the  burn- 
ing of  Buffalo.  Ruel  lost  his  father 
by  death  when  an  infant,  and  he 
was  but  seven  years  old  when  his 
mother  died.  At  the  age  of  nine- 
teen he  became  a  convert  to  "Mor- 
monism"  and  went  to  live  with  his 
brother  Alexander  in  Pennsylvania, 
but  as  his  brother  was  unfriendly 
to  the  "Mormons,"  Ruel  went  to 
Nauvoo,  111.,  in  1844,  where  he 
joined  his  brother  Emery  who  had 
also  become  a  convert  to  "Mormon- 
Ism."     In   October,    1844,   Ruel   was 


baptized,  and  in  1845  he  was  or- 
dained a  Seventy  in  the  Nauvoo 
Temple.  When  the  call  was  made 
for  a  battalion  to  participate  in  the 
Mexican  war,  Bro.  Barrus  enlisted 
in  the  Mormon  Battalion  and  be- 
came second  lieutenant  in  Company 
B.  He  was  with  the  battalion  dur- 
ing the  entire  march  to  California, 
and  on  July  16,  1847,  he  re-enlisted 
and  served  the  United  States  eight 
more  months.  After  his  release  he 
accompanied  Elder  Parley  P.  Pratt 
on  a  two  years'  mission  In  Northern 


California,  spent  a  year  in  the  Santa 
Clara  valley  and  came  to  Utah  in 
1857,  locating  at  Grantsville,  Tooele 
county.  In  1859  (August  10th)  he 
married  Ellen  Martin,  who  bore  her 
husband  nine  children,  and  died 
August  19,  1914.  Five  of  these 
children  are  still  living.  After  set- 
tling at  Grantsville,  Bro.  Barrus  en- 
gaged in  cattle  and  sheep  raising,  in 
which  he  was  fairly  successful;  he 
also  followed  farming  to  some  ex- 
tent. At  the  time  of  the  Johnston 
Army  troubles,  Bro.  Barrus  organ- 
ized a  company  of  militia,  of  which 
he  became  the  major.  Throughout 
his  life  he  rendered  his  country  and 
Church  efficient  service.  When  he 
joined  the  Battalion  he  had  a  team 
and   wagon   for   which   he   had   been 


BIOGRAPHICAL  ENCYCLOPEDIA. 


13 


offered  $500;  he  gave  it  to  the 
company  with  which  he  had  been 
traveling.  Bro.  Barrus  died  Feb.  10, 
1918,  at  the  age  of  ninety-six  and  a 
half  years.  He  has  living  five  chil- 
dren, twelve  grand  children  and  eight 
great  grand  children.  The  names  of 
his  children  are:  Ellen  P.,  born 
Feb.  2,  1861;  Betsy  A.,  born  Nov. 
11,  1862;  Zelpha  A.,  born  March 
28,  1864;  Fannie  Ida,  born  June  11, 
1866;  Loana,  born  August  12,  1870; 
Ruel  Monta,  born  March  14,  1873; 
Darius  Martin,  born  April  20,  1876; 
Royal  Layton,  born  June  27,  1879, 
and  Essie  Glee,  born  March  13,  1885. 

BABBUS,  Ellen  Martin,  wife  of 
Ruel  Barrus,  was  born  Sept.  2  3, 
1843,  in  Bedfordshire,  England,  the 
daughter     of     Samuel     Martin     and 


Priscilla  Layton.  Her  parents  joined 
the  Church  when  she  was  but  a 
child  and  left  England  for  America 
Oct.  2,  1850,  crossing  the  Atlantic 
in  the  ship  "James  Pennell,"  which 
arrived  at  New  Orleans,  whence  the 
emigrants  went  up  the  Mississippi 
river  to  St.  Louis,  Mo.,  where  the 
Martin  family  lived  about  five  years. 
Here  Sister  Ellen's  mother  died  and 
her  father  married  a  second  time. 
The  family  left  St.  Louis  in  1855 
for  Utah,  crossing  the  plains  in  Rich- 


ard Ballantyne's  company  which  ar- 
rived in  Salt  Lake  City  September 
2  5,  1855.  The  family  located  at 
Grantsville,  Tooele  county.  Ellen 
Martin  was  married  to  Ruel  Barrus, 
a  member  of  the  Mormon  Battalion, 
Aug.  10,  1859.  This  union  was  blessed 
with  nine  children.  Sister  Barrus 
rendered  much  service  to  the  Church 
and  to  the  community  at  large;  was 
a  favorite  nurse  among  the  sick,  and 
very  generous  and  sympathetic  in 
all  her  movements  in  life.  She 
died  at  Grantsville  August  19,  1914, 
mourned  and  missed  by  all  who  had 
been  associated  with  her  in  life. 
She  was  survived  by  her  husband 
Ruel  Barrus,  who  died  Feb.  10, 
1918,  96  years  of  age.  Two  bro- 
thers, two  sisters,  five  children, 
twelve  grandchildren  and  eight  great 
grandchildren  survived  Sister  Barrus. 

BATES,  Orson  Parley,  president  of 
the  Batesville  branch  of  the  Tooele 
Ward  (Tooele  Stake),  Tooele  coun- 
ty, Utah,  was  born  March  3,  1836, 
at  Ellisburg,  Henderson  county,  N.  Y., 
the  son  of  Ormus  E.  Bates  and 
Phebe  Maria  Matteson.  The  Bates 
family  descended  from  the  New  York 
stock  of  Revolutionary  times,  whose 
forefathers  came  from  England  about 
1630.  Orson  P.  was  baptized  in 
Nauvoo,  111.,  in  1845,  by  his  father, 
came  to  Utah  with  his  parents  in 
1851,  and  as  a  member  of  his 
father's  family  he  became  one  of  the 
first  settlers  of  Batesville  in  1852. 
He  moved  to  Tooele  about  1865,  but 
returned  to  Batesville  in  1872.  In 
1871-72  he  filled  a  mission  to  the 
United  States  and  soon  after  his  re- 
turn (in  1873)  he  was  appointed  to 
preside  over  the  Batesville  branch. 
In  1877  he  was  chosen  as  a  mem- 
ber of  the  High  Council  of  the 
Tooele  Stake,  which  position  he 
filled  until  his  death  in  January, 
1899.  In  1867  he  married  Ann 
Elizabeth  Brower,  daughter  of  Ariah 
C.  Brower  and  Cordelia  Ann  Thomp- 
son, by  whom  he  had  eleven  chil- 
dren, namely,  Orson  Parley,   Martha 


14 


LATTER-DAY   SAINT 


Ann,  Ormus  Ariah,  Valeria,  Alice, 
Franklin  Lafayette,  Harriet  Eliza- 
beth, Ida  Leona,  George  Albion, 
Bertram  Edward  and  Lyman  William. 
He  also  married  Harriet  Bates, 
daughter  of  Cyrus  and  Harriet  Bates, 
by  whom  he  had  three  children, 
namely,  Lula,  Effie  and  Emily 
Elida. 

BATES,  Ormus  Ariah,  third  Bish- 
op of  Batesville,  Tooele  county, 
Utah,    was   born    Dec.    10,    1860,    at 


taken  special  interest  in  teaching 
his  pupils  music;  thus  he  taught 
singing  in  schools  and  choirs  in  dif- 
ferent Wards,  both  in  Utah  and 
Idaho.  In  1892  (Nov.  29th)  he  mar- 
ried Sarah  M.  Martin  (daughter  of 
Robt.  Martin  and  Susannah  Thomp- 
son) who  was  born  March  2  2,  1870. 
The  issue  of  this  marriage  is  ten 
children,  namely,  Ormus  O.,  Hart, 
Robt.  Orson,  Anthony  M.,  Lawrence 
Nelson,  Edith  Martin,  Lucian,  Alvin 
Dwight,  Vane  Quentin  and  Leneve. 
Bro.  Bates  was  ordained  a  Bishop 
March  11,  1906,  and  set  apart  to 
preside  over  the  Batesville  Ward, 
which  position  he  held  until  June 
28,  1908,  when  he  was  released  and 
moved  to  Tooele. 

BAYLES,  Hanson,  Bishop  of  Bland- 
ing,  San  Juan  county,  Utah,  was  born 
Nov.  29,  1857,  at  Parowan,  Iron 
county,  Utah,  the  son  of  Herman 
Daggett  and  Anna  Fredericka  Easter. 


Bates  ranch  (now  Batesville,  Tooele 
county,  Utah),  the  son  of  Orson  Par- 
ley Bates  and  Ann  Elizabeth  Brower. 
He  was  baptized  in  186d  by  Geo. 
Atkin;  ordained  a  Seventy  Oct.  8, 
1883,  by  Lorenzo  Snow;  filled  a  mis- 
sion to  the  Southern  States  in  1883- 
86,  laboring  principally  in  Missis- 
sippi; ordained  a  High  Priest  April 
2,  1899,  by  Francis  M.  Lyman  and 
set  apart  as  second  counselor  to 
Bishop  Chas.  A.  Orme;  acted  as 
president  of  a  Ward  Y.  M.  M.  I.  A. 
and  superintendent  of  the  Ward  Sun- 
day school.  He  taught  school  at 
Holden,  Millard  county,  Utah,  seven 
years,  at  Nephi,  Juab  county,  two 
years,  at  Tooele,  Tooele  county,  thir- 
teen years,  and  in  Cassia  county, 
Idaho,  three  years.  Altogether  he 
taught    school    26     years,     and    has 


As  a  child  he  attended  such  schools 
as  his  native  village  afforded  and 
shared  the  hard  work  of  making  a 
living  on  the  rugged  frontiers.  While 
still  a  boy  he  was  ordained  to  the 
office  of  Teacher  and  at  the  age  of 
sixteen  to  the  office  of  Elder,  the 
later  ordination  taking  place  under 
the  hands  of  Wm.  Woodward  prepar- 


BIOGRAPHICAL   ENCYCLOPEDIA. 


15 


atory  to  work  which  he  did  for  the 
dead  in  the  St.  George  Temple.  In 
April,  1879,  he  accompanied  an  ex- 
ploring party  sent  by  the  General 
Authorities  of  the  Church  to  find  a 
place  for  settlement  on  the  San  Juan 
river.  Crossing  the  Colorado  at  Lee's 
Ferry,  and  traveling  through  North- 
ern Arizona,  they  reached  the  present 
site  of  Bluff  in  June,  1879.  Return- 
ing by  way  of  Castle  valley,  they  ar- 
rived home  Sept.  16,  187d,  after  a 
most  trying  and  eventful  trip.  In 
1880  (Nov.  3rd)  Bro.  Bayles  married 
Mary  Ann  Durham  in  the  St.  George 
Temple,  John  D.  T.  McAllister  offici- 
ating. On  Nov.  9,  1880,  he  started 
with  his  young  wife  for  the  San  Juan 
Mission,  reaching  Bluff  Dec.  22, 
1880.  In  all  the  hardships,  disap- 
pointments and  perilous  times  inci- 
dent to  the  early  life  of  Bluff,  Bro. 
Bayles  took  a  most  active  part,  labor- 
ing for  the  temporal  and  spiritual 
welfare  of  the  little  colony  in  what- 
ever place  he  was  called  to  fill.  His 
wife  died  in  child-bed  Jan.  31,  1888, 
leaving  him  four  small  children.  Nine 
years  later  (July  14,  1897)  he  mar- 
ried Evelyn  Lyman.  Bro.  Bayles  was 
ordained  a  High  Priest  Feb.  2  0. 
1893,  by  Pres.  Francis  A.  Hammond 
and  set  apart  as  a  High  Councilor  in 
San  Juan  Stake.  He  served  as  a 
special  Y.  M.  M.  I.  A.  missionary  in 
San  Luis  and  San  Juan  Stakes  during 
the  winter  of  1897-98.  For  several 
years  he  was  assistant  Stake  superin- 
tendent of  Sunday  schools  and  from 
July,  1905,  to  August,  1908,  he 
served  as  Stake  Sunday  school  sup- 
erintendent; he  was  ordained  a  Bish- 
op August  16,  1908,  and  set  apart  as 
the  first  Bishop  of  Grayson  (now 
Blanding),  Utah.  In  the  early  days 
of  San  Juan  he  acted  for  several 
years  as  county  assessor  and  also 
served  a  number  of  terms  as  county 
commissioner.  He  was  always  a 
strong  factor  in  preserving  law  and 
order.  Bro.  Bayles  is  interested  in 
cattle,  sheep,  land  and  merchandise. 
He   is   a   director   in    many    business 


concerns,  a  staunch  pillar  in  San 
Juan  county's  financial  well-being 
and  always  ready  to  assist  the  needy 
and  boost  every  worthy  enterprise. 
The  live  institutions  of  his  Ward  tes- 
tify of  his  ability  as  a  leader,  and  the 
phenomenal  growth  the  settlement 
has  had  since  his  coming  reflects  the 
genuine  effort  and  excellent  judg- 
ment of  his  administration, 

BAYIiES,  Mary  Ann  Durham,  wife 
of  Hanson  Bayles,  was  born  Dec.  6, 
1861,  at  Paragoonah,  Iron  county, 
Utah,  the  daughter  of  Thomas  and 
Mary  Durham.  From  her  early  youth 
she  was  raised  and  tutored  as  one  of 
the   faithful   daughters   of  Zion   and 


became  the  wife  of  Hanson  Bayles 
Nov.  3,  1880.  Accompanying  her 
husband  to  the  San  Juan  country  in 
1880  she  became  a  veritable  pioneer 
of  that  place  and  took  part  in  all  the 
hardships  incident  to  building  up  of 
a  new  settlement  in  a  desert.  She 
died  in  childbed  Jan.  31,  1888,  leav- 
ing her  husband  four  small  children, 
namely,  Mary  Ann,  Hanson  D.,  Em- 
ma Juliet  and  Caroline  Elizabeth. 
Her  patience  and  good  cheer  through 
the  privations  of  early  San  Juan  days 
is  still  remembered  by  all  who  knew 
her. 


16 


LATTER-DAY   SAINT 


BAYIiES,  Evelyn  Lyman,  wife  of 
Bishop  Hanson  Bayles,  was  born  Dec. 
14,  1875,  at  Fillmore,  Millard  coun- 
ty, Utah,  the  daughter  of  Platte  D. 
Lyman  and  Adelia  Robison.  She  was 
married    to    Hanson    Bayles    In    the 


the  Paris  First  Ward.  In  1888-'dl 
he  filled  a  mission  to  New  Zealand, 
acting  as  president  of  the  Hawkes 
Bay  district  about  two  years  and 
president  of  the  Bay  of  Islands  dis- 
trict six  months.  In  1893  (June 
28th)  he  married  Elizabeth  Rogers 
(daughter  of  Frederick  Rogers  and 
Emma  Shepherd),  who  was  born 
March  16,  1876,  in  Middlesex,  Lon- 
don, England;  she  became  the  mother 
of  four  children  and  died  March  6, 
1899.  In  1900  (March  25th)  Bishop 
Beck  married  Minnette  M.  Bunn 
(daughter  of  James  F.  Bunn  and 
Minnette  King)  who  was  born  Nov. 
3,  1876,  at  Liberty,  Bear  Lake  coun- 
ty, Idaho;  she  became  the  mother  of 
eight    children.      Bishop    Beck    is    a 


Manti  Temple  July  14,  1897,  Bro. 
John  D.  McAllister  officiating.  Com- 
ing with  her  husband  from  Bluff  to 
Grayson  in  1908,  she  has  since  taken 
a  prominent  part  in  Relief  Society 
work  at  Grayson  (now  Blanding), 
and  in  public  affairs  generally.  The 
names  of  her  children  follow:  De 
Lyman,  Velyn,  Clark  L.,  Grant  L., 
Adelia,  Weston  L.,  Wesley  L.,  Mary 
and  Scott  L. 

BECK,  Joseph  Peter,  first  Bishop 
of  Lanark  Ward  (Bear  Lake  Stake), 
Bear  Lake  county,  Idaho,  was  born 
March  29,  1867,  at  Paris,  Idaho,  the 
son  of  Anders  Beck  and  Sophia  Chris- 
tina Hansen.  He  was  baptized  when 
eight  years  old  by  Wm.  Budge;  or- 
daiued  a  Deacon  and  Teacher  when 
quite  young;  ordained  a  Seventy  July 
14,  1886,  by  Wm.  Budge;  ordained 
a  High  Priest  and  Bishop  Nov.  5, 
1893,  by  Pres.  Jos.  F.  Smith  and 
served  as  a  Bishop  until  1897.  Bro. 
Beck  was  an  active  Church  worker 
from  his  early  youth  and  served  as 
a  counselor  in  the  Y.  M.  M.  I.  A.  of 


farmer  and  stockraiser  by  avocation, 
and  the  names  of  his  twelve  chil- 
dren are:  Joseph  F.,  Leon  A.,  Viola, 
Elizabeth,  Rulon  E.,  Mitchell,  Marion, 
Edward  P.,  Veda,  Alfred  W.,  Wel- 
don  and  Mary  L. 

BENNETT,  Ephraim,  second  Bish- 
op of  Mound  Valley  Ward  (Bannock 
Stake),  Bannock  county,  Idaho,  was 
born  Nov.  29,  1842,  at  Sugar's  Brook, 
Worcestershire,  England,  the  son  of 
Thomas  Bennett  and  Ann  Lacy.  Be- 
coming a  convert  to  "Mormonlsm" 
he   was    baptized    May    24,    1851,    by 


BIOGRAPHICAL  ENCYCLOPEDIA. 


17 


aamuel  Nichols  and  emigrated  to 
America  in  1861,  crossing  the  Atlan- 
tic in  a  sailing  vessel,  and  the  plains 
in  an  ox  train.  On  his  arrival  in  Utah 
he  located  at  Draper,  Salt  Lake 
county,  and  was  ordained  a  High 
Priest    in    June,    1881.      In    1871    he 


In  1862  he  was  called  to  Dixie  as  a 
colonization  missionary,  but  returned 
to  Kaysville  in  1876.  In  1889  he 
located  at  Camas  Meadows,  Idaho, 
where  he  remained  four  years.  Dur- 
ing the  hard  winter  of  1889-1890  he 
lost  cattle  and  horses  to  the  value  of 
$15,000.  He  afterwards  moved  to 
Alberta,  but  returned  to  Utah  in  1909 
and  settled  at  South  Hooper.  He 
was  ordained  a  High  Priest  in  March, 
1911,  by  Thos.  Steed.  Bro.  Bennett 
has  been  married  twice.  His  first 
wife  was  Nancy  Melvina  Taylor 
(daughter  of  Bishop  Alley  Taylor  and 
Sarah  Lovisa  AUred,  born  May  30, 
1846)  whom  he  married  August  26, 
18  61;  she  bore  her  husband  eleven 
children,  seven  boys  and  four  girls 
and  died  Feb.  6,  1885,  at  Kaysville. 
His  second  wife,  Sarah  Ann  Wiggle, 
whom  he  married  May  14,  1886,  in 
the  Logan  Temple,  was  the  daughter 
of  Jeremiah  Wiggle  and  Priscilla  Tal- 


located  in  Mound  valley,  Idaho,  and 
was  ordained  a  Bishop  Dec.  5,  1891, 
having  previously  served  as  a  coun- 
selor to  Bishop  Robt.  H.  Williams 
from  1881  to  1891.  Bro.  Bennett 
continued  as  Bishop  of  the  Mound 
Valley  Ward  until  1896.  Bishop  Ben- 
nett participated  in  the  Black  Hawk 
war  in  the  sixties  and  otherwise  took 
an  active  part  in  public  affairs.  In 
1870  (Feb.  28th)  he  married  Ma- 
tilda Cutler  (daughter  of  Harmon 
Cutler  and  Lucy  Ann  Pettigrew)  who 
was  born  June  2,  1853,  at  West  Jor- 
dan, Salt  Lake  county,  Utah.  This 
marriage  has  been  blessed  with 
eleven  children. 

BENNETT,  George,  a  veteran  El- 
der of  the  Kaysville  Ward,  Davis 
county,  Utah,  was  born  March  14, 
1843,  at  Augusta,  Hancock  county, 
111.,  the  son  of  James  Bennett  and 
Ellen  Pincock.  He  emigrated  with 
his  parents  to  Utah  in  1852,  cross- 
ing the  plains  in  Capt.  Warren  Snow's 
company    and    located    at    Kaysville. 

Vol.   Ill,  No.  2. 


hot,  born  April  17,  18  62,  in  Salt 
Lake  City.  She  became  the  mother 
of  seven  children,  two  boys  and  five 
girls.  In  his  younger  days  Elder 
Bennett  made  twenty-four  trips  be- 
tween Salt  Lake  City  and  St.  George 
with  team,  two  trips  to  Canada  by 
train  and  one  trip  to  Alberta,  Canada, 
returning  by  team. 

February,  1918. 


18 


LATTER-DAY   SAINT 


BENNETT,  George  Riley,  Bishop 
of  the  West  Point  Ward  (North  Davis 
Stake),  Davis  county,  Utah,  was  born 
March  17,  18  64,  at  Kaysville,  Davis 
county,  Utah,  the  son  of  George  Ben- 
nett and  Nancy  Melvina  Taylor.     He 


was  baptized  May  23,  1875,  by  Lem- 
uel H.  Redd  at  New  Harmony,  Utah; 
ordained  an  Elder  in  May,  1866,  by 
Henry  Thornly,  and  ordained  a  High 
Priest  August  31,  18d6,  by  George 
Teasdale.  He  moved  to  South  Hooper 
in  1886,  and  acted  as  assistant  super- 
intendent in  the  South  Hooper  Ward 
Sunday  school,  as  counselor  to  Levi 
B.  Hammond  in  the  Ward  Y.  M.  M. 
I.  A.,  and  as  president  of  the  Y.  M. 
M.  I.  A.  from  1893  to  1895;  from 
1894  to  1895  he  also  served  as  a 
counselor  to  Gilbert  Parker  in  the 
Elders  quorum.  He  served  as  second 
counselor  to  Bishop  Antone  C.  Chris- 
tensen  of  the  South  Hooper  Ward 
from  1896  to  1898  and  then  as  first 
counselor  to  Bishop  Gilbert  Parker 
for  seventeen  years.  He  was  for 
many  years  a  diligent  Ward  Teacher. 
In  1915  (August  8th)  he  was  or- 
dained a  Bishop  and  set  apart  to  pre- 
side over  the  West  Point  Ward  by 
Apostle  Francis  M.  Lyman.  Bishop 
Bennett  has  also  been  active  in  secu- 
lar affairs.  Thus  he  served  four 
years    as    constable    of    the     South 


Hooper  precinct,  four  years  as  a 
deputy  assessor  and  a  number  of 
years  as  school  trustee;  he  was  also 
health  inspector  for  eleven  years.  He 
has  also  acted  as  director  in  the 
local  cheese  factory  and  as  a  director 
in  the  Hooper  Irrigation  Company. 
In  1885  (Jan.  1st)  Bishop  Bennett 
married  Mary  Ann  King  (daughter 
of  Hyrum  Smith  King  and  Alice  Ben- 
nett), who  was  born  May  28,  1865, 
at  Kaysville.  This  marriage  has  been 
blessed  with  twelve  children,  eight 
boys  and  four  girls. 

BENNION,  Samuel  Otis,  president 
of  the  Central  States  Mission,  was 
born  June  9,  1874,  at  Taylorsville, 
Salt  Lake  county,  Utah,  the  son  of 
John  R.  Bennion  and  Emma  Jane 
Terry.  He  was  baptized  when  about 
eight  years  old  and  was  later  or- 
dained a  Deacon  and  presided  over 
the  quorum  of  Deacons  of  which  he 
was  a  member.  In  due  course  of 
time  he  was  ordained  an  Elder  and 
later  a  Seventy.  In  1898  (August 
25th)    he   married      Miss      Charlotte 


Towler  of  Mill  creek  Ward,  Salt  Lake 
county,  Utah.  President  Bennion  re- 
ceived a  fairly  good  education  in  his 
younger  days  and  was  occupied  for 
many  years  in  the  sheep  and  farming 
business.     He  was  called  on  a  mission 


BIOGRAPHICAL   ENCYCLOPEDIA. 


19 


to  the  Central  States  and  left  for 
his  field  of  labor  Nov.  9,  190  4;  after 
laboring  as  a  traveling  Elder  for  six 
months,  he  was  chosen  to  preside 
over  the  South  Texas  conference  and 
acted  in  that  capacity  until  he  was 
selected  as  secretary  of  the  Mission, 
in  November,  1905.  He  held  that 
position  until  he  was  appointed  presi- 
dent of  the  Central  States  Mission 
in  October,  1906.  In  March,  1907, 
under  the  direction  of  President 
Joseph  F.  Smith  and  counselors,  he 
moved  the  headquarters  of  the  Mis- 
sion from  Kansas  City,  Mo.,  to  Inde- 
pendence, Mo.,  which  was  the  first 
time  the  Church  had  an  established 
residence  at  Independence  since  the 
expulsion  of  the  Saints  from  that 
county  by  the  mob  in  1833.  Under 
the  direction  of  Pres.  Bennion  the 
Church  has  built  or  bought  some 
splendid  meeting  houses  in  different 
parts  of  the  Central  States  Mission, 
notably  at  Independence,  where  a  fine 
chapel  was  erected  in  1^14;  a  print- 
ing plant  building  was  also  erected 
there  in  1915  and  a  good  mission 
home  was  built  in  1917.  In  addition 
to  this  the  Church  has  purchased  a 
substantial  chapel  at  St.  Louis,  Mo., 
and  erected  a  fine  school  building 
and  a  magnificent  meeting  house  at 
Kelsey,  Texas.  Another  meeting 
house  has  been  built  at  Enoch,  Texas, 
and  others  in  different  parts  of  the 
mission.  President  Bennion's  mis- 
sion so  far  has  been  a  most  success- 
ful one,  and  the  Central  States  Mis- 
sion with  headquarters  at  Independ- 
ence, Jackson  county,  Mo.,  is  grow- 
ing rapidly. 

BIRCH,  Erastus  Franklin,  Bishop 
of  Silver  City  Ward  (Nebo  Stake), 
Juab  county,  Utah,  was  born  August 
24,  1877,  at  Bellview,  Washington 
county,  Utah,  the  son  of  Joseph  F. 
Birch  and  Mary  Silvester.  He  was 
baptized  in  1886  by  Erastus  Mcln- 
tire;  became  an  active  Church  mem- 
ber in  1902;  was  ordained  an  Elder 
I)y   Bishop   John   Roundy   of  Knight- 


ville  in  1903;  labored  as  an  officer 
in  the  Knightville  Ward  Y.  M.  M.  I.  A. 
from  1903  to  1906;  acted  as  Ward 
clerk  from  1906  to  1910;  filled  a 
mission  to  the  Eastern  States  In 
1910-12,  presiding  a  part  of  the  time 
over  the  West  Pennsylvania  confer- 
ence and  later  acted  as  assistant  sec- 
retary of  the  Eastern  States  Mission. 
He  was  ordained  a  Seventy  April  2  0, 
1903,  by  Chas.  H.  Hart,  and  became 
a  member  of  the  164th  quorum  of 
Seventy;  ordained  a  High  Priest  and 
Bishop  August  20,  1913,  by  Francis 
M.  Lyman,  and  set  apart  to  preside 
over   the    Silver   Ward    of   the   Nebo 


Stake.  Bro.  Birch  worked  with  his 
father  on  a  farm  until  he  was  seven- 
teen years  of  age;  after  that  he 
worked  on  a  cattle  and  sheep  ranch 
and  finally  engaged  in  a  mining 
career  at  the  age  of  nineteen;  which 
occupation  he  still  follows.  From 
1896  to  1904  he  worked  as  a  miner 
in  different  camps  in  Colorado,  Neva- 
da and  Utah,  and  held  positions  as 
shift  foreman,  mine  foreman  and 
superintendent.  Since  1912  he  has 
acted  as  assistant  general  manager 
of  the  Knight  mines  in  Tintic.  In 
1901  (Oct.  25th)  he  married  Rosetta 
McEwan,  daughter  of  Isaac  McEwan 
and  Rachel  Ferre.  This  marriage 
has  been  blessed  with  seven  children. 


20 


LATTER-DAY   SAINT 


BJ0RKMAN,  Oscar  Gotfred,  an  ac- 
tive Church  worker  in  the  Logan 
Fourth  Ward,  Cache  county,  Utah, 
was  born  Feb.  14,  1872,  in  Copen- 
hagen, Denmark,  the  son  of  Gotfred 
Bjorkman   and   Marie   Poulsen.      He 


was  baptized  when  quite  young  by 
Hans  J.  Christiansen  and  emigrated 
to  Utah  when  seventeen  years  old; 
ordained  a  Teacher,  Priest  and  Elder 
by  Bishop  Christian  J.  Larson  of  the 
Logan  Seventh  Ward,  the  latter  or- 
dination taking  place  Dec.  8,  1894. 
He  was  ordained  a  High  Priest  Jan. 
25,  1908,  by  Apostle  Heber  J.  Grant, 
labored  as  second  assistant  Sunday 
school  superintendent  and  afterwards 
as  superintendent  of  the  Logan  Sev- 
enth Ward  Sunday  school;  presided 
over  the  fourth  quorum  of  Elders  in 
the  Cache  Stake  from  October,  1904, 
to  October,  1907,  and  acted  as  first 
counselor  to  Bishop  Lorin  A.  Merrill 
of  the  Logan  Seventh  Ward  from 
Nov.  17,  1907,  to  Sept.  7,  1913.  He 
married  Ollie  M.  Lloyd  in  the  Logan 
Temple  Dec.  19,  18  94,  which  mar- 
riage has  been  blessed  with  seven 
children,  namely,  Cyril  Oscar,  born 
December  17,  1895;  Lester  Ver- 
non, born  May  15,  1898,  and  died 
July  17,  1902;  Phyllis  Margaret,  born 
Feb.  18,  1901,  and  died  May  9,  1909; 
Eva  Helen,  born  July  28,  1904;  Por- 


tia Bernice,  born  May  15,  1907;  Alta 
Blanch,  born  Feb.  5,  1909,  and  Mary 
Katharine,  born  May  23,  1912. 

BLACK,  George,  third  Bishop  of 
the  Marion  Ward  (Panguitch  Stake), 
Garfield  county,  Utah,  was  born  May 
23,  1854,  at  Fillmore,  Millard  county, 
Utah,  the  son  of  Geo.  Black  and 
Susan  Jaquay.  With  his  parents  he 
moved  to  Southern  Utah  in  1861 
and  was  baptized  by  Apostle  Erastus 
Snow  at  St.  George  when  about 
eight  years  old.  He  was  ordained  a 
Deacon  at  Rockville,  whence  the 
family  had  moved,  and  when  seven- 
teen years  old,  after  residing  a  short 
time  in  Kanosh,  they  settled  at  King- 
ston, Circle  valley,  in  May,  1877. 
After  that  George  was  engaged  for 
some  time  herding  in  Grass  valley; 
he  was  ordained  an  Elder  by  Abra- 
ham A.  Kimball  at  Kanosh  and  or- 
dained a  Seventy  Sept.  4,  1891,  by 
Abraham  H.  Cannon,  and  set  apart 
for  a  mission  to  Great  Britain.  He 
was  ordained  a  High  Priest  and  set 
apart  as  second  counselor  to  Bishop 


Culbert  King  of  the  Marion  Ward 
Feb.  26,  1894,  by  Mahonri  M.  Steele. 
He  served  in  that  capacity  until  Cul- 
bert Levi  King  became  Bishop  of  the 
Marion  Ward,  when  Elder  Black  was 
chosen  as  first  counselor  in  the  bish- 


BIOGRAPHICAL  ENCYCLOPEDIA. 


21 


opric,  serving  thus  until  Sept.  10, 
1908,  when  he  was  ordained  a  Bishop 
by  Francis  M.  Lyman  and  set  apart 
to  preside  over  the  Marion  Ward.  He 
also  acted  as  first  assistant  superin- 
tendent of  the  Marion  Sunday  school. 
Bishop  Black  is  a  farmer  and  stock- 
raiser  and  served  his  fellow-citizens 
for  a  number  of  years  as  justice  of 
the  peace.  In  1877  (Feb.  15th)  he 
married  Esther  Clarinda  King  in  the 
St.  George  Temple;  she  was  the 
daughter  of  Culbert  King  and  Eliza 
Esther  McCullough.  This  marriage 
has  been  blessed  with  ten  children, 
namely,  Geo.  K.,  Lois  Clarinda,  Ber- 
tha, Culbert  Loren,  Wm.  Henry, 
John  Edward,  Collins  R.,  Esther, 
Susan  and  Richard  Levi.  Of  these 
children  only  four  are  now  alive. 

BLACK,  William  Morley,  a  Patri- 
arch in  the  San  Juan  Stake  of  Zion 
was  born  Feb.  11,  182  6,  at  Vermil- 
lion, Richland  county,  Ohio,  the  third 
child  of  John  Black  and  Mary  Kline. 
The  family  moved  to  Bridgeport,  111., 


when  William  was  eleven  years  old. 
Three  years  later  his  father  died. 
When  seventeen  years  of  age,  with 
the  consent  of  the  family,  he  left  his 
mother's  home  to  earn  his  own  liv- 
ing. His  education  consisted  of  two 
winters'     schooling.       After    leaving 


home  he  worked  three  years  among 
the  farmers.  In  184  6  he  married 
Margaret  Ruth  Banks  and  settled 
with  his  young  wife  near  Peoria, 
111.  At  the  age  of  22  he  was  elected 
county  sheriff  at  that  place.  In  1849 
he  caught  the  gold  fever,  and  on  his 
journey  west  passed  through  Nauvoo, 
111.,  which  he  still  found  in  ruins. 
Driving  an  ox  team  across  the  plains, 
following  the  old  "Mormon"  trail 
1400  miles,  he  arrived  in  Salt  Lake 
valley  July  24,  1849.  While  camped 
near  the  Jordan  bridge,  he  and  a 
companion  were  invited  to  supper  at 
the  house  of  Uncle  Buck  Smithson. 
There  he  first  heard  of  "Mormon- 
ism,"  and  the  Sunday  following  he 
attended  a  meeting  in  the  brush 
bowery  where  he  heard  Apostle  John 
Taylor  preach.  When  that  meeting 
closed  his  ambitious  dreams  for  gold 
vanished,  he  having  found  a  richer 
treasure.  He  forfeited  his  share  of 
the  team  and  outfit,  and  without  a 
dollar  in  his  pocket  he  cast  his  lot 
with  the  Latter-day  Saints.  He  was 
baptized  in  184i  by  Levi  Jackman, 
assisted  in  erecting  the  Council 
House,  and  worked  as  a  mason  on 
the  tithing  office,  which  was  built 
on  the  ground  now  occupied  by  the 
Hotel  Utah.  Being  called  by  Pres. 
Young  to  aid  in  settling  Sanpete 
valley,  he  started  for  that  part  of 
the  country,  but  was  attacked  by 
Indians  in  Spanish  Fork  canyon.  By 
the  heroic  effort  of  Ephraim  K. 
Hanks,  peace  was  made  with  the 
Indians  and  the  party  reached  Manti 
in  a  snowstorm.  He  was  kindly  re- 
ceived into  the  home  of  Patriarch 
Morley,  to  whom  he  soon  became 
greatly  attached,  and  lived  with  him 
two  years.  He  then  returned  to  Can- 
ton, 111.,  for  his  family.  Three  days 
before  reaching  Canton  he  met  with 
a  severe  accident,  breaking  three  of 
his  ribs.  His  wife  and  parents-in- 
law  received  him  as  one  raised  from 
the  dead.  His  parents-in-law  became 
very  angry  when  they  learned  that 
he  had  joined  the  "Mormon"  Church, 


22 


LATTER-DAY   SAINT 


and  he  was  told  that  he  must  leave 
the  house  before  morning  or  re- 
nounce his  "Mormonism."  This  was 
indeed  a  crucial  test  of  his  life,  but 
he  did  not  flinch.  At  daybreak  he 
harnessed  his  team  and  without  a 
word  of  goodbye  he  pulled  out  in  the 
face  of  a  fearful  blizzard  with  his 
wife  and  two  children  and  started 
for  Utah.  In  the  spring  he  joined 
a  company  of  Saints  at  Omaha  and 
was  made  a  captain  of  a  company  of 
40  wagons  in  which  he  crossed  the 
plains.  In  his  busy  life  Patriarch 
Black  made  homes  at  Manti,  Ephraim, 
Nephi,  Circle  valley,  Beaver,  Glen- 
dale,  Orderville  and  Huntington 
(Utah),  Fruitland  (New  Mexico), 
and  Pacheco,  Mexico.  His  Ephraim 
home  was  valued  at  $6,000,  and  his 
Pacheco  home  about  the  same.  Bro. 
Black  was  a  miller  by  trade  and  fol- 
lowed that  business  more  or  less  for 
sixty  years.  In  July,  1912,  when 
Gen.  Salazar  expelled  400  or  more 
"Mormon"  colonists  from  their  homes 
in  Pacheco  and  vicinity,  Bro.  Black 
and  his  last  living  wife  (Maria)  were 
among  the  exiles.  In  his  last  days 
Brother  Black  took  pleasure  in  ex- 
pressing his  gratitude  to  Pres.  Wm. 
H.  Taft,  the  U.  S.  Congress  and  the 
citizens  of  El  Paso  for  their  whole- 
souled  liberality  to  the  "Mormon" 
people  at  the  time  they  were  expelled 
from  Mexico.  Bro.  Black  was  or- 
dained a  Patriarch  May  16,  1903, 
by  Apostle  Matthias  F.  Cowley,  and 
while  acting  in  that  sacred  calling 
he  gave  900  blessings.  But  the 
crowning  joy  of  his  life  was  his 
family,  he  being  the  husband  of  six 
wives  and  the  father  of  40  children, 
twenty  sons  and  twenty  daughters. 
He  passed  to  his  final  rest  June  21, 
1915,  at  Blanding,  Utah.  Patriarch 
Black  was  in  life  quiet  and  obliging 
in  disposition,  until  old  age  rendered 
him  helpless.  He  was  always  active, 
cheerful  and  strong  in  his  love  for 
the  Gospel. 

BLACK,    Maria    Hansen,    wife    of 
William  M.  Black,  was  born  Nov.  19, 


1840,  in  Veile  amt,  Denmark,  the 
daughter  of  Anders  Hansen  and  Ab- 
lone  Knudsen.  Becoming  a  convert 
to  "Mormonism"  she  was  baptized 
when  quite  young  and  emigrated 
from  her  native  land  in  1855,  cross- 
ing the  Atlantic  and  the  plains  in 
Canute  Peterson's  company.  She  be- 
came the  wife  of  Wm.  M.  Black,  Oct. 
26,  1859,  and  has  resided  successive- 
ly at  Manti,  Nephi,  Ephraim,  Circle- 
ville,  Beaver,  Washington,  Glendale, 
Orderville,  and  Huntington,  in  Utah, 
Pacheco,  in  Old  Mexico,  and  at  Fruit- 
land,  in  New  Mexico,  and  is  now 
living  at  Blanding,  Utah.  While  re- 
siding   in    Sanpete    county    she    wit- 


nessed the  terrors  of  the  Black  Hawk 
war,  her  husbands'  brother  and  bro- 
ther-in-law being  killed  by  Indians. 
In  Circle  valley  the  family  was  robbed 
of  their  all  and  driven  from  their 
homes.  Again,  when  her  husband 
was  8  6  years  of  age,  the  family  was 
driven  from  Old  Mexico,  losing  their 
home  and  everything  they  possessed. 
Sister  Black  is  a  woman  of  great 
faith,  having  witnessed  many  instan- 
taneous healings  by  the  prayer  of 
faith.  She  was  a  plural  wife  for 
forty  years  and  rejoiced  in  that  order 
of  marriage,  glorifying  the  name  of 
the  Lord  for  that  grand  principle 
which  gave  her  a  loving  husband  and 
a  family  of  virtuous,  noble  children. 


BIOGRAPHICAL   ENCYCLOPEDIA. 


23 


BLOOD,  Henry  Hooper,  president 
of  the  North  Davis  Stake  of  Zion, 
Davis  county,  Utah,  was  born  Oct.  1, 
1872,  at  Kaysville,  Davis  county, 
Utah,  the  son  of  William  Blood  and 
Jane  Wilke  Hooper.  He  was  bap- 
tized Oct.  23,  1880,  by  his  father; 
ordained  an  Elder  May  10,  1890,  by 
William  L.  Galbraith;  was  ordained 
a  Seventy  April  22,  1901,  by  Geo. 
Teasdale,  and  ordained  a  High  Priest 
March  25,  1906,  by  Hyrum  M.  Smith, 
and  set  apart  as  an  alternate  mem- 
ber of  the  Davis  Stake  High  Council. 
In  his  boyhood  days  he  acted  as 
president  of  a  quorum  of  Deacons 
at  Kaysville.  From  I'd 01  to  1904  he 
filled    a    mission    to    Great    Britain, 


laboring  first  as  president  of  the 
Grimsby  conference  with  headquar- 
ters at  Hull,  and  later  as  president 
of  the  London  conference.  After  his 
return  home  he  taught  school  for 
one  year  at  the  Brigham  Young  Col- 
lege at  Logan,  Cache  county,  Utah. 
In  June,  1905,  he  was  given  the 
position  of  secretary,  treasurer  and 
manager  of  the  Kaysville  Milling 
Company,  which  position  he  still 
holds.  From  1905  to  1907  he  acted 
as  superintendent  of  the  Kaysville 
Sunday  school,  and  in  ld07  (Feb. 
2  4th)   he  was  ordained  a  Bishop  by 


Apostle  Rudger  Clawson  and  set 
apart  to  preside  over  the  Kaysville 
Ward.  Prior  to  this  he  had  acted 
as  president  of  the  Kaysville  Y.  M. 
M.  I.  A.  and  as  a  counselor  in  the 
Stake  presidency  of  Y.  M.  M.  I.  A. 
For  a  number  of  years  he  also  had 
charge  of  the  Ward  amusements.  Of 
civil  offices  he  has  held  many;  at 
the  age  of  21  he  was  elected  city 
recorder  and  held  that  office  for 
several  terms;  he  also  acted  as  city 
councilman  for  a  number  of  terms; 
served  as  county  treasurer  from  1897 
to  1901,  and  as  minute  clerk  of  the 
State  senate  since  1901.  When  the 
public  schools  of  Davis  county  were 
consolidated  July  17,  1911,  he  was 
appointed  one  of  the  board  of  educa- 
tion of  the  county,  and  by  the  board 
elected  president,  which  position  he 
still  holds  under  an  election  held  in 
1914.  For  seven  years  he  received 
a  business  training  as  an  employee 
of  John  R.  Barnes  of  Kaysville.  In 
1911  he  organized  the  Utah-Idaho 
Millers  and  Grain  Dealers  Associa- 
tion, acting  at  the  present  time  as 
president  of  said  association.  He  is 
also  a  director  in  the  Barnes  Bank- 
ing Company,  president  and  direc- 
tor in  the  Union  State  Bank  of  Boun- 
tiful, director  and  chairman  of  the 
executive  committee  of  Clearfield 
State  Bank,  at  Clearfield,  Utah;  di- 
rector of  the  Kaysville  Co-operative 
Mercantile  Institution,  secretary, 
treasurer  and  director  of  the  Kays- 
ville Livestock  Company,  the  Kays- 
ville Stock  and  Dairy  Company  and 
the  Reflex  Publishing  Company. 
When  the  Davis  Stake  was  divided 
in  June,  1915,  Bishop  Blood  was 
chosen  as  president  of  the  North 
Davis  Stake,  which  position  he  still 
holds.  On  March  20,  1917,  he  was 
appointed  by  Governor  Bamberger  as 
a  member  of  the  Public  Utilities 
Commission  of  the  State  of  Utah.  In 
1896  (June  4th)  Pres.  Blood  mar- 
ried Minnie  Ann  Barnes  (daughter  of 
John  R.  Barnes  and  Emily  Stewart), 
who  was  born  in  Kaysville  Oct.  2, 
1872.      Four    children    have    blessed 


24 


LATTER-DAY   SAINT 


this  marriage,  namely,  Russel  Henry, 
Alan  Barnes,  Hazel  Elaine  and 
Evelyn. 

BLOOD,  William,  one  of  the  early 
members  of  the  Church  and  the 
father  of  the  late  Patriarch  Wil- 
liam Blood  of  Kaysville,  was  born 
in  1806,  in  Derbyshire,  England,  the 
son  of  Thomas  Blood  and  Ann  Blood 
He  became  a  member  of  the  Church 
in  1842.  In  his  early  youth  he  -wias 
entrusted  with  the  charge  of  a  gen- 
tleman's estate  which  was  a  most 
responsible  position,  in  view  of  the 
fact  that  the  master  and  owner  was 
an  invalid,  and  the  work  and  re- 
sponsibility therefore  fell  upon  Bro. 
Blood.  While  thus  angaged  he  be- 
came acquainted  with  Mary  Stretten, 
one  of  the  maids  employed  on  the 
estate,  whom  he  married  in  1836. 
One  boy  (the  late  Patriarch  William 
Blood  of  Kaysville)  and  two  girls 
(Ann  and  Mary)  were  the  result  of 
this  marriage.  Bro.  Blood  emigrated 
with  his  family  to  America  in  1844, 
crossing  the  Atlantic  in  the  ship 
"Fanny,"  which  sailed  from  Liver- 
pool, Jan.  23,  1844,  and  arrived  at 
New  Orleans  March  7,  1844.  The 
emigrant  company  arrived  at  Nauvoo 
April  13,  1844,  and  three  weeks 
after  their  arrival  Bro.  Blood  took 
sick  and  died.  Soon  after  his  de- 
mise his  wife  gave  birth  to  a  girl 
named  Emma  who  died  in  infancy. 

BOCKHOLT,  Dirk,  president  of  the 
Netherlands  Mission  from  1874  to 
1875,  was  born  Oct.  6,  1843,  in 
Groningen,  Holland,  the  son  of  Her- 
man Henrich  Bockholt  and  Anna 
Valk.  Becoming  a  convert  to  "Mor- 
monism"  he  was  baptized  Nov.  1, 
1863,  by  John  L.  Smith.  He  emi- 
grated to  Utah  in  1864,  arriving  in 
Salt  Lake  City,  Oct.  26,  1864.  In 
1869  he  married  Christina  Oliver, 
who  bore  him  three  children  (Alice, 
Clara  Belle  and  Nellie).  In  1874-75 
he  filled  a  mission  to  Holland,  presid- 
ing over  the  Netherlands  Mission.  In 


1876  (April  10th)  he  married  Anna 
Alida  DeHaan,  who  bore  him  five 
children,  namely.  Dirk,  Herman  Hen- 
rick,  Anna  R.,  Adrian  F.  and  Chris- 
tina C.  In  1883  he  married  Orian 
Parker.     For  fourteen  years  he  held 


the  office  of  county  clerk  of  Salt 
Lake  county.  After  his  return  from 
his  mission  he  assisted  Judge  Elias 
Smith,  probate  judge  oi  Salt  Lake 
county.  Brother  Bockholt  died  as 
a  faithful  Latter-day  Saint  very  sud- 
denly in  Salt  Lake  City,  Jan.  1,  1887, 
only  43  years  of  age. 

BONE,  Francis,  counselor  in  the 
presidency  of  the  High  Priests  quor- 
um of  the  North  Davis  Stake,  and  a 
resident  of  Layton,  Davis  county, 
Utah,  was  born  March  14,  1863,  at 
Kaysville,  the  son  of  William  H. 
Bone  and  Ellen  Carter.  He  was  bap- 
tized when  about  eight  years  of  age, 
and  ordained  successively  to  the  of- 
fices of  Deacon,  Priest,  Elder, 
Seventy  and  High  Priest.  For  many 
years  he  labored  as  a  Ward  Teacher, 
Sunday  school  teacher,  Sunday  school 
chorister,  assistant  superintendent 
and  superintendent  of  the  West  Lay- 
ton  Sunday  School,  etc.  He  was  also 
one  of  the  seven  presidents  of  the 
158th  quorum  of  Seventy.  For  fif- 
teen years   he   acted  as  Ward   chor- 


BIOGRAPHICAL  ENCYCLOPEDIA. 


25 


ister.  In  1912  he  was  set  apart  as 
second  counselor  to  Bishop  David  E. 
Layton,  and  on  June  20,  1915,  set 
apart  as  second  counselor  to  Pres. 
H.  J.  Sheffield  in  the  presidency  of 
the  High  Priests  quorum.      In   1888 


Kansas,  July  28,  1855,  and  arrived 
in  Salt  Lake  City,  Nov.  13,  1855.  The 
next  year  (1856)  he  located  at  Pleas- 
ant Grove,  Utah  county,  and  in  1859 
settled  in  Provo  valley  as  one  of  the 
first  settlers  at  Heber  City.  In  1861 
he  went  back  to  the  Missouri  river  as 
a  Church  teamster  after  emigrants. 
On  the  return  trip  he  acted  as  cap- 
tain of  ten.  In  18  63  he  made  an- 
other trip  to  the  Missouri  river  after 
a  load  of  stoves  for  the  Heber  City 
store.  In  1867  he  took  part  in  the 
Black  Hawk  war.  For  many  years  he 
acted  as  a  block  Teacher.  He  served 
as  janitor  in  the  Heber  City  meeting 
house  for  37  years,  and  during  these 
years  he  rang  the  Church  bell.  For 
twenty  years  he  also  rang  the  curfew 
bell  and  he  gained  the  reputation 
during  that  time  that  he  never  once 
missed  ringing  the  bell  on  the  min- 
ute. For  37  years  Bro.  Bond  acted 
as  stray-pound  keeper.  Since  his 
early  youth  he  has  been  a  most  dili- 
gent and  faithful  Church  worker.  He 
was  ordained  a  Seventy  May  30, 
1857,  by  Joseph  Young,  and  a  High 


(Dec.  19th)  he  married  Lucy  I.  Lay- 
ton  (daughter  of  Christopher  Layton 
and  Isabella  Golightly),  who  was 
born  Nov.  7,  1865.  This  marriage 
has  been  blessed  with  seven  children, 
three  boys  and  four  girls.  Bro.  Bone 
came  to  Layton  with  his  parents  at 
an  early  day  and  is  one  of  the  early 
settlers  of  what  is  now  Layton,  where 
his  parents  homesteaded  a  farm.  He 
is  a  farmer,  stockraiser  and  gardener 
by  occupation. 


BOND,  Jesse,  one  of  the  first  set- 
tlers of  Heber,  Wasatch  county,  Utah, 
was  born  Feb.  27,  1832,  at  Hunting- 
ford,  Gloucestershire,  England,  the 
son  of  James  Bond  and  Sarah  Card. 
He  was  baptized  Dec.  29,  1844,  by 
Job  Saltor,  was  ordained  a  Teacher 
in  1854  by  Henry  Alpin,  and  emi- 
grated to  America  the  same  year, 
crossing  the  Atlantic  in  the  ship  Priest  May  13,  1900,  by  Rudger  Claw- 
"Clara  Wheeler,"  which  sailed  from  son.  In  18  61  (Sept.  24th)  he  mar- 
Liverpool,  Nov.  27,  1854,  and  arrived  ried  Sarah  Adams,  who  bore  him 
at  New  Orleans,  Jan.  11,  1855;  he  nine  children,  namely,  Wm.  J.,  Jane, 
crossed  the  plains  in  Isaac  Allred's  Frank,  Joseph  T.,  Dora,  Minnie,  Ger- 
company  which  left  Mormon  Grove,    trude,  Zina  and  Lacy. 


26 


LATTER-DAY   SAINT 


BOND,  Sarah  Adams,  wife  of 
Jesse  Bond,  was  born  May  12,  1843, 
at  Bradley  Edge,  Staffordshire,  Eng- 
land, the  daughter  of  Samuel  Adams 
and  Bessie  Mumford.  She  was  bap- 
tized in  1851  by  Samuel  Adams  and 


Jane  Alder.  He  was  baptized  Dec. 
6,  1874,  by  Thos.  Workman;  ordained 
a  Deacon  as  a  boy;  ordained  an  Elder 
in  1892  by  Oliver  Wilcox;  ordained 
a  Seventy  in  1904  by  Amasa  L.Clark; 
set  apart  as  a  president  of  the  56th 
quorum  of  Seventy  in  1908,  by  J.  G. 
Kimball,  and  ordained  a  High  Priest 
March  13,  1913,  by  Apostle  Geo.  F. 
Richards,  and  at  the  same  time  set 
apart  as  a  High  Councilor  in  the 
Davis  Stake  of  Zion.  In  1905-1908 
he  filled  a  mission  to  the  Northern 
States,  laboring  principally  in  Wis- 
consin and  Illinois.  In  secular  mat- 
ters Bro.  Bourne  has  always  taken  an 
active  part.  Thus  he  acted  two  terms 
as  a  member  of  the  city  council  of 
Farmington  and  since  January  1, 
1914,  has  officiated  as  mayor  of  said 
city.  He  acts  as  president  of  the 
Farmington  Land  and  Stock  Com- 
pany, president  of  the  Windmill  Land 
and  Stock  Company,  secretary  and 
director  of  the  Haight  Bench  Water 
and  Irrigation  Company,  director  of 
the  Davis  County  Bank,  etc.     Other- 


emigrated  to  America  in  1857.  After 
a  temporary  sojourn  in  Iowa  City, 
she  went  back  to  New  York  in  1861 
and  there  met  her  parents  with 
whom  she  emigrated  to  Utah  that 
same  year,  crossing  the  plains  in 
Capt.  Ira  Eldredge's  company.  On 
the  journey  she  made  the  acquaint- 
ance of  Jesse  Bond,  who  was  one  of 
the  teamsters,  and  she  became  his 
wife  Sept.  24,  1861,  having  arrived 
in  the  Valley  Sept.  15th  of  that  year. 
She  became  the  mother  of  nine  child- 
ren and  died  at  Heber  City  Dec.  1, 
1908.  Sister  Bond  was  a  faithful  and 
devoted  wife,  a  loving  and  kind 
mother,  and  the  friend  of  all  her 
associates.  She  was  united  with  her 
husband  in  all  his  faithful  labors  and 
always  insisted  on  paying  a  full  and 
honest  tithing. 


BOURNE,  John  Albert,  a  member  "^^^^    ^^^    occupation    is    that    of    a 

of    the    High    Council    in    the    South  farmer    and    stockraiser.       In     1892 

Davis  Stake  of  Zion,  and  a  resident  (June  1st)   he  married  Emmeline  R. 

of  Farmington,   Davis  county,   Utah,  Hess  (daughter  of  John  W.  Hess  and 

was  born  Sept.  28,  1865,  at  Farming-  Julia  Pearson),   who  was  born  July 

ton,    the   son   of   Chas.    Bourne   and  22,  1868,  at  Farmington. 


BIOGRAPHICAL  ENCYCLOPEDIA. 


27 


BOWEN,  Joseph  Leonard,  a  pio- 
neer of  Utah  and  Idaho,  was  born 
July  5,  1837,  about  nine  miles  from 
Kirtland,  Ohio.  His  parents  had 
joined  the  Church  about  three 
months   after   its    organization.      His 


father  died  when  he  was  only  nine 
years  old,  leaving  his  mother  home- 
less with  a  large  family  traveling  on 
the  road  between  Kirtland  and  the 
"Mormon"  settlements  in  Missouri. 
The  family  passed  through  some  ter- 
rible experiences  and  hardships  be- 
fore they  again  were  able  to  cast 
their  lot  with  the  Saints  in  the 
gathering  places.  In  1849  Joseph 
came  West  with  his  mother  and  first 
settled  at  Ogden,  Weber  county,  Utah. 
Here  he  helped  to  build  the  two  first 
forts  erected  at  that  place,  namely, 
the  so-called  Farr  fort  and  Mound 
fort.  In  the  spring  of  1855  he  was 
called  on  the  Salmon  River  Mission, 
and  though  only  eighteen  years  old,  he 
took  the  part  of  a  man  in  every  way. 
He  acted  as  one  of  the  guards  on  this 
mission  and  had  some  very  hot  skirm- 
ishes with  the  Indians.  He  remained 
in  that  part  of  the  country  three 
years,  or  until  the  mission  was  aban- 
doned in  1858.  While  on  Salmon 
river,  he  assisted  in  making  the  first 
irrigation  ditch  and  the  first  grist 
mill  built  in   Idaho.      In    1858,   after 


his  return  from  the  North,  he  partici- 
pated in  the  general  move  South,  and 
on  his  return  became  one  of  the  early 
settlers  of  Cache  valley  in  1860.  The 
Indians  being  very  troublesome,  he 
was  called  by  Apostle  Ezra  T.  Ben- 
son, with  49  others,  to  act  as  a  min- 
ute man  under  the  command  of  Col. 
Thos.  E.  Ricks  to  guard  the  lives  and 
property  of  the  settlers.  After  act- 
ing in  this  capacity  in  Cache  valley 
a  few  years,  he  was  called  to  go  to 
Bear  Lake  valley  by  Apostle  Benson 
tor  the  same  purpose,  leaving  his 
young  wife,  whom  he  had  recently 
married,  and  he  did  not  see  her  again 
for  two  years.  In  Bear  Lake  valley 
he  helped  to  build  the  first  house  and 
established  a  large  farm.  He  also 
opened  up  a  number  of  the  canyons 
in  that  part  of  the  country.  Rro. 
Bowen  spent  the  better  part  of  his 
life  in  doing  good  to  others.  He  died 
in  the  Beaver  Ward.  Box  Elder 
county,  Utah,  May  30,  1910,  leaving 
a  large  posterity.  Two  wives  and  five 
children  had  preceded  him  to  the 
great  beyond. 

HOWKEK,  John  Squires,  Bishop  of 
the      Groveland      Ward       (  Hlackfoot 


Stake),  Bingham  county,  Idaho,  was 
born  April  4,  1871,  at  American 
Fork,  Utah  county,  Utah,  the  son  of 


28 


LATTER-DAY   SAINT 


John  Bratton  Bowker  and  Mary 
Emily  Squires.  He  was  blessed  as  a 
child  by  Bishop  Leonard  E.  Harring- 
ton of  American  Fork  In  May,  1871, 
baptized  in  July,  1880,  by  Emanuel 
Richman,  was  ordained  an  Elder  in 
1895  by  Bishop  Anders  O.  Ingelstrom 
at  Blackfoot,  Idaho,  and  ordained  a 
High  Priest  Feb.  5,  1898,  at  lona, 
Idaho,  by  Robert  L.  Bybee.  Bro. 
Bowker  has  from  his  early  youth 
been  an  active  member  of  the  Church 
wherever  he  has  resided;  he  always 
took  an  active  part  in  any  labor  that 
tended  to  l)uild  up  the  country 
temporally  as  well  as  spiritually.  In 
the  Logan  Temple,  Nov.  27,  1895,  he 
married  Ifosella  M.  Wilson,  daughter 
of  Lewis  D.  Wilson  and  Eliza  E.Hunt. 
From  February,  1898,  to  Sept.  17, 
1899,  he  labored  as  a  counselor  to 
Bishop  Hans  P.  Christiansen  of  the 
Moreland  Ward,  and  in  1914  (May 
24th)  he  was  ordained  a  Bishop  by 
Apostle  Geo.  F.  Richards  and  set 
apart  to  preside  over  the  Groveland 
Ward,  in  Idaho.  Before  laboring  as 
a  member  of  the  bishopric  he  was  an 
active  worker  in  the  Priesthood  anc 
the  Y.  M.  M.  I.  A.,  and  from  his  early 
youth  he  has  been  a  strict  observer 
of  the  Word  of  Wisdom.  His  marriage 
has  been  blessed  with  six  children, 
namely,  a  boy  who  died  at  birth;  Viola 
May,  born  May  21,  1898;  Veda  Eli- 
nore,  born  Dec.  31,  1899;  John  Ly- 
man, born  April  27,  1902;  Cleo 
Arvilla,  born  July  30,  1903,  and 
Elna,  born  Dec.  15,  1908.  Bishop 
Bowker's  occupation  has  been  that  of 
an  agriculturalist. 

BOWNS,  James,  Bishop  of  the  Almy 
Ward  ( Woodruff  Stake ) ,  Uintah  coun- 
ty, Wyo.,  was  born  July  27,  1841,  in 
Oldbury,  Staffordshire,  England,  the 
son  of  James  Bowns,  and  Harriet 
Harrison.  He  joined  the  Church  in 
18C7,  being  baptized  Nov.  30,  1867, 
by  William  Coulthard,  was  ordained 
a  Priest  May  2,  1869,  by  Lewis  W. 
Shirtliff,  and  was  ordained  an  Elder 
Nov.   27,  1870,  by  Geo.  H.  Peterson. 


He  emigrated  to  Utah  in  1871,  arriv- 
ing in  Salt  Lake  City  August  19, 
1871,  was  called  to  preside  over  the 
Almy  branch  (then  in  the  Bear  Lake 
Stake)  June  24,  1877,  and  on  Feb. 
10,  1878,  he  was  ordained  a  High 
Priest  and  Bishop  by  Apostle  Frank- 
lin D.  Richards  and  set  apart  to  pre- 
side over  the  Almy  Ward.  In  1898, 
when  the  Woodruff  Stake  was  organ- 
ized, the  Almy  Ward  became  a  part  of 
that  Stake.  In  September,  1900,  Bro. 
Bowns  moved  to  Castle  Gate,  Carbon 
county,  Utah,  where  he  worked  as 
general  mine  inspector  for  the  Utah 
Fuel  Company.  While  living  there  he 
was  elected  as  a  county  commissioner 


and  served  in  that  capacity  from 
1902  to  1906.  He  also  served  in  the 
seventh  session  of  Utah's  legislature 
from  Carbon  county.  In  1908  he  re- 
turned to  Almy,  Wyoming,  and  was 
again  sustained  as  Bishop  of  the 
Almy  Ward,  which  position  he  still 
holds.  On  April  13,  1864,  he  married 
Sarah  Ann  Spencer  of  Sutton  in  Ash- 
field,  England.  She  became  the 
mother  of  four  children  and  died 
Nov.  12,  1870.  After  Bro.  Bowns 
arrived  in  Almy  in  1871,  he  married 
Christina  Spowart  Nov.  27,  1871,  who 
is  the  mother  of  eight  children.  Two 
children  by  his  former  wife,  and  four 
by  his  present  wife  are  living  today. 


BIOGRAPHICAL  ENCYCLOPEDIA. 


BRADY,  Jordan,  a  Patriarch  in  the 
North  Sanpete  Stake  of  Zion,  was 
born  June  7,  1843,  at  Nauvoo,  111., 
the  son  of  Lindsey  Anderson  Brady 
and  Elizabeth  Ann  Hendrickson.  As 
a  child  in  his  father's  family  he  left 
Nauvoo  in  184  6,  and  after  spending 
some  time  at  Winter  Quarters  came 
to   Utah   in    1850,   after  crossing  the 


plains  in  William  Walls  company. 
The  family  settled  at  Union  Fort, 
Salt  Lake  county,  where  young  Jor- 
dan was  baptized  by  Jehu  Co.k  in 
November,  18  52.  In  18  59  the  family 
moved  to  Fairview,  Sanpete  county. 
Jordan  Brady  was  ordained  an  Elder 
in  April,  1866,  and  ordained  a  High 
Priest  in  1883  (May  9th)  by  Apostle 
Brigham  Young,  Jr.  In  1866  he  went 
as  a  Church  teamster  to  the  Missouri 
river  after  emigrants.  Subsequently 
he  was  called  by  Pres.  Wilford  Wood- 
ruff to  settle  in  the  San  Luis  valley, 
Colo.,  and  help  to  build  up  that  coun- 
try. Elder  Brady  married  Mary 
Lovina  Howell  Dec.  10,  1861,  which 
marriage  has  been  blessed  with  thir- 
teen children,  namely,  Jordan  H., 
Keziah  L.,  Lindsey  E.,  Martha  Eliza- 
beth, Mary  E.,  Willis  A.,  Sarah  M., 
Ada  C,  Radna  A.,  Warren  A.,  Ophelia 
S.,  Millie  R.  and  Samuel  Joseph. 


BRIGGS,  George,  Jr.,  Bishop  of  the 
Archer  Ward  (Fremont  Stake)  Fre- 
mont county,  Idaho,  was  born  August 
13,  1883,  at  Lyman,  Oneida  county, 
Idaho,  the  son  of  George  Briggs  and 
Sarah  Susannah  Blackburn.  He  was 
baptized  Nov.  22,  1891,  by  his  father; 
ordained  a  Deacon  and  afterwards  a 
Priest;  ordained  an  Elder  April  10, 
1904,  by  Charles  R.  Thompson;  or- 
dained a  High  Priest  March  2,  1907. 
by  Henry  Flamm  and  ordained  a 
Bishop  June  16,  1907,  by  Geo.  F. 
Richards.  While  a  youth  he  acted 
as  president  of  a  Deacons'  quorum 
and  later  as  president  of  the  Ward 
Y.  M.  M.  I.  A.  In  1904  (June  22nd) 
he  married  Martha  Burns  (daughter 
of  Charles  Burns  and  Susannah 
Stacey),  who  was  born  June  9,  1885, 
in  Salt  Lake  City.  This  marriage  so 
far  has  been  blessed  with  three 
children,    namely,    Raymond    George 


(born  May  23,  1905);  Elda  Susanna 
(born  Oct.  16,  1909);  and  Chester 
Burns  (born  Oct.  19,  1911). 

BRIMHALL,       Xormaii       Andrew, 

Bishop  of  the  Taylor  Ward  (Snow- 
flake  Stake),  Navajo  county,  Arizona, 
was  born  Oct.  20,  1863,  at  Hyrum, 
Cache  county,  Utah,  the  son  of  Noah 
Brimhall  and  Samantha  Lake.  He 
was  baptized  in  December,    18  71,  by 


30 


LATTER-DAY   SAINT 


John  Boise,  ordained  an  Elder  Dec. 
6,  1882  by  Andrew  Thomson,  and 
ordained  a  High  Priest  in  1889  by 
John  Henry  Smith,  and  later  or- 
dained a  Bishop.  In  1898-99  he 
labored  as  a  Y.  M.  M.  I.  A.  missionary 


in  the  Maricopa  Stake,  and  in  1899- 
1902,  he  filled  a  mission  to  Colo- 
rado. He  was  raised  principally  in 
Oxford,  Idaho,  until  twelve  years  of 
;'ge,  when  he  moved  to  Savoia,  New 
Mexico  with  his  mother's  family. 
Here  he  became  one  of  the  earliest 
settlers  and  suffered  many  hardships. 
Here  also  his  mother  died  with  the 
smallpox.  In  1878  he  moved  to  the 
"Mormon"  settlements  in  Arizona. 
His  whole  life  so  far  has  been  spent 
in  the  interests  of  the  Latter-day 
Saints,  and  in  Northern  Arizona  he 
has  been  very  busy  as  a  builder  of 
reservoirs,  dams,  ditches,  churches 
and  school  houses,  etc.  He  has  wit- 
nessed great  changes  in  the  climate 
and  seen  the  desert  become  produc- 
tive fields,  and  pools  of  water  spring 
up  in  dry  places.  In  1882  (Dec.  6th) 
he  married  Agnes  Willis  in  the  St. 
George  Temple.  The  children  from 
this  marriage  are:  Mary,  Andrew  N., 
Logan,  Dicie,  Joseph,  George,  Mocel- 
la,  Rulon  and  Elias.  His  wife  Agnes 
died  at  Taylor,  Navajo  county,  Ari- 
zona,  March    12,    1913,   and   on   Oct. 


9,  1913,  he  married  Caroline  Smith. 
He  was  released  from  the  office  of 
Bishop  in  August,  1915. 

HKOWN,  James  Stephens,  a  Utah 

pioneer  and  a  successful  Latter-day 
Saint  missionary,  was  born  July  4, 
1828,  in  Davidson  county.  North 
Carolina,  the  son  of  Daniel  Brown 
and  Elizabeth  Stephens.  Becoming  a 
(;onvert  to  "Morraonism,"  he  was  bap- 
tized in  1844  and  joined  the  "Mor- 
mon" exiles  as  they  were  being  driven 
away  from  Illinois.  Bro.  Brown  par- 
ticipated in  the  exodus,  and  after  the 
arrival  on  the  Missouri  river  he  en- 
listed in  the  Mormon  Battalion  and 
marched  all  the  way  to  California  as 
a  member  of  that  illustrious  body. 
After  his  discharge  in  California  in 
1847,  he,  together  with  others  of  the 
"Mormon"  boys,  found  employment 
with  a  Mr.  Sutter  on  the  Sacramento 
river  and  was  one  of  those  Mormon 
Battalion  boys  who  first  discovered 
gold  in  California.  In/  1848  he  ar- 
rived in  Salt  Lake  Valley,  where  he 
passed  through  all  the  experiences  in- 


cident to  pioneer  life.  He  was  or- 
dained a  Seventy  and  became  a  mem- 
ber of  the  third  quorum  of  Seventy. 
In  the  fall  of  184  9  he  was  called  on 
a  mission  to  the  Society  Islands, 
which    mission    he    filled    with   great 


BIOGRAPHICAL  ENCYCLOPEDIA. 


31 


diligence  and  much  success,  passing 
through  experiences  and  hardships, 
which  even  for  a  "Mormon"  mission- 
ary were  exceptionally  dangerous  and 
hard.  On  one  occasion,  when  the 
natives  threatened  to  burn  him  at  the 
stake,  he  was  saved  by  the  miracu- 
lous power  of  God.  After  being  at 
length  expelled  from  the  Society  Is- 
lands by  the  French  authorities,  he 
returned  to  Utah,  and  was  for  a  num- 
ber of  years  closely  associated  with 
Indian  missions,  in  which  labor  he 
was  again  very  successful.  Sept.  23, 
18G2,  he  returned  to  Salt  Lake  City 
after  having  filled  a  successful  mis- 
sion to  Great  Britain.  Soon  after  his 
return  from  that  mission  he  met  with 
a  severe  accident  by  which  he  lost 
one  of  his  legs  and  was  thus  maimed 
for  the  remainder  of  his  days.  For  a 
number  of  years  he  spent  much  of  his 
time  lecturing  in  different  parts  of 
the  Territory,  for  notwithstanding  his 
limited  education  he  was  a  most  in- 
teresting speaker.  In  1892-1893  he 
filled  another  successful  mission  to 
the  Society  Islands.  In  18  9  8  he  was 
invited  to  celebrate  the  50th  anni- 
versary of  the  discovery  of  gold  in 
California.  He  being  one  of  the  orig- 
inal discoverers,  was  made  a  guest  of 
honor  on  that  occasion.  Bro.  Brown 
died  March  25,  1902,  at  his  home  in 
Salt  Lake  City,  leaving  a  large  pos- 
terity. Before  his  death  he  wrote  an 
interesting  sketch  of  his  life  which 
was  published  in  book  form  under 
the  title  "Life  of  a  Pioneer,"  being 
the  Autobiography  of  James  S. 
Brown,"  in  which  interesting  work 
the  details  of  Bro.  Brown's  life  are 
depicted  in  a  way  calculated  to  in- 
spire faith  and  confidence  in  the 
great  Latter-day  Work,  to  which  Bro. 
Brown  devoted  his  life's  strength  and 
energy.  During  his  lifetime  Bro. 
Brown  married  four  wives.  His  first 
wife  was  Lydia  Jane  Tanner.  The 
names  of  her  children  are  Lydia  J., 
Rachel  Elizabeth,  Emeretta,  James 
T.,  Zina  May,  August,  and  Valentine. 
His  second  wife  was  Rebecca  Ann 
McBride,  whom  he  married  in  Septem- 


ber, 1854.  The  names  of  her  children 
were  Deseret,  Daniel,  Alveretta,  Van- 
tile  Mac,  Burtina,  Pauline,  Homer, 
and  Alphonso.  His  third  wife  was 
Eliza  Lester,  whom  he  married  Jan. 
31,  1863,  and  who  bore  him  nine 
children.  Their  names  are  Leo,  Zim- 
ania  Wilford,  Elando,  Annie  Eliza, 
Frank  Lester,  Charles,  Sarah-Emma, 
and  Ada.  His  last  wife  was  Eliza- 
beth Clegg,  whom  he  married  March 
4,  1872,  and  whose  children  were 
named  Mary  Lillious,  Gaurdello, 
Mark  C,  Benjamin  Joseph,  Louetta, 
and  Myrtle  J.  At  his  death  Elder 
Brown  was  survived  by  three  of  his 
wives  and  twenty-one  of  the  above 
named  children,  all  of  whom  are 
members  of  the  Church  in  which 
Elder  Brown  had  implicit  faith  and 
in  whose  service  he  spent  the  greater 
part  of  his  life. 

BUNKEK,  Edward,  founder  and 
Bishop  of  Bunkerville  (St.  George 
Stake),  Lincoln  county,  Nevada,  was 
born  August  1,  1822,  at  Atkinson, 
Penobscot  county,  Maine,  the  son  of 


Silas  Bunker  and  Hannah  Berry.  He 
was  the  youngest  of  nine  children 
whose  names  were  Nahum,  Abigail, 
Martin,  Alfred,  Hannah,  Kendall, 
Silas,  Saben  and  Edward.  When  nine- 
teen years  of  age  he  left  a  comfort- 


32 


LATTER-DAY   SAINT 


able  home  and  in  company  with  his 
brother-in-law,     John     Berry,     went 
west,  going  as  far  as  Kirtland,  Ohio, 
where  they  met  Martin  Harris,  one  of 
the  three   witnesses  to  the   Book  of 
Mormon,  and  attended  the  meetings 
of   the    Saints.      He    soon    became    a 
convert    to    "Mormonism"    and    was 
baptized   in   1845.      Subsequently   he 
made  his  way  to  Nauvoo,  111.,  where 
he   worked    on    the   Temple   and   the 
Nauvoo  House.      He  also  joined  the 
famous  Nauvoo  Legion  and  as  a  mem- 
ber of  that  body  did  considerable  mil- 
itary duty.      In   1846    (Feb.    9th)    he 
married    Emily    Abbott    and    almost 
immediately    thereafter    crossed    the 
Mississippi  river  with  his  young  wife 
and  traveled  as  far  as  Garden  Grove, 
Iowa,    where    he   left   his    wife    in    a 
half-finished   log  cabin  while  he  en- 
listed   as    a   member    of   the    famous 
Mormon      Battalion      in      which      he 
marched  to  California.     He  was  de- 
tailed   on    that    journey   as   assistant 
teamster  to  Hyrum   Judd,   which  re- 
leased him  from  carrying  his  gun  and 
also  exempted  him  from  guard  duty. 
After  the  arrival  in  California  in  Jan- 
uary, 1847,  he  spent  most  of  his  time 
doing   guard    duties   at   Los    Angeles 
until    his    discharge    July    16,    1847. 
Starting  together   with  many  others 
of  the  Battalion  boys  he  traveled  by 
way   of   Sutter's    Fort    to    Salt    Lake 
Valley,    where    he    arrived    Oct.    16, 
1847.     After  resting  a  short  time  he 
and    a    few    others    continued    their 
journey  east  with  sixteen  pounds  of 
flour  to   the   man,   and   three   mules 
(which    Bro.     Bunker    had    brought 
from  California)   between  them.     On 
this    perilous    journey    they    bought 
some  buffalo  meat  from  the  Indians 
and    also    killed    some    buffalo    for 
themselves.      On    arriving    at    Loupe 
Fork  of  the  Platte  river  they  found 
the   ice   running   so   thick   that   they 
could  not  cross.      They  remained   in 
camp  all  day,  exposed  to  a  most  ter- 
rific  snowstorm,    and   ate   their   last 
provisions     consisting     of     rawhides, 
saddle   bags,    etc.      Continuing   their 
journey  through  ten  inches  of  snow 


they  finally  reached  the  Pawnee  Mis- 
sion where  they  crossed  the  river,  but 
found  the  mission  deserted  and  the 
corn  all  gathered.  They  succeeded, 
however,  in  finding  a  few  ears  of 
frost-bitten  corn  which  the  Indians 
had  left.  The  brethren  ate  these  un- 
cooked and  stayed  all  night  in  one  of 
the  vacated  houses  without  bedding. 
They  finally  killed  one  of  their  mules 
and  ate  it  to  preserve  their  lives. 
Soon  they  took  up  their  line  of  March 
for  the  Missouri  river  and  arrived  at 
Winter  Quarters  Dec.  18,  1847,  where 
Elder  Bunker  found  his  wife,  and  a 
fine  son,  11  months  old.  Soon  after- 
wards he  went  to  Missouri  to  work 
for  provisions  and  finally  located 
with  his  wife  on  Mosquito  creek  in 
Iowa,  where  he  raised  a  good  crop 
of  corn  the  following  season.  Suc- 
ceeding in  getting  an  outfit,  he 
started  for  the  Valley  in  the  spring 
of  1850,  as  a  captain  of  ten  In 
Mathevv  Caldwell's  fifty  and  Capt. 
Johnsons  hundred.  On  the  journey 
they  were  attacked  by  cholera  and 
eight  of  their  number  died.  The  com- 
pany reached  Salt  Lake  Valley  Sept. 
1,  1850,  and  Bro.  Bunker  located  In 
Ogden  City.  The  next  year  (1851). 
when  a  Stake  of  Zion  was  organized 
at  Ogden,  Bro.  Bunker  was  chosen  as 
a  member  of  the  High  Council.  In 
June,  1852,  he  married  Sarah  R. 
Browning  Lang,  widow  of  James 
Lang,  who  owned  a  small  farm  ad- 
joining his.  In  October,  1852,  he 
was  called  on  a  mission  to  England, 
where  he  first  presided  over  the  Bris- 
tol conference  and  afterwards  had 
the  pastoral  care  of  the  Sheffield, 
Bradford  and  Lincolnshire  confer- 
ence. Still  later  he  was  appointed  to 
preside  in  Scotland,  his  field  of  labor 
including  the  conferences  of  Dundee, 
Glasgow  and  Edinburgh.  He  re- 
turned to  America  in  1856,  and  on 
the  arrival  at  Iowa  City  in  June. 
1856,  he  was  placed  in  charge  of  a 
hand  cart  company  with  which  he 
crossed  the  plains,  starting  from 
Iowa  City  June  28,  1856,  and  arriv- 
ing at  Salt  Lake  City  Oct.    2,   1856. 


BIOGRAPHICAL   ENCYCLOPEDIA. 


33 


Most  of  the  Saints  in  his  charge  were 
i'rom  Wales,  and  the  company,  being 
short  of  provisions  all  the  way,  would 
have  suffered  severely  for  want  of 
food,  had  it  not  been  for  supplies 
sent  them  from  the  Valley.  Soon 
after  his  return  to  Utah,  Elder 
Bunker  was  chosen  as  Bishop  of  the 
Ogden  Second  Ward  and  labored  in 
that  capacity  until  he  moved  to  Dixie 
in  1861.  In  April,  1861,  he  married 
Mary  M.  McQuarrie  as  a  third  wife, 
and  in  the  fall  of  the  same  year  with 
his  wives,  Emily  and  Mary,  and  their 
families  moved  to  Dixie,  or  Southern 
Utah.  His  wife  Sarah,  who  remained 
in  Ogden,  joined  the  rest  of  the 
family  later.  In  the  fall  of  1862, 
Elder  Bunker  was  called  to  preside  as 
Bishop  at  Santa  Clara,  Washington 
county,  and  during  the  following 
years  he  and  his  family  suffered 
many  privations  and  hardships.  Bro. 
Bunker  also  assisted  in  establishing 
a  settlement  in  Clover  valley  (now  in 
Nevada),  and  soon  after  moved  part 
of  his  family  there.  Later  he  bought 
a  place  in  Panguitch,  where  he  lo- 
cated part  of  his  family  when  that 
part  of  the  country  was  resettled 
after  the  Indian  troubles.  Elder 
Bunker  presided  as  Bishop  of  Santa 
Clara  twelve  years.  During  the  latter 
part  of  his  administration  the  United 
Order  was  introduced,  which  he  and 
most  of  the  members  of  his  Ward 
accepted.  After  that,  according  to 
counsel  received  from  Pres.  Brigham 
Young  he  sought  out  a  new  location 
on  the  Rio  Virgen,  where  he  in  18  77 
settled  and  built  the  town  of  Bunker- 
ville,  Lincoln  (now  Clark)  county, 
Nevada.  He  was  chosen  as  Bishop 
of  the  new  settlement  from  the  be- 
ginning and  presided  there  until  his 
health  failed,  when  his  son  Edw^ard 
succeeded  him  as  Bishop  of  this 
place.  In  starting  this  settlement  all 
the  people  worked  on  the  company 
plan  which  proved  very  successful  in 
the  beginning,  but  finally  broke  up 
as  the  Saints  did  not  fully  under- 
stand the  stewardship  plan.  In  May, 
1901,    Elder    Bunker    moved    to    Old 

Vol.   Ill,  Xo.  3. 


Mexico,  together  with  several  other 
families  and  located  at  Moreles, 
where  he  died  Nov.  17,  1901,  leaving 
three  wives,  22  children  and  a  host 
of  grand  and  great  grandchildren. 
Bishop  Bunker  was  one  of  those 
faithful  and  energetic  Elders  of  the 
Church  whose  memory  will  live  for- 
ever. (Compiled  by  Mrs.  H.  A. 
Crosby,  daughter  of  Bishop  Bunker.) 

BUNTING,  James  Lovett,  a  mem- 
ber of  the  Stake  presidency  and  of 
the  High  Council  of  the  Kanab  Stake 
of  Zion  was  born  Oct.  5,  1832,  at 
Attleborough,  Norfolk,  England,  the 
third    son    of    Thomas    Bunting    and 


Earley  Lovett.  Becoming  a  convert 
to  "Mormonism"  he  was  baptized 
March  7,  1853,  by  James  Flowers  at 
Beccles,  Suffolk,  England.  Soon 
afterwards  he  was  ordained  an  Elder 
by  Charles  A.  Harper  and  called  to 
labor  as  a  local  missionary  in  April, 
1854.  After  laboring  as  a  traveling 
Elder  in  the  Norwich  and  Manchester 
conferences  he  was  called,  in  1857,  to 
preside  over  the  latter  conference, 
holding  that  position  until  1858, 
when  he  emigrated  to  Utah  in  com- 
pany with  the  American  Elders  who 
were  called  home  on  account  of  the 
Johnston    Army    troubles.      In    1859 

March,  1918. 


34 


LATTER-DAY   SAINT 


(May  15th)  he  married  Miss  Harriet 
Dye  fa  daughter  of  Robert  Dye  and 
Harriet  Coman),  who  subsequently 
bore  her  husband  twelve  children. 
Bro.  Bunting  was  ordained  a  Seventy 
in  18  61  by  Geo.  Snyder  and  became 
a  president  of  the  33rd  quorum  of 
Seventy.  In  1870,  he  was  called  to 
Kanab,  together  with  about  twenty- 
five  other  families,  and  for  three 
years  he  acted  as  bishop's  clerk  of  the 
Kanab  Stake.  He  was  ordained  a 
High  Priest  April  18,  1877,  by 
Lorenzo  Snow,  and  acted  for  several 
years  as  a  member  of  the  Kanab 
Stake  High  Council.  Subsequently 
he  acted  as  second  counselor  in  the 
Kanab  Stake  presidency.  For  several 
years  he  was  also  an  active  Sunday 
school  officer  both  in  the  Kanab 
Ward  and  Stake.  In  1878-80  he  filled 
a  mission  to  Great  Britain,  presiding 
over  the  Liverpool  conference;  re- 
turning home  in  May,  1880,  he  had 
charge  of  a  company  of  emigrating 
Saints.  During  his  presidency  in 
Liverpool  a  Y.  M.  M.  I.  A.  and  a  Re- 
lief Society  were  organized  in  the 
Liverpool  branch;  they  are  supposed 
to  have  been  the  first  organizations 
of  that  kind  in  the  British  Mission. 
In  1893  he  went  to  England  on  a 
genealogical  mission  and  has  suc- 
ceeded in  tracing  his  genealogy  on 
his  mother's  side  back  twenty  gen- 
erations, or  to  about  A.  D.  1060.  In 
1897  he  was  called  to  labor  as  an 
ordinance  worker  in  the  St.  George 
Temple,  where  he  has  spent  twelve 
years  of  his  life  and  at  his  instance 
more  than  one  thousand  persons  have 
been  endowed  in  the  St.  George 
Temple.  Of  civic  offices  he  has  acted 
as  probate  judge,  been  a  member  of 
the  St.  George  city  council,  served  as 
delegate  to  State  conventions,  etc. 
In  the  meantime  he  yielded  obedience 
to  the  higher  law  of  marriage  by  tak- 
ing Ann  Ashurst  and  Hester  Mayer 
as  plural  wives.  Elder  Bunting  is 
still  a  resident  of  St.  George.  He  is 
the  father  of  thirteen  children  and 
has  sixty  grand  children  and  thirty- 
two  great  grand  children. 


BURNS,  William  Josiah,  Bishop  of 

the  Milford  Ward  (Beaver  Stake) 
Beaver  county,  Utah,  was  born  Dec. 
9,  1874,  at  Nephi,  Juab  county,  Utah, 
the  son  of  Miles  Lamoni  Burns  and 
Julia  Ann  Blackburn.  His  parents 
removed  from  Nephi  to  Loa,  Utah, 
when  William  was  five  years  of  age. 
Here  they  remained  three  years,  but 
found  the  place  too  cold  at  that  time 
to  raise  wheat.  After  enduring  many 
privations  the  family  located  at  Glen- 
wood,  where  William  received  his 
first  schooling,  and  afterwards,  when 
the  family  moved  back  to  Loa,  he 
finished  his  studies  in  the  district 
schools  and  afterwards  attended  the 


L.  D.  S.  College  for  three  years,  grad- 
uating from  the  Normal  Department 
of  that  school,  June  2,  1893.  After 
his  graduation  he  taught  school  at 
Molen,  Emery  county,  Utah,  and  In 
following  the  profession  of  school 
teacher  for  twelve  years  he  taught 
school  at  Gooseberry  one  year,  Min- 
ersville  three  years  (1897-1899),  and 
Milford  seven  years.  In  1907  he 
entered  into  the  lumber  business 
which  he  followed  three  years  and 
then  engaged  in  his  present  business, 
that  of  a  furniture  dealer.  In  a 
Church  capacity  Bro.  Burns  has  been 
a  diligent  worker  since  his  early 
youth  and  has  acted  as  president  of  a 


BIOGRAPHICAL  ENCYCLOPEDIA. 


35 


Deacons  quorum,  president  of  a 
Y.  M.  M.  I.  A.,  and  served  as  a 
Bishop's  counselor  for  six  years.  He 
was  ordained  a  Bishop  Sept.  1,  1909, 
by  Apostle  Geo.  F.  Richards  and  set 
apart  to  preside  over  the  Milford 
Ward,  which  position  he  still  holds. 
Bishop  Burns  has  been  engaged  in 
municipal  and  civil  affairs  during  the 
greater  part  of  his  life;  thus  he 
served  as  county  commissioner  of 
Beaver  county  from  1909  to  1912.  He 
has  also  served  as  a  member  of  the 
school  board  at  Milford  since   1907. 

BUKTON,  Arthur  Fielding,  first 
counselor  in  the  presidency  of  the 
Star    Valley    Stake,    Wyoming,    was 


born  June  3  0,  1873,  at  Ogden,  Utah, 
the  son  of  William  Walton  Burton 
and  Sarah  Ann  Fielding.  He  was 
baptized  in  1881  by  Joseph  T.  John- 
son; ordained  a  Deacon  about  1887 
and  later  ordained  an  Elder  and 
acted  as  a  counselor  to  Thos.  R.  Wil- 
son of  the  Elders  quorum.  He  was 
ordained  a  Seventy  July  12,  1896,  by 
Geo.  Reynolds  and  became  a  presi- 
dent of  the  103rd  quorum  of  Seventy 
August  12,  1900.  Finally  he  was 
ordained  a  High  Priest,  June  1,  1913, 
and  set  apart  as  first  counselor  to 
Clarence  Gardner,  president  of  the 
Star  Valley  Stake  of  Zion.     In  1898- 


1900  he  filled  a  mission  to  the  East- 
ern States,  laboring  principally  on 
Long  Island  and  in  several  of  the 
New  England  States;  he  also  acted 
as  mission  secretary  and  the  last  five 
or  six  months  as  a  counselor  to  Pres. 
W.  H.  Smart.  At  home  he  acted  as 
first  assistant  superintendent  of  the 
Afton  Sunday  school  from  Dec.  15, 
1895,  to  Oct.  31,  1904,  and  as  super- 
intendent of  said  school  from  the 
latter  date  to  June  2  9,  1913.  He  also 
acted  as  a  member  of  the  Stake 
Y.  M.  M.  I.  A.  superintendency  from 
1902  to  1905.  In  1894  (Oct.  10th) 
he  married  Kittie  C.  Dixon,  daughter 
of  Harvey  Dixon  and  Kittie  E.  Prit- 
chett.  Following  are  the  names  of 
the  children  from  this  marriage: 
Mable,  born  July  7,  1896;  Arthur 
Dixon,  born  Nov.  28,  1897;  Calpurna, 
born  August  29,  1900;  Helen,  born 
March  17,  1902;  Elia  Mae,  born  Sept. 
16,  1904;  Bernice,  born  June  20, 
1907;  Eva,  born  Nov.  2,  1908;  Ruth, 
born  March  8,  1912,  and  Alta,  born 
Sept.  7,  1915.  Elder  Burton  is  gen- 
eral manager  of  the  Burton  Creamery 
Association,  general  manager  of  the 
Burton  Mercantile  Company,  which 
has  branches  at  Afton  and  Freedom, 
in  Wyoming,  and  Montpelier,  in 
Idaho,  president  of  the  Afton  Electric 
Company  and  secretary  and  treasurer 
of  the  Star  Lumber  and  Milling  Com- 
pany. 

BUSH,  Richard,  a  member  of  the 
Mormon  Battalion,  was  born  March 
2,  182  6,  in  Ulster  county,  N.  Y.,  the 
son  of  John  M.  Bush  and  Jane  Oster- 
houdt.  He  remained  under  parental 
care  until  the  age  of  fifteen,  when  he 
was  bound  to  an  apprenticeship.  This 
was  both  oppressive  and  distasteful 
to  him,  and  in  order  to  escape  these 
conditions  he  left  home.  Becoming 
a  convert  to  "Mormonism"  he  was 
baptized  about  the  year  1841  and 
journeyed  to  Nauvoo,  111.,  where  he 
worked  on  the  farm  of  the  Prophet 
Joseph  Smith.  He  participated  in 
the  exodus  from  Nauvoo,  and  on  his 


36 


LATTER-DAY   SAINT 


arrival  on  the  Missouri  river  enlisted 
as  a  member  of  the  Mormon  Bat- 
talion and  marched  with  that  fam- 
ous body  of  men  to  California  where 
he  was  discharged  in  1848.  He  was 
at  Sutter's  Mill  when  gold  was  first 
discovered  in  California  in  January, 
1848.  Having  joined  his  people  in 
Salt  Lake  City,  Utah,  he  met  Maria 
Pettit  whom  he  married  May  10, 
1849;  this  marriage  was  blessed  with 
three  children  (Richard  N.,  John  P., 
and  Ellen  E),  one  of  whom  died  in 
early  childhood.  Having  received 
only  a  limited  education,  Bro.  Bush 
acquired  what  he  possessed  by  his 
own  efforts,  experiences  and  observa- 
tions in  life.  He  acquired  consider- 
able property  in  Utah  and  died  June 
21,  1883,  in  Salt  Lake  City. 

BUSH,  Richard  Nelson,   Bishop  of 
the    Clover    Ward     (Tooele     Stake) 
Tooele  county,  Utah,  was  born  Aug- 
ust   2,    1850,    at    Farmington,    Davis 
county,    Utah,    the    son    of    Richard 
Bush  and  Maria  Pettit.     When  Rich- 
ard   was    twelve    years    of    age    his 
mother  died,  and  his  father  being  a 
partial   invalid,   the    boy    was    forced 
to    work    his   own    way    through    the 
world.      The    only    education    he    re- 
ceived   was   obtained    from    the   pro- 
ceeds  of   his   own    industry    and    re- 
search.     In    1865    he   drove   a   four- 
and  six-horse   team   from   Salt   Lake 
City  to  Los  Angeles,  Cal.     This  trip 
was   very    hazardous     and     travelers 
along  this  trail  were  in  constant  dan- 
ger from  Indians.      On  one  occasion, 
while  herding  the  horses  at  night,  he 
and    his    traveling    companions    were 
attacked  by  a  band  of  Indians,  and 
although  no  lives  were  lost,  two  of 
the  animals  were  killed  by  poisoned 
arrows.      During  his  early   life   Rich- 
ard   often    passed    through    instances 
and  experiences  peculiar  to  the  fron- 
tiersman.     Later   in    life   he    worked 
for  Pres.   Brigham   Young,   and   still 
later  helped  to  build  the  Union  Pa- 
cific Railroad  through  Wyoming.    In 
18 68  he  drove  a  large  herd  of  cattle 


belonging  to  his  uncle,  Lorenzo  Pettit, 
into  Tooele  county,  Utah,  for  winter 
pasturage,  and  there  pursued  the 
vocation  of  a  cowboy.  At  Tooele  he 
met  Hannah  Maria  Green,  whom  he 
married  Oct.  31,  1870.  This  mar- 
riage was  blessed  with  ten  children, 
two  of  whom  died  In  infancy,  the 
others  living  to  bring  up  families  of 
their  own.  After  his  marriage  he 
began  to  acquire  land  and  pursued 
the  industry  of  farming  and  stock 
raising.  In  1884  he  drove  a  team  to 
Phoenix,  Arizona,  to  visLt  his  brother 
John  P.  Bush,  who  was  located  in 
that  territory.      En  route  he  fell  in 


with  a  company  of  emigrants  who 
made  him  their  captain.  He  re- 
mained in  Arizona  one  year,  during 
which  he  was  employed  by  the  U.  S. 
Government  in  carrying  mail,  on 
tours  of  exploration  and  in  various 
other  ways.  During  one  of  his  trips 
he  was  ordered  by  the  commander  to 
take  a  young  lady  school  teacher 
from  Fort  McDowell  to  the  Tonto 
Basin,  through  the  Mezetelle  Moun- 
tains where  they  were  belated.  Hav- 
ing missed  the  station  they  camped 
out  all  night.  The  next  morning, 
upon  investigation,  they  discovered 
that  all  the  people  of  the  station, 
including  the  cowboys,  had  recently 
been  killed  and  saw  the  bodies  of  the 


BIOGRAPHICAL  ENCYCLOPEDIA. 


37 


dead  strewn  about  the  place.  Return- 
ing to  his  post  and  reporting  to  his 
commander,  he  was  informed  he  was 
the  first  white  man  to  make  that  trip 
without  an  escort  of  troops.  In  early 
life  Bro.  Bush  had  many  narrow  es- 
capes from  drowning  and  encoun- 
tered a  variety  of  dangers  incident 
to  pioneer  life  so  common  during 
the  pilgrimages  in  unexplored  terri- 
tory. Returning  to  his  home  in  Utah 
from  Arizona  he  visited  California. 
During  his  residence  in  Clover, 
Tooele,  county,  Utah,  he  has  served 
as  constable  for  a  period  of  30  years, 
held  the  office  of  school  trustee 
nearly  40  years,  acted  as  registration 
agent,  and  in  November,  1914,  was 
elected  county  commissioner  of 
Tooele  county  for  a  four-year  term. 
In  1912  he  took  a  trip  to  New  York, 
New  Jersey  and  other  States  in  search 
of  relatives,  and  met  many  of  his 
kinsmen.  Early  in  life  Bro.  Bush 
was  ordained  to  several  positions  in 
the  Priesthood  and  labored  faithfully 
under  the  direction  of  Bishops  John 
J.  Child,  Geo.  W.  Burridge  and  Fran- 
cis De  St.  Jeor,  successively.  He 
was  ordained  a  Bishop  Jan.  1,  1913, 
by  Francis  M.  Lyman  and  set  apart 
to  preside  over  the  Clover  Ward. 
Bishop  Bush  continues  to  retain  pos- 
session of  his  lands,  which  he  ac- 
quired after  his  marriage  in  1870, 
and  is  still  a  prosperous  farmer  and 
stock  raiser.  He  has  sustained  four 
of  his  sons  on  foreign  missions,  three 
(Charles  C,  Marinus  M.  and  Edward 
Earl)  of  them  having  labored  in 
Hawaii  and  one  (Lorenzo  L.)  in 
Australia.  The  names  of  his  chal- 
dren  are  Richard  Randolph,  born 
March  27,  1872;  Charles  Clarence, 
born  July  5,  1873;  John  Wesley, 
born  March  5,  1875;  Daniel  Donovan, 
born  Oct.  17,  1876;  Marinus  Marion, 
born  April  11,  1878;  Hannah  Rosa- 
mond, born  Dec.  25,  1880;  Lorenzo 
Lionel,  born  May  29,  1883;  Laurel 
Lillian,  born  June  3,  1886;  Edwin 
Earl,  born  May  15,  1888,  and  Ivor 
Walter,  born  Dec.  25,  1896. 


JJUSH,  Hannah  Maria  Green,  wife 
of  Richard  N.  Bush  of  Clover,  Tooele 
county,  Utah,  was  born  August  3, 
1850,  at  Newport,  Monmouthshire, 
Wales,  the  daughter  of  Richard  W. 
Green  and  Ann  Phillips.  She  emi- 
grated to  America  with  her  mother 
in  1853,  crossing  the  Atlantic  in  the 
sailing  vessel  "Martha  Whitmore," 
her  father  having  sailed  with  the  three 
other  older  children  in  the  ship  "In- 
ternational" in  February,  1853.  After 
residing  in  Missouri,  Iowa  and 
Nebraska,  she  emigrated  to  Utah  in 
1862,  crossing  the  plains  in  an  in- 
dependent company  which  arrived  in 
Salt  Lake  City  Sept.  22,  1862.  She 
located  at  Shambip,  now  Clover,  and 
was    married    to    Richard    N.     Bush 


Oct.  31,  1870;  she  is  the  mother  of 
ten  children  (eight  boys  and  two 
girls),  eight  of  whom  are  now  living 
(six  boys  and  two  daughters).  Four 
of  her  sons  have  performed  missions 
for  the  Church.  Sister  Bush  acted 
as  president  of  the  Clover  Ward 
I'rimary  Association  four  years,  was 
secretary  of  the  Ward  Relief  Society 
ten  years,  and  has  acted  as  president 
of  said  Relief  Society  since  Febru- 
ary,   1914. 


38 


LATTER-DAY   SAINT 


BUTLER,  Rufus  Edgar,  Bishop  of 

Cornish  (Benson  Stake),  Cache  coun- 
ty, Utah,  was  born  March  27,  1876, 
at  Ogden,  Utah,  the  son  of  Myron  W. 
Butler  and  Miranda  Stowell.  He  was 
baptized  March   27,   1874,   by  Myron 


W.  Butler;  was  ordained  to  different 
offices  in  the  lesser  Priesthood;  or- 
dained an  Elder  in  1898  and  filled 
a  mission  to  the  Southern  States  in 
1898-1900  (laboring  principally  in 
the  South  Alabama  conference).  In 
1906  (August  9th)  he  married  Eliza 
May  Clayson,  daughter  of  Nathan 
Clayson  and  Annie  Harriet  Butler. 
This  marriage  has  been  blessed  with 
six  children,  three  boys  and  three 
girls.  Bishop  Butler  has  been  an 
active  C!hurth  worker  since  the  days 
of  his  early  youth.  lie  acted  as  sec- 
ond assistant  superintendent  of  the 
Cornish  Sunday  school  and  having 
been  ordained  a  High  Triest  acted  as 
second  counselor  to  Benjamin  Frank- 
lin Bingham;  he  was  ordained  a 
Bishop  by  Heber  J.  Grant  August  4, 
1907,  and  set  apart  to  preside  over 
the  Cornish  Ward.  Bishop  Butler's  oc- 
cupation is  that  of  a  farmer  and  stock- 
raiser.  He  was  honorably  released 
from  his  position  as  Bishop  Jan.  13, 
1918. 


BUTLER,  Sarah  Adeline,  a  faithful 
Temple  worker,  was  born  Feb.  15, 
1841,  at  Nauvoo,  111.,  the  daughter 
of  John  L.  Butler  and  Caroline  Faro- 
zine  Skeen  .  She  was  blessed  by  the 
Prophet  Joseph  Smith  and  baptized 
by  her  father  when  eight  years  of 
age,  crossed  the  plains  with  her  par- 
ents in  1852,  and  was  married  to 
Philo  Allen  March  9,  1857,  in  Salt 
Lake  City.  She  became  the  mother 
of  six  children,  namely,  John  Butler, 
Rachel  Caroline,  Gideon,  Charity 
Louisa,  Sarah  Elizabeth  and  Keziah 
Milanda.  She  suffered  the  hardships 
of  the  early  days  in  Utah  and  also 
became  a  pioneer  in  Southern  Utah. 
After  the  separation  from  her  hus- 
band by  being  a  plural  wife  she  re- 
mained a  widow  for  many  years  and 
struggled  to  raise  her  children,  but 
was  married  to  John  II.  Tuttle  In 
1895.  The  same  year  she  was  called 
to  labor  as  an  ordinance  worker  in 
the  Manti  Temple,  which  labor  she 
continued  faithfully  and  diligently  for 
fourteen  years  until  her  health  failed. 


She    now    resides    with    her   daughter 
at  Panguitch,  Utah. 

CALL,  Josiah,  first  counselor  in 
the  presidency  of  the  Rlgby  Stake, 
Fremont  county,  Idaho,  was  born 
April  18,  1862,  at  Willard,  Box  Elder 


BIOGRAPHICAL   ENCYCLOPEDIA. 


39 


county,  Utah,  the  son  of  Homer  Call 
and  Nancy  Merrill.  He  was  baptized 
in  the  spring  of  1870  by  Benjamin 
Jones,  ordained  an  Elder  when  eigh- 
teen years  old  and  presided  over  an 
Elders    quorum    for    two    years.      In 


1884  (Dec.  18th)  he  married  Dove 
Facer  in  the  Logan  Temple.  She 
was  the  daughter  of  Geo.  Facer  and 
Mary  Pryor  and  was  born  Jan.  10, 
1867,   at  Willard.      In   the  spring  of 

1885  Bro.  Call  moved  to  Idaho  and 
located  at  Rigby  where  he  still  lives. 
In  1897-1899  he  filled  a  mission  to 
the  Southern  States.  When  the  Rigby 
Ward  was  organized  May  22,  1886, 
he  was  ordained  a  High  Priest  and 
set  apart  as  counselor  to  Bishop  Geo. 
A.  Cardon  by  Apostle  John  W.  Taylor. 
He  labored  in  the  Bishopric  22  years, 
and  when  the  Rigby  Stake  was  or- 
ganized he  was  sot  apart  as  first 
counselor  in  said  Stake,  which  posi- 
tion he  now  holds.  In  a  secular  way 
Bro.  Call  has  held  many  responsible 
positions.  He  acted  as  justice  of  the 
peace  in  the  Rigby  precinct  from 
1890  to  1892  and  served  as  a  mem- 
ber of  the  city  council  two  terms. 
He  is  interested  in  banking  and  mer- 
cantile business,  though  farming  is 
his  main  avocation.  Elder  Call  lost  his 
wife    by    death    April    2,    1915.      She 


had  given  birth  to  ten  children, 
namely,  Oel  F.,  born  Nov.  24,  1885, 
at  Willard;  Mary  Nancy,  born  Nov. 
28,  1887;  Ethel  May,  born  April  21, 
1890;  Elmo  Josiah,  born  Jan.  25, 
1893;  Dove  Alida  B.,  born  Oct.  3, 
1895;  Royal  Glenn,  born  April  30, 
1900;  Vivian  A.,  born  April  9,  1902; 
Allen  Willard,  born  April  29,  1904; 
Leland,  born  May  9,  1906,  and  Lola, 
born  August  8,  1908;  the  last  nine 
were  born  at  Rigby,  Idaho. 

CAMERON,  Benjamin,  a  High 
Councilor  in  the  Panguitch  Stake  of 
Zion  and  a  resident  of  Panguitch, 
Garfield  county,  Utah,  was  born  April 
2  0,  1858,  at  Provo,  Utah  county, 
Utah,  the  son  of  Wm.  Cameron  and 
Jane  Francis  Lint.  He  was  baptized 
by  Wm.  Carter  when  about  eight 
years  of  age,  was  ordained  an  Elder 
when  quite  young  and  married  Sarah 
Elizabeth  Allen  Jan.  7,  1882,  in  the 
St.  George  Temple.  This  marriage 
has  been  blessed  with  ten  children, 
namely,  Benjamin,  Allen,  Millie,  Wm. 
G.,  Stephen  G.,  John  A.,  Philo.  Rachel 


A.,  AIe.v  II.,  and  Jesse  Orvil.  Bro. 
Cameron  was  ordained  a  High  Priest 
May  3  0,  1908,  by  David  Cameron 
and  was  set  apart  as  a  member  of 
the  Panguitch  Stake  High  Council. 
Prior    to    this    he    had    a<ted    as    aa 


40 


LATTER-DAY   SAINT 


officer  in  the  Ward  Y.  M.  M.  I.  A. 
From  1910  to  1916  he  officiated  as 
a  member  of  the  presidency  of  the 
High  Priests  quorum  of  the  Pan- 
guitch  Stake.  Not  only  in  ecclesias- 
tical matters  has  Bro.  Cameron  been 
a  diligent  worker,  but  he  has  also 
filled  a  number  of  positions  of  a  civil 
nature.  Thus  he  acted  as  city  magis- 
trate at  I'anguitch  two  years  and 
served  two  terms  as  a  school  trustee. 

CAMKRON,  Sarah  Kli/abcth  Allen, 

wife  of  Benjamin  Cameron,  was  born 


July  30,  186(5,  at  South  Weber, 
Weber  county,  Utah,  the  daughter  of 
Philo  Allen  and  Sarah  Adeline  But- 
ler. She  was  baptized  July  18,  1887, 
by  Joseph  A.  Young;  was  married  to 
Benjamin  Cameron  in  1882  and  be- 
came the  mother  of  ten  children,  six 
of  whom  are  still  living.  Before  her 
marriage  she  moved  considerably 
from  place  to  place  with  her  parents 
and  first  came  to  Panguitch  in  1871. 
In  1873  she  accompanied  her  parents 
to  Upper  Kanab,  where  the  family 
resided  about  a  year  and  a  half  and 
then  returned  to  Panguitch.  Sister 
Cameron  has  been  a  diligent  Church 
worker  since  her  early  youth  and  for 
many  years  took  an  active  part  in 
the  local  Y.  L.  M.  I.  A.  at  Panguitch. 
From  1898  to  1911  she  labored  as  a 


Stake  missionary  in  the  Panguitch 
Stake,  after  which  she  was  chosen 
as  president  of  the  Panguitch  Relief 
Society,  which  position  she  held  until 
June,  191G,  when  she  was  chosen  as 
president  of  the  Panguitch  North 
Ward  Relief  Society;  this  position 
she  still  liolds. 

CARUINK,   William  Van  Orden,  a 

Patriarch  in  the  Union  Stake  of  Zion 
and  a  resident  of  La  Grande,  Oregon, 
was  born  Feb.  17,  1835,  at  Carro, 
Greene  county  N.  Y.,  the  son  of  Ed- 
mond  Z.  Carbine  and  Adelia  Rider. 
His  parents  became  converts  to  "Mor- 
monism"  in  1841  in  Greene  county, 
N.  Y.,  and  migrating  to  Illinois  in 
1842,  they  located  about  six  miles 
from  Nauvoo,  on  the  road  to  Carth- 
age, and  the  father  taught  school  at 
Camp  Creek.     When  the  persecutions 


against  the  Saints  subsequently  broke 
out,  the  family  were  exposed  to  great 
danger  and  passed  through  many 
hardships.  Together  with  the  exiled 
Saints  the  Carbine  family  left  Nau- 
voo for  the  wilderness  in  the  spring 
of  184  6.  The  father  was  stricken 
with  the  fever  after  they  arrived  on 
the  Missouri  river  and  died  August 
27,  1846.  The  widow  with  her  chil- 
dren subsequently  located  at  Winter 
Quarters,    where    William    was    bap- 


BIOGRAPHICAL  ENCYCLOPEDIA. 


41 


tized  by  Benjamin  L.  Clapp  in  1847. 
He  migrated  to  Great  Salt  Lake  Val- 
ley with  Bishop  Newel  K.  Whitney 
in  1848,  crossing  the  plains  in  Heber 
C.  Kimball's  company,  together  with 
his  uncle,  the  late  Hector  C.  Haight. 
He  located  at  Farmington  in  1848. 
Attaching  himself  to  Capt.  Hancock's 
military  company  he  served  in  the 
Walker  war  and  later  accompanied 
Col.  Chauncey  W.  West's  company 
on  an  expedition  into  Marsh  valley. 
He  participated  in  the  Echo  canyon 
expedition  during  the  winter  of  1857- 
8,  and  was  one  of  the  Relief  company 
sent  under  Capt.  Horton  D.  Haight 
to  the  relief  of  the  Salmon  river  mis- 
sion in  1858.  In  1861  (Feb.  25th) 
he  married  Susan  Hulda  Miller, 
daughter  of  Daniel  A.  Miller.  During 
the  Black  Hawk  war  in  186 G  he 
served  under  Capt.  Robt.  T.  Burton 
in  Sanpete  county.  His  wife  Susan 
died  May  26,  1867,  and  three  years 
later  (May  30,  1870)  he  married 
Sarah  J.  Miller,  daughter  of  Henry 
W.  Miller.  His  children  by  his  first 
wife  (Susan  Carbine)  were  William 
Arnold  (born  Dec.  25,  1861)  and 
Edmond  Z.  (born  Sept.  25,  1864). 
His  second  wife's  children  are  Wil- 
liam H.,  Alma  M.,  Sarah  L.,  Horton 
David,  Adelia  E.,  Daniel  A.,  Susan 
M.,  Lucy  E.,  Everett  V.  O.,  Julia  A., 
Francis  H.  and  Clarissa  J.  Elder 
Carbine  was  ordained  a  Seventy  by 
Truman  Leonard  in  1858,  and  in 
1870  he  moved  to  Clarkston,  Cache 
county,  Utah.  He  was  ordained  a 
High  Priest  May  20,  1877,  and  set 
apart  to  act  as  counselor  to  Bishop 
Jardine  of  Clarkston.  Here  he  also 
served  as  postmaster  for  ten  years, 
constable  two  years  and  justice  of 
the  peace  six  years.  In  1886  he 
moved  to  Parker,  Fremont  county, 
Idaho,  where  he  served  as  first  coun- 
selor in  the  Bishopric  for  ten  years, 
after  which  he  served  as  an  alternate 
member  of  the  High  Council  of  the 
Fremont  Stake  of  Zion.  He  was  or- 
dained a  Patriarch  by  John  Henry 
Smith  Jan.  20,  1902,  and  in  the  fall 


of  the  same  year  he  moved  to  La 
Grande,  Oregon,  which  is  his  present 
home.  Bro.  Carbine  came  with  his 
parents  to  Nauvoo  in  184  2  and  was 
present  at  the  meeting  held  August  8, 
1844,  when  the  mantle  of  Joseph 
fell  on  Brigham  Young.  Writing  of 
this  incident  Bro.  Carbine  says: 
"Though  I  was  only  a  boy,  I  remem- 
ber it  quite  distinctly,  and  I  told  my 
mother  that  the  Prophet  was  not 
dead,  for  I  had  seen  him  on  the 
stand." 

CARLSON,  Anders  Alfred,  Bishop 
of  the  Pratt  Ward  of  the  Teton  Stake 
(in  Lincoln  county,  Wyoming,  and 
Fremont    county,    Idaho),    was    born 


May  2,  1855,  at  llingkarleby,  0rebro 
Ian,  Sweden,  the  son  of  Carl  Johan 
Anderson  and  Caroline  Glanzelius. 
He  was  raised  on  a  farm  and  labored 
as  a  farm  hand  until  1878,  when  he 
established  himself  as  a  shoemaker 
and  dealer  in  footwear  in  the  city  of 
Vestera.s.  While  thus  engaged  he 
became  a  convert  to  "Mormonism" 
and  was  baptized  Feb.  19,  1890.  by 
Jonas  Matson.  In  1892  he  emigrated 
to  Utah  together  with  his  family.  He 
located  temporarily  in  the  Benson 
Ward,  Cache  county,  and  took  charge 
of  a  rented  farm  about  three  years. 
After    that    he    moved    to    the    Teton 


42 


LATTER-DAY   SAINT 


Basin  where  he  has  resided  ever 
since,  he  being  among  the  early  set- 
tlers in  that  valley.  Prior  to  leaving 
the  old  country  he  was  ordained  a 
Teacher  March  2,  1892,  by  Jonas 
Matson  and  ordained  an  Elder  Aug- 
ust 7,  1892,  by  Carl  Lundell.  He 
was  ordained  a  Seventy  when  the 
14  4th  quorum  of  Seventy  was  organ- 
ized. Later  he  was  chosen  as  a  presi- 
dent of  said  quorum.  In  1909-1911 
he  filled  a  mission  to  Sweden,  dur- 
ing which  he  presided  a  part  of  the 
time  over  the  Norrkoping  confer- 
ence. He  was  ordained  a  High  Priest 
and  Bishop  and  set  apart  to  preside 
over  the  Pratt  Ward  in  the  Teton 
Stake  May  18,  1913,  by  Francis  M. 
Lyman.  Bro.  Carlson  married  Anna 
Sophia  Nygren  Nov.  18,  1877,  in 
Sweden,  which  marriage  has  been 
blessed  with  six  children,  namely, 
Anna  Alfrida.  Alfred  Emanuel,  Alma 
Matilda,  Ada  Sophia,  Anna  Carolina 
and  Carl  August. 

CAPENER,  Arthur  liiRby,  second 
Bishop  of  the  Garland  Ward  (Bear 
River  Stake),  Box  Elder  county,  Utah, 
was  born  Jan.  20,  1869,  in  Salt  Lake 
City,  Utah,  the  son  of  Wm.  Capener 
and  Ellen  Rigby.  He  removed  with 
his  parents  to  Centerville,  Davis 
county,  in  1874.  While  his  home 
was  with  his  parents  he  and  his 
brothers  spent  part  of  their  time 
working  away  from  home  in  order  to 
gain  a  livelihood.  Thus  Arthur 
spent  a  good  part  of  his  boyhood  days 
in  Salt  Lake  City.  He  was  ordained 
a  Deacon,  afterwards  a  Priest  and 
still  later  an  Elder,  the  latter  ordin- 
ation taking  place  under  the  hands  of 
Nathan  T.  Porter  Jan.  9,  1891.  In 
November,  1891,  he  located  upon  his 
present  homestead  in  the  Bear  River 
valley,  which  at  that  time  contained 
only  a  few  families.  In  1893  (July 
12lh)  he  married  Miss  Mary  Larelda 
Garn.  The  first  years  of  their  resi- 
dence in  the  Bear  River  valley  was 
rather  unpleasant,  but  after  a  while 
ecclesiastical  organizations  were  ef- 
fected in  this  locality  and  Arthur  was 


chosen  as  superintendent  of  the  Sun- 
day school,  which  position  he  held  for 
eleven  years.  In  1905-1907  he  filled 
a  mission  to  the  Northern  States, 
laboring  principally  in  the  Southern 
Illinois  conference,  part  of  the  time 
as  its  president.  He  was  ordained  a 
High  Priest  and  Bishop  Oct.  11,  1908, 
by  Rudger  Clawson,  and  set  apart  to 
preside  over  the  Garland  Ward,  which 
position  he  still  holds.  Bishop  Cap- 
ener's  main  vocation  is  that  of  farm- 
ing, horticulture  and  buying  and  sell- 
ing cattle,  in  all  of  which  branches  of 
business  he  has  been  very  successful. 
Of  civil  positions  which  he  has  filled 


in  the  interests  of  his  fellow-citlzena 
it  may  be  mentioned  that  he  acted  as 
road  supervisor  for  several  years,  was 
treasurer  of  the  town  of  Garland  and 
a  member  of  the  town  board,  and  in 
1916  was  elected  for  a  four  year 
term  as  county  commissioner  of  Box 
Elder  county.  He  was  also  a  member 
of  the  Bear  River  Stake  Tabernacle 
Board  and  took  an  active  part  in  the 
erection  of  that  building  in  1914;  the 
building  cost  $55,000. 

CARPENTKK,  John  Stillcy,  fifth 
Bishop  of  Glendale  (Kanab  Stake) 
Kane  county,  Utah,  was  born  Feb. 
11,  1849,  at  Centerville,  New  Castle 
county,    Delaware,    the   son    of   John 


BIOGRAPHICAL  ENCYCLOPEDIA. 


43 


Steele  Carpenter  and  Margaret  Mc- 
Cullough.  He  came  to  Utah  with  his 
parents  in  1857,  crossing  the  plains 
in  Jacob  Hoffhein's  company,  and  lo- 
cated in  Salt  Lake  City  (8th  Ward). 
At  the  time  of  the  move  in  1858  the 


family  went  to  Lehi,  Utah  county, 
but  soon  returned  to  the  City.  John 
S.  was  baptized  August  1,  1858,  by 
Samuel  Bringhurst  and  in  1866  he 
was  ordained  an  Elder,  and  the  same 
year  went  back  to  the  Missouri  river 
as  a  Church  teamster  after  emigrants. 
In  1868  he  was  called  to  the  Muddy 
Mission  (now  in  Nevada),  where  he 
remained  until  that  mission  was 
broken  up  in  1871,  \,hen  he  became 
one  of  the  first  resettlers  of  Glendale. 
which  then  became  his  permanent 
home.  He  was  ordained  a  High  Priest 
by  Erastus  Snow,  August  4,  1877,  and 
set  apart  as  second  counselor  to 
Bishop  James  Leithead  of  Glendale. 
In  1879  (Nov.  Sth)  he  was  chosen  as 
first  counselor  to  Bishop  Royal  J. 
Cutler,  which  position  he  held  until 
the  death  of  Bishop  Cutler  in  18  94. 
In  September  of  that  year  he  was 
chosen  as  first  counselor  to  Bishop 
Moses  D.  Harris,  which  position  he 
held  until  March,  1898.  After  that 
he  served  eight  years  as  a  member  of 
the  High  Council,  and  in  1908  he  was 
ordained  a  Bishop  by  Francis  M.  Ly- 


man and  set  apart  to  preside  over 
the  Glendale  Ward.  He  acted  as 
Bishop  five  years.  In  1881-83  he 
filled  a  mission  to  the  Southern 
States,  laboring  part  of  the  time  as  a 
conference  president.  For  2  5  years 
he  served  as  a  director  in  the  Glen- 
dale Irrigation  Company,  and  for  22 
years  was  a  member  of  the  district 
school  board.  From  April  20,  1844, 
to  Jan.  12,  1896,  he  acted  as  superin- 
tendent of  the  Glendale  Sunday 
school,  after  which  he  acted  as  assist- 
ant superintendent  of  the  same 
school.  Bishop  Carpenter  married 
Margaret  E.  Cutler  Feb.  1,  1877;  she 
was  born  July  29,  1860,  the  daughter 
of  Royal  James  Cutler  and  Margaret 
Ross.  She  bore  her  husband  two 
children  (John  Cutler  and  Rosanah), 
and  died  Sept.  12,  1880.  Bro.  Carpen- 
ter married  Ann  Elizabeth  Hopkins 
Jan.  10,  1890.    She  had  four  children. 

CARPENTER,  Ann  Elizabeth  Hop- 
kins, wife  of  Bishop  John  S.  Carpen- 
ter, was  born  Feb.  23,  1867,  at  To- 
querville,  Washington  county,  Utah, 
the  daughter  of  Lahrelet  J.   Hopkins 


and  Ann  Spendlove.  She  was  mar- 
ried to  John  S.  Carpenter  Jan.  10, 
1890,  in  the  MantI  Temple,  and  is  the 
mother  of  four  children,  namely, 
Ethel,  born  Oct.  27,  1890;  Walter 
Stilley,    born    Oct.    29,    1894;    Prank 


44 


LATTER-DAY   SAINT 


Gould,  born  Sept.  16,  1898,  and  Ella 
born  Dec.  5,  1905.  Sister  Carpenter 
has  been  an  active  Church  worker 
for  many  years;  she  acted  as  presi- 
dent of  the  Y.  L.  M.  I.  A.  in  the 
Glendale  Ward  for  about  three  years, 
served  as  secretary  and  later  as  a 
counselor  in  the  Ward  Relief  Society. 

CHAMBERLAIN,  Henry,  Bishop  of 
Orderville  (Kanab  Stake),  Kane 
county,  Utah,  was  born  July  6,  1879, 


at  Orderville,  the  son  of  Thomas 
Chamberlain  and  Ann  Carling.  He 
was  baptized  and  confirmed  by  his 
father  August  21,  1887;  ordained  a 
Deacon  by  H.  W.  Esplln  Feb.  8,  1892; 
ordained  an  Elder  by  Isaiah  Bowers 
Sept.  26,  1897,  and  ordained  a  High 
Priest  by  Hyrum  M.  Smith  Sept.  6, 
1910,  and  set  apart  as  an  alternate 
member  of  the  High  Council;  ordained 
a  Bishop  by  Geo.  F.  Richards  Nov. 
30,  1910,  and  set  apart  to  preside 
over  the  Orderville  Ward.  While  yet 
quite  young  he  presided  over  a  quor- 
um of  Deacons,  labored  as  a  home 
missionary  and  acted  as  choir  leader. 
In  1901-1903  he  filled  a  mission  to 
the  Northern  States  with  headquart- 
ers In  Chicago.  While  laboring  in 
Chicago  he  acted  as  superintendent 
of  the  branch  Sunday  school  and  also 
as  chorister  of  the  branch.     In  1899 


(Oct.  11)  he  married  Mary  Esplln 
(daughter  of  Henry  W.  Esplin  and 
Philema  Cox),  born  Dec.  13,  1880,  at 
Orderville.  Bishop  Chamberlain  is  a 
farmer  by  occupation  and  a  much 
respected  citizen. 

CHAMBERLAIN,  Thomas,  a  I'atri- 
arch  in  the  Kanab  Stake  of  Zion,  and 
a  resident  of  Kanab,  Kane  county, 
Utah,  was  born  July  14,  1854,  at 
Tooele,  Tooele  county,  Utah,  the  son 
of  Thos.  Chamberlain  and  Hannah 
Whaile.  He  was  baptized  by  Geo. 
Atkins  Nov.  9,  1S62;  ordained  a 
Elder  June  26,  1870,  by  Wm.  Heaton, 
at  St.  Joseph,  Nevada;  ordained  a 
High  Priest  April  20,  1877,  by 
Apostle  Orson  Pratt,  and  set  apart  as 
one  of  the  original  High  Councilors 
in  the  Kanab  Stake  of  Zion;  was 
ordained  a  Bishop,  August  5,  1877, 
and  called  to  preside  over  the  Order- 
ville   Ward;    was    chosen    as    second 


counselor  to  Pres.  Edwin  D.  Woolley, 
president  of  the  Kanab  Stake,  June 
9,  1884,  and  became  first  counselor 
in  the  Kanab  Stake  presidency  May 
24,  1887,  serving  in  the  latter  posi- 
tion until  the  reorganization  of  the 
Stake  Dec.  4,  1910.  Bro.  Chamber- 
lain's father  died  when  Thomas  was 
three  years  of  age.  His  mother  mar- 
ried   again,    after    which    the    family 


BIOGRAPHICAL   ENCYCLOPEDIA. 


45 


moved  to  the  Muddy,  Nevada,  in  1868. 
In  1871  they  settled  in  Long  valley 
and  subsequently  were  among  the 
first  settlers  of  Orderville,  where  they 
took  a  very  active  part  in  the  United 
Order,  Bro.  Chamberlain  acting  as 
one  of  the  board  of  directors  and  for 
nine  years  was  president  of  said 
board.  During  the  Indian  troubles 
he  made  two  trips  across  the  Colo- 
rado river  to  the  Moquis  and  Navajo 
Indians;  he  acted  as  treasurer  of 
Kane  county  ten  years  and  served  as 
chairman  of  the  board  of  county  com- 
missioners. He  also  served  in  the 
Utah  penitentiary  si-x  months  (in 
1888-89)  after  being  convicted  of  so- 
called  unlawful  co-habitation.  Bro. 
Chamberlain  was  the  husband  of  six 
wives,  five  of  them  still  living,  and 
the  father  of  fifty-five  children;  of 
this  number  24  sons  and  16  daugh- 
ters are  still  living.  Of  his  24  sons, 
ten  are  registered  and  three  are  now 
(1918)  serving  in  the  United  States 
Army;  seven  sons  have  filled  foreign 
missions,  two  of  his  sons  now  act  as 
Bishops;  another  son  is  a  High 
Councilor,  and  another  a  Bishop's 
counselor,  while  nearly  all  of  them 
have  or  are  filling  positions  in  the 
various  auxiliary  organizations.  His 
families  all  have  comfortable  homes 
and  other  property,  and  the  children 
have  all  had  the  advantage  of  school- 
ing; seventeen  have  attended  high 
school.  Bro.  Chamberlain  filled  many 
positions  of  honor  and  responsibility 
in  the  community;  thus  he  acted  as 
school  trustee  for  ten  years.  He  was 
one  of  the  first  dry  farmers  In  Kane 
county,  and  was  until  the  time  of 
his  demise  the  most  extensive  farmer 
in  Southern  Utah.  He  was  also  a 
liberal  subscriber  to  the  Red  Cross 
and  Liberty  Bonds,  and  was  always 
one  of  the  foremost  donators  to  pub- 
lic enterprises.  He  was  a  farmer  and 
stock  raiser  by  avocation  and  also  a 
merchant.  Bro.  Chamberlain  was 
ordained  a  Patriarch  by  Apostle 
Francis  M.  Lyman  Sept.  8,  1S95.  He 
gave      several      hundred     patriarchal 


blessings  free  of  charge  and  kept  a 
neat  creditable  record  of  all  he  did  in 
this  capacity.  Patriarch  Chamberlain 
died  March  17,  1918,  at  Kanab,  Utah, 
not  quite  64  years  old. 

CHRISTENSEN,  Mads,  a  Patriarch 
in  the  Church,  was  born  March  2  4, 
1825,  at  Blands,  Lolland,  Denmark, 
the  son  of  Christian  Andersen  and 
Karen  N.  Hansen.  He  learned  the 
trade  of  a  carpenter  and  followed 
that  avocation  in  his  native  land. 
He  was  naturally  spiritual  minded, 
but  did  not  believe  in  any  of  the 
sects.  As  a  boy  he  received  a  special 
testimony   in  regard   to  true  Christi- 


anity, and  becoming  a  convert  to 
"Mormonism  "  he  was  baptized  Jan. 
23,  1857,  together  with  his  wife, 
Maren  Johanne  Jensen,  whom  he 
married  Nov.  24,  1854.  Disposing 
of  his  property  in  Denmark  he  emi- 
grated to  Utah  in  1857,  crossing  the 
Atlantic  in  the  ship  " Westmoreland" 
and  the  plains  in  Christian  Christian- 
sen's handcart  company,  which  ar- 
rived in  Salt  Lake  City,  Sept.  13, 
1857.  With  his  means  he  assisted  a 
number  of  poor  Saints  to  emigrate  to 
Utah.  He  was  ordained  a  Seventy  by 
A.  Milton  Musser  March  1,  1S5S. 
During  the  general  move  south 
in    1858    he    went    as    far    south    as 


46 


LATTER-DAY   SAINT 


American  Fork,  and  later  settled  In 
the  Fourteenth  Ward,  Salt  Lake  City. 
In  1861  he  located  at  Farmlngton, 
Davis  county,  Utah,  and  in  1864  went 
back  to  the  Misslouri  river  as  a 
Church  teamster  after  emigrants. 
From  May,  1875,  to  October,  1876,  he 
filled  a  mission  to  Scandinavia,  and 
in  1883-1885  he  filled  a  colonization 
mission  to  Arizona.  While  in  Ari- 
zona he  was  ordained  a  High  Priest 
Nov.  3,  1884,  by  Brigham  Young,  Jr., 
and  set  apart  as  a  High  Councilor  in 
the  St.  Joseph  Stake  of  Zion.  In 
1892  he  moved  to  Idaho,  locating  on 
Robin  creek,  Marsh  valley,  Bannock 
county,  Idaho,  and  was  ordained  a 
Patriarch  in  the  Pocatello  Stake  Sept. 
3,  1898,  by  Pres.  Wm.  C.  Parkinson. 
Yielding  obedience  to  the  higher  law 
of  marriage  by  marrying  Hannah 
M.  Christiansen  Dec.  29,  1881,  he 
was  arrested  Feb.  13,  1888,  on  a 
charge  of  unlawful  cohabitation,  and 
being  convicted  he  served  a  term  of 
seven  months  in  the  Utah  peniten- 
tiary, from  which  he  was  released 
Sept.  3,  1888.  Patriarch  Christensen 
died  June  14,  1914,  at  Robin,  Idaho, 

CHRISTENSEN,  Niels,  an  active 
Elder  and  a  resident  of  Hyrum,  Cache 
county,  Utah,  was  born  Dec.  11,  1816, 
in  Randers  amt,  Denmark,  the  son  of 
Christian  Nielsen  and  Anna  M.  Johan- 
sen.  Becoming  a  convert  to  "Mor- 
monism"  he  was  baptized  July  6, 
1858,  by  Rasmus  Mikkelsen.  He 
married  Kirstine  Nielsen  and  emi- 
grated to  Utah  in  1860  with  four 
children  (Niels  Christian,  Christen, 
Niels  and  Maria  Christine),  leaving 
his  wife  behind.  He  settled  at  Hy- 
rum, Cache  county,  Utah,  and  en- 
gaged in  a  number  of  activities,  such 
as  farming,  shoemaking  and  carpen- 
tering. He  married  a  second  wife, 
Dorthea  Christine  Johansen,  in  1860, 
by  whom  he  had  six  children,  namely, 
Joseph,  Sophia,  Dorthea,  John  and 
Samuel.  In  1863  he  married  a  third 
wife  (Christine  Anderson),  by  whom 
he  had  nine  children,   making  nine- 


teen children  in  all,  ten  of  whom  are 
now  living.  The  names  of  his  chil- 
dren by  his  third  wife  are  Andrew, 
Ezra,  Mary  Ann,  Heber,  Joseph,  Hy- 
rum, Nephi  Lehi,  Wilford  and  Orson. 
Ripe  in  years  and  highly  respected, 
Bro.  Christensen  died  July  30,  1881, 
at  Hyrum,  He  was  a  man  of  energy, 
a   good    provider   and    strong   in   the 


faith.  By  his  diligence  and  faithful- 
ness he  proved  himself  a  true  Latter- 
day  Saint. 

CHRISTENSEN,     NieLs     Christian, 

one  of  the  early  settlers  of  Hyrum, 
Cache  county,  Utah,  was  born  July 
11,  184  4,  at  Starbrand,  Randers  amt, 
Denmark,  the  son  of  Niels  Christen- 
sen and  Kirstine  Nielsen.  Becoming 
a  convert  to  "Mormonism,"  he  was 
baptized  Dec.  23,  1859,  and  emi- 
grated to  Utah  the  following  year 
with  his  father's  family.  In  1868 
he  married  Karen  Marie  Christensen, 
by  whom  he  became  the  father  of 
eleven  children.  Ever  since  he 
joined  the  Church  Elder  Christensen 
worked  with  zeal  and  energy  for  the 
advancement  of  truth  among  his  fel- 
low men.  At  the  time  of  his  demise, 
which  occurred  at  Hyrum,  April  1, 
1905,  he  held  the  office  of  High 
Priest.  Elder  Christensen  seemed  to 
be   especially   gifted   with   the   power 


BIOGRAPHICAL   ENCYCLOPEDIA. 


47 


of  healing  and  was  therefore  called     Smith  and  set  apart  to  preside  over 
among  the  sick  a  great  deal.  the  Farr  West  Ward. 


CHUGG,  Moroni,  fourth  Bishop  of 
Farr  West,  Weber  county,  Utah,  was 
born  Jan.  23,  1879,  at  Harrlsville, 
Weber  county,  Utah,  the  son  of  John 
Chugg  and  Hanna  Lee.  He  was  bap- 
tized by  W^m.  A.  Taylor,  Sen.),  when 
about  eight  years  old;  ordained  a 
Deacon  Jan.  24,  1894,  by  Jacob 
Thomas;  chosen  as  secretary  of  the 
Farr  West  Sunday  school  Jan.  5, 
189  6;  became  secretary  of  the  Ward 
Y.  M.  M.  I.  A.  Oct.  11,  1896;  acted 
as  a  block  teacher  when  attending 
the  Weber  Academy;  chosen  as  first 
counselor  to  John  Larkins  in  the 
Deacons'  quorum  Jan.  15,  1897; 
labored  as  a  Teacher  in  the  Sunday 
school;  was  ordained  a  Priest  Oct.  5, 
1899,  by  Joseph  Stephenson,  and  or- 
dained an  Elder  Jan.  22,  1901,  by 
Peter  C.  Stephenson.  He  married 
Ida  Taylor  Jan.  23,  1901,  in  the  Salt 
Lake  Temple,  which  marriage  has 
been  blessed  with  eight  children, 
namely,  Moroni  Orrin,  born  Nov.  16, 
1901;  Carl  Willis,  born  June  11, 
1903;  Leila  Ida,  born  Dec.  17,  1904; 
Zola  Philomela,  born  Feb.  26,  1907; 
John  Andrew,  born  June  15,  1908, 
Melburne  David,  born  Feb.  20,  1910; 
Oretta  Hanna,  born  Oct.  13,  1912; 
and  Duard  Baily,  born  May  28,  1914. 
Bro.  Chugg  was  appointed  Ward 
clerk  Oct.  12,  1902,  and  held  that 
position  till  April  11,  1909;  was  or- 
dained a  Seventy  March  3,  1904,  by 
J.  Golden  Kimball;  sustained  as  sup- 
ervisor of  parents'  class  January  28, 
1906;  chosen  as  first  counselor  to 
Geo.  A.  White  in  the  presidency  of 
the  Ward  Y.  M.  M.  I.  A.;  set  apart 
as  a  president  of  the  60th  quorum  of 
Seventy  Dec.  6,  1906;  sustained  as 
principal  instructor  of  the  Seventy's 
class  Oct.  27.  1907;  ordained  a  High 
Priest  August  2,  190S,  by  James 
Wotherspoon  and  set  apart  as  an 
alternate  member  of  the  North  Weber 
Stake  High  Council;  ordained  a  Bish- 
op   April     11,     1909,    by    Hyrum    M. 


CliAJlIDGE,  Samuel,  Patriarch, 
and  former  Bishop  of  the  Thatcher 
Ward  (St.  Joseph  Stake),  Graham 
county,  Arizona,  was  born  Dec.  5, 
1828,  at  Leighton-Buzzard,  Bedford- 
shire, England,  the  son  of  David  Clar- 
idge  and  Elizabeth  Hopkins,  and  bap- 
tized June  5,  1851,  by  George  Cole- 
man. He  married  Charlotte  Joy,  a 
refined  and  superior  English  girl  in 
1849.  She  was  born  Sept.  28,  1819, 
at  Chatteras,  Cambridgeshire,  Eng- 
land. Three  children  were  born  to 
his  first  wife  and  came  with  the 
parents  to  T'tah  in  1853.     Elder  Clar- 


idge  and  family  finally  settled  at 
Xephi,  Juab  county.  He  was  or- 
dained an  Elder  and  subsequently 
became  president  of  the  Forty-ninth 
quorum  of  Seventy.  Directly  after 
being  ordained  a  High  Priest  by 
President  Wilford  Woodruff  in  Aug- 
ust, 1808,  he  was  called  on  a  mis- 
sion to  the  Muddy  (now  in  Nevada), 
where  he  took  a  portion  of  his  fam- 
ily and  remained  until  1871,  shar- 
ing in  the  vicissitudes  and  pioneer 
struggles  of  that  most  difficult  of  all 
missions.  He  did  not  leave  until  all 
were  released  to  return  to  Utah  in 
1S71.       He    married    for   his    second 


48 


LATTER-DAY   SAINT 


wife  Rebecca  Hughes,  born  Nov.  15, 
1847,  In  Liverpool,  England.  They 
were  married  July  3,  1865.  Return- 
ing from  the  Muddy  Bro.  Claridge 
settled  in  Long  valley,  Kane  county, 
Utah,  locating  at  Mt.  Carmel.  When 
the  United  Order  was  started  in  1874, 
Elder  Claridge  entered  therein  with 
heart  and  soul.  He  devoted  every 
power  of  mind  and  body  to  the  de- 
velopment of  this  divine  plan.  That 
wondrously  successful  experiment  at 
Orderville  will  yet  be  studied  as  a 
pattern  for  the  final  adjustment  of 
worldly  affairs  ere  the  Saints  return 
to  build  up  the  Center  Stake  of  Zion. 
Elder  Claridge  was  appointed  first 
vice  president  of  the  Order,  and  in 
1875  became  one  of  the  founders  of 
Orderville,  where  the  United  Order 
was  continued  under  the  direction  of 
Howard  O.  Spencer.  In  1877  Elder 
Claridge  went  to  Great  Britain  on  a 
mission.  He  left  a  sick  wife  and 
seven  small  children  at  home,  but 
nothing  daunted  the  ardor  of  his 
testimony  or  hindered  the  fulfillment 
of  his  glorious  purpose.  He  devoted 
considerable  time  while  there  to 
gathering  genealogy,  and  laid  the 
foundation  for  his  later  tireless  lab- 
ors in  the  Temples  In  Zion.  After  his 
return  he  continued  for  ten  years  in 
promoting  the  interests  and  labors  of 
the  United  Order.  In  1883  he  re- 
moved to  Arizona  and  located  at 
Thatcher.  His  first  wife  died  one 
year  later  and  was  buried  at  Nephi, 
their  old  home.  He  was  ordained  a 
Bishop  of  the  Thatcher  Ward.  His 
second  wife,  Rebecca,  who  has  been 
his  faithful  and  devoted  companion 
during  all  his  later  years,  has  borne 
him  fourteen  children,  nine  sons  and 
five  daughters,  twelve  of  whom  are 
now  living  at  Thatcher,  Arizona.  His 
posterity  at  the  present  time  num- 
bers about  five  hundred  souls.  He 
has  performed  a  truly  marvelous 
work  in  redeeming  his  dead,  and 
loves  to  come  to  Salt  Lake  City  to 
rest  for  a  season  in  the  home  of  his 
daughter,  Mrs.  A.  W.  McCune,  while 
engaging    in    Temple    work    for    his 


kindred  dead.  His  second  daughter, 
Lottie,  by  his  first  wife  Charlotte, 
was  a  gifted  actress,  the  wife  of  B.  S. 
Young;  she  died  several  years  ago. 
One  of  his  sons  by  his  second  wife, 
— David  Claridge — is  now  a  Bishop 
and  has  served  one  term  in  the  Ari- 
zona legislature  with  dignity  and 
ability.  All  of  his  children  are  ex- 
emplary and  gifted  with  intelligence 
and  integrity.  Elder  Claridge  is  an 
Israelite  "in  whom  there  is  no  guile." 
Unworldly  in  spirit,  faithful  in  friend- 
ship, honest  in  his  dealings  with  his 
fellow-men,  pure  and  exalted  in  his 
sentiments,  he  is  beloved  by  all  who 
know  him,  and  as  President  Joseph 
F.  Smith  once  said  of  him:  "Brother 
Claridge  was  a  Latter-day  Saint  be- 
fore he  came  upon  this  earth." — 
( Susa  Young  Gates.) 

CLARK,     Edward     Barrett,     first 

counselor  in  the  presidency  of  the 
South    Davis    Stake,     Davis     county, 


Utah,  was  l)orn  April  7,  1859,  at 
Farmington,  Utah,  the  son  of  Ezra 
T.  Clark  and  Mary  Stevenson.  He 
was  baptized  April  21,  1867,  by  Tru- 
man Leonard.  As  a  boy  he  was 
active  in  the  auxiliary  organizations 
of  the  Church  and  was  especially 
prominent  in  the  Y.  M.  M.  I.  A.,  serv- 
ing as  second  counselor,  fir.st  counse- 


BIOGRAPHICAL   ENCYCLOPEDIA. 


49 


lor  and  president  for  a  number  of 
years.  From  1875  to  1877  he  acted 
as  Stake  secretary  of  the  Y.  M.  M. 
I.  A.  When  sixteen  years  old  he  was 
ordained  an  Elder  and  received  his 
blessings  in  the  House  of  the  Lord. 
A  few  months  later  he  was  ordained 
a  Seventy  by  Ezra  T.  Clark;  later  he 
acted  as  senior  president  of  the  40th 
quorum  of  Seventy.  In  February, 
1881,  he  was  chosen  secretary  of  a 
local  organization  composed  of  all 
the  Seventies  of  the  Ward.  As  a 
civic  worker  he  has  been  active  from 
an  early  date  and  has  taken  part  in 
most  of  the  business  enterprises  of 
the  community.  In  March,  1882,  he 
was  appointed  county  treasurer  to 
fill  a  vacancy  and  on  August  6,  1883, 
was  elected  to  that  office;  he  was  re- 
elected August  2,  1886.  He  acted  as 
president  of  the  first  commercial 
club  at  Farmington,  and  was  appoint- 
ed to  that  position  a  second  time  in 
rdl4;  he  is  now  serving  his  third 
term  as  city  councilman.  Bro.  Clark 
was  ordained  a  High  Priest  by  Joel 
Parrish  May  9,  1886,  and  acted  as 
counselor  to  Ezra  T.  Clark,  who  pre- 
sided over  the  local  organization  of 
High  Priests  at  Farmington.  Later 
he  was  chosen  as  second  counselor 
to  Joel  Parrish,  president  of  the  High 
Priests  of  the  Davis  Stake.  This  posi- 
tion he  held  until  the  death  of  Pres. 
Parrish  Nov.  14,  19C4.  He  was 
chosen  first  counselor  to  Thos.  Steed, 
president  of  the  High  Priests  quorum, 
Feb.  25,  1905;  served  as  a  home  mis- 
sionary in  the  Davis  Stake  and  la- 
bored as  a  Ward  teacher  for  25  years. 
In  1908-10  he  filled  a  mission  to  the 
Northern  States,  laboring  mostly  in 
Iowa;  he  presided  over  the  West 
Iowa  conference  from  August  2  8, 
1909,  to  Sept.  25,  1910.  Upon  his 
return  home  he  was  chosen  president 
of  the  High  Priests  quorum  of  the 
Davis  Stake  Dec.  24,  1910,  succeed- 
ing Pres.  Steed,  deceased.  He  held 
that  position  until  the  Davis  Stake 
was  divided  June  20,  1915,  when  he 
was  chosen  as  first  counselor  in  the 
presidency  of  the  South  Davis  Stake. 

Vol.  Ill,  Xu.  -J. 


In  1879  (Sept.  25th)  Bro.  Clark  mar- 
ried Wealthy  Richaids,  who  has  borne 
her  husband  five  children,  namely, 
Edward  F.,  Rulon  W.,  Wealthy,  Or- 
son R.  and  Mary  Lucille.  In  18  85 
(April  2nd),  he  married  Alice  Ran- 
dall, who  bore  him  five  children, 
namely,  Walter  E.,  Melvin  J.,  Rhoda, 
Maurine  and  Bryant. 

CLARK,  Jo.shua  Reuben,  a  Patri- 
arch in  the  Tooele  Stake  of  Zion,  and 
a  resident  of  Grantsville,  Tooele 
county,  Utah,  was  born  Dec.  11,  18  40, 
near  the  town  of  Navarre,  Stark 
county,    Ohio,    the   son   of   Hendricks 


Clark  and  Esther  Rinker.  In  1865 
he  passed  through  Salt  Lake  City  on 
his  way  to  Montana,  but  returned  to 
Salt  Lake  City  in  the  spring  of  1867, 
and  becoming  a  convert  to  "Mormon- 
ism"  was  baptized  April  14,  1867,  by 
Isaac  Laney.  In  18  68  he  was  sent 
from  the  Tenth  Ward,  Salt  Lake  City, 
to  meet  the  Church  emigration  at 
Fort  Benton  on  the  Platte  River.  In 
November,  18  68,  he  went  to  Grants- 
ville, where  he  taught  school  for  four 
years,  and  later  taught  private 
schools.  Since  then  he  has  spent 
most  of  his  time  in  farming.  He  was 
superintendent  of  the  Grantsville  Co- 
operative Store  for  six  years;  was 
ordained  a  Teacher  in  1867,  by  Blsh- 

Aiuil,   ]!)18. 


50 


LATTER-DAY   SAINT 


op  John  Proctor;  ordained  an  Elder 
in  June,  1868,  by  John  D.  T.  Mc- 
Allister; was  ordained  a  Seventy  in 
the  spring  of  1869,  by  John  W. 
Cooley,  and  ordained  a  High  Priest  in 
1908  by  Pres.  Hugh  S.  Gowans.  He 
was  assistant  superintendent  of  the 
Grantsville  Sunday  school  four  years 
and  acted  as  senior  president  of  the 
31st  quorum  of  Seventy  fifteen  years. 
In  1894-96  he  filled  a  mission  to  the 
Northern  States  and  was  president  or 
the  Mission  from  Jan.  1,  1895,  to 
June,  1896.  Bro.  Clark  labored  as  a 
home  missionary  for  a  number  of 
years  in  the  Tooele  Stake,  was  super- 
intendent of  the  district  school  in 
Tooele  county  ten  years  and  acted  as 
postmaster  eleven  years.  On  the  11th 
of  July,  1870,  he  married  Mary 
Louisa  Woolley  (daughter  of  Bishop 
Edwin  D.  Woolley  and  Mary  Wicker- 
sham),  who  was  born  July  5,  1848, 
in  the  Black  Hills,  while  his  parents 
were  traveling  toward  the  Valley. 
Bro.  Clark  is  the  father  of  ten  chil- 
dren, namely,  Joshua  Reuben,  Edwin 
Marcelus,  Elmer  Dale,  Mary  Esther, 
Frank  Rinker,  Alice  May,  Samuel 
Woolley,  Lucille  Rebecca,  John  Wool- 
ley  and  Gordon  Woolley.  Bro.  Clark 
was  ordained  a  Patriarch  by  Francis 
M.  Lyman,  June  28,  1913;  he  has 
kept  a  daily  journal  for  forty  years, 
and  is  at  present  preparing  a  brief 
biography  of  his  life  from  childhood. 
In  October,  1916,  he  was  chosen  as 
president  of  the  Clark  and  Clarke 
Genealogical  Society  which  is  in- 
tended to  include  all  bearing  that 
name  in  America  and  Europe. 

CLIFFORD,        Thomas        Holman, 

Bishop  of  the  Melba  Ward  (Rigby 
Stake),  Fremont  county,  Idaho,  was 
born  Dec.  18,  1880,  in  Gentile  valley, 
Oneida  county,  Idaho,  the  son  of 
Leander  T.  Clifford  and  Melissa  A. 
Gifford.  He  was  baptized  March  6, 
1889,  by  Arthur  Horsley,  moved  with 
his  father  to  Rexburg,  Idaho,  In  the 
spring  of  1882,  and  moved  with  his 
parents  back  to  Weston  Idaho,  In 
1884.     In   1885   he   moved  with   his 


parents  to  Southern  Utah,  locating  at 
Harrisburg.  In  the  spring  of  1886 
he  moved  to  Price,  Emery  county, 
and  in  1889  located  in  the  La  Belle 
Ward,  Bingham  county,  Idaho,  still 
with  his  parents.  He  was  ordained 
a  Deacon  in  1893,  a  Teacher  in  1895 
and  a  Priest  in  1897.  In  1897-99  he 
acted  as  an  officer  in  the  Ward  Y. 
M.  M.  I.  A.,  was  ordained  an  Elder 
Nov.  11,  1899,  by  John  Ririe,  and 
chosen  as  president  of  the  La  Belle 
Ward  Y.  M.  M.  I.  A.  In  1899  (Nov. 
2  2nd)  he  married  Edith  M.  Birch 
of  Ogden,  Utah,  and  in  1902  moved  to 
Annis,  Bingham  county,  Idaho,  where 


he  had  bought  a  home.  In  1906- 
1907,  he  filled  a  mission  to  the 
Northern  States,  having  been  or- 
dained a  Seventy  by  Rulon  S.  Wells 
Jan.  9,  1906;  his  principal  field  of 
labor  was  Wisconsin.  After  his  re- 
turn home,  he  presided  over  the  An- 
nis Sunday  school,  was  chosen  as  an 
aid  in  the  Stake  Y.  M.  M.  I.  A.,  and 
later  chosen  as  a  president  of  the 
130th  quorum  of  Seventy.  In  1910 
he  moved  onto  a  homestead  in  a  new 
unorganized  district  of  country. 
There  were  only  two  neighbors  with- 
in 15  miles,  but  people  soon  began 
to  come  In,  and  in  June,  1910,  a 
Sunday  school  was  organized  of 
which    Bro.    Clifford    was   chosen   as 


BIOGRAPHICAL  ENCYCLOPEDIA. 


51 


superintendent  August  11,  1912. 
When  the  Melba  Ward  was  organ- 
ized Nov.  6,  1912,  he  was  chosen  as 
Bishop  of  the  same,  being  ordained  a 
High  Priest  and  Bishop  by  Joseph  F. 
Smith,  Jr.  Bishop  Clifford  has  been 
a  frontiersman  all  his  life.  His 
family  consists  of  his  wife  and  seven 
children  (Melba  A.,  Zelpha  R.,  Derold 
B.,  Lorena  M.,  Edith  A.,  Florence  B. 
and  Geneve  V.)  He  has  been  a  most 
active  Church  worker  and  pioneer  all 
his  life  and  has  assisted  in  the  erec- 
tion of  three  meeting  houses. 

COLEMAN,  Henry  Thrclkeld,  Bish- 
op of  the  Midway  First  Ward  (Was- 
atch  Stake),   Wasatch  county,   Utah, 


jorn  Nov.  20,  1863,  in  Big  Cot- 
tonwood, Salt  Lake  county,  Utah,  the 
son  of  Henry  Coleman  and  Mary 
Jane  Threlkeld.  He  was  baptized 
August  24,  1873,  by  Elijah  Alder; 
ordained  a  Teacher  April  3,  1881,  by 
David  Van  Wagener;  ordained  an 
Elder  April  19,  1890,  by  David  Van 
Wagener  and  chosen  as  second  coun- 
selor in  an  Elders  Quorum  Nov.  19, 
1892;  chosen  as  first  counselor  in 
the  Ward  Y.  M.  M.  I.  A.  Oct.  29, 
1905;  ordained  a  High  Priest  and 
Bishop  by  Hyrum  M.  Smith  May  7, 
1906,  and  set  apart  to  preside  as  the 
second   Bishop   of  the   Midway   First 


Ward.  He  acted  in  that  position  until 
Oct.  26,  1913,  when  he  was  chosen 
as  a  High  Councilor  in  the  Wasatch 
Stake.  Bishop  Coleman  married 
Emily  Matilda  Springer  Dec.  31, 
1889,  by  whom  he  had  eleven  chil- 
dren, namely,  Henry  Springer,  born 
Jan.  13,  1891;  Guy  Elsworth,  born 
May  10,  1892;  Lethe  Bell,  born  Dec. 
28,  1893;  Merle  Vivienne,  born  April 
23,  1895;  Glen  Roby,  born  March  17, 
1897;  Nathan  Chatmond,  born  April 
23,  1898;  Keith  Threlkeld,  born  April 
10,    1901;    Dale  Franklin,   born   Jan. 

16,  1903;  Rhea  Lillian,  born  May 
19,  1907;  Ruth  May,  born  Nov.  3, 
1908,  and   Jessie  Chloe,   born  March 

17,  1911.  Bishop  Coleman  has  filled 
many  positions  of  a  civic  nature;  thus 
he  acted  as  county  commissioner 
from  1902  to  1906,  acted  as  president 
of  the  Midway  Water  Works  Com- 
pany for  six  years,  and  as  councilman 
at  Midway  six  years.  Otherwise  he 
is  a  farmer,  sheep  raiser  and  con- 
tractor by  occupation. 

COOK,  David,  Bishop  of  the  Syra- 
cuse Ward,  Davis  county,  Utah,  was 
born  March  15,  1847,  in  England,  the 


son  of  Mark  Cook  and  Ann  Evans. 
He  emigrated  to  Utah  with  his  par- 
ents in  1853,  crossing  the  plains  in 
Jacob  Gates'  company,  which  arrived 


52 


LATTER-DAY   SAINT 


in  Salt  Lake  City  in  October  of  that 
year.  In  1856  the  Cook  family  moved 
to  East  Bountiful,  Davis  county,  and 
here  David  grew  to  manhood  and  his 
father  and  mother  died,  the  former 
in  September,  1895,  and  the  latter 
July  23,  1882.  David  was  ordained  a 
Deacon  while  quite  young  and  or- 
dained an  Elder  in  1863  by  Franklin 
D.  Richards.  For  several  years  he 
presided  over  the  Elders  quorum  at 
Bountiful.  He  was  ordained  a  Seven- 
ty in  1888  by  Henry  Lee,  became  a 
president  of  the  100th  quorum  of 
Seventy  in  1893,  and  was  set  apart  as 
presiding  Elder  of  the  south  part  of 
the  South  Hooper  Ward  in  18  93  by 
Franklin  D.  Richards.  Finally  he 
was  ordained  a  High  Priest  Dec.  1, 
1895,  by  Geo.  Q.  Cannon  and  set 
apart  to  preside  over  the  South 
Hooper  Ward,  which  position  he  held 
until  1909.  Prior  to  this  he  had 
acted  as  assistant  Sunday  school  sup- 
erintendent of  the  South  Hooper 
branch,  acted  as  road  supervisor  three 
years,  served  as  county  commissioner 
two  years  and  as  school  trustee  six 
years.  He  was  also  director  in  the 
Syracuse  Mercantile  Company  and 
other  institutions.  From  1880  to  1882 
he  filled  a  two-years'  mission  to 
Great  Britain,  laboring  principally  in 
the  Liverpool  conference.  In  18  66 
Bro.  Cook  went  to  the  Missouri  river 
as  a  guide  in  Capt.  Horton  D. 
Haight's  emigrant  train.  He  married 
Hannah  Holt  (daughter  of  John  Holt 
and  Elizabeth  Rhodes)  March  21, 
1871;  his  wife,  who  came  to  Utah 
with  her  mother  in  1866,  bore  her 
husband  nine  children.  Bountiful  was 
the  family  home  until  1890,  when 
they  moved  to  Syracuse,  where  the 
Bishop  secured  a  farm  of  160  acres. 
Two  of  the  Bishop's  sons  have  filled 
honorable  and  successful  missions. 

COOK,  Phineas  Woolcott,  Bishop 
of  the  Goshen  Ward,  Utah  county, 
Utah,  from  1857  to  1860,  was  born 
August  28,  1819,  at  Goshen,  Litch- 
field county.  Conn.,  the  son  of  Phin- 
eas Cook  and  Irene  Churchhill.     He 


was  baptized  Sept.  14,  1845,  by  Ed- 
ward Webb  and  came  to  Utah  in 
1848,  crossing  the  plains  in  Brigham 
Young's  company.  In  1840  (Jan. 
1st,)  Bro.  Cook  married  Ann  Eliza 
Howland  (daughter  of  Henry  How- 
land  and  Phebe  Baker),  who  was 
born  June  18,  1823,  at  Stillwater, 
New  York.  Sixteen  children  (Char- 
lotte Aurelia,  Daniel  Webster,  Har- 
riet Betsey,  Eliza  Hall,  Augusta  Pre- 
cindia,  Phineas  Henry,  Phebe  Irene, 
Vulcum,  Ann  Eliza  and  Alonzo 
(twins),  Mary,  Henry  Howland,  Mar- 
tha, Wm.,  Aurelia,  and  Hyrum) 
blessed    this    marriage.      Bro.    Cook 


married  Amanda  P.  Savage,  Dec.  18, 
1853,  the  daughter  of  David  Savage 
and  Theodocia  Finch,  who  was  born 
August  23,  1836,  in  Canada;  she 
came  to  Utah  with  her  father  in  1847, 
crossing  the  plains  in  Parley  P. 
Pratt's  company;  she  became  the 
mother  of  four  children,  namely, 
David  Savage,  Rosali  and  Mary 
(twins),  and  Joseph,  and  died  July 
15,  1915.  Bro.  Cook's  third  wife 
was  Catherine  McCleave,  whom  he 
married  Dec.  18,  1853;  she  was  the 
daughter  of  John  McCleave  and  Nan- 
cy Jane  McFern  of  Belfast,  Ireland. 
The  only  child  by  this  marriage  was 
Joseph  Woolcott.  Bro.  Cook  mar- 
ried Johanna  C.  Poulsen  as  a  fourth 


BIOGRAPHICAL   ENCYCLOPEDIA. 


53 


wife  Sept.  13,  1878;  she  was  the 
daughter  of  James  Poulsen  and  Jo- 
hanna U.  Lundgren,  and  was  born 
Aug.  8,  1845,  at  Malmo,  Sweden,  The 
children  by  this  marriage  were  Carl, 
Moses,  Kib,  Emer  and  Omer  (twins). 
Parley,  and  Idalia  Johannette.  Bro. 
Cook  first  heard  the  gospel  preached 
during  the  winter  of  1844-45  and 
came  to  Winter  Quarters  with  his 
family  in  the  fall  of  1846.  Two  of 
his  children  died  at  Winter  Quar- 
ters and  the  whole  family  passed 
through  much  sickness  and  priva- 
tion. He  reached  Utah  with  his  wife 
and  two  children,  was  a  millwright, 
carpenter  and  cabinet  maker,  and 
worked  on  the  first  grist  mills  (Neff's 
and  Chase's)  built  in  Salt  Lake  Val- 
ley in  184  9  and  1850.  He  located  in 
Sanpete  valley  in  the  fall  of  1850 
and  became  one  of  the  first  settlers 
of  Manti,  where  he  built  the  first 
grist  mill  in  connection  with  Pres. 
Brigham  Young  and  Isaac  Morley. 
This  mill  was  burned  by  the  Indiany 
in  1853.  Bro.  Cook  built  a  rock 
house  at  Manti  and  returned  to  Salt 
Lake  City  in  the  spring  of  1853. 
Here  he  worked  on  the  Bee  Hive  and 
Lion  houses  and  made  some  of  the 
first  furniture  manufactured  from 
Utah  pine.  He  made  a  bureau  for 
Pres.  Brigham  Young  which  is  now 
in  the  museum  in  Salt  Lake  City; 
built  a  house  at  Bountiful  for  Jed- 
ediah  M.  Grant,  moved  to  Payson, 
Utah  county,  in  1855,  built  an  In- 
dian farm  house  west  of  Spanish 
Fork,  and  founded  a  settlement  in  the 
valley  lying  west  of  Payson  in  1857, 
naming  it  Goshen  for  his  birthplace 
in  Connecticut.  There  he  acted  as 
Bishop  for  three  years.  In  18  63  he 
went  to  Bear  Lake  among  the  first 
settlers;  here  he  made  a  handmill  to 
grind  wheat,  built  a  grist  mill  in 
1865  and  later  a  saw  mill,  a  shingle 
mill,  a  wool  carding  machine,  etc. 
Afterwards  he  moved  to  Logan  and 
labored  diligently  in  the  Temple 
there  for  the  dead  of  his  father's  fam- 
ily. Being  arrested  and  convicted  of 
so-called    unlawful    cohabitation,    he 


served  a  term  in  the  Utah  peniten- 
tiary after  being  seventy  years  old. 
The  last  few  years  of  his  life  he 
spent  at  Afton,  Wyoming,  and  died 
a  faithful  Latter-day  Saint  July  24, 
IdOO,  at  Afton,  aged  eighty-one 
years.  Bro.  Cook  was  the  father  of 
twenty-eight  children,  sixteen  sons 
and  twelve  daughters.  He  was  sur- 
vived by  eleven  sons  and  four  daugh- 
ters, who  were  all  faithful  members 
of  the  Church.  Bishop  Cook  was  a 
farmer  and  stock  raiser  to  a  limited 
extent;  he  was  known  as  a  very  kind, 
benevolent  man,  always  ready  to 
share  what  he  had  with  any  one  in 
need. 

COXDIE,  Thomas  A.,  counselor  in 
the  bishopric  of  the  Croyden  Ward, 
Morgan  county,  Utah,  was  born  April 


19,  1865,  at  Croyden,  Utah,  the  son 
of  Thos.  Condie  and  Hannah  Swann. 
He  was  baptized  June  28,  1874,  at 
Croyden,  by  his  father;  ordained  a 
Deacon  Jan.  19,  1878;  ordained  a 
Teacher  Feb.  5,  1883,  by  Ephraim 
Swann;  ordained  a  Priest  Feb.  24, 
1884,  by  Chas.  Turner;  ordained  a 
Seventy  Oct.  19,  188  4,  by  Seymour 
B.  Young;  ordained  a  High  Priest 
Feb.  14,  1897,  and  set  apart  as  first 
counselor  to  Bishop  Geo.  R.  Thack- 
eray of  the  Croyden  Ward  by  Francis 


54 


LATTER-DAY    SAINT 


M.  Lyman.  He  married  Alice  Rebec- 
ca London  in  the  Salt  Lake  Temple 
Dec.  8,  1897.  She  is  the  daughter  of 
John  London  and  bore  her  husband 
five  children,  namely,  Olive,  born 
May  2,  1899;  Alice  Hannah,  born 
May  8,  1905;  Lula,  born  Dec.  15, 
1907;  Edna,  born  August  4,  1909, 
and  Thomas  Anson,  born  Feb.  7, 
1913.  Bro.  Condie's  occupation  is 
that  of  a  farmer.  He  graduated  in 
the  normal  course  of  the  Brigham 
Young  College  at  Logan  in  May, 
1892,  and  the  following  year  had 
charge  of  the  L.  D.  S.  Seminary  at 
Franklin,  Idaho.  Owing  to  conflict- 
ing water  claims  at  Lost  creek  he 
took  a  leading  part  in  organizing  the 
Croyden  Irrigation  Company  and  was 
later  instrumental  in  the  adjudication 
of  the  water  rights  of  Lost  creek. 
He  served  as  county  attorney  of 
Morgan  county  in  ldOl-1902,  and 
when  the  Morgan  county  schools  were 
consolidated  Nov.  10,  1908,  he  was 
appointed  representative  for  the  Croy- 
den precinct  and  served  as  vice  presi- 
dent of  the  district  for  two  years. 

COPE,  Francis,  an  active  Elder  in 
the  Church,  was  born  in  Birm- 
ingham, England,  March  31,  1846, 
the  son  of  John  and  Elizabeth  Cope 
(nee  Markland).  He  emigrated  to 
Utah  in  1869,  arriving  in  Salt  Lake 
City  August  20th  of  that  year.  The 
Cope  family  had  been  engaged  in  the 
business  of  operating  a  brass  foundry 
in  England,  but  as  there  was  no 
openings  in  this  trade  it  was  neces- 
sary to  accept  whatever  employment 
came  to  hand,  and  the  first  work 
was  that  of  cook  for  a  camp,  working 
for  John  Snell  in  building  salt  works 
on  the  Great  Salt  Lake.  Shortly 
after  his  arrival  in  Utah  the  work  of 
building  the  Utah  Central  Railway 
was  commenced  by  Brigham  Young 
from  Ogden  south  and  Bro.  Cope  was 
engaged  as  clerk  of  construction. 
After  the  completion  of  the  road  he 
was  employed  as  telegrapher  in  the 
station  at  Kaysville;  afterwards  he 
moved  to  Salt  Lake  City,  working  in 


the  freight  house.  Later  he  was  pro- 
moted to  the  position  of  station  agent 
at  Ogden.  His  next  advancement  was 
to  the  Salt  Lake  City  local  office, 
where  he  acted  as  agent  for  the  local 
station.  In  1879  he  went  to  England 
on  a  mission,  serving  two  years  in 
the  Liverpool  office,  then  located  at 
42  Islington.  On  his  return  he  was 
made  general  freight  and  passenger 
agent  of  the  Utah  Central  Railway, 
in  the  place  of  James  Sharp,  who  had 
been  promoted  to  the  position  of 
general  superintendent.  On  the  con- 
.solidation  of  the  Utah  Central  with 
the  Utah  Northern  Railway  of  the 
Union  Pacific  system,  he  was  ad- 
vanced   to    the    position     of     general 


freight  and  passenger  agent  of  the 
consolidated  system.  He  was  to  have 
assumed  this  office  on  January  1, 
1890,  but  having  contracted  a  fatal 
illness  during  the  previous  month  he 
died  on  Dec.  27,  1889,  at  the  age 
of  forty-three  years.  During  his  life- 
time Francis  Cope  held  many  prom- 
inent positions  in  civil  and  religious 
life.  He  served  as  justice  of  the  peace 
and  city  councilman  and  was  a  mem- 
ber of  the  bishopric  of  the  Sixteenth 
Ward,  associated  with  the  late  Bishop 
Frederick  Kesler.  He  was  associated 
in  the  founding  of  the  Zion's  Benefit 
Building  Society,  the  Home  Fire  In- 


BIOGRAPHICAL  ENCYCLOPEDIA. 


55 


surance  Company,  the  Latter-day 
Saints  University  and  other  Utah 
activities.  Although  deprived  of  an 
education  in  his  boyhood  by  reason 
of  the  necessity  for  early  employ- 
ment he,  by  personal  application,  be- 
came an  educated  man,  held  in  high 
esteem  by  all  who  knew  him. 

COX,  Edward  Isaiah,  Bishop  of  the 
Bunkerville  Ward  (Moapa  Stake), 
Clark  county,  Nevada,  was  born  June 


9,  1874,  at  St.  George,  Utah,  the  son 
of  Isaiah  Cox  and  Martha  James  Cra- 
gun.  He  was  baptized  April  1,  1883, 
by  John  Monson  at  Overton,  Lincoln 
county,  Nevada,  ordained  a  Priest 
July  3,  1894,  by  Myron  Abbott,  or- 
dained an  Elder  Feb.  25,  1897,  by 
Edward  Bunker,  Jr.,  ordained  a  Sev- 
enty March  10,  1897,  by  Seymour  B. 
Young,  and  filled  a  mission  to  the 
Southern  States  in  1897-9  9,  laboring 
principally  in  Arkansas.  In  1900 
(March  8th)  he  married  Mary  Emily 
Bunker,  daughter  of  Edward  Bunker 
and  Mary  McQuarrie.  He  was  or- 
dained a  High  Priest  and  Bishop 
June  9,  1912,  by  Francis  M.  Lyman 
and  set  apart  to  preside  over  the 
Bunkerville  Ward.  After  returning 
from  his  mission.  Elder  Cox  spent 
two  years  in  the  B.  Y.  U.  as  a  student, 
since   which   he   has  made   his   home 


in  Bunkerville.  He  is  a  public-spirited 
and  energetic  man,  interested  in 
everything  that  tends  to  the  uplift 
of  the  community.  For  many  years 
he  served  as  president  and  member 
of  the  school  board  in  his  district  and 
took  a  most  actitve  part  in  securing  a 
high  school  for  his  home  town.  At 
present  (1918)  he  is  assisting  in 
promoting  a  scheme  to  build  an  ex- 
pensive but  permanent  dam  in  the 
Rio  Virgen,  an  undertaking  which, 
if  successful,  will  prove  a  great  bless- 
ing to  the  whole  lower  Rio  Virgen 
valley.  Bishop  Cox  is  the  father  of 
seven  children,  all  living,  namely, 
Edward  Bunker,  born  Feb.  18,  1901; 
Fern,  born  Oct.  15,  1903;  Kenyon, 
born  June  27,  1906;  Emlin,  born 
April  11,  1909;  Rose,  born  June  9, 
1912;  David,  born  August  4,  1914, 
and  Mary,  born  Oct.  8,  1916. 

CRAWFORD,    William    Robinson, 

Bishop  of  the  Springdale  Ward  (St. 
George   Stake),   Washington   county. 


Utah,  was  born  on  an  island  in  the 
Illinois  river  in  Gaboon  county.  111., 
Sept.  29,  1842,  the  son  of  John  Craw- 
ford and  Marilla  Terry.  While  quite 
small  his  father  died,  leaving  a  widow 
and  two  small  boys  (William  R.  and 
John);  the  later  died  while  quite 
young.     The  widow  married  John  A. 


56 


LATTER-DAY    SAINT 


Hanson  to  whom  she  bore  seven  chil- 
dren, namely,  Martha  Jane,  Andrew 
Jackson,  Amy,  Lafayette,  Sarah,  Han- 
nah, and  Julia.  Mr.  Hanson,  not 
wishing  to  gather  with  the  Saints  to 
Utah,  fitted  his  family  out  for  the 
trip,  while  he  himself  went  to  Cali- 
fornia with  his  son  Andrew  Jackson. 
William  R.  took  charge  of  his 
mother's  outfit,  together  with  his 
own,  when  he  was  only  nineteen 
years  old,  and  led  them  from  their 
home  at  Glenwood,  Mills  county, 
Iowa,  to  the  Great  Salt  Lake  valley. 
While  spending  the  winter  at  Draper, 
Salt  Lake  county,  Wm.  R.  was  con- 
verted to  "Mormonism"  through  the 
influence  of  his  uncle  Joshua  Terry, 
and  was  baptized  when  about  twenty 
years  old.  In  1862  he  made  a  trip  to 
the  Missouri  river  as  a  Church  team- 
ster after  emigrants,  and  in  the  fall 
of  the  same  year  located  in  Rock- 
ville.  Southern  Utah,  being  among  the 
first  settlers  at  that  place.  Here  he 
became  acquainted  with  Miss  Frances 
Lewis,  whom  he  intended  to  marry, 
but  she  took  sick  and  died.  Later 
(Nov.  1,  1868)  he  married  Cornelia 
Gifford  of  Shunesburg,  who  has  borne 
her  husband  thirteen  children,  name- 
ly, John  Robinson,  Wm.  Louis,  Sam- 
uel Kendall,  James,  Daniel,  Annie, 
Jacob,  Fannie,  Mary,  Marilla,  Emma, 
Lora  and  Joseph.  In  1878  Bro. 
Crawford  endeavored  to  establish  a 
home  for  himself  and  family  at  Des- 
eret,  Millard  county,  Utah,  but  not 
succeeding,  he  returned  to  Southern 
Utah  in  November,  1878.  In  May, 
1879,  he  located  at  Springdale,  where 
he  was  made  Bishop  Nov.  6,  1887.  He 
served  in  this  capacity  seven  years. 
Bishop  Crawford  died  suddenly  Oct. 
29,  1913,  of  heart  failure,  while  at 
his  work  as  a  wheelwright. 

DAVIDSON,  Robert,  Bishop  of  the 
Logan  Third  Ward,  Cache  county, 
Utah,  was  born  Jan.  31,  1839,  in 
Dundee,  Fifeshire,  Scotland,  the  son 
of  Thomas  and  Annie  Davidson.  Be- 
coming a  convert  to  "Mormonism," 
together  with  his  parents  in  1852,  he 


emigrated  to  America  in  1853,  and 
crossed  the  plains  in  Capt.  Jacob 
Gates'  company,  the  so-called  Ten- 
Pound  Company.  In  1857-58  he 
participated  in  the  Johnston  cam- 
paign in  Echo  canyon  and  settled  at 
Logan,  Cache  valley,  in  1859.  Here 
he  took  part  in  all  kinds  of  pioneer 
labor,  including  guard  duty  against 
Indians.  In  1861  he  married  Ada 
Ilemenway,  which  union  was  blessed 
with  nine  children,  namely,  Herbert 
S.,  Elvira  D.,  Annie,  Ada,  Amy,  Rob- 
ert, Isabelle  and  John  (twins),  and 
Jennie.  After  laboring  as  Ward  clerk 
in  the  Logan  Third  Ward  about  two 


years,  he  was  chosen  as  first  counse- 
lor to  Bishop  Thos.  Tarbet  of  the 
Logan  Third  Ward,  and  held  that 
position  until  the  death  of  Bishop 
Tarbet,  which  occurred  in  November, 
1872.  He  was  then  chosen  as  acting 
Bishop  of  the  Ward,  and  at  an  im- 
portant meeting  held  May  20,  1877, 
he  was  ordained  a  High  Priest  and 
Bishop  by  Apostle  Franklin  D.  Rich- 
ards and  set  apart  to  preside  over 
the  Logan  Third  Ward,  which  posi- 
tion he  held  until  his  death.  Bro. 
Davidson  served  as  a  school  trustee 
for  several  years.  In  1880  he  mar- 
ried Janet  McNeil,  who  bore  him  five 
children,  namely,  Thomas,  Joseph, 
George,  Nettie  and  Edna.     During  the 


BIOGRAPHICAL   ENCYCLOPEDIA. 


57 


anti-polygamy  prosecutions  he  passed 
through  severe  trials.  In  1886-88  he 
filled  a  mission  to  Great  Britain,  lab- 
oring in  Scotland  and  later  in  the 
Liverpool  office.  After  his  return  to 
Utah  he  was  arrested  on  a  charge  of 
unlawful  cohabitation  and  sentenced 
Dec.  5, 1888,  in  the  First  District  Court 
at  Ogden,  to  four  months'  imprison- 
ment in  the  Utah  penitentiary  and 
to  pay  a  fine  of  $100.  Having  served 
his  sentence  he  was  released  April  15, 
188d,  after  which  he  followed  the 
vocation  of  a  farmer,  stockman  and 
dairyman,  and  for  a  time  also  served 
as  manager  of  the  United  Order 
dairy.  He  was  one  of  the  pioneers 
in  dry  farming  in  Cache  valley,  de- 
veloping a  tract  of  land  at  Cache 
Junction,  long  before  the  whistle  of 
a  locomotive  was  heard  in  that  part 
of  the  valley.  By  his  untiring  energy 
and  faithfulness  he  did  much  good 
for  the  community  in  the  building  of 
Church  edifices  such  as  meeting 
houses,  tabernacles,  and  the  Logan 
Temple.  In  the  latter  he  labored 
much  for  the  dead.  Bishop  Davidson 
closed  his  life's  labor  Dec.  23,  1899, 
after  serving  as  Bishop  of  the  Logan 
Third  Ward  about  thirty  years. 

DAVIS,  Edward,  a  Patriarch  in  the 
Boise  Stake  of  Zion,  Idaho,  was  born 
Nov.  11,  1842,  at  London,  England, 
the  son  of  George  Davis  and  Mary 
Anthony  Timpson.  He  was  baptized 
in  the  early  fifties  by  J.  H.  Harrison, 
and  become  a  member  of  the  White- 
chapel  Branch,  London.  When  about 
eleven  years  of  age  he  had  to  assist 
in  helping  his  father's  family,  whose 
circumstances  in  life  were  poor.  He 
was  employed  as  a  doctor's  errand 
boy  and  also  worked  in  a  sugar  fac- 
tory in  London.  At  the  age  of  six- 
teen he  went  into  training  on  the 
old  British  man  of  war  "Neptune," 
which  lay  moored  off  Greenwich,  dur- 
ing which  service  he  became  an  ex- 
pert at  knotting  and  splicing  rope, 
furling,  setting  and  reefing  sails,  set- 
ting up  masts,  crossing  yards,  etc., 
and  also  learned  the  use  of  firearms. 


Later  he  was  drafted  into  the  mer- 
chants' service  and  made  many  voy- 
ages to  the  different  countries  in 
Europe  and  also  to  the  West  Indies 
and  Africa.  He  finally  landed  in 
Queensland,  Australia,  in  February, 
1863,  where  he  remained  eleven 
years,  mostly  engaged  in  freighting, 
later  he  engaged  in  mercantile  busi- 
ness. During  all  his  travels  and  ex- 
periences in  life  the  testimony  of  the 
divinity  of  the  gospel  of  Jesus  Christ 
as  restored  through  the  Prophet 
Joseph  Smith  never  left  him,  though 
for  sixteen  years  he  was  isolated 
from  the  Church.  He  was  rebaptized 
by  Mark  Lindsey  in  1874  in  Salt 
Lake  City,  was  subsequently  ordained 


an  Elder  and  still  later  a  Seventy,  be- 
coming a  member  of  the  3rd  quorum 
of  Seventy.  From  1874  to  1881  he 
was  a  member  of  the  Salt  Lake  Tab- 
ernacle choir  and  also  led  the  Four- 
teenth Ward  choir;  where  he  acted 
as  a  Ward  teacher  and  was  an  active 
member  of  the  Y.  M.  M.  I.  A.  from 
its  first  organization.  In  1881  he 
moved  to  Paris,  Bear  Lake  county, 
Idaho,  where  he  acted  as  a  clerk  of 
Seventies  for  four  years.  He  also 
acted  as  a  Ward  teacher,  Sunday 
school  officer,  etc.  In  1885-1887  he 
filled  a  successful  mission  to  Great 
Britain  and  succeeded  William  Hors- 


58 


LATTER-DAY    SAINT 


ley  as  the  president  of  the  London 
conference.  During  this  mission  he 
baptized  ten  persons.  Bro.  Davis  was 
ordained  a  High  Priest  June  10, 
1888,  by  William  Budge,  and  set 
apart  as  a  member  of  the  High  Coun- 
cil of  the  Bear  Lake  Stake.  After 
moving  to  Rexburg,  Idaho,  in  1891, 
he  became  an  alternate  member  of 
the  High  Council  in  that  Stake.  In 
1892  he  moved  into  the  Teton  basin, 
where  he  acted  as  Ward  chorister  and 
teacher  in  the  theological  class;  he 
also  taught  a  district  school  during 
the  winter  of  18  92-93  .  He  moved 
back  to  Paris,  Idaho,  in  1894,  and 
to  Star  valley,  Wyoming,  in  18  95. 
Here  he  acted  as  a  member  of  the 
High  Council  and  also  labored  in  the 
Stake  Sunday  School  Board.  In  1894 
he  moved  to  Carry,  Idaho,  where  he 
also  became  a  diligent  Sunday  school 
worker.  In  1909,  when  a  branch 
Sunday  school  was  organized  in  Rose- 
ville,  lie  was  chosen  as  its  superin- 
tendent. Finally  he  was  ordained  a 
Patriarch  Feb.  22,  1914,  by  Apostle 
Geo.  F.  Richards  at  Boise  City.  At 
the  present  time  he  is  busily  engaged 
in  his  calling  as  a  Patriarch,  travel- 
ing and  visiting  the  different  Wards 
in  the  Boise  Stake. 

DAYBELL,  William,  the  second 
Bishop  of  Charleston,  Wasatch  coun- 
ty, Utah,  was  born  Feb.  24,  1858, 
near  Old  Wittington,  Derbyshire, 
England,  the  son  of  Finity  Daybell 
and  Mary  Draper.  He  emigrated 
with  his  parents  to  Utah  in  1864, 
crossing  the  Atlantic  in  the  ship 
"General  McClelland,"  which  sailed 
from  Liverpool,  England,  May  21st 
and  arrived  at  New  York  June  23rd. 
From  Wyoming,  Nebraska,  the  fam- 
ily crossed  the  plains  in  Capt.  Wm. 
S.  Warren's  company,  which  arrived 
in  Salt  Lake  City,  Oct.  4,  1864.  Two 
months  later  they  located  at  Charles- 
ton, Wasatch  county,  where  Elder 
Daybell  has  resided  ever  since.  Here 
he  was  baptized  and  ordained  a  Dea- 
con. In  1885  (May  4th)  he  was  or- 
dained a  Seventy  by  Heber  J.  Grant, 


and  in  1885-87  he  filled  a  mission 
to  the  Southern  States,  laboring  prin- 
cipally in  Tennessee.  He  was  or- 
dained a  High  Priest  Nov.  1,  1891, 
by  Francis  M.  Lyman  and  set  apart 
to  act  as  a  High  Councilor.  He 
served  in  that  capacity  till  Feb.  10, 
1901,  when  he  was  ordained  a  Bish- 
op by  Francis  M.  Lyman  and  set 
apart  to  preside  over  the  Charles- 
ton Ward.  Prior  to  this  he  had  acted 
as  assistant  superintendent  of  the 
Ward  Sunday  school.  Later  he  pre- 
sided over  the  Sunday  school  four- 
teen years  and  also  acted  as  presi- 
dent of  the  Ward  Y.  M.  M.  I.  A.  In 
a  secular  capacity  Bro.  Daybell  has 
served    as    a    county    commissioner. 


school  trustee,  etc.  In  187d  (Nov. 
12th)  he  married  Annie  Price,  who 
bore  her  husband  eleven  children. 
Farming  and  stock-raising  have  been 
Bro.  Daybell's  principal  avocations 
in  life.  He  acted  as  Bishop  until 
Nov.   11,  1904. 

DAYBELL,  Annie  Price,  wife  of 
William  Daybell,  was  born  June  21, 
1858,  at  Ludlow,  Shropshire,  Eng- 
land, the  daughter  of  James  Price 
and  Ann  Powell.  She  emigrated  with 
her  parents  to  Utah  in  1864,  cross- 
ing the  Atlantic  in  the  ship  "Gen- 
eral   McClelland"    and    the   plains    in 


BIOGRAPHICAL   ENCYCLOPEDIA. 


59 


Joseph  S.  Rawlins'  company,  which 
arrived  in  Salt  Lake  City  Oct.  4, 
1864.  She  went  direct  to  Heber  City, 
where  she  was  baptized  in  1866  by 
John  M.  Murdock  and  became  a  set- 
tler  at    Charleston    in    1870.      Seven 


f  -■  '*•■ 


'■\ 


> 


James  D.  Ross's  company  which  left 
Florence,   Neb.,    June    17th,    and    ar- 
rived in  Salt  Lake  City  Sept.  3,  18  60. 
He  located  soon  afterwards  at  ugden, 
Utah.      In    1871     (April    10th)     Bro. 
Dee    married    Annie    Taylor    in    Salt 
Lake    City,    Utah.        Eight    children 
blessed       this       marriage,       namely, 
Thomas   Reese,   Annie     Maud,     Mary 
Elizabeth,      Margaret,      Edith      May, 
Florence  Emily,  Rosabelle  Cora  and 
Lawrence    Taylor.       Having    learned 
the    carpenters'    trade     in     England, 
Bro.    Dee    worked    at    this    trade    for 
several  years  after  locating  at  Ogden. 
For  a  number  of  years  also  he  en- 
gaged in  the  building  and  contracting 
business.       Being     a     public-spirited 
man  he  acted  eight  years  (1877-1885) 
as  city   assessor   at   Ogden,   acted   as 
justice  of  the  peace  and  alderman  of 
Ogden  City,  and  police  judge    (1883- 
87).       In    1891-92    he    served    as    a 
member    of   the    Ogden    city   council, 
and  served  as  a  member  of  the  State 
Board  of  Equalization  in  1896-1905. 
years  later  (Nov.  12,  1877)  she  mar-    j^e   was   also   closely   identified   with 
Tied  Wm.  Daybell,  to  whom  she  bore    ^^e  public  schools  in  Weber  county 
eleven    children,    nine   of   whom    she 
raised  to  man-  and  womanhood.  Sis- 
terDaybell  was  for  many  years  a  dili- 
gent   worker    in    the   Ward    Primary 
Association,  acting  for  a  number  of 
years  as  president  of  that  association. 
Since  1901  she  has  also  been  a  dili- 
gent Relief  Society  worker  and  has 
performed  a  special  work  of  looking 
after  the  sick  and  dead  of  the  Ward. 

DEE,  Thomas  Duncombe,  counselor 
to  Bishop  James  Taylor  of  Mound 
Fort  Ward,  Weber  county,  Utah,  was 
born  Nov.  10,  1844,  at  Llanelly,  Caer- 
marthenshire,  South  Wales,  the  son 
of  Thomas  Hill  Dee  and  Elizabeth 
Reese.  He  was  baptized  March  2  0, 
18  60,  and  emigrated  to  America  in 
1860,  together  with  594  British  and 
Swiss  Saints  who  crossed  the  Atlan- 
tic in  the  ship  "Underwriter"  under 
the  presidency  of  James  D.  Ross.  The  Ogden  City  School  Board  was  or- 
ship  sailed  from  Liverpool  March  ganized,  he  was  chosen  to  represent 
30th  and  arrived  at  New  York  May  1,  the  Third  Ward,  Ogden,  holding  this 
1860.     He  crossed  the  plains  in  Capt.    position  successively  until  his  demise. 


from    1870    to    1905,    first    as    Ward 
trustee,  and  later    (1890),  when  the 


60 


LATTER-DAY   SAINT 


serving  much  of  the  time  as  presi- 
dent of  the  board.  For  thirty  years 
he  acted  as  superintendent  of  Sunday 
schools,  eight  years  in  the  Ogden 
Third  Ward  and  22  years  in  the 
Mound  Fort  Ward.  In  1886  he  was 
ordained  a  High  Priest  and  set  apart 
as  first  counselor  to  Bishop  James 
Taylor  of  the  Mound  Fort  Ward, 
which  position  he  held  until  his 
death,  which  occurred  at  Ogden,  Utah, 
July  9,  1905.  Bro.  Dee  was  con- 
nected with  many  industrial  enter- 
prises, such  as  the  Eccles  Lumber 
Company,  Oregon  Lumber  Company, 
Amalgamated  Sugar  Company,  Utah 
Construction  Company,  Utah  Canning 
Company,  Ogden  Rapid  Transit  Com- 
pany, First  National  Bank  and  Ogden 
Savings  Bank,  etc. 

DEE,  Annie  Taylor,  wife  of  Thomas 
D.  Dee,  was  born  Nov.  4,  1852,  at 
Lostock,  Graylam,  Cheshire,  England, 
the  daughter  of  John  P.  Taylor  and 
Ann  Sanders.  She  emigrated  to 
America  with  her  father  and  family 
in  1857,  crossing  the  Atlantic  in  the 
ship  "George  Washington,"  under 
the  direction  of  Elder  James  Park. 
She  resided  with  her  parents  in 
Iowa  City,  Iowa,  where  her  father 
conducted  a  merchant  tailor  business, 
and  acted  as  president  of  the  branch 
of  the  Church.  In  18  60  the  family 
crossed  the  plains,  her  father,  John 
P.  Taylor,  being  captain  of  the  com- 
pany which  arrived  in  Salt  Lake  City 
Sept.  18,  1860.  The  family  resided 
successively  in  the  Second,  Four- 
teenth and  Ninth  Wards,  Salt  Lake 
City.  Sister  Annie  was  a  member  of 
the  Tabernacle  choir,  and  as  such 
sang  first  in  the  old  tabernacle  and 
afterwards  in  the  new  tabernacle.  She 
was  also  a  member  of  the  choirs 
in  the  Wards  where  she  resided.  In 
1871  (April  10th)  she  was  married 
to  Thomas  D.  Dee  and  moved  to  Og- 
den with  her  husband,  becoming  a 
resident  of  the  Ogden  Third  Ward. 
During  her  residence  there  she  be- 
came the  mother  of  four  children, 
namely,  Thomas  Reese,  Annie  Maud, 


Mary  Elizabeth  and  Margaret.  While 
a  resident  of  that  Ward  Sister  Dee 
took  a  most  active  part  in  the 
Ward  Relief  Society.  In  November, 
1881,  the  family  moved  to  Mound 
Fort  Ward,  where  her  children, 
Edith  May,  Florence  Emily,  Rose- 
belle  Cora  and  Lawrence  Taylor  were 
born.  Her  husband  died  July  9,  1905. 
Sister  Dee  was  set  apart  as  president 
of  the  Ogden  Eighth  Ward  Relief 
Society  Nov.  19,  I'dOS.  During  the 
past  ten  years  she  has  been  active  in 
civic  and  charitable  organizations. 
In  1910,  together  with  her  family, 
she  built  and   founded   the  Thos.   D. 


Dee  Memorial  Hospital  in  Ogden, 
which  institution  was  deeded  to  the 
Church  of  Jesus  Christ  of  Latter-day 
Saints  in  1915. 

DEWEY,  George  Carlos,  Bishop  of 
Deweyville  Ward  (Bear  River  Stake), 
Box  Elder  county,  Utah,  was  born 
Dec.  23,  1857,  at  Bountiful,  Davis 
county,  Utah,  the  son  of  John  C. 
Dewey  and  Harriet  May.  He  was 
baptized  May  9,  1866,  by  Bishop 
Thos.  Harper;  ordained  an  Elder 
Oct.  19,  1875,  by  Lorenzo  Snow;  or- 
dained a  Seventy  in  1884  by  Jacob 
Gates,  and  ordained  a  High  Priest 
and  Bishop  Oct.  24,  1896,  by  Lorenzo 
Snow.   While  residing  at  Washington, 


BIOGRAPHICAL  ENCYCLOPEDIA. 


61 


Washington  county,  Utah,  he  acted 
as  president  of  an  Elders  quorum 
and  also  acted  in  the  Ward  Y.  M.  M. 
I.  A.  and  as  assistant  superintendent 
of  the  Ward  Sunday  school.  He  also 
served  as  city  police  and  marshal  four 


years  and  constable  two  years.  In 
1875  he  was  called  on  a  mission  to 
Dixie  to  raise  cotton,  and  while  liv- 
ing in  the  Washington  Ward  he  met 
Susan  Emma  Chidester,  whom  he 
married  March  22,  1876.  She  was 
the  daughter  of  John  Peck  Chidester 
and  Susan  Foy,  and  was  born  Dec.  2, 
1857,  at  Spanish  Fork,  Utah.  Her 
parents  were  among  the  first  pioneers 
to  Utah's  Dixie  in  18  61.  Nine  chil- 
dren are  the  issue  of  this  marriage, 
namely,  Susan  E.,  George  C,  John 
A.,  Harriet  E.,  Bert  A.,  Horace  M., 
Lettie,  Natella  and  Vera.  In  Novem- 
ber, 1876,  Bro.  Dewey  was  released 
from  his  mission  to  Dixie  and  re- 
turned north  with  his  wife,  locating 
at  Deweyville,  but  in  November,  18  77, 
he  once  more  moved  to  Washington, 
where  he  then  remained  until  1893, 
when  he  returned  to  Deweyville,  his 
present  home.  Bro.  Dewey  continued 
as  Bishop  at  Deweyville  until  Aug. 
20,  1911,  when  he  was  honorably 
released,  and  in  June,  1912,  he  was 
chosen  as  a  member  of  the  High 
Council  in  the  Bear  River  Stake  of 
Zion. 


DEWEY,  James  Ernest,  fourth 
Bishop  of  Deweyville  Ward  (Bear 
River  Stake),  Box  Elder  county, 
Utah,  was  born  June  12,  1866,  at 
Deweyville,  Utah,  the  son  of  John  C. 
Dewey  and  Harriet  May.  He  was 
baptized  June  20,  1875,  by  John  C 
Dewey;  ordained  to  the  offices  of 
Deacon,  Teacher  and  Priest  when 
quite  young;  ordained  an  Eldf^r  in 
1890  by  Chas.  M.  Squires;  ordained 
a  Seventy  Dec.  3,  1897,  by  Seymour 
B.  Young;  ordained  a  High  Priest 
June  8,  1902,  by  Wm.  A.  Hyde;  or- 
dained a  Bishop  May  31,  1913,  and 
set  apart  to  preside  over  the  Dewey- 
ville Ward.  In  his  youth  Bro.  Dewey 
acted  as  president  of  the  Ward  Y.  M. 
M.  I.  A.  and  as  superintendent  of 
the  Sunday  school.  In  1897-98  he 
filled  a  mission  to  the  Eastern  States, 
laboring  first  in  New  York  City  and 
afterwards  as  president  of  the  West 
Virginia  conference.  He  moved  to 
McCammon,  Idaho,  in  1902,  where  he 
acted  as  first  counselor  to  Bishop 
Albert  M.  Boyce,  being  ordained  a 
High  Priest.  He  held  this  position 
till  1905,  when  he  returned  to  Dewey- 


ville, Utah,  and  in  1908  was  chosen 
as  a  member  of  the  High  Council  in 
the  Bear  River  Stake.  In  1889  (Jan. 
23rd)  he  married  Matilda  B.  Smith, 
daughter    of    Alfred    B.    Smith    and 


62 


LATTER-DAY   SAINT 


Lucy  Smith;  two  children  (James 
Leland  and  Horace  Asa)  have  blessed 
this  marriage.  Bishop  Dewey  is  a 
farmer  and  stockraiser  by  avocation. 

DICKSON,  Albert  Douglas,  Bishop 
of  Richville  Ward,  Morgan  county, 
Utah,    was    born    Jan.    26,    1840,    in 


Porter  county,  Indiana,  the  son  of 
Billa  Dickson  and  Mary  Ann  Stod- 
dard. He  assisted  in  bringing  emi- 
grants and  freight  to  Utah,  having 
become  a  member  of  the  Church  in 
his  early  youth.  He  settled  at  Rich- 
ville in  1863,  and  assisted  in  building 
canals  and  wagon  roads  in  different 
parts  of  Morgan  county.  Among  the 
many  positions  of  honor  and  responsi- 
bility which  he  held,  it  may  be  men- 
tioned that  he  was  watermaster,  road 
commissioner,  school  trustee,  town 
trustee,  etc.  He  acted  as  Bishop  of 
Richville  37  years,  from  July  1,  1877, 
to  Nov.  24,  1914.  In  1861  (March 
28th)  he  married  Nancy  Elizabeth 
Shipley  (daughter  of  John  Shipley 
and  Sarah  Perkins),  who  was  born 
Dec.  12,  1840,  in  Illinois;  she  bore 
her  husband  nine  children,  namely, 
Mary  Alvira,  born  May  20,  1862; 
Albert,  born  April  12,  18  65;  Lucy 
Louisa,  born  Oct.  4,  1867;  John  Shel- 
don, born  Sept.  IS,  1870;  Judson, 
born  Feb.  21,  1873;  William  Jasper, 


born  May  24,  1875;  George  Henry, 
born  Sept.  10,  1878;  James  Douglas, 
born  August  17,  1880,  and  Moroni 
Denzil,  born  Sept.  4,  1882.  Bro. 
Dixon  also  married  Harriet  Rozella 
Flint  (the  daughter  of  Wm.  Flint 
and  Mary  Jane  Goodrich)  who  was 
born  Jan.  22,  1861,  at  Bountiful, 
Utah.  She  bore  her  husband  the 
following  children:  Abel  Josiah,  born 
December  3,  1880;  Asa  Leonard, 
born  Sept.  29,  1883;  Nancy  Eliza- 
beth, born  Oct.  7,  1885;  Rufus,  born 
Jan.  23,  1887;  Sophia,  born  Sept.  12, 
1888;  Harriet,  born  Sept.  15,  1890; 
Stoddard,  born  May  2,  1892;  Jared, 
born  Nov.  2  4,  1896;  Elbern  Bert, 
born  August  4,  1899,  and  Forde, 
born  Oct.   6,   1902. 

DIBBLE,  Edwin  Cleveland,  second 
counselor  to  Bishop  Samuel  R.  Cor- 
bridge,  of  Layton,  Davis  county,  Utah, 
was  born  Sept.  1,  1869,  at  Center- 
ville,  Utah,  the  son  of  Philo  Dibble, 
Jr.,    and    Antoinette    Cleveland.      He 


was  baptized  June  5,  1881,  by  Rich- 
ard Prophet,  and  ordained  a  Deacon, 
Elder  and  Seventy  successively.  When 
a  boy  he  commenced  dry  farming  at 
what  was  then  known  as  the  Sand 
Ridge  near  Layton,  his  parents  being 
among  the  first  settlers  who  moved 
into    that   part    of   the    country.      In 


BIOGRAPHICAL  ENCYCLOPEDIA. 


63 


September,  1890,  he  entered  the  Lat- 
ter-day Saints'  College  (now  Uni- 
versity) graduating  from  that  insti- 
tution in  June,  1893,  and  later  taught 
in  the  public  schools  at  Grantsville 
and  at  Bountiful,  Utah.  From  1894 
to  1897  he  filled  a  mission  to  the 
Hawaiian  Islands,  laboring  as  presi- 
dent of  the  Honolulu  conference,  and 
for  a  time  taught  the  mission  school 
at  Laie.  In  1900  (June  15th)  Elder 
Dibble  married  Emma  Jane  Smith, 
daughter  of  Silas  S.  Smith  and  Mar- 
tha E.  Bennett.  She  was  born  April 
4,  1876,  at  Paragoonah,  Iron  county, 
Utah,  and  has  borne  her  husband 
four  children:  Edwin  S.,  George  S., 
Joseph  S.,  and  Ahahel  S.  In  1002-5, 
Bro.  Dibble  filled  a  second  mission  to 
Hawaii,  taking  his  wife  and  children 
with  him.  While  filling  that  mission 
he  spent  most  of  his  time  at  Laie,  and 
during  the  absence  of  Pres.  Woolley, 
Bro.  Dibble  took  charge  of  the  mis- 
sion. Elder  Dibble  acted  as  Ward 
clerk  for  some  time,  and  for  five 
years  was  superintendent  of  the  West 
Layton  Ward  Sunday  school.  In 
1914  (Dec.  2  6th)  he  was  chosen  as 
second  counselor  to  Bishop  Cor- 
bridge.  He  was  ordained  a  Seventy 
Dec.  29,  1892,  by  Seymour  B.  Young, 
and  a  High  Priest  August  16,  1908, 
by  Ezra  F.  Richards. 

DUCKWORTH,  James,  president  of 
the  Blackfoot  Stake,  Idaho,  was  born 
November  10,  1865,  at  Preston,  Lan- 
cashire, England,  the  son  of  James 
Duckworth  and  Alice  Chippendale. 
He  was  baptized  by  George  Crane  May 
22,  1880,  and  Soon  afterwards  or- 
dained a  Deacon.  He  emigrated  to 
Utah  in  1880,  crossing  the  Atlantic 
in  the  steamship  "Wisconsin"  which 
sailed  from  Liverpool,  Oct.  23,  1880, 
and  he  arrived  in  Salt  Lake  City, 
Nov.  11,  1880.  He  was  ordained  a 
Priest  at  Taylorsville;  ordained  an 
Elder  by  Robert  Walters  August  14, 
1892;  ordained  a  Seventy  by  Abra- 
ham H.  Cannon  April  13,  1894,  and 
filled  a  mission  to  Great  Britain  in 
1894-96,    laboring    in    the    Liverpool 


conference,  over  which  he  presided 
the  latter  half  of  his  mission.  After 
his  return  home  he  labored  as  a  home 
missionary  in  the  Salt  Lake  Stake 
from  1896  to  1898  .  He  filled  a  mis- 
sion to  the  Woodruff  Stake  in  the 
interest  of  the  Y.  M.  M.  I.  A.  during 
the  winter  of  1898-99;  acted  as  assist- 
ant superintendent  of  the  Nineteenth 
Ward  (Salt  Lake  City) Sunday  school; 
was  set  apart  as  a  president  of  the 
30th  quorum  of  Seventy,  April  10, 
1899;  labored  as  a  special  mission- 
ary without  purse  or  scrip  at  Mercur, 
Tooele  county,  from  August  9,  1899, 
to  July  13,  1900.  In  1901  (July  8th) 
he  left  Salt  Lake  City  for  Australia, 
having  been  called  to  preside  over 
the  Australian  mission,  being  accom- 


panied by  his  wife;  they  returned 
home  July  21,  1906,  visiting  New 
Zealand,  Fiji  and  Hawaii  on  their 
way  here.  Bro.  Duckworth  acted  as 
a  member  of  the  Stake  Board  of  the 
Salt  Lake  Stake  Sunday  schools;  was 
ordained  a  High  Priest  July  14,  1907, 
and  set  apart  to  preside  over  the 
Blackfoot  Stake  by  Francis  M.  Ly- 
man, being  called  specially  from  Salt 
Lake  City  to  fill  that  position.  Bro- 
ther Duckworth  married  Elizabeth 
Hanson  at  Manti,  Sept.  21,  1892. 
Having  no  children  of  their  own, 
President  Duckworth  and   wife  have 


64 


LATTER-DAY   SAINT 


adopted  four  children.  Brother  Duck- 
worth first  labored  on  a  farm  upon 
his  arrival  in  Utah;  later  he  engaged 
in  the  sheep  business,  and  upon  his 
removal  to  Idaho  he  became  identi- 
fied with  the  mercantile  and  also 
the  banking  business.  At  present  he 
is  president  of  the  Blackfoot  Mer- 
cantile Company,  vice  president  of 
the  Blackfoot  City  Bank,  and  is  also 
interested  in  several  farms. 

DUGMORE,  Samuel,  the  second 
Bishop  of  Sunnyside  Ward  (Carbon 
Stake),     Carbon     county,    Utah,    was 


born  Nov.  27,  1851,  at  Tivedale,  Staf- 
fordshire, England,  the  son  of 
Thomas  Dugmore  and  Eliza  James. 
He  married  Elizabeth  Esther  Gould 
July  12,  1875,  at  Dudley,  Stafford- 
shire, England,  who  bore  her  hus- 
band two  children,  namely,  Mary 
Ann  (born  March  2,  1896)  and  Wil- 
liam (born  Oct.  15,  1877).  Becom- 
ing a  convert  to  "Mormonism,"  Sam- 
uel Dugmore   was   baptized   Oct.    10, 

1883,  by  Elder  Reuben  Carter,  and 
emigrated  to  Utah  with  his  family  in 

1884,  crossing  the  Atlantic  in  the 
steamship  "Wisconsin."  On  his  ar- 
rival in  Utah  he  settled  at  Fountain 
Green,  Sanpete  county.  May  1,  1884. 
He  was  ordained  an  Elder  August  6, 

1885,  by  Reuben  Carter,  took  charge 


of  the  Deacons  at  Fountain  Green 
from  1886  to  1888,  and  received  his 
blessings  in  the  Manti  Temple  August 
22,  1888.  He  left  Fountain  Green 
for  Sunnyside  June  11,  1898,  where 
he  has  followed  the  occupation  of 
stationary  engineer  for  the  Utah 
Fuel  Company  for  many  years.  He 
was  ordained  a  High  Priest  by  Pres. 
Reuben  G.  Miller  Nov.  22,  1903,  and 
set  apart  as  second  counselor  to 
Bishop  Potter  of  Sunnyside.  Having 
been  called  to  succeed  Bishop  Potter 
at  Sunnyside,  he  was  ordained  a  Bish- 
op Jan.  16,  1906,  by  Apostle  Hyrum 
M.  Smith.  Bro.  Duckmore  is  still 
acting  as  Bishop  of  the  Sunnyside 
Ward,  at  which  place  he  has  filled 
many  positions  of  honor  and  re- 
sponsibility; at  present  he  is  a  mem- 
ber of  the  town  board  of  Sunnyside. 

DUKE,  John,  a  Patriarch  in  the 
Wasatch  Stake  of  Zion  and  a  resident 
of  Heber  City,  Utah,  was  born  Nov. 
19,  1834,  in  Albany,  N.  Y.,  the  son  of 
Jonathan   O.   Duke  and   Mary  Stone. 


He  was  baptized  when  eight  years  old 
in  the  Mississippi  river,  and  arrived 
in  Great  Salt  Lake  Valley  with  his 
parents  in  1850,  crossing  the  plains 
in  Capt.  Bennett's  company.  After  a 
year's  residence  in  Salt  Lake  City  the 
family  moved  to  Provo  and  later  set- 


BIOGRAPHICAL   ENCYCLOPEDIA. 


65 


tied  at  Heber  City,  where  John  was  or- 
dained successively  to  the  offices  of 
Deacon,  Elder  and  Seventy;  he  also 
acted  as  president  of  a  quorum  of 
Seventy  for  several  years.  In  1884 
he  was  ordained  a  High  Priest  and 
set  apart  as  first  counselor  to  Bishop 
Henry  Clegg  in  the  Heber  West 
Ward,  which  position  he  held  until 
1894,  when  he  was  ordained  a  Patri- 
arch. In  1857  (March  25th)  he 
married  Martha  V.  Young,  daughter 
of  Alfred  and  Rhoda  Young,  which 
marriage  was  blessed  with  eleven 
children.  In  1857  (April  6th)  he 
married  Mary  Jones  (daughter  of 
Elisha  Jones  and  Margaret  Tolbet) 
who  bore  her  husband  twelve  chil- 
dren; twelve  of  Bro.  Duke's  children 
are  still  alive.  In  1857  Bro.  Duke 
was  sent  back  east  in  the  Y.  X.  Com- 
pany, and  in  1866  he  took  part  in 
the  Indian  war.  Being  blessed  with 
a  special  gift  of  healing  he  was  called 
by  the  proper  authorities  to  adminis- 
ter to  the  sick  and  was  very  much 
blessed  in  his  administration.  He 
has  always  been  a  steadfast  Latter- 
day  Saint,  faithful  in  the  discharge  of 
all  his  duties,  and  is  blessed  with  a 
mild   and   cheerful   disposition. 

DUKE,  Robert,  Bishop  of  the 
Heber  First  Ward  (Wasatch  Stake), 
Wasatch  county,  Utah,  was  born  Dec. 
4,  1857,  at  Provo,  Utah  county,  Utah, 
the  son  of  Robert  S.  Duke  and  Anna 
Ross  Young.  He  was  baptized  June 
30,  1867,  by  John  Jordan;  ordained 
an  Elder  in  1877  by  John  L.  Smith; 
ordained  a  Seventy  in  October,  1884, 
by  Andrew  J.  Rynearson,  and  or- 
dained a  High  Priest  and  Bishop 
Feb.  10,  1901,  by  Apostle  Reed  Smoot 
and  set  apart  to  preside  over  the 
Heber  East  Ward.  In  1903  (Feb. 
8th)  he  was  set  apart  as  Bishop  of 
the  Heber  First  Ward.  In  his 
younger  days  he  took  an  active  part 
in  the  Ward  Y.  M.  M.  I.  A.  and  also 
acted  as  a  president  of  the  20th 
quorum  of  Seventy  for  fifteen  years. 
He  also  performed  missionary  labors 
for  the  Y.  M.  M.  I.  A.  in  the  Tooele 
Vol.  III.  No.  5. 


Stake  in  the  winter  of  1898-1899. 
In  18  90-92  he  filled  a  mission  to  the 
Northern  States,  laboring  principally 
in  Indiana  and  Ohio;  part  of  the 
time  he  acted  as  president  of  the  In- 
diana conference.  In  1882  (Feb. 
9th)  he  married  Anna  Josephine 
Peterson,  daughter  of  Swen  A.  Peter- 
son and  Britta  Dahlman,  born  Feb. 
21,  18  60.  This  marriage  has  been 
blessed  with  eight  children,  namely, 
Adolphia  R.,  Joseph  Pratt,  Mable  R., 
Seymour  B.,  Stirling  S.,  Mina  L.,  Des- 
sie  and  Jerald  Boyd.  Bishop  Duke 
has  served  four  terms  in  the  Heber 
City  council,  was  president  of  the 
council    one    term,    county    treasurer 


two  terms,  and  is  at  the  present  time 
secretary  and  treasurer  of  the  Heber 
Mercantile  Company. 

DUKE,  Robert  Stone,  a  Patriarch 
in  the  Wasatch  Stake  of  Zion,  was 
born  April  14,  1837,  at  Albany,  N.  Y., 
the  son  of  Jonathan  O.  Duke  and 
Mary  Stone.  He  moved  with  his 
father's  family  to  Nauvoo,  111.,  and 
has  a  vivid  recollection  of  the  martyr- 
dom of  the  Prophet  Joseph  Smith  and 
the  Patriarch;  he  also  remembers  the 
Nauvoo  battle  and  how  the  quails 
were  caught  by  the  famishing  Saints 
on  the  banks  of  the  Mississippi  river. 
During  the  exodus  of  1846  he  moved 

May,  1918. 


66 


LATTER-DAY   SAINT 


with  his  father's  family  to  Mt.  Pis- 
gah,  Iowa,  where  he  was  baptized 
August  10,  1846,  by  Hyrum  Buys. 
In  1850  the  family  emigrated  to 
Utah,  crossing  the  plains  in  Capt. 
Pace's  company,  which  arrived  in 
Salt  Lake  City  Oct.  3rd  of  that  year. 
In  1851  he  moved  to  Provo,  and  in 
the  spring  of  18  60  settled  at  Heber 
City,  Provo  valley,  which  has  been 
his  permanent  home  ever  since.  In 
1863  he  was  chosen  as  a  counselor 
to  Wm.  M.  Wall,  the  presiding  Elder 
of  Heber  City.  He  took  part  in  the 
Echo  canyon  campaign  in  1857,  and 
went  back  as  a  Church  teamster  to 
the  Missouri  river  in  186  6  after  emi- 
grants. As  early  as  1849  Bro.  Duke 
was  ordained  a  Teacher  by  his  father. 
He  was  ordained  a  Seventy  in  July, 
1857,  by  Joseph  Young;  ordained  a 
High  Priest  and  Bishop  in  November, 
1884,  by  Francis  M.  Lyman  and  set 
apart  to  preside  over  the  Heber  East 
Ward.  This  position  he  held  until 
Feb.  8,  1903,  when  he  was  ordained 
a  Patriarch  by  Abraham  Owen  Wood- 
ruff. In  1882-1884  he  filled  a  mis- 
sion to  Pennsylvania,  etc.  In  1857 
(March  6th)  he  married  Anna  Ross 
Young  and  in  1872  (Nov.  9th)  he 
married  Rachel  Horrocks.  By  these 
two  wives  he  became  the  father  of 
seventeen  children,  of  whom  thirteen 
are  still  living.  In  1891  he  was  ar- 
rested on  a  charge  of  unlawful  co- 
habitation. 

D^'K,  Joseph  Henry,  president  of 
the  Shelley  Stake,  was  born  March  3, 
1867,  at  Riverdale,  Weber  county, 
Utah,  the  son  of  Richard  Dye  and 
Mary  Maiden  Peck.  He  was  baptized 
June  30,  1877,  by  Wm.  Stimpson; 
was  ordained  a  Deacon  Jan.  1,  1885, 
by  Richard  Dye;  ordained  a  Teacher 
Feb.  6.  1886,  by  John  C.  Thompson; 
ordained  a  Priest  March  27,  1887, 
by  Warren  G.  Child ;  ordained  an  Elder 
Oct.  8,  1888,  by  Richard  Dye,  and  or- 
dained a  High  Priest  Nov.  17,  1890, 
by  William  Rigby.  While  living  in 
the  parental  home  at  Riverdale  he 
took    an    active    part     in     the    Ward 


Primary,  Sunday  school  and  Y.  M. 
M.  I.  A.  After  moving  to  Basalt, 
Idaho,  in  1885,  he  took  a  prominent 
part  in  pioneering  this  section  of  the 
Snake  River  valley.  From  Nov.  25, 
1888,  to  Dec.  31,  1899,  he  acted  as 
superintendent  of  the  Basalt  Ward 
Sunday  school.  From  Nov.  17,  1890, 
to  June  19,  1904,  he  acted  as  second 
counselor  to  Bishop  Anders  O.  Ingel- 
strom  of  the  Basalt  Ward.  At  that 
time  he  also  acted  as  a  Y.  M.  M.  I.  A. 
officer  and  Ward  chorister.  In  1898 
and  1899  he  labored  as  a  missionary 
at  Lost  River,  Idaho,  and  from  Nov. 
15,  1899,  to  Dec.  14,  1901,  he  filled 
a  mission  to  the  Southern  States. 
After  his  return  from  that  mission  he 


again  acted  as  Sunday  school  super- 
intendent, and  in  190  2  filled  another 
short  mission  to  Lost  river  valley. 
From  1904  to  1909  he  acted  as  Stake 
superintendent  of  religion  classes  in 
the  Blackfoot  Stake,  and  was  set 
apart  as  first  counselor  to  Bishop 
Wm.  M.  Dye  May  2,  1909.  Finally 
he  was  set  apart  as  second  counselor 
to  Pres.  James  Duckworth  of  the 
Blackfoot  Stake  May  18,  1912.  He 
occupied  this  position  until  the  Black- 
foot Stake  was  divided  and  Shelley 
Stake  organized,  when  he  was  chosen 
and  set  apart  as  president  of  said 
Stake   August    16,    1914,    by    Apostle 


BIOGRAPHICAL  ENCYCLOPEDIA. 


67 


Francis  M.  Lyman.  President  Dye 
was  a  successful  farmer  until  1909, 
when  he  engaged  in  mercantile  busi- 
ness. He  has  also  served  the  public 
in  several  secular  offices.  At  the 
present  time  he  is  director  of  the 
Cedar  Point  canal  and  Snake  River 
Valley  Irrigation  District,  and  also 
serves  as  a  member  of  the  district 
school  board.  In  1888  (Oct.  10th) 
he  married  Nellie  Dora  Child,  daugh- 
ter of  Warren  G.  Child  and  Hannah 
Austin  Wilder.  This  marriage  has 
been  blessed  with  eleven  children, 
namely,  Mary,  born  July  26,  1889; 
Joseph  Alma,  born  March  8,  1892; 
Nellie  Florence,  born  Jan.  28,  1894; 
Rachel,  born  Feb.  20,  189G;  Alice 
Lucien,  born  April  4,  1899;  Ethel 
Child,  born  Nov.  2  2,  190  2,  and  died 
Dec.  10,  1902;  Ida  Irene,  born  May 
5,  1904;  Warren  Ellis,  born  July  17, 
1906;  Arvilla,  born  May  21,  1909; 
Hannah,  born  June  16,  1911,  and 
died  June  19,  1911,  and  l..ynn  Austin, 
born  June  6,  1915. 

DYE,  William  Mahlcn,  Bishop  of 
the  Basalt  Ward  (Shelley  Stake), 
Bingham     county,     Idaho,    was    born 


son;  he  was  ordained  a  Deacon  Jan. 
15,  1883,  by  Wm.  C.  Parker;  or- 
dained a  Teacher  Feb.  5,  188  6,  by 
Wm.  C.  Parker  and  was  ordained  an 
Elder  March  27,  1887,  by  Chas.  F. 
Middleton.  In  1887  he  settled  in 
Snake  river  valley  and  built  a  log 
house  twelve  by  sixteen  feet  at  Ba- 
salt. It  was  the  building  in  which 
the  first  school  was  held  during  the 
winter  of  1887-88.  In  1891  (April 
15th)  he  married  Julia  Adelaide 
('hild,  daughter  of  Warren  G.  Child 
and  Hannah  A.  Wilder.  He  was  or- 
dained a  Seventy  Feb.  14,  1891,  by 
Francis  M.  Lyman  and  filled  a  mis- 
sion to  the  Southern  States  in  1896- 
99,  laljoring  principally  in  the  State 
of  Mississipi)i.  He  served  as  a  jus- 
tice of  the  peace  of  the  Basalt  pre- 
cinct from  1892  to  1894,  and  was  or- 
dained a  High  Priest  and  Bishop 
July  24,  1904,  by  Geo.  Albert  Smith 
and  set  apart  to  preside  over  the 
Basalt  Ward,  which  position  he  still 
holds.  He  has  blessed  seventy  babies, 
ordained  eighteen  Deacons,  eighteen 
Teachers,  nine  Priests  and  six  Elders. 
Bishop  Dye's  occupation  in  life  has 
been  that  of  a  farmer  and  stock 
raiser.  His  family  at  the  present 
time  consists  of  four  sons  and  four 
(laughters. 

M.XIlli,  Sylvester  Henry,  one  of  the 

original  Utah  pioneers  of  1S47,  was 
born  August  Ki,  1S15,  in  Ohio,  the 
son  of  Joseph  Earl  and  Dorcas  Wix- 
om.  Me  was  baptized  Feb.  29,  18:57, 
l)y  Elder  ('has.  C.  Rich.  Immediately 
afterwards  he  migrated,  in  company 
with  Elder  Rich  and  Geo.  M.  Hinkle 
and  others  to  Far  West,  Mo.,  arriv- 
ing there  April  1,  IS.! 7.  Soon  after- 
wards he  purchased  a  tract  of  land 
and  several  cows  and  i)repare(l  to 
make  a  home.  He  was  ordained  an 
Elder  by  llyrum  Smith  at  a  confer- 
ence at  Far  West  in  Novemljer,  lSo7, 
and  started  on  a  mission  through 
Marcth  26,  1865,  at  Riverdale,  Weber  Illinois,  Ohio  and  Indiana,  Feb.  15, 
county,  Utah,  the  son  of  Richard  Dye  1S;',8.  On  the  way  he  met  the  Prophet 
and  Mary  Alden  Peck.  He  was  bap-  Joseph  Smith  (at  Jacksonville)  who 
ti/.ed  June  :50,   1877,   by   Wm.  Stimp-    gave   him   a   blessing,   promising   him 


68 


LATTER-DAY   SAINT 


that  he  should  never  lack  for  words 
when  preaching  the  gospel.  After 
raising  up  a  branch  of  the  Church  in 
Schuyler  county,  111.,  he  continued 
his  journey  eastward  into  Ohio, 
preaching  and  baptizing  by  the  way. 
His  mother  died  Sept.  15,  1838,  and 
was  buried  by  him  by  the  side  of  his 
father  who  had  died  sixteen  years 
before.  He  then  returned  to  Illinois, 
bringing  his  two  younger  brothers 
(Wilmer  J.,  and  James  E.  Earl) 
with  him  to  a  place,  where  he  had 
previously  raised  up  a  small  branch 


of  the  Church.  In  1839  (Jan.  28th) 
he  married  a  young  lady  by  the  name 
of  Lois  Caroline  Owen,  whom  he  had 
previously  baptized.  By  this  time 
the  Saints  were  settling  in  Illinois. 
In  April,  1841,  he  was  sent  on  a  mis- 
sion to  Indiana  and  Ohio,  and  after 
his  return  from  this  mission  he  pur- 
chased a  farm  (near  the  city  of 
Nauvoo)  onto  which  he  moved  his 
family  in  the  fall  of  1842.  In  the 
spring  of  1844  he  spent  several  weeks 
preaching  the  gospel  in  the  southern 
part  of  Illinois.  Being  impressed  by 
the  spirit  of  the  Lord  he  returned 
home  and  found  that  the  mob  had 
begun  their  depredations  against  the 
Saints  near  Nauvoo,  his  family  being 
threatened  that  if  they  did  not  move 
away    in    three   days    they   would    be 


burned  out.  The  next  day  he  went 
out  to  assist  in  keeping  the  mob  out 
of  Nauvoo  and  returned  to  his  family 
in  two  weeks.  Bro.  Earl,  as  a  mem- 
ber of  the  Nauvoo  Legion,  was  pres- 
ent when  the  Prophet  Joseph  Smith 
made  his  famous  speech  before  the 
Legion,  just  prior  to  his  martyrdom. 
Soon  after  the  death  of  the  Prophet 
he  moved  his  family  into  the  city 
of  Nauvoo.  In  the  fall  of  1844  he 
was  ordained  a  Seventy  and  became 
a  member  of  the  10th  quorum  of 
Seventy.  Later  he  was  set  apart  as 
one  of  the  presidents  of  the  20th 
quorum.  During  the  summer  of  1845 
he  worked  on  the  Nauvoo  Temple  and 
in  the  winter  of  1845-46  he  was  one 
of  the  guards  of  the  Temple  and  also 
assisted  in  guarding  the  homes  of 
the  leading  men  of  the  Church,  shar- 
ing with  the  Saints  In  all  the  trials 
and  afflictions  of  these  days.  Final- 
ly, on  Feb.  10,  1846,  he  took  his 
family  and,  together  with  many 
others,  crossed  the  Mississippi,  start- 
ing on  their  long  journey  to  the  West. 
They  all  suffered  much,  and  many 
being  aestitute  of  food,  Bro.  Earl, 
together  with  nineteen  of  his  breth- 
ren, was  sent  into  Missouri,  in  March, 

1846,  to  work  for  food.  He  returned 
two  months  later  to  the  camps  of 
Israel.  He  then  moved  on  westward, 
crossed  the  Missouri  river  and  pre- 
pared for  the  winter,  during  which 
many  of  the  Saints  lost  their  lives 
through  exposure.  In  April,  1847,  he 
left  Winter  Quarters  as  one  of  the 
original  band  of  pioneers  for  the 
Rocky  mountains,  arriving  in  Great 
Salt  Lake  Valley  in  July,  1847.  In 
August,  1847,  together  with  a  com- 
pany of  about  forty  men,  he  started 
back  to  the  Missouri  river.  The  com- 
pany being  very  destitute  of  food,  he 
on  one  occasion  traded  his  shirt  to 
the  Indians  for  buffalo  meat;  after- 
wards he  made  himself  another  shirt 
out  of  his  wagon  cover.  The  com- 
pany continued  the  journey  and  ar- 
rived   at    Winter    Quarters    Oct.    21, 

1847.  In  May,  1848,  together  with 
a  company  of  Saints,   he  again  took 


BIOGRAPHICAL  ENCYCLOPEDIA. 


69 


his  journey  across  the  plains,  and 
on  his  arrival  in  the  valley  he  built  a 
home  for  his  family  in  the  Nineteenth 
Ward,  Salt  Lake  City.  In  October, 
1852,  he  was  called  on  a  mission  to 
England.  He  started  on  this  mission 
Sept.  15,  1852,  and  arrived  in  Liver- 
pool Jan.  5,  185;!.  After  laboring 
faithfully  as  a  missionary  in  Great 
Britain,  he  returned  to  Salt  Lake 
City  in  September,  1855,  having  been 
absent  from  home  about  three  years. 
Soon  after  his  return  he  was  ordained 
a  High  Priest  and  set  apart  as  first 
counselor  to  Bishop  Alonzo  H.  Raleigh 
of  the  Nineteenth  Ward.  In  October, 
1855,  he  married  Margaret  Emily 
Jones.  Together  with  his  eldest  son, 
Wilbert  B.  Earl,  he  spent  part  of  the 
winter  of  1857-58  in  Echo  canyon, 
together  with  others  who  were  sent 
out  to  prevent  Johnston's  army  from 
entering  the  Valley.  In  the  fall  of 
1861  he  was  called  to  take  his  family 
and  move  into  the  southern  part  of 
Utah;  he  settled  in  Pine  valley  where 
he  engaged  in  saw  mill  business  and 
stock  raising.  In  December,  1871,  he 
moved  part  of  his  family  to  Middle- 
ton,  near  St.  George,  where  he  died, 
July  23,  1872.  He  was  buried  in  the 
St.  George  cemetery  the  following 
day.  Elder  Earl  was  a  stalwart  de- 
fender ot  the  eternal  truths  revealed 
to  the  Prophet  Joseph  Smith.  He 
yielded  obedience  to  the  principle  of 
plural  marriage,  and  with  his  two 
wives  became  the  father  of  thirteen 
children;  seven  of  his  children  sur- 
vived him. 

EAKLEY,  Lichi  Nephi,  Bishop  of 
Round  Valley  Ward  (Bear  Lake 
Stake),  Rich  county,  Utah,  was  born 
August  29,  1855,  at  Brockenhurst, 
Hampshire,  England,  the  son  of  Geo. 
Earley  and  Jane  Burton.  He  emi- 
grated with  his  parents  to  Utah  in 
1870,  and  after  residing  several  years 
at  Grantsville,  Tooele  county,  became 
a  permanent  resident  of  Round  Val- 
ley, Rich  county,  Utah,  in  1878.  He 
was  ordained  a  Deacon  when  quite 
young  and  ordained  an  Elder  Oct.  30, 


1887,  by  Ira  Nebeker;  served  as  pres- 
ident of  the  Round  valley  Y.  M.  M. 
I.  A.  five  years,  was  superintendent 
of  the  Ward  Sunday  school  five  years 
and  Ward  clerk  from  1893  to  1912. 
He  was  ordained  a  High  Priest  and 
Bishop  Sept.  15.  1912,  by  Jos.  F. 
Smith,  Jr.,  and  set  apart  to  preside 
over  the  Round  Valley  Ward.  In 
1886  (Sept.  12th)  he  married  Eliza- 
beth Loftus  (daughter  of  John  Loftus 
and  Hannah  Flowers),  who  was  born 
Nov.  10,  1868,  and  died  Oct.  5,  1899, 
after  giving  birth  to  six  children 
(Ada,  Frank  L.,  Ella,  Aleen,  Chas. 
W.,  and  Lewis.  In  1903  (Dec.  2nd) 
Hro.  Earley  married  Mary  Jane  Hay- 
den    (daughter    of   Jos.    Hayden   and 


Mary  Siddalls),  who  was  born  April 
24,  1877,  at  Chastown,  Staffordshire, 
England,  March  22,  1917.  By  his 
second  wife  Bishop  Earley  is  the 
father  of  Lydia  M.,  and  Joseph  H. 
Farming  and  stockralsing  are  his 
chief  avocations. 

EDGLKV,  Joseph,  a  Patriarch  in 
the  Church  and  a  resident  of  Poca- 
tello,  Idaho,  was  born  August  25, 
1843,  at  Wickhambrook,  Suffolk, 
England,  the  son  of  Thomas  Edgley 
and  Amy  Simpson.  He  was  baptized 
June  11,  1882,  by  Joseph  A.  West 
and  confirmed  by  M.  F.   Brown;    or- 


70 


LATTER-DAY   SAINT 


dained  a  Deacon  in  June,  1882;  or- 
dained an  Elder  in  July,  1883;  was 
married  Sept.  5,  1864,  in  London, 
England,  which  marriage  was  blessed 
with  eleven  children.  Emigrating  to 
America  with  his  wife  and  nine  chil- 


ents,  becoming  converts  to  "Mormon- 
ism,"  removed  to  Jackson  county. 
Mo.  Joseph  was  baptized  in  May, 
183  3,  by  David  W.  Patten  in  Clay 
county.  Mo.,  and  soon  after  that  the 
Saints  were  driven  out  of  Jackson 
county.  Later,  the  family  settled  at 
Far  West,  Caldwell  county.  Mo.,  and 
after  passing  through  nearly  all  the 
Missouri  persecutions,  they  settled 
temporarily  at  Quincy,  111.  After- 
wards they  became  residents  of 
Nauvoo,  Hancock  county,  111.,  where 
Joseph  married  Mary  C.  Allred,  and 
in  184G  was  ordained  a  Seventy  and 
became  a  member  of  the  4th  (juorum 
of  Seventy.  During  the  exodus  he 
went  with  his  family  to  Winter  Quar- 
ters, and  in  1847  traveled  to  the 
Great  Suit  Lake  Valley  as  one  of  the 
original  pioneers  under  Pres.  Brig- 
ham  Young,  entering  the  Valley  in 
Orson  Pratt's  advance  company,  July 
2  2,  184  7.  He  returned  to  Winter 
Quarters  the  same  season,  and  came 
to  the  Valley  a  second  time  in  1849, 
bringing  his  family  with  him.  After 
settling  temporarily  in  South  Cotton- 


dren  he  sailed  from  Liverpool,  in 
September,  1886,  in  the  steamship 
"Wisconsin"  and  arrived  at  Logan, 
Utah,  Sept.  28,  1886.  He  located  at 
Pocatello,  Idaho,  in  1887;  was  or- 
dained a  High  Priest  in  1896  by 
Apostle  Marriner  W.  Merrill  and  was 
appointed  to  preside  over  the  High 
Priests  at  Pocatello,  May  28,  189(1. 
He  also  acted  as  second  counselor, 
and  subse(|uently  as  first  counselor, 
to  Bishop  Carl  J.  Cannon  in  the  Po- 
catello Ward.  Prior  to  this  he  acted 
as  a  Ward  teacher  from  18;) 2  to  1897 
and  also  presided  over  an  Elders' 
quorum  for  several  years.  His  first 
wife  died  in  June.  1906,  and  in  April, 
1908,  he  married  Mary  Ann  Price. 
Pro.  Edgley  was  ordained  a  Patriarch 
August  1.^).  19  If)  ,by  Apostle  James  E. 
Talma  go. 


KCillKRT,  .loscph,  one  of  the  orig-  wood.    Salt    Lake    county,    he   settled 

inal  lU.ih  pioneers  of  18  17,  was  born  permanently      at      Kaysville,       Davis 

March    10.   ISIS,   in   Sullivan   county,  county,  in  1851,  where  he  resided  for 

Indiana,  the  son  of  John  Egbert  and  many  years  and  assisted  in  every  way 

Susannah    Healm    of    Kentucky.      He  possible  to  i)uild  up  that  part  of  the 

was  raised  as  a  farmer,  and  his  par-  country.       Here    he    acted    for    many 


BIOGRAPHICAL  ENCYCLOPEDIA. 


71 


years  as  a  Ward  teacher,  and  also 
served  his  fellow-citizens  as  consta- 
ble, poundkeeper,  watermaster,  etc. 
For  over  twenty  years  he  was  the 
proprietor  of  a  hotel  at  Kaysville. 
When  a  young  man  in  Nauvoo  he 
worked  on  the  Nauvoo  Temple  until 
it  was  completed  and  received  his 
endowments  before  starting  for  the 
West.  On  several  occasions  Bro.  Eg- 
bert sent  teams  to  the  Missouri  river 
after  poor  emigrants,  and  was  as  a 
rule  liberal  with  his  means  when 
Church  affairs  were  involved.  Bro. 
Egbert  died  May  24,  1898,  at  Ogden, 
Utah. 

ELDREDGE,  Frederick  Baker,  was 

born  Nov.  17,  1845,  at  Dennis,  Barn- 
stable county,  Mass.,  the  third  son 
of  Elnathan  Eldredge  and  Ruth  Bak- 


er. Bro.  Eldredge  is  a  descendant  of 
the  old  Pilgrim  stock,  his  direct  an- 
cestor being  Wm.  White,  who  came 
to  America  in  the  "Mayflower"  in 
lG2(t.  Bro.  Eldredge  crossed  the 
]>lains  with  his  parents  in  John  Neb- 
eker's  ten,  Geo.  B.  Wallace's  fifty 
and  Abraham  O.  Smoot's  hundred, 
and  arrived  in  Salt  Lake  Valley  Sei)t. 
2  6,  1S47.  He  passed  through  all  the 
hardships  of  pioneer  life,  and  his 
childhood  days  saw  the  cricket  and 
the  grasshojjper  famine.     As  a  young 


man  he  spent  his  time,  as  nearly  all 
the  other  pioneer  boys  did,  in  making 
roads,  getting  out  timber,  tending 
crops,  etc.  For  several  years  during 
high  water  time,  he  worked  in  City 
creek  to  keep  the  water  from  flood- 
ing his  father's  and  neighbors'  homes. 
In  1869  (Jan.  4th)  he  married  Al- 
mira  Jane  Nebeker,  daughter  of  John 
Nebeker  and  Lurena  Fitzgerald,  both 
pioneers  of  1847.  After  his  marriage, 
Bro.  Eldredge  first  resided  in  Salt 
Lake  City  and  then  removed  to  the 
Bear  Lake  country,  Idaho,  where  he 
remained  twelve  years.  In  the  fall 
of  1882  he  returned  to  Salt  Lake 
county  and  made  his  home  at  Gran- 
ger, where  he  resided  until  a  few 
years  prior  to  his  death.  Bro.  Eld- 
redge held  many  positions  of  honor 
and  responsibility  in  the  midst  of  his 
fellow-citizens;  thus  he  acted  as 
school  trustee  about  ten  years  and 
was  a  deputy  assessor.  He  labored 
as  assistant  superintendent  of  Sun- 
day school  of  the  Granger  Ward  for 
a  number  of  years,  and  was  ordained 
a  High  Priest  Oct.  2  7,  190  7,  by  Wm. 
Asper.  Bro.  Eldredge  died  July  23, 
1-^09,  as  a  faithful  Latter-day  Saint. 
He  was  a  quiet,  unassuming  man,  be- 
loved by  all  who  knew  him.  The 
names  of  his  children  are  Frederick 
Elnathan,  Minnie,  Delbert,  Ashton 
Nebeker,  Wm.  N.,  Rosella  Stocks, 
Laura,  Lurena,  Elias  Asahel  and 
Leone  Almira. 

KLDitKIKJK,  .laine.s  Aloii.son,  first 
counselor  in  the  Davis  Stake  presi- 
dency, was  born  Feb.  15,  18  57,  in 
Salt  Lake  City,  Utah,  the  son  of 
Horace  S.  Eldredge  and  Hannah 
Adams.  He  was  bai)tized  when  about 
eight  years  of  age  and  was  ordained 
an  Elder  Oct.  2  2,  1876,  by  Horace  S. 
Eldredge.  At  the  age  of  five  years 
he  moved  to  Woods  (-ross  (Bounti- 
ful) with  his  parents.  In  1SS2  he 
moved  to  a  ranch  near  Chesterfield. 
Idaho,  where  he  took  up  ranching  for 
a  few  years  and  then  returned  to 
Utah,  and  after  residing  two  years 
in   Salt   l.iake  ('ity,   he  became  a  per- 


72 


LATTER-DAY   SAINT 


manent  settler  at  Bountiful.  He  was 
ordained  a  Seventy  May  2  4,  1885, 
by  Wm  Woodward;  ordained  a  High 
Priest  Jan.  9,  1903,  by  Abraham  O. 
Woodruff,  and  set  apart  as  an  alter- 
nate member  of  the  Davis  Stake  High 
Council.  He  was  set  apart  as  first 
counselor  to  Pres.  Joseph  H.  Grant  of 
the  Davis  Stake  Sept.  25,  1904.  Prior 
to  this  (from  1877  to  1882)  he  acted 
as  superintendent  of  the  West  Boun- 
tiful Sunday  school.  In  1883-84  he 
filled  a  mission  to  the  Southern 
States,  laboring  principally  in  Ken- 
tucky and  Tennessee.  At  Bountiful 
he  acted  as  president  of  the  West 
Bountiful  Ward  Y.  M.  M.  I.  A.,  and 
filled  many  other  positions  of  honor 
and  responsibility  in  the  Church.  In 
1897  (Dec.  27th)  he  together  with 
his  wife  left  for  a  mission  to  Cali- 
fornia, where  he  labored  in  the  Los 
Angeles  conference  several  months, 
part  of  the  time  as  president  of  said 
conference.  He  also  opened  mis- 
sionary labors  in  Carson  and  Reno, 
Nevada,  and  returned  to  Utah  Sept. 
19,  1899.  In  1907-08  he  served  a 
term  in  the  Utah  State  Legislature, 
and  he  has  been  connected  with  many 
successful  business  enterprises.  For 
two  years  he  has  acted  as  president 
of  the  Woods  Cross  Canning  Factory; 
has  been  president  of  the  Bountiful 
State  Bank  since  its  organization,  is 
at  the  present  time  president  of  the 
Eldredge  Brothers  Livestock  Com- 
pany, which  is  doing  business  in  Al- 
berta, Canada;  is  vice  president  of 
the  Davis  County  Bank  of  Farming- 
ton,  director  of  the  Deseret  Savings 
Bank  in  Salt  Lake  City,  and  is  con- 
nected with  many  other  business  en- 
terprises. In  18  79  (June  2  3rd) 
Bro.  Eldredge  married  Jane  Jen- 
nings. 

ELDIIEDGE,  Jane  Jennings,  wife 
of  James  A.  Eldredge  of  West  Boun- 
tiful, Davis  county,  Utah,  was  born 
March  19,  185G,  in  Salt  Lake  City. 
Utah,  the  daughter  of  William  Jen- 
nings and  Jane  Walker.  She  was 
baptized  Sept.   5,,   1867,  by  Chas.   R. 


Jones  and  became  the  wife  of  James 
A.  Eldredge  June  23,  1879;  she  is 
the  mother  of  two  adopted  children. 
Sister  Eldredge  labored  as  a  teacher 
in  the  14th  Ward  Sunday  school.  Salt 
Lake  City,  for  many  years,  and  was 
president  of  the  West  Bountiful  Pri- 
mary Association  in  18  81-82.  From 
1888  to  1894  she  acted  as  president 
of  the  Primary  Associations  of  the 
Oneida  Stake.  In  1897-99  she  filled 
a  mission  together  with  her  husband 
to  Southern  California.  She  acted  as 
a  Stake  aid  in  the  Y.  L.  M.  I.  A.  of 
the  Davis  Stake  from  1899  to  1902, 
and  was  president  of  the  South  Dis- 
trict Y.  L.  M.  I.  A.  of  the  Davis 
Stake  from  1902  to  1909.  Since  the 
later  date  she  has  been  busily  en- 
gaged in  genealogical  work. 

ELLERBECK,    Thomas    Witton,    a 

prominent  Elder  in  the  Church,  was 
born  Sept.  14,  1829,  at  Pendleton. 
Lancashire,  England,  the  son  of 
Thomas  Ellerbeck  and   Mary   Witton. 


He  received  in  England  only  a  com- 
mon school  education,  but  showed  a 
wonderful  aptitude  for  mathematics. 
His  unusual  mental  alacrity  placed 
him  practically  on  a  par  with  those 
men  of  unusual  attainment  in  mental 
arithmetic  who  exploited  their  abil- 
ity   for    a    livelihood.      Between    the 


BIOGRAPHICAL  ENCYCLOPEDIA. 


73 


ages  of  twelve  and  sixteen,  while  in 
England,  as  a  mere  boy,  he  had 
charge  of  the  bookkeeping  of  a  large 
wooden  shoe  manufactory.  During 
the  industrial  war  in  England  this 
manufacturing  concern,  failing  to 
adopt  modern  devices  for  the  produc- 
tion of  its  ware,  became  insolvent, 
and  upon  examination  of  the  books, 
an  old-time  judge  or  justice,  who 
had  been  on  the  bench  for  more  than 
thirty  years,  claimed  that  the  books 
of  the  company  were  clearer  and 
better  kept  than  any  set  of  books 
that  had  ever  been  presented  before 
the  court.  He  was  immediately  given 
a  responsible  position  with  a  railroad 
company  in  England,  but  choosing  to 
cast  his  fortunes  in  America,  he  came 
to  Utah,  arriving  in  Salt  Lake  City 
Oct.  15,  1851.  His  splendid  business 
aptitude  was  soon  discovered  by 
President  Brigham  Young,  who  used 
his  services  to  very  great  advantage 
in  the  business  affairs  of  the  Church. 
Bro.  Ellerbeck  became  chief  clerk  in 
President  Brigham  Young's  office, 
and  was  largely  instrumental  in  out- 
lining a  splendid  system  of  account- 
ing. During  the  building  of  the 
Union  Pacific  Railroad  into  Utah  he 
had  charge  of  all  the  business  affairs 
incident  to  the  contracts  taken  by 
Pres.  Brigham  Young  for  the  con- 
struction of  three  hundred  miles 
of  that  railway.  Bro.  Ellerbeck 
had  charge  of  the  construction  of 
the  first  waterworks  system  for 
Salt  Lake  City,  and  in  1872, 
without  any  previous  experience,  he 
took  charge  of  the  then  important 
enterprise  of  establishing  a  gas  plant 
for  Salt  Lake  City,  of  which  he  was 
general  superintendent  until  1890, 
being  of  course  also  largely  inter- 
ested in  the  financial  affairs  of  the 
company.  To  Mr.  Ellerbeck  much  of 
the  credit  must  be  given  for  the  de- 
velopment of  the  early  horticultural 
and  agricultural  efforts  in  Utah,  he 
having  started  the  first  nursery  for 
the  sale  of  trees,  shrubs  and  vines 
in  Utah  Territory.  His  sterling  busi- 
ness honesty  and  great  foresight,  and 


his  unusual  natural  capabilities  as  an 
engineer,  made  his  counsel  of  great 
value  to  President  Brigham  Young, 
and,  for  that  matter,  to  the  people  of 
the  Territory  at  large,  because  of  his 
contributing  influences  in  the  early 
development  and  material  growth  of 
various  enterprises,  and  the  agricul- 
ture of  the  territory,  which  were  of 
vital  moment.  Bro.  Ellerbeck  died 
April  2,  1895,  leaving  a  large  family 
of  children,  all  of  whom  have  ex- 
celled in  the  various  professions 
which  they  have  followed,  such  as 
science,  literature,  art,  etc. 

ELLISON,  Ephraini  Peter,  first 
counselor  in  the  presidency  of  the 
North  Davis  Stake,  was  born  June 
10,   1850,  in  St.  Louis,  Mo.,  the  son 


of  John  Ellison  and  Alice  Pilling. 
He  was  baptized  when  about  eleven 
years  old  by  his  father.  His  parents 
settled  at  Nauvoo,  111.,  early  enough 
to  become  participants  in  the  exodus 
of  1846.  They  went  to  St.  Louis  at 
that  time,  where  they  remained  until 
1852,  when  they  crossed  the  plains 
and  mountains  to  Utah.  They  set- 
tled on  Heber  C.  Kimball's  farm 
"over  the  Jordan,"  and  the  next  year 
(1853)  moved  to  Kaysvllle,  Davis 
county,  where  Ephraim  was  baptized 
by  his  father  and  subsequently  or- 
dained   an    Elder,    a    Seventy    and    a 


74 


LATTER-DAY   SAINT 


High  Priest.  The  latter  ordination 
took  place  in  1897  under  the  hands 
of  President  Joseph  F.  Smith,  and 
he  was  also  set  apart  as  an  alternate, 
and  later  as  a  regular  member  of  the 
Davis  Stake  High  Council.  He  acted 
in  that  capacity  until  June  20,  1915. 
when  he  was  chosen  as  first  coun- 
selor to  President  Henry  H.  Blood 
of  the  North  Davis  Stake.  For  many 
years  Brother  Ellison  acted  as  Ward 
superintendent  of  the  Sunday  school 
at  Layton.  He  served  as  county  com- 
missioner three  years,  has  been  man- 
ager of  the  Farmers  Union  of  Layton 
since  its  organization  in  1882;  was 
manager  and  vice  president  of  the 
Knight  Sugar  Company,  in  Alberta, 
Canada,  for  ten  years;  has  served  as 
president  of  the  Ellison  Milling  Com- 
pany of  Alberta,  Canada,  since  its 
organization  in  1902;  has  been  presi- 
den  of  the  Davis  &  Weber  Counties 
Canal  Company  since  TdOO;  is  a  di- 
rector and  manager  of  the  Layton 
Milling  &  Elevator  ('ompany,  of  Lay- 
ton;  was  a  director  of  the  Amalga- 
mated Sugar  Company  from  its  or- 
ganization until  the  year  1914;  acts 
as  vice  president  of  the  Pingree  Na- 
tional Bank  of  Ogden,  Utah,  the 
F'irst  National  Bank,  of  Layton,  Utah, 
and  the  National  City  Bank  of  Salt 
Lake  City,  Utah;  is  also  a  director 
of  the  W^innemucca  State  Bank,  of 
Winnemucca,  Nevada,  vice  president 
of  the  Utah  Ore  Sampling  Company, 
director  in  the  Knight  Woolen  Mills, 
vice  president  and  general  manager 
of  the  Ellison  Ranching  Company, 
vice  president  of  the  Layton  Sugar 
('ompany,  and  is  also  a  director  of 
the  Beneficial  Life  Insurance  Com- 
pany and  the  San  Joa«iuin  Valley 
Sugar  Company,  of  Visalia,  Cali- 
fornia. In  January,  1878,  he  mar- 
ried Elizabeth  Whitesides  (daughter 
of  Lewis  Whitesides  and  Susan  Per- 
kins), who  was  l)orn  Nov.  l:{,  1S51. 
This  marriage  has  been  blessed  with 
nine  children. 

KSI»LI\,    H<Miiy    \\Vbst4'r,    Bishop 
of   Orderville    (  Kanab    Stake),    Kane 


county,  Utah,  was  born  Oct.  20,  1854, 
at  Nephi,  Juab  county,  Utah,  the  son 
of  John  Esplin  and  Margaret  Web- 
ster. He  was  baptized  Nov.  9,  1862, 
by  Thos.  J.  Scofield;  was  ordained  an 
Elder  Feb.  11,  1871,  by  Wm.  Heaton; 
ordained  a  High  Priest  and  set  apart 
to  act  as  second  counselor  to  Bishop 
Thos.  Chamberlain,  which  position 
he  held  until  Dec.  7,  1884,  when  he 
was  ordained  a  Bishop  by  Geo.  Teas- 
dale  and  set  apart  to  preside  over 
the  Orderville  Ward.  This  position 
he  held  until  1910.  For  a  number 
of  years  Bro.  Esplin  acted  as  assist- 
ant Stake  superintendent  of  Sunday 
schools,  and  acted  as  counselor  and 
later  as  president  in  the  Ward   Y.  M. 


M.  I.  A.  He  has  also  served  as 
county  commissioner,  and  has  acted 
on  a  number  of  boards  of  directors, 
and  taken  an  active  part  in  all  pub- 
lic affairs  pertaining  to  the  growth 
ard  development  of  the  settlements 
in  which  he  has  resided.  He  is  one 
of  the  most  successful  farmers  in 
Long  valley,  and  one  of  the  most 
energetic  and  hard  working  citizens 
in  Southern  Utah.  In  IS" A  (Nov. 
:{rd)  he  married  Philena  Cox,  who 
has  borne  her  husband  twelve  chil- 
dren, namely,  John  O.,  Effie,  Henry 
C.,  Mary  E.,  Wni.  C..  Arietta.  Edgar 
C,  Alma  C.  Eleanor.  Cora.  Owen  J.. 


BIOGRAPHICAL  ENCYCLOPEDIA. 


75 


and  Thos.  C.  In  1878  (Sept.  13th) 
Bishop  Esplin  married  Keziah  Ann 
Carroll,  who  is  the  mother  of  twelve 
children,  namely,  Sarah,  Margaret, 
Keziah,  Emily,  Homer  W.,  Geneva, 
Charles  H.,  Evelyn,  Bessie,  Lucy, 
Verda  and  Lena.  His  first  wife  was 
the  daughter  of  Orville  S.  Cox  and 
Mary  Elizabeth  Allen,  and  was  born 
Dec.  30,  1854,  at  Manti,  Utah.  His 
second  wife  was  the  daughter  of 
Chas.  W.  Carroll  and  Keziah  Giles, 
and  was  born  Dec.  13,  1857,  at 
Provo,  Utah. 

EVANS,  John  William,  Bishop  of 
the  Raymond  Second  Ward  (Taylor 
Stake),  Alberta,  Canada,  was  born 
August    15,    1875,    at    Layton,    Davis 


county,  Utah,  the  son  of  Hyrum 
Evans  and  Annie  Elizabeth  King. 
He  was  baptized  in  June,  1884,  by 
William  Payne,  ordained  a  Deacon 
when  twelve  years  old  and  subse- 
(luently  ordained  successively  a 
Teacher,  a  Priest  and  an  Elder  in 
the  Layton  Ward.  He  received  a 
common  school  education  and  after- 
wards studied  in  the  University  of 
Utah  and  the  Agricultural  College 
of  Logan,  after  which  he  taught 
school  four  years.  He  married  Miss 
Phoebe  Longstroth,  June  7,  1S99; 
was    ordained    a    Seventy    June     14, 


1899,  by  John  Henry  Smith;  filled 
a  mission  to  California  in  1899-1901, 
laboring  principally  at  San  Jose, 
Stockton,  Sacramento,  San  Diego  and 
Los  Angeles.  In  August,  1901,  he 
was  called  to  act  as  second  counselor 
to  Bishop  D.  B.  Harris  of  the  East 
Layton  Ward,  being  ordained  a  High 
Priest  by  Joseph  Clark.  In  1903  he 
moved  to  Raymond,  Alberta,  Canada, 
where  he  went  to  work  for  the  Knight 
Sugar  Company,  in  whose  employ  he 
remained  nearly  twelve  years,  filling 
successively  the  position  of  farm  fore- 
man, factory  foreman,  bookkeeper 
and  field  superintendent.  In  August, 
1903,  he  was  called  to  act  as  first 
counselor  to  Bishop  John  F.  Ander- 
son of  the  Raymond  Ward,  and  when 
Raymond  Ward  was  divided  June  2, 
1912,  he  was  called  to  preside  over 
the  Raymond  Second  Ward  as  Bish- 
op. In  1904-1905  he  taught  a  Church 
school  at  Raymond.  He  has  filled 
such  public  positions  as  school  trus- 
tee, town  counselor,  mayor,  justice 
of  the  peace,  etc.  His  wife,  a  most 
faithful  helpmate,  has  borne  him 
seven  children,  namely,  Charlotte 
Annie,  Phoebe,  Alice,  George  William, 
John  Longstroth,  Ruth  and  Alma 
Gill. 

K\'.A\S,  William,  Bishop  of  Logan 
Third  Ward  (Cache  Stake).  Logan, 
Utah,  was  born  March  14,  1SG6,  at 
Ystrad  Mynach,  Glamorganshire, 
South  Wales,  the  son  of  Evan  Evans 
and  Mary  Davis.  He  was  baptized 
Jan.  2,  1884,  by  Wm.  Watterson; 
ordained  a  Teacher  Jan.  12,  1885,  by 
Wm.  Watterson;  ordained  an  p]lder 
Feb.  15,  1891,  by  James  Z.  Stewart; 
ordained  a  High  I'riest  and  Bishop 
April  28,  1907,  by  Orson  F.  Whitney, 
and  appointed  to  preside  over  the 
Logan  Third  Ward.  Prior  to  this  he 
had  acted  as  president  of  the  Y.  M. 
M.  I.  A.  of  the  Logan  Third  Ward 
for  nine  years  (1898-1907)  and  as 
superintendent  of  the  Ward  Sunday 
school  from  1900  to  1907.  He  also 
acted  as  a  member  of  the  Logan  city 
council  from  Jan.  1,  1904,  to  Decern- 


76 


LATTER-DAY   SAINT 


ber  31,  1912.  Being  called  on  a  six 
months'  mission  to  Great  Britain,  he 
left  home  Feb.  10,  1914,  and  re- 
turned August  10,  1914.  Bro.  Evans 
emigrated  to  America  in  1883,  cross- 
ing   the    Atlantic    in    the    steamship 


"Nevada"  with  a  company  of  Saints 
which  sailed  from  Liverpool,  Eng- 
land, August  28,  1883;  the  emigrants 
arrived  at  Logan,  Utah,  Sept.  19, 
1883.  In  1887  (Nov.  21st)  Bro. 
Evans  married  Emma  R.  Williams, 
who  bore  her  husband  seven  boys 
and  five  girls,  namely.  William,  Em- 
ma Rachel,  Phyllis,  Benjamin  Wynd- 
ham,  Mary  Gwyneth,  Louis,  Evan, 
Virginia,  Harold,  Ariel  Gladwyn, 
Joseph  Alton  and  Afton  Lucile. 

FARR,  liucian  Cordian  Jr.,  Bishop 
of  Arimo  (Portneuf  Stake),  Bannock 
county,  Idaho,  was  born  June  7, 
1882,  at  Logan,  Utah,  the  son  of 
Lucian  C.  Farr  and  Sarah  A.  E. 
Holden.  He  was  baptized  by  his 
father  when  about  eight  years  old 
and  was  subsequently  ordained  to 
the  offices  of  Deacon,  Priest,  Elder 
and  Seventy.  The  latter  ordination 
was  by  Chas.  H.  Hart.  He  was  or- 
dained a  Bishop  May  17,  1913,  by 
Hyrum  M.  Smith,  and  set  apart  to 
preside  over  the  Arimo  Ward  as  its 
first  Bishop.     In  his  younger  days  he 


acted  as  a  counselor  in  the  presi- 
dency of  a  Deacons'  Quorum,  was 
secretary  of  the  Ward  Y.  M.  M.  I.  A. 
and  later  served  on  the  Stake  Board. 
He  has  been  a  constant  worker  in 
Sunday  School  and  Y.  M.  M.  I.  A. 
matters.  Otherwise  he  is  a  farmer 
by  occupation. 

PAWNS,  David  Fowler,  a  Patri- 
arch In  the  Alberta  Stake  of  Zion, 
Canada,  was  born  June  9,  1853,  at 
Dundee,  Forfarshire,  Scotland,  the 
son  of  David  Fawns  and  Elizabeth 
Davidson.  He  emigrated  with  his 
parents  to  Utah  in  1876,  crossing  the 
Atlantic  in  the  steamship  "Anchoria," 
accompanied  by  his  mother  and  step- 
father. They  had  tickets  to  Portland, 
Oregon,  but  stopped  off  to  visit  rela- 
tives in  Utah.  Arriving  at  Payson, 
Utah  county,  April  3,  1876,  they  first 
heard  the  principles  of  the  Gospel 
explained,  and  six  months  later  young 
David,  together  with  his  mother,  was 
baptized.  They  located  on  a  farm 
west  of  Payson,  and  David  was  soon 
afterwards   ordained   a   Priest;    later 


he  was  ordained  an  Elder  by  Wm. 
Paxman.  He  was  ordained  a  Seventy 
Sept.  18,  1886,  by  Henry  G.  Boyle, 
and  became  a  president  of  the  46th 
quorum  of  Seventy.  In  1888-89  he 
filled    a    mission    to     the     Southern 


BIOGRAPHICAL   ENCYCLOPEDIA. 


77 


States,  presiding  over  the  Georgia 
conference.  In  1906-1909  he  filled 
another  mission,  this  time  laboring 
in  the  Western  States  Mission.  He 
was  ordained  a  High  Priest  Jan.  10, 
1901,  and  set  apart  as  first  counselor 
to  Bishop  Jesse  S.  Taylor  of  the  Pay- 
son  Second  Ward.  In  the  spring  of 
1903  he  moved  with  his  family  to 
Raymond,  Alberta,  Canada,  and  when 
the  Taylor  Stake  of  Zion  was  organ- 
ized, he  was  chosen  as  a  member  of 
the  High  Council.  He  was  ordained 
a  Patriarch  by  Apostle  Geo.  F.  Rich- 
ards May  3,  1914.  In  1881  (Sept. 
29th)  he  married  Hannah  Olson, 
who  has  borne  her  husband  seven 
children,  namely,  Arthur  E.,  Eliza- 
beth, William  D.,  Nellie,  Irvine, 
Charles  E.,  and  Laretta  May. 

FINLINSON,  Joseph  Trimble,  first 
counselor  in  the  presidency  of  the 
Deseret  Stake,  Millard  county,  Utah, 


Seventy  July  1,  1898,  by  J.  Golden 
Kimball.  In  1898-ldOO  he  filled  a 
mission  to  the  Eastern  States,  re- 
maining in  the  field  two  years  and 
a  half,  and  presided  over  the  East 
Pennsylvania  conference  a  part  of 
that  time.  From  1901  to  1909  he 
served  as  county  superintendent  of 
schools  and  also  taught  in  the  public 
schools  of  Oak  City  five  years.  He 
was  ordained  a  High  Priest  and  Bish- 
op May  12,  1907,  and  set  apart  to 
preside  over  the  Oak  Creek  Ward  by 
Francis  M.  Lyman.  He  served  in 
that  capacity  four  years  until  August 
11,  1912,  when  the  Millard  Stake 
was  divided,  and  he  was  then  chosen 
to  act  as  first  counselor  to  Pres. 
Alonzo  A.  Hinckley  in  the  Deseret 
Stake  of  Zion,  which  position  he  still 
holds.  Bro.  Finlinson  married  Edith 
Zina  Lyman  (daughter  of  Frederic 
R.  Lyman  and  Ann  E.  Lovell)  Oct. 
8,  1903.  The  children  by  this  mar- 
riage are  Burns  L.,  Fred  L.,  Ann, 
Joseph  L.,  Rich  L.  and  Elizabeth. 

FISHER,  Franklin  Peirce,  Bishop 
of  Hill  Spring  Ward  (Albert  Stake), 
Alberta,    Canada,    was    born    July    4, 


was  born  March  8,  1876,  at  Oak  City, 

Millard    county,    Utah,    the     son     of 

George  Finlinson  and  Susan  Trimble. 

He  was  baptized   Sept.    29,    1884,   by 

Christen  H.  Jensen.     After  finishing 

the   public    schools    at   Oak    City,    he 

attended   the   L.    D.   S.   University   in     1882,  in  East  Mill  Creek,  Salt  Lake 

Salt  Lake  City   from    1893    to   1897;     county,    Utah,    the   son   of   James   M. 

was  ordained  an  Elder  June  26,  1898,     Fisher   Jr.    and    Mary    M.    Neff.      He 

by    Geo.    Finlinson,    and    ordained    a     was  blessed   Oct.    2,   1882,   by  Henry 


78 


LATTER-DAY   SAINT 


E.  Skidmore;  baptized  Sept.  21,  1890, 
by  Jos.  Hughley;  confirmed  Sept.  21, 
1890,  by  Samuel  Oliver;  ordained  a 
Deacon  March  28,  1894,  by  Horace 
H.  Cummings;  ordained  a  Teacher 
August  1,  1897,  by  Bishop  JohnNeff; 
ordained  a  Priest  at  Magrath,  Can- 
ada; ordained  an  Elder  Jan.  6,  1901, 
by  Orson  A.  Woolley;  ordained  a 
Seventy  at  Raymond  May  11,  1907, 
by  John  P.  Smallis;  ordained  a  High 
Priest  June  12,  1910,  by  Zebulon  W. 
Jacobs,  and  ordained  a  Bishop  Aug- 
ust 20,  1910,  by  Apostle  David  O. 
McKay.  Bro.  Fisher  was  called  to 
Canada  May  23,  18d9,  to  assist  in 
colonizing  that  country,  and  to  work 
on  the  canal  which  was  then  being 
constructed  by  the  brethren  in  South- 
ern Alberta.  From  his  early  youth 
Bishop  Fisher  has  been  a  faithful 
Church  worker;  he  labored  as  a  Sab- 
bath school  teacher  in  the  McGrath 
Ward  eleven  years,  or  until  he  moved 
to  Hill  Spring  in  1910.  Soon  after- 
wards he  was  called  to  act  as  Bishop. 
Prior  to  that  he  also  labored  in  Re- 
ligion Class  work  in  the  Taylor  Stake, 
and  as  superintendent  of  Religion 
Class  work  for  two  years  (1908- 
1909).  He  has  also  labored  as  gov- 
ernment district  weed  inspector  and 
district  recorder  of  vital  statistics. 
In  1901  (Jan.  16th)  he  married 
Sarah  Gibb  in  the  Salt  Lake  Temple, 
which  marriage  has  been  blessed  with 
nine  children,  all  born  in  Alberta, 
Canada,  namely,  Mary  Phyllis,  born 
Jan.  28,  1902;  Orrin  Peirce,  born 
July  9,  1903;  Glen  Gibb,  born  Feb. 
23,  1905;  Emma,  born  July  20,  1906; 
Neff  Gibb,  born  Jan.  29,  1908;  Ethel, 
born  Oct.  29,  1909;  Ada,  born  Sept. 
17,  1911;  Minerva,  born  July  20, 
1913,  and  Carol,  born  Dec.  25,  1914. 

I'^LAKE,  Osmcr  llcnni.s,  Stake  sup- 
erintendent of  Sunday  schools  of  the 
Snowflake  Stake,  Navajo  county, 
Arizona,  was  born  March  6,  18  68,  at 
Beaver,  Beaver  county,  Utah,  the  son 
of  Wm.  J.  Flake  and  Lucy  H.  White. 
He  was  baptized  by  his  father  in 
1876,  moved  to  Arizona  in  1877,  was 


ordained  a  Deacon  and  subsequently 
a  Priest,  was  engaged  as  a  stock- 
man in  early  life,  and  later  served 
as  a  clerk  in  a  store.  He  also  served 
as  the  first  clerk  of  the  district  court 
of  Navajo  county,  Arizona  ( 1894-97  ) . 
In  1891  (March  11th)  he  married 
Elsie  A.  Owens,  which  marriage  has 
been  blessed  with  six  children,  name- 
ly, Ada,  Lucretia,  Geo.  M.,  Grace, 
Lewis,  and  Elsie.  His  wife  died 
March  25,  1908,  and  in  1911  (Oct. 
4th)  he  married  Ethel  Ray  in  the 
Salt  Lake  Temple;  four  children  are 
the  issue  of  this  marriage,  namely, 
Wallace  R.,  Lester  W.,  Horace  H., 
and  Veoma.  Bro.  Flake  was  ordained 


an  Elder  June  7,  1891,  by  John  Hunt; 
ordained  a  Seventy  Dec.  15,  1897,  by 
Geo.  Teasdale,  and  filled  a  mis- 
sion to  the  Southern  States  in  1897- 
1900,  laboring  as  president  of  the 
Mississippi  conference  the  last  year; 
he  also  suffered  considerable  from 
mob  violence.  His  mother  died  two 
months  before  he  returned  from  this 
mission.  In  1913  he  filled  a  short 
mission  to  South  Texas.  Both  his 
missions  were  very  successful.  At 
home  lOhler  Flake  has  labored  as  a 
Ward  clerk,  Sunday  school  superin- 
tendent. Ward  sexton  and  has  acted 
as  Stake  Sunday  s(;hool  superintend- 
ent since   1913.      lie  has  served  as  a 


BIOGRAPHICAL   ENCYCLOPEDIA. 


79 


forest  ranger  six  years,  and  was 
elected  to  the  House  of  Representa- 
tives in  the  State  of  Arizona,  Nov.  7. 
1916;  otherwise  he  is  a  stockman  and 
farmer  by  vocation. 

FLORENCE,  Henry,  a  counselor  in 
the  Porterville  Bishopric,  Morgan 
county,    Utah,    was     born     April    11, 


counselor  to  Bishop  Samuel  Carter, 
which  position  he  held  till  1897.  By 
occupation  Bro.  Florence  is  a  farmer 
and  sawyer.  In  1866  he  took  part  in 
the  Black  Hawk  war,  and  went  to 
Fort  Benton  on  the  Platte  river  after 
emigrants  in  1868.  He  acted  as 
school  trustee  in  Porterville  for 
twenty  years.  In  1861  (Nov.  13th) 
he  married  Sarah  Jane  Taylor, 
daughter  of  Stephen  King  Taylor  and 
Caroline  Rogers,  who  was  born  Nov. 
16,  1844,  at  Bristol,  Gloucestershire, 
England,  and  became  the  mother  of 
fourteen  children,  eight  boys  and  six 
girls.  She  presided  over  the  Ward 
Relief  Society  twenty  years,  and  died 
Dec.  17.  1908,  at  Porterville.  Elder 
Florence  married  Ann  Maria  Cave 
May  13.  1909.  She  is  the  daughter 
of  Wm.  Henry  Cave  and  Ann  Grew- 
cock  and  was  born  August  19.  1852, 
in  Ashton,  Birmingham,  England. 
She  is  the  mother  of  nine  children, 
three  boys  and  six  girls. 

FL0KF:NCE,  Samuel  Stephen,  sec- 
ond Bishop  of  the  Porterville  Ward, 
Morgan  county,  Utah,  was  born  May 


1841,  at  Norwich,  Norfolk  county. 
England,  the  son  of  Samuel  Florence 
and  Susan  Waller.  He  was  baptized 
March  11,  1857,  by  John  Clark;  or- 
dained a  Deacon  March  25,  185  7,  by 
Wm.  Jeffries;  emigrated  to  Utah  in 
1S59,  crossing  the  Atlantic  in  the 
ship  ■■\\'m.  Tapscott"  and  the  plains 
in  Capt.  Rowley's  handcart  company. 
He  pulled  a  handcart  all  the  way, 
and  arrived  in  Salt  Lake  City  Sept. 
27,  1859.  Locating  in  Big  (^otton- 
wood,  he  resided  there  for  three 
years.  He  was  ordained  an  Elder 
Oct.  17,  1862,  by  Edward  Stevenson; 
was  ordained  a  Seventy  Oct.  11,  1876, 
by  Joseph  Young,  and  ordained  a 
High  Priest  Feb.  25,  1883,  by  Rich- 
ard Fry.  In  1876  he  filled  a  short 
mission  to  Great  Britain,  but  re- 
turned sick.  He  acted  as  president 
of  the  Ward  Y.  M.  M.  I.  A.  for  some 
time,  and  was  superintendent  of  the 
Ward  Sunday  school  3  0  years.  In 
1SS3    he    was    set    apart    as    second 


8,  1S70,  at  Portervile,  Morgan  coun- 
ty, Utah,  the  son  of  Henry  Florence 
and  Sarah  Jane  Taylor.  He  was  bap- 
tized by  his  father  when  eight  years 
old;  ordained  a  Deacon  May  8,  1881, 


80 


LATTER-DAY   SAINT 


by  Edward  W.  Phillips;  ordained  a 
Teacher  in  1891  by  Bishop  Samuel 
Carter;  ordained  an  Elder  in  1894 
by  Wm.  G.  Brough;  ordained  a  Sev- 
enty March  3,  1897,  by  Seymour  B. 
Young;  ordained  a  High  Priest  in 
February,  1901,  by  Hyrum  M.  Smith, 
and  ordained  a  Bishop  March  8,  1907, 
by  Francis  M.  Lyman  and  appointed 
to  preside  over  the  Porterville  Ward. 
In  his  youth  Bishop  Florence  acted 
as  a  counselor  in  a  Deacon's  quorum, 
presided  over  the  Ward  Y.  M.  M.  I 
A.,  filled  a  mission  to  the  Eastern 
and  Northern  States  in  1897-99,  and 
filled  many  positions  of  honor  and 
responsibility  at  different  times.  In 
1894  (Dec.  19th)  he  married  Minnie 
Giles  (daughter  of  John  Henry  Giles 
and  Ann  Kingman),  who  was  born 
August  1,  1872,  at  Littleton,  Morgan 
county,  Utah.  This  marriage  has  been 
blessed  with  ten  children,  seven  boys 
and  three  girls. 

FLUCKIGER,  John,  Bishop  of  the 
Bedford  Ward  (Star  Valley  Stake), 
Lincoln  county,  Wyoming,  was  born 
August  28,  1856,  in  Bern,  Switzer- 
land, the  son  of  Ulrich  Fluckiger  and 
Anna  K§,ser.  He  was  baptized  Feb. 
11,  1884,  by  Rudolf  Hochstrasser, 
and  emigrated  to  Utah  in  the  Sum- 
mer of  1884.  In  1889  he  located  at 
Bedford,  Lincoln  county,  Wyoming. 
He  was  ordained  an  Elder  March  19, 
1890,  by  Robert  Henderson,  and  or- 
dained a  Seventy  and  set  apart  for 
a  mission  June  15,  1894,  by  Apostle 
Heber  J.  Grant.  He  filled  a  mission 
to  Switzerland  in  1894-96.  When 
the  Bedford  Ward  was  organized  in 
1896  he  was  chosen  as  second  coun- 
selor to  Bishop  John  B.  Thatcher, 
and  after  returning  from  his  mission 
in  October,  1896,  he  was  ordained  a 
High  Priest  and  set  apart  to  that 
position  by  Wm.  W.  Burton.  Later 
he  became  superintendent  of  the 
Ward  Sunday  school  and  first  coun- 
selor to  Bishop  Thatcher.  He  was 
ordained  a  Bishop  Sept.  3,  1905,  by 
Apostle  Geo.  A.  Smith  and  set  apart 
to   preside   over   the   Bedford    Ward. 


In  1890  (April  2nd)  he  married  Mar- 
ian Von  Almen  in  the  Logan  Temple. 
His  children  are  Anna,  born  April  16, 
1891;  John  Joseph,  born  March  29, 
1894;  Edna,  born  May  12,  1898; 
Lyman  Wilford,  born  Dec.  18,  1900; 
Lillie,  born  Dec.  12,  1902;  Mary, 
born  Nov.  9,  1905,  and  Adeline,  born 
July  24,  1907. 

FORD,  Joseph  Nelson,  Bishop  of  the 
Centerville  Ward,  Davis  county,  Utah, 
was  born  Nov.  12,  1872,  at  Center- 
ville, the  son  of  John  Ford  Jr.,  and 
Elizabeth    Garn.       He    was    baptized 


by  Micah  Garn  when  about  eight 
years  of  age  and  was  ordained  succes- 
sively to  the  offices  of  Deacon,  Teach- 
er, Priest,  Elder,  Seventy  and  High 
Priest.  He  was  ordained  a  Seventy 
in  July,  1899,  by  Seymour  B.  Young 
and  was  ordained  a  High  Priest  and 
Bishop  of  (Centerville  Ward  Feb.  5, 
1911,  by  John  Henry  Smith.  For 
a  number  of  years  he  acted  as  sup- 
erintendent of  the  Ward  Religion 
Class  and  president  of  the  Ward 
Y.  M.  M.  I.  A.;  also  as  a  counselor 
in  the  presidency  of  an  Elders  quor- 
um and  later  as  one  of  the  presi- 
dents of  the  70th  quorum  of  Seventy. 
In  188*;)-1890  he  filled  a  mis.slon  to 
Great  Britain,  laboring  in  the  Liver- 
pool conference,  part  of  the  time  as 


BIOGRAPHICAL   ENCYCLOPEDIA. 


81 


conference  clerk.  In  1904-06  he 
filled  a  mission  to  the  Eastern  States, 
laboring  in  Boston  about  six  months 
and  afterwards  as  secretary  of  the 
mission  at  the  mission  headquarters 
in  New  York.  From  July  1,  1911,  to 
December,  1914,  he  acted  as  a  mem- 
ber of  the  Board  of  Education  of  the 
Davis  county  school  district.  In  1905 
(June  22nd)  he  married  Algie 
Walker,  daughter  of  William  Walker 
and  Anna  Turner,  who  was  born 
March  16,  1874,  at  Farmington.  This 
marriage  has  been  blessed  with  five 
children,  namely,  Ralph,  Nora,  Dale, 
Harold  and  Helen.  Bishop  Ford  is 
by  avocation  a  farmer  and  stock- 
raiser. 

FOSTER,  Solon  J.,  Bishop  of  the 
Cedar  City  East  Ward  (Parowan 
Stake)   and  a  resident  of  Cedar  City, 


Iron  county,  Utah,  was  born  March 
16,  1879,  at  St.  George,  Utah,  the 
son  of  Solon  Foster  Jr.,  and  Sarah 
Margaret  Moody.  He  was  baptized  in 
1887  by  Walter  Granger,  educated  in 
the  public  schools  of  St.  George  and 
in  the  State  Normal  schools  at  Cedar 
City.  In  the  years  1901-1903  he  filled 
a  mission  to  Australia;  he  left  Salt 
Lake  City  to  fill  said  mission  Jan. 
12,  1901,  and  returned  Dec.  23,  1903, 
via  the  Suez  canal,  thus  circumnavi- 


gating the  globe.  In  the  spring  of 
1904  he  was  chosen  as  cashier  of  the 
Bank  of  Southern  Utah,  which  at  that 
time  was  organized  in  Cedar  City, 
and  he  has  been  connected  with  that 
institution  ever  since.  In  November, 
1906,  he  was  elected  a  member  of 
the  Cedar  City  council  and  served  a 
term  of  four  years.  In  October,  1913, 
he  was  ordained  a  High  Priest  and 
Bishop  by  Apostle  Orson  F.  Whit- 
ney and  set  apart  to  preside  over  the 
Cedar  City  East  Ward.  He  resigned 
from  the  office  of  Bishop  in  October, 
1916,  owing  to  pressing  business  in 
other  directions,  and  is  now  (1^18) 
acting  as  Sunday  school  superintend- 
ent. In  1904  (May  29th)  he  mar- 
ried Emma  Jessie  Morris,  daughter  of 
Richard  A.  Morris  of  St.  George.  She 
has  borne  her  husband  five  children, 
four  girls  and  one  boy.  Bro.  Foster 
is  one  of  the  leading  business  men 
of  Southern  Utah. 

FRANCIS,  Samuel,  was  born  July 

3,  1830,  at  Trowbridge,  Wiltshire, 
England,  the  son  of  William  Francis 
and  Ann  Phillips  .  His  parents  were 
poor,  in  consequence  of  which  they 
were  unable  to  give  their  children  a 
liberal  education,  but  they  were  fond 
of  their  children  and  sought  their 
happiness  in  every  possible  manner. 
They  were  honest,  industrious  and 
affectionate.  Young  Samuel  was 
early  in  life  employed  in  the  manu- 
facture of  cloth  and  continued  in 
that  business  until  after  the  death  of 
his  father.  When  about  thirteen 
years  of  age  he  commenced  the  study 
of  religion  in  earnest,  but  could  find 
nothing  in  the  sects  of  the  day  which 
satisfied  him.  Finally  he  heard  of 
the  Latter-day  Saints  and  attended 
their  meetings,  and,  although  opposed 
by  his  folks  and  other  relatives,  he 
became  a  convert  to  "Mormonism" 
and  was  baptized  Feb.  8,  1847.  He 
was  ordained  a  Priest  by  Elder  John 
Halliday  Jan.  16,  1848;  although  not 
yet  eighteen  years  old  he  became  an 
active  worker,  preaching  the  gospel 
in    Trowbridge    and    adjacent    towns 


\'ol.   III.  N. 


June,  V.n^. 


82 


LATTER-DAY   SAINT 


successfully.  In  November,  1849,  his 
father  was  taken  sick  with  inflam- 
mation of  the  lungs  and  brain,  and 
died  Nov.  21,  1849.  This  death 
brought  great  grief  to  Samuel  and 
his  mother.  In  March  ,1850,  Samuel 
went  to  London  to  assist  his  cousin 
Joseph  Francis,  who  was  doing  a 
grocery  and  provision  business  there. 
Soon  after  that  his  sister  Amelia 
took  sick  and  died.  Having  returned 
to  Trowbridge,  Samuel  was  appointed 
by  Geo.  Halliday  to  take  charge  of 
missionary  labors  in  Sherborne,  and  at 
a  conference  of  the  Saints  held  at 
Trowbridge,    Dec.    29,    1850,    he    was 


ordained  an  Elder  by  Geo.  Halliday, 
after  which  he  engaged  most  earnest- 
ly in  missionary  labors,  passing 
through  all  the  experiences  which 
local  missionaries  met  with  in  those 
days  in  England.  By  the  middle  of 
June,  1851,  he  had  baptized  about 
twenty  persons.  Afterwards  he 
labored  successfully  in  Cornwall  and 
Brighton.  In  September,  1854,  he 
was  appointed  to  labor  in  the  Swiss 
Mission  under  the  presidency  of  Dan- 
iel Tyler.  He  bid  good-bye  to  the 
Saints  at  Brighton  Sept.  28,  1854, 
traveling  through  France,  and  ar- 
rived at  Geneva,  Switzerland,  a  few 
days  later.     He  was  appointed  to  pre- 


side over  the  Saints  in  Italy.     Cross- 
ing the  Alps  he  arrived  at  Turin  Oct. 
7th.      The   next   day   he   went   to   La 
Tour  where  he|commenced  missionary 
labors  and  was  successful  in  acquir- 
ing the  language  and  making  friends. 
In  November,   1855,  he  accompanied 
a  small   company  of  Saints   to   Eng- 
land,   arriving    in     London     Dec.    4, 
1855.       After    seeing    the    emigrants 
safely  on  board  the  ship  he  returned 
to  his  former  field  of  labor  in  Italy. 
In  February,   1856,  he  was  called  to 
Geneva,  Switzerland,  to  attend  to  the 
Swiss  emigration.      This  change  im- 
proved his  health  which  had  become 
considerably  impaired  while  in  Italy. 
When  Pres.  John  L.  Smith  left  Gene- 
va   for   England,    Feb.    24,    1857,    he 
left     Elder     Francis     in     temporary 
charge  of  the  Swiss  and  Italian  Mis- 
sion.     While   engaged   in   missionary 
labors  at  La  Tour,   Italy,  he  met  an 
accomplished      young      lady      school 
teacher  of  German  parentage  by  the 
name    of     Esther     C.    E.    Weisbrodt, 
whom  he  converted  to  the  gospel  and 
whom     he     afterwards     married     at 
Geneva,    Switzerland.    July    1,    1857. 
The  fruits  of  this  happy  union  were 
ten   children    (seven   sons   and   three 
(laughters),  all  of  whom  were  reared 
to  man  and  womanhood.  Elder  Fran- 
cis labored  in  the  Swiss  and   Italian 
Mission    until    the    spring    of    1858, 
when  he  was  called  to  labor  in  Eng- 
land   under    the    direction    of    Elder 
William  Budge.     He  was  afterwards 
called    to   preside    over    the    Durham 
conference.     On  receiving  an  honor- 
able    release     from     his     missionary 
labors,   after  rendering  eleven  years 
of   faithful  service,   he   emigrated   to 
America  with  his  wife  and  two  chil- 
dren, sailing  from  Liverpool  in  May, 
1861,   on  the  ship   "Monarch   of  the 
Sea."       Crossing    the    plains    by    ox 
teams  he  arrived   in   Salt  Lake  City 
in    September,    1861.      After    his   ar- 
rival In  Utah  he  turned  his  hands  to 
any    employment      that      afforded    a 
means  of  subsistance;  he  drove  team, 
sawed  wood,  ran  a  carding  machine 
and  taught  school.     In  August,  1863, 


BIOGRAPHICAL   ENCYCLOPEDIA. 


83 


he  moved  into  Weber  valley  and 
made  Morgan  county  his  permanent 
home,  engaging  principally  in  farm- 
ing and  stockraising.  With  the  ex- 
ception of  a  short  sojourn  in  Ogden 
he  remained  a  resident  of  Morgan 
county  the  remainder  of  his  life. 
When  the  Morgan  Stake  was  organ- 
ized in  1877  he  was  chosen  counselor 
to  Willard  G.  Smith,  president  of  the 
Stake  and  continued  in  the  Stake 
presidency  until  the  death  of  Richard 
Fry  April  25,  1900,  when  he  was 
honorably  released  and  ordained  a 
Patriarch.  Samuel  Francis  was  no 
less  active  in  governmental  affairs 
than  those  of  the  Church;  he  applied 
himself  to  study  and  qualified  him- 
self to  occupy  positions  of  honor  and 
trust  in  the  government  of  county 
and  State.  He  filled  the  positions  of 
justice  of  the  peace,  county  clerk, 
county  recorder,  county  commis- 
sioner, county  attorney  and  probate 
judge.  He  also  served  a  number  of 
terms  in  the  Territorial  legislature 
and  was  also  a  member  of  the  State 
Constitutional  Convention  when  Utah 
was  admitted  into  the  Union  as  a 
State.  During  his  early  terms  of 
office  in  the  county  he  applied  him- 
self to  the  study  of  law,  and  for 
many  years  conducted  almost  the 
entire  legal  business  of  the  county. 
He  was  admitted  to  the  bar  in  1888 
and  practiced  in  the  courts  of  the 
State  until  the  time  of  his  death.  He 
d'"  May  26,  1906,  at  the  age  of  76 
yk.v.-o.  Possibly  no  other  man  in  the 
history  of  Morgan  county  gave  so 
much  valuable  service  in  both  religi- 
ous and  civil  affairs  as  did  Samuel 
Francis. 

FRANCIS,  Esther  Charlotte  Emily 
Weisbrodt,  wife  of  Samuel  Francis, 
was  born  June  24,  1836,  in  Turin, 
Italy,  of  German  parentage,  her  par- 
ents coming  from  Saxony.  She  re- 
ceived a  high  school  education  in  the 
public  schools  of  Turin.  She  first 
heard  the  gospel  from  Elder  Samuel 
Francis,  who  was  sent  to  Italy  as  a 
missionary  from  England;  she  after- 


wards accepted  the  gospel  and  was 
baptized  July  26,1856.  Soon  after  join- 
ing the  Church,  through  persecution, 
she  was  forced  to  leave  Turin,  and 
went  to  Geneva,  Switzerland,  then 
the  headquarters  of  the  Swiss  Mis- 
sion. Here  she  again  met  Elder 
Samuel  Francis,  to  whom  she  was 
married  July  2  6,  1856,  by  the  Eng- 
lish consul.  About  a  year  after  their 
marriage  they  left  for  England  and 
remained  there  from  1857  to  1861, 
her  husband  continuing  in  mission- 
ary work.  Her  two  sons,  Samuel  and 
Joseph,  were  born  there  as  the  result 
of  this  union.      The   family  came  to 


Utah  in  1861,  crossing  the  plains 
with  ox-teams.  They  moved  to  Mor- 
gan county  in  the  fall  of  1863,  where 
they  spent  the  remainder  of  their 
days.  Sister  Francis  was  the  mother 
of  ten  children,  seven  boys  and  three 
girls,  all  of  whom  she  raised  to  man 
and  womanhood  and  all  survived  her. 
She  died  Feb.  21,  1912,  as  a  faithful 
Latter-day  Saint. 

FRANCIS,  Alonzo,  second  Bishop 
of  South  Morgan,  Morgan  county, 
Utah,  was  born  July  8,  1862,  at 
Farmington,  Davis  county,  Utah  the 
son  of  Samuel  Francis  and  Esther 
C.  E.  Weisbrodt.  He  moved  with  his 
parents  to   Morgan   county  in    1864; 


84 


LATTER-DAY   SAINT 


was  baptized  In  1872  and  ordained 
successively  to  the  office  of  Deacon, 
Teacher,  Priest,  Elder,  Seventy  and 
High  Priest.  To  the  latter  office  he 
was  ordained  July  15,  1906,  by  David 
O.  McKay,  who  also  ordained  him  a 


Bishop  and  set  him  apart  to  preside 
over  the  Morgan  Ward,  then  includ- 
ing both  North  and  South  Morgan. 
When  the  Morgan  Ward  was  divided 
in  1910  he  was  sustained  as  Bishop 
of  the  South  Morgan  Ward.  Prior 
to  his  becoming  a  Bishop  he  acted 
as  president  of  a  Deacons  quorum; 
labored  as  a  Stake  aid  in  the  Sunday 
school  organization;  filled  a  mission 
to  Switzerland  in  189  4-96,  laboring 
in  the  Geneva  conference  among  the 
French-speaking  inhabitants,  and 
during  the  latter  part  of  his  mission 
presided  over  the  conference  named. 
In  1897  he  filled  a  mission  in  Bear 
Lake  county,  Idaho,  and  Box  Elder 
and  Davis  counties,  Utah,  in  the  in- 
terests of  Y.  M.  M.  I.  A.  In  1898 
he  was  chosen  as  first  assistant  sup- 
erintenent  of  the  Morgan  Stake  Sun- 
day schools  and  held  that  position 
until  he  was  ordained  a  Bishop.  He 
acted  as  county  superintendent  of 
schools  one  year.  After  attending  the 
University  of  Utah  two  years  (1883- 
84)  he  taught  school  for  about  ten 
years  prior  to  going  on  his  foreign 


mission  and  again  taught  school  one 
year  after  his  return.  Bro.  Francis 
is  a  farmer  and  stockraiser.  In  1906 
(March  28th)  he  married  Selma  C. 
Christofferson,  daughter  of  Otto 
Christofferson  and  Petrea  Erickson, 
who  was  born  March  13,  1879,  in 
Norway.  This  marriage  has  already 
been  blessed  with  five  children, 
namely,  Carma,  Lovinia,  Alonzo  C, 
Larene,  and  Irvin  Wilson. 

FRAL'GHTOX,  Franklin  Augustus, 

second  Bishop  of  Wallsburg,  Wasatch 
county,  Utah,  was  born  Jan.  31,  1846, 
at  Westfield,  Chautauqua  county, 
N.  Y.,  the  son  of  George  Fraughton 
and  Heneretta  Case.  He  emigrated 
with  his  parents  to  Utah  in  1854, 
crossing  the  plains  in  an  independent 
train.  They  settled  in  Provo,  Utah 
county,  where  in  the  year  1855  Bro. 
Fraughton  was  baptized  by  John  Ses- 
sions. The  family  remained  in  Provo 
until  the  spring  of  1860,  when  they 
moved  to  what  is  now  Heber  City, 
Wasatch  county,  and  in  the  year  1866 
Bro.  Fraughton  went  back  to  the  Mis- 


souri river  after  the  "Mormon"  emi- 
gration as  night  herder  in  an  ox- 
train.  In  the  fall  of  18  66  and  the 
summer  of  1867  he  acted  as  scout 
in  what  is  known  as  the  Black  Hawk 
Indian  war,  and  on  August  12,  1867, 


BIOGRAPHICAL  ENCYCLOPEDIA. 


85 


he  married  Juliet  Mott  and  made  a 
home  in  Heber  City.  In  1870  he  was 
ordained  an  Elder  by  Joseph  Mur- 
dock  and  a  few  years  later  was  or- 
dained a  Seventy  and  set  apart  as  one 
of  the  presidents  of  the  20th  quorum 
of  Seventy.  For  a  number  of  years 
he  was  in  the  Stake  superintendency 
of  Y.  M.  M.  I.  A.  He  sawed  the  lum- 
ber that  made  the  first  house  built 
in  Park  City;  he  also,  in  connection 
with  three  other  men,  purchased  and 
operated  the  first  steam  saw  mill 
which  ever  came  into  Wasatch  coun- 
ty, and  sawed  hundreds  of  thousands 
of  feet  of  lumber  for  the  Ontario  and 
other  mines  in  the  Park.  In  1885  he 
was  called  on  a  mission  to  the  South- 
ern States  and  labored  principally  in 
the  State  of  South  Carolina.  His 
first  companion  was  Elder  Wiley  G. 
Cragun  of  North  Ogden,  Utah,  and 
he  first  labored  in  York  county. 
About  the  first  experience  he  had 
there  was  an  attack  on  himself  and 
companion  by  a  mob  of  about  twenty- 
five  armed  men.  Falling  into  their 
hands  he  was  given  forty  stripes  with 
oak  sprouts.  Elder  Cragun  made 
his  escape  to  the  woods  under  fire 
of  about  twenty-five  shots.  Bro. 
Fraughton  was  among  the  first  El- 
ders called  to  the  South  after  the 
Cane  Creek  (Tennessee)  massacre. 
He  filled  his  mission  and  returned 
home  in  1887  and  was  called  and 
sent  to  Wallsburg  to  act  as  Bishop 
of  Wallsburg  Ward,  being  ordained 
a  High  Priest  and  Bishop  by  Franklin 
D.  Richards.  He  acted  as  Bishop 
until  May  1,  1903,  when  he  was 
honorably  released  from  that  office. 
Together  with  Wm.  P.  Fullmer,  Bro. 
Fraughton  raised  the  first  sugar 
beets  under  contract  to  the  Sugar 
company  at  Lehi.  They  were  also 
the  first  beets  raised  in  Wasatch 
county.  In  1907  he  was  called  to 
take  a  mission  to  the  Northern  States 
and  labored  mostly  in  Indiana,  re- 
turning in  1909.  In  1912  (Jan.  28th) 
he  was  chosen  as  first  counselor  to 
Bishop  Wm.  P.  Fullmer  of  the  Walls- 
burg   Ward,    in    which    position    he 


labored  until  April  2,  1916,  when  he 
was  honorably  released. 

FRAUGHTON,  Juliet  Mott,  wife  of 
Bishop  Franklin  A.  Fraughton,  was 
born  Feb.  12,  1852,  at  Decatur, 
Green  county,  Wisconsin,  the  daugh- 
ter of  Daniel  R.  Mott  and  Elizabeth 
Graham.  She  emigrated  with  her 
parents  to  Utah  in  1854,  crossing  the 
plains  In  an  independent  company, 
her  father  driving  one  yoke  of  oxen 
and  one  yoke  of  cows.  Her  grand- 
parents, Samuel  Mott  and  Elizabeth 
Dwight,  were  in  the  same  company. 
The  family  first  settled  in  Spanish 
Fork  and  later  moved  to  Payson, 
Utah.  Sister  Fraughton's  father  went 


back  to  the  mountains  on  the  old 
emigrant  trail  and  assisted  some  of 
the  belated  and  snow-bound  hand- 
cart companies  Into  the  Valley  in 
1856.  In  1866  Juliet  came  to  Was- 
atch county,  where  she  met  Franklin 
A.  Fraughton  and  later  was  married 
to  him.  While  residing  in  Heber 
City  she  was  appointed  president  of 
the  Y.  L.  M.  I.  A.  of  one  of  the  Wards, 
which  position  she  filled  for  five 
years.  At  Wallsburg  she  has  acted 
as  counselor  In  the  Y.  L.  M.  I.  A.  and 
has  filled  the  office  of  treasurer  of 
the  Ward  Relief  Society  for  a  num- 
ber of  years.     During  the  last  seven 


86 


LATTER-DAY   SAINT 


or  eight  years  she  has  acted  as  a 
missionary,  visiting  the  Relief  Socie- 
ties in  all  the  Wards  of  the  Wasatch 
Stake,  and  has  performed  a  noble 
work.  Sister  Fraughton  is  the  foster 
mother  of  seven  children. 

FRIDAIj,  Knud  Hansen,  Bishop  of 
the  Elwood  Ward  (Bear  River 
Stake),  Box  Elder  county,  Utah,  was 
born  Jan.  21,  1854,  on  the  island  of 
Fyen,  Denmark,  the  son  of  Hans  Ol- 
sen  and  Karen  Marie  Jorgensdatter. 
When  a  boy  about  fourteen  years  old 
he   first   heard    the    gospel    and    was 


converted  to  its  truth,  and  although 
his  relatives  were  adherents  of  the 
Lutheran  faith  and  opposed  to  "Mor- 
monism,"  he  was  baptized  March  12, 
1871,  by  Christian  Nielsen  and  con- 
firmed the  same  day  by  Niels  C. 
Edlefsen.  Bro.  Fridal  is  the  only  one 
of  his  father's  family  so  far  who  has 
become  a  Latter-day  Saint.  He  was 
ordained  a  Teacher  in  1872,  emi- 
grated to  Utah  in  1873,  crossing  the 
Atlantic  in  the  steamship  "Wiscon- 
sin" and  arrived  at  Ogden  July  24, 
1873.  Soon  afterwards  he  located 
at  Bear  River  City.  In  1875  he  was 
called  by  Pres.  Lorenzo  Snow  to  work 
for  two  years  in  the  United  Order, 
as  it  had  been  established  in  Box 
Elder  county  at  that  time,  and  spent 


most  of  his  time  as  a  herder  of  the 
co-op  dairy  stock.  He  remained  with 
the  Order  until  it  was  dissolved.  He 
was  ordained  an  Elder  in  1878  by 
Bishop  Wm.  Neeley,  labored  as  a 
Ward  teacher,  as  an  officer  in  the 
Ward  Y.  M.  M.  I.  A.  and  Sunday 
school  and  as  chorister  in  the  Bear 
River  City  Ward  for  a  number  of 
years.  He  was  ordained  a  Seventy 
Jan.  27,  1884,  by  Oliver  G.  Snow 
and  later  became  one  of  the  presi- 
dents of  a  quorum  of  Seventy.  He 
filled  a  mission  to  Scandinavia  in 
1895-97,  laboring  principally  in  the 
cities  of  Esbjerg  and  Copenhagen, 
Denmark.  When  the  Manila  Ward 
was  organized  Dec.  16,  1900,  he  was 
chosen  as  second  counselor  in  the 
bishopric,  being  ordained  a  High 
Priest  Jan.  5,  1901,  by  Pres.  Chas. 
Kelley.  He  held  this  position  until 
Sept.  6,  1908,  when  he  was  set  apart 
as  first  counselor  in  the  bishopric  of 
the  same  Ward,  now  called  Elwood. 
When  the  Bear  River  S<ake  was  or- 
ganized Oct.  11,  1908,  Elder  Fridal 
was  called  and  ordained  Bishop  of 
the  Elwood  Ward  by  Apootle  Geo.  F. 
Richards,  succeeding  Bishop  Peter  M. 
Hansen  who  had  been  chosen  as  a 
member  of  the  Stake  presidency. 
Bro.  Fridal  presided  as  Bishop  of  the 
Elwood  Ward  until  the  Ward  was  di- 
vided Nov.  12,  1914,  into  the  Elwood 
and  Tremonton  Wards,  when  he  was 
honorably  released,  and  on  Dec.  12, 
ldl4,  called  to  act  as  president  of  the 
High  Priests  Quorum  of  the  Bear 
River  Stake.  Elder  Fridal  and  his 
family  have  always  been  active  citi- 
zens and  been  identified  with  the 
general  development  of  the  Bear 
River  valley.  His  chief  occupation 
has  been  that  of  a  farmer  and  stock- 
raiser. 

FUHRIMAN,  Godfrey,  first  Bishop 
of  the  Providence  First  Ward  (Cache 
Stake),  Cache  county,  Utah,  was  born 
June  15,  1859,  at  Durrenroth,  Can- 
ton Bern,  Switzerland,  the  son  of 
Jacob  Fuhriman  and  Barbara  Loosli. 
He  was  baptized  when  nine  years  old, 


BIOGRAPHICAL   ENCYCLOPEDIA. 


87 


having  emigrated  with  his  parents  to 
Utah  in  1860,  crossing  the  Atlantic  in 
the  ship  "Underwriter,"  which  sailed 
from  Liverpool  March  30,  1860,  and 
arrived  at  New  York  May  1,  1860. 
He  crossed  the  plains  in  Capt.  Ross's 


company,  which  arrived  in  Salt  Lake 
City  Sept.  3,  1860.  The  family  set- 
tled at  Providence  in  Cache  valley 
where  Godfrey  was  ordained  a  Dea- 
con and  acted  as  a  president  of  a 
Deacons  quorum.  He  was  also  an 
officer  in  the  Ward  Y.  M.  M.  I.  A. 
and  assistant  Sunday  school  superin- 
tendent. He  was  ordained  an  Elder 
in  1881  and  a  High  Priest  in  1889, 
acted  as  counselor  to  Bishop  Freder- 
ick Theurer  from  1889  to  1909,  and 
was  finally  ordained  a  Bishop  May  1, 
1909,  by  Hyrum  M.  Smith  and  set 
apart  to  preside  over  the  Providence 
First  Ward  which  was  then  organ- 
ized. In  1884-86  he  filled  a  mission 
to  Switzerland,  laboring  part  of  the 
time  as  president  of  the  Central  con- 
ference. In  1881  (July  7th)  at  Mull- 
heimthurgau,  Switzerland,  he  mar- 
ried Bertha  Mary  Frederick  (daugh- 
ter of  Arnold  J.  Frederick  and  Eliza- 
beth Enz),  who  was  born  Jan.  7, 
1860.  After  bearing  her  husband  six 
children  she  died  Feb.  11,  1895.  In 
1895  (July  10th)  Bro.  Fuhriman 
married  Elizabeth  Fluckiger  Von  Al- 


men  (a  widow),  who  has  borne  her 
second  husband  four  children.  Bro. 
Fuhriman  is  a  farmer  and  stock- 
raiser  by  occupation.  He  has  served 
as  school  trustee,  director  and  presi- 
dent of  five  different  irrigation  com- 
panies, director  of  a  bank,  etc. 

GAILEY,  John  William,  first  coun- 
selor in  the  presidency  of  the  High 
Priests  quorum  of  the  Davis  Stake  of 
Zion,  was  born  Sept.  4,  1853,  in  Salt 
Lake  City,  Utah,  the  son  of  John 
Galley  and  Mary  Mills.  He  was  bap- 
tized in  April,  1862,  by  Jesse  Dredge, 
ordained  a  Teacher  and  subsequently 
an  Elder;  ordained  a  Seventy  Oct.  7, 
1883,  by  Jacob  Gates  and  ordained 
a  High  Priest  in  1910  by  James  H. 
Eldredge.  He  moved  to  Kaysville  in 
185  6  and  was  set  apart  as  first  coun- 
selor to  Pres.  Sheffield  in  the  North 
Davis  Stake  High  Priests  quorum 
June  20,  1915.  Bro.  Galley  has 
filled  many  secular  offices  at  differ- 
ent times;  thus  he  acted  as  justice  of 
the  peace  and  mayor  of  Kaysville 
for  many  years.     His  principal  avoca- 


tion is  that  of  a  farmer  and  stock- 
raiser.  In  1883-86  he  filled  a  mis- 
sion to  the  Southern  States,  laboring 
principally  in  Mississippi,  part  of  the 
time  as  president  of  the  Mississippi 
conference.      In    1903-05   he  filled  a 


88 


LATTER-DAY   SAINT 


mission  to  Great  Britain,  laboring  in 
the  Sheffield  conference,  part  of  the 
time  as  conference  president.  In 
1878  (Nov.  28th)  he  married  Mary 
Elizabeth  Barnes  (daughter  of  John 
R.  Barnes  and  Emily  Shelton),  who 
was  born  Sept.  23,  1858,  in  Kays- 
ville,  Utah.  She  became  the  mother 
of  two  children  (John  Richard  and 
Arthur  Franklin)  and  died  Feb.  20, 
1881.  In  1886  (May  25th)  Bro. 
Gailey  married  Elizabeth  Edmonds 
(daughter  of  Francis  and  Ann  Brim) 
who  was  born  July  28,  1854,  in 
Lowestoft,  England.  She  became  the 
mother  of  four  children  (William  E., 
Gordon  C,  LeRoy  and  Lilly)  and 
died  Oct.  15,  18'^8.  In  1900  (Feb. 
22nd)  Bro.  Bailey  married  Melissa 
A.  Tucker  (daughter  of  Samuel  M. 
Tucker  and  Rebecca  Rhodes),  who 
was  born  August  14,  1868,  in  Missis- 
sippi. This  last  marriage  has  been 
blessed  with  three  children,  namely, 
M.  Allen,  Arnold  and  Vergil. 

GARN,  James  E.,  Bishop  of  the 
Cedar  Valley  Ward  (Alpine  Stake), 
Utah  county,  Utah,  was  born  Nov.  5, 
1860,  at  Centerville,  Davis  county, 
Utah,  the  son  of  Samuel  Garn  and 
Paralee  A.  Harmon.  He  was  baptized 
in  May,  1869,  moved  with  his  father's 
family  in  187  6  to  Sunset,  Arizona, 
where  he  lived  in  the  United  Order 
until  July  23,  1882,  when  he  was 
sent  to  Sevoya,  New  Mexico.  Here 
he  followed  the  business  of  stock- 
raising,  and  went  in  1885  to  Old 
Mexico  to  assist  in  moving  thither 
several  families  who  were  getting  out 
of  the  United  States  owing  to  the 
anti-polygamy  raid.  In  May,  189  4, 
he  moved  to  Cedar  Fort,  Utah  county, 
Utah,  and  there  acted  as  superintend- 
ent of  the  Ward  Sunday  school  from 
1895  to  1907.  He  was  ordained  a 
Priest  in  1882  by  Wilford  Woodruff; 
ordained  an  Elder  Oct.  26,  1889,  by 
Elijah  N. Freeman;  ordained  a  Seventy 
Sept.  2  5,  1891,  by  John  Morgan;  or- 
dained a  High  Priest  Dec.  30,  1906, 
by  Stephen  L.  Chipman,  and  set  apart 
as  second  counselor  to  Bishop  Wm. 


Cook  of  the  Cedar  Valley  Ward. 
He  was  ordained  a  Bishop  February 
26,  1911,  by  Francis  M.  Lyman.  Bish- 
op Garn's  occupation  otherwise  is 
that  of  a  farmer.  He  has  served  his 
fellow-citizens  in  a  number  of  posi- 
tions, such  as  justice  of  the  peace, 
notary  public,  etc.  In  1889  (Dec. 
20th)  he  married  Martha  J.  White 
who  has  borne  him  eight  children 
His  wife  died  Oct.  20,  1914. 

GIBBONS,  Joseph,  Bishop  of  Mea- 
dowville  (Bear  Lake  Stake)  Rich 
county,  Utah,  was  born  June  9,  1852, 
at  Bath,  Somersetshire,  England, 
the  son  of  James  Gibbons  and  Ann 
Shuttleworth.  He  was  baptized  Sept. 
13,   1865,  by  Elijah  Harper  and  or- 


dained a  Deacon  May  17,  1867.  He 
emigrated  to  Utah  with  his  father's 
family  in  1868,  crossing  the  Atlantic 
in  the  ship  "John  Bright"  and  the 
plains  in  John  R.  Murdock's  com- 
pany. His  first  Utah  home  was  in 
Ogden,  and  in  1870  he  located  at 
Laketown,  Rich  county,  Utah.  He 
worked  on  the  construction  of  the 
Union  Pacific,  Utah  Central,  Central 
Pacific,  and  Utah  Southern  rail- 
roads for  a  number  of  years.  He  was 
ordained  an  Elder  Oct.  9,  1873,  by 
Elias  Smith  and  on  the  same  day 
married  Mercy  Weston,  daughter  of 


BIOGRAPHICAL   ENCYCLOPEDIA. 


89 


Nehemiah  Weston  and  Rosana  Qlf- 
ford.  They  made  their  home  at  Lake- 
town,  Utah,  where  Bro.  Gibbons  be- 
came an  energetic  Sunday  school 
worker  and  also  a  leader  in  Y.  M. 
M.  I.  A.  work.  In  1883  he  married 
Catherine  Newcomb,  and  on  July  (5, 
1884,  he  was  ordained  a  Seventy.  In 
1889-91  he  filled  a  mission  to  Great 
Britain.  He  was  ordained  a  High 
Priest  and  Bishop  May  10,  1893,  by 
Geo.  Teasdale,  and  set  apart  to  pre- 
side over  the  Meadowville  Ward, 
which  position  he  held  until  the 
Meadowville  Ward  was  united  with 
the  Laketown  Ward.  In  1902  he 
moved  to  Oregon  and  settled  at  Mt. 
Glen,  where  he  was  called  to  act  as 
counselor  to  Bishop  Edward  Whiting. 
In  1909  he  returned  to  Utah  and 
located  in  the  Eighth  Ward  of  Logan, 
Cache  county.  He  is  now  the  father 
of  eighteen  children  and  his  grand- 
children number  28.  Bishop  Gib- 
bons has  always  been  active  and  suc- 
cessful in  Church  matters. 

GILES,  Franklin  Moor,  second 
counselor  to  Bishop  Henry  Clegg  of 
the     Heber    West     Ward     (Wasatch 


^•^"'j»iiii^ 
•'^>^i^ 


He  was  baptized  when  eight  years  of 
age;  emigrated  with  his  parents  to 
America  in  185  6  and  came  to  Utah  in 
1858.  In  1873  (Dec.  22nd)  he  mar- 
ried Elizabeth  Day  bell  (daughter  of 
Finity  Daybell  and  Mary  Draper)  who 
was  born  Jan.  24,  1856,  in  Derby- 
shire, England,  and  came  to  Utah 
with  her  parents  in  1864.  Some  time 
after  settling  at  Heber,  Wasatch 
county,  Bro.  Giles  was  ordained  a 
High  Priest  and  set  apart  as  second 
counselor  to  Bishop  Henry  Clegg, 
which  position  he  held  until  1894. 
He  died  August  8,  1912,  as  a  faith- 
ful Latter-day  Saint. 

GILES,  George  Thomas,  second 
counselor  to  Bishop  William  Fore- 
man of  the  Heber  City  Ward,  in 
Wasatch  county,  Utah,  was  born  in 
Lincolnshire,  England,  April  16,  1846, 
the  son  of  Thomas  H.  Giles  and 
Elizabeth  Moor.  He  was  baptized 
when  eight  years  of  age,  emigrated 
with  his  parents  to  America  in  1856 
and  arrived  in  Utah  in  1858.  The 
following  year  (1859)  he  settled  in 
Wasatch  county,  Utah.  In  1864  he 
was  sent  back  to  the  Missouri  river 


Stake),   Wasatch   county,    Utah,    was  as  a  Church  teamster  after  emigrants, 

born  Sept.   10,  1851,  at  Nottingham,  He  participated  in  the   Black  Hawk 

Nottingham,     England,     the     son     of  war   in    1866,    was   ordained   a   High 

Thomas  H.  Giles  and  Elizabeth  Moor.  Priest  and  set  apart  as  second  coun- 


90 


LATTER-DAY   SAINT 


selor  to  Bishop  Foreman  in  1877, 
and  held  that  posittion  until  1884. 
In  1867  (Jan.  28th)  he  married 
Sarah  Daybell  (daugther  of  Finity 
Daybell  and  Mary  Draper),  born 
March  11,  1850,  in  Lincolnshire, 
England;  she  came  to  Utah  in  1864 
in  William  Waren's  train,  arriving 
in  Salt  Lake  City  Oct.  4,  1864.  This 
marriage  was  blessed  with  thirteen 
children,  seven  of  whom  are  still 
alive  .  Bro.  Giles  died  May  17,  1910, 
at  Heber  as  a  faithful  Latter-day 
Saint  honored  and  beloved  by  all  who 
knew  him.  During  most  of  his  life 
Elder  Giles  followed  farming  for  a 
living. 

GREEN,  Erban,  Bishop  of  McCam- 
mon  Ward  (Portneuf  Stake)  Ban- 
nock county,  Idaho,  was  born  April 
8,  1881,  at  Woodruff,  Malad  Valley, 
Idaho,  the  son  of  Jared  Green  and 
Delloretta  Harris.  He  was  baptized 
in  August,  1889,  by  James  Wm. 
Howell;  ordained  successively  to  the 
office  of  Deacon,  Teacher  and  Priest; 
ordained  an  Elder  March  18,  1909, 
by  Wm.  A.  Hyde;  ordained  a  Seventy 
March  19,  1911,  by  Geo.  F.  Richards, 


presidency  of  a  Deacon's  quorum 
when  quite  a  boy  and  afterwards 
labored  as  a  counselor  and  president 
of  the  Ward  Y.  M.  M.  I.  A.  He  was 
also  superintendent  of  the  Ward  Sun- 
day school  and  labored  as  a  member 
of  the  Stake  Board  of  Religion 
Classes.  In  1909-10  he  filled  a  mis- 
sion to  the  Western  States,  laboring 
principally  in  Colorado  and  New  Mex- 
ico. To  fill  this  mission  he  left  home 
April  11,  1909,  and  returned  home 
sick  August  14,  1910.  About  a  year 
prior  to  his  going  on  a  mission 
(namely  April  27,  1908),  he  married 
Sarah  Fairzina  Lish  (daughter  of 
Wm.  S.  Lish  and  Sarah  Jane  Moss), 
who  was  born  Dec.  25,  1888,  at  Al- 
bion, Idaho.  This  marriage  has  been 
blessed  with  four  children,  namely, 
Rosamond,  Erban  L.,  Fannie  R.,  and 
Richard  L.  Bishop  Green's  chief  oc- 
cupations in  life  have  been  those  of 
farming  and  sheep-raising.  He  has 
been  a  resident  of  McCammon  since 
1896. 

GREEN,  George  William,  Bishop 
of  the  Lethbridge  Ward  (Taylor 
Stake),    Alberta,    Canada,    was    born 


and  ordained  a  High  Priest  and 
Bishop  February  19,  1916,  by 
Apostle  Rudger  Clawson  and  set 
apart  to  preside  over  the  McCammon 
Ward.      He    was    a    member    of    the 


Feb.  27,  1868,  at  Enterprise,  Morgan 
county,  Utah,  the  son  of  George  W. 
Green  and  Davinia  Forbes.  He  moved 
with  his  father's  family  to  Layton, 
Utah,  about  1871,  where  George  Wil- 


BIOGRAPHICAL   ENCYCLOPEDIA. 


91 


liam  resided  for  many  years  after- 
wards and  where  he  was  baptized 
May  8,  1881,  by  Wm.  Beezley.  He 
followed  the  occupation  of  farming 
until  1890,  when  he  entered  Layton 
Milling  &  Elevator  Company  as  an 
employee.  In  1893  he  moved  to  Salt 
Lake  City,  and  in  1894  (Feb.  2  8th) 
he  married  Mary  Esther  Nalder, 
daughter  of  Wm.  N.  Nalder  and  Em- 
ma Evans  of  Layton,  Utah.  In  1902 
he  moved  with  his  family  to  Ray- 
mond, Alberta,  Canada,  where  he  be- 
came manager  of  the  Ellison  Milling 
&  Elevator  Co.,  a  new  mill  just 
erected  at  that  point.  He  served  as 
mayor  of  Raymond  in  190  6-07  and 
moved  to  Lethbridge  in  I'dlO;  he  was 
chosen  as  Bishop  of  the  Lethbridge 
Ward  in  May,  1914.  Following  are 
the  children  of  George  William  Green 
and  Mary  Esther  Nalder:  Orlando 
W.,  George  N.,  Viola,  Josie,  Arthur 
N.,  Emma,  Gladys,  and  Thomas  N. 

GREEN,  John  HjTum,  second  coun- 
selor to  Bishop  William  Kay  of  Kays- 
ville,  Davis  county,  Utah,  was  born 
March  15,   1801,  in  Worcester,   Eng- 


In  1834  Bro.  Green  married  Susan- 
nah Phillips,  daughter  of  James  Phil- 
lips and  Mary  Press  Dee;  she  became 
the  mother  of  fifteen  children  In 
1841  Bro.  Green  emigrated  to  Nau- 
voo,  111.,  where  he  passed  through 
the  persecutions  that  befell  the  Saints 
in  that  place.  During  the  exodus  he 
started  with  his  co-religionists  to  the 
West,  but  losing  his  property  by  fire, 
he    did    not    reach    the    Valley    until 

1849.  After  wintering  in  Big  Cotton- 
wood, Salt  Lake  county,  he  settled 
permanently    at    Kaysville    in    April, 

1850,  and  on  Jan.  27,  1851,  he  was 
chosen  as  second  counselor  to  Bishop 
Wm.  Kay.  He  took  an  active  part 
in  the  upbuilding  of  Kaysville,  labor- 
ing diligently  on  the  fort  wall,  the 
canals  and  ditches,  the  bridges,  the 
roads,  etc.,  and  remained  a  faithful 
Latter-day  Saint  until  his  death  which 
occurred  April  16,  1886,  at  Kaysville. 
His  wife  died  at  the  same  place  Oct. 
2,  1902. 

GLEASON,  John  S.,  one  of  the  or- 
iginal Utah  Pioneers  of  18  47,  was 
born    Jan.    13.    1819,    in    New    York 


land,  the  son  of  William  Green  and  State.  As  a  pioneer  with  the  first 
Mary  Steed.  In  1825  he  married  company  he  was  a  veritable  trail- 
Susannah  Burrupp,  who  was  born  blazer  with  that  historic  band.  Prior 
Nov.  22,  1816,  in  England.  After  to  making  the  journey  he  was  identi- 
giving   birth   to   one    child    she   died,  tied    with    all    the    important    move- 


92 


LATTER-DAY   SAINT 


ments  of  the  Church  and  its  leaders 
since  the  date  of  his  conversion  in 
1842.  He  was  an  intimate  associate 
with  the  Prophet  Joseph  Smith,  filled 
important  missions  for  the  Church, 
and  was  throughout  his  life  an  ener- 
getic worker  for  the  advancement  of 
its  interests.  As  a  military  man  he 
served  as  a  major  in  the  Nauvoo 
Legion.  He  married  Desdemona 
Chase,  daughter  of  Isaac  Chase,  and 
was  one  of  the  builders  of  the  old 
Chase  mill  in  Liberty  Park,  Salt  Lake 
City.  Making  his  home  in  several 
places  in  Utah,  he  assisted  wherever 
he  went,  in  building  up  the  commun- 
ities with  which  he  became  identified. 
His  last  home  was  in  Pleasant  Grove, 
where  he  died  Dec.  21,  1904. 

GOFF,  Jedediah,  a  High  Councilor 
in  the  Jordan  Stake  of  Zlon,  Salt 
Lake  county,  Utah,  was  born  July  5, 
1857,    at    Long    Whatton,    Leicester- 


shire, England,  the  son  of  Isaac  Goff 
and  Mary  Naylor.  He  emigrated  with 
his  parents  to  America  in  18  63,  cross- 
ing the  Atlantic  in  the  ship  "Cyna- 
sure"  and  arrived  in  Salt  Lake  City 
Oct.  13,  1863,  after  crossing  the 
plains  in  Capt.  Rosel  Hyde's  com- 
pany. He  settled  at  once  in  West 
Jordan,  Utah;  was  ordained  an  Elder 
in   1874   by  Wm.   Smith;    ordained  a 


Seventy  about  1894  by  Samuel  Bate- 
man,  and  ordained  a  High  Priest  Jan. 
21,  1900,  by  Francis  M.  Lyman  and 
set  apart  as  a  High  Councilor  of  the 
Jordan  Stake,  which  position  he  held 
until  1913.  In  his  younger  days  El- 
der Goff  acted  as  president  of  the 
West  Jordan  Ward  Y.  M.  M.  I.  A., 
served  25  years  in  the  Ward  Sunday 
school,  acted  as  a  president  of  the 
33rd  quarum  of  Seventy  from  1897 
to  1900,  filled  a  mission  to  the  South- 
ern States  in  1881  and  1882,  Georgia 
being  his  principal  field  of  labor,  and 
filled  a  mission  to  New  Zealand  and 
Australia  in  1895-97,  presiding  apart 
of  the  time  over  the  Sydney  branch. 
In  1881  (March  3rd)  he  married 
Semira  M.  Grange  (daughter  of  Sam- 
uel Grange  and  Ann  Bunting)  who 
was  born  March  2,  1858,  at  Spring- 
ville,  Utah  county.  Eight  children 
(Anna,  Jedediah  H.,  Ethel  T.,  Par- 
len  L.,  Mary  A.,  Wilburn  R.,  Leland 
N.  and  Nola  S. )  have  blessed  this 
marriage.  In  1912  Bro.  Goff  settled 
at  Rigby,  Idaho;  his  occupation  is 
that  of  a  farmer  and  stockraiser. 

GRACE,  Charles  Howard,  Bishop 
of  the  Nephi  North  Ward,  Juab  coun- 
ty, Utah,  was  born  Oct.  6,  1864,  at 
Nephi,  the  son  of  Isaac  Grace  and 
Elizabeth  Williams  Evans.  He  was 
baptized  in  August,  1877,  by  Joel 
Grover;  ordained  successively  to  the 
offices  of  Elder,  Seventy,  High  Priest 
and  Bishop,  the  last  two  ordinations 
taking  place  in  August,  1914,  by 
Joseph  F.  Smith,  Jr.,  when  he  was 
set  apart  to  preside  as  Bishop  of  the 
Nephi  North  Ward.  In  1887-Sd  he 
filled  a  mission  to  the  Northwestern 
States.  He  has  also  acted  as  a  coun- 
selor in  the  Stake  presidency  of  Y.  M. 
M.  I.  A.,  counselor  and  president  of 
the  Nephi  Second  Ward  Y.  M.  M.  I. 
A.,  Stake  superintendent  of  Sunday 
schools,  and  superintendent  of  the 
Second  Ward  Sunday  school  eight 
years.  For  twenty  years  he  served 
as  a  president  in  the  71st  quorum  of 
Seventy.  Otherwise  he  served  as  a 
member  of  the  city  council  at  Nephi 


BIOGRAPHICAL   ENCYCLOPEDIA. 


93 


two  years  and  was  school  director 
nine  years,  taking  an  active  part  in 
starting  the  high  school  at  Nephi. 
Among  his  many  secular  occupations 
may  be  mentioned  that  for  twenty 
years  he  had  charge  of  Grace  Bro- 
thers Library  Company.  He  started 
the  Excelsior  Mercantile  Company, 
was  manager  of  the  Nephi  Creamery 
twelve  years  and  is  now  cashier  in 
the  Nephi  National  Bank.  Bro.  Grace 
has  introduced  a  combination  which 
cuts  and  threshes  1000  bushels  of 
grain  a  day  and  has  also  introduced 
the  header  in  Juab  county. 

GROG,  Isaac,  president  of  the  Aus- 
tralasian Mission,  was  born  April  8, 
1827,  at  Neversink,  Sullivan  county. 


New  York,  the  son  of  Samuel  Groo  and 
Mercy  Tuttle.  His  father  died  when 
Isaac  was  about  seven  years  old,  leav- 
ing his  mother  with  a  large  family  of 
children.  At  eleven  years  of  age  he 
hired  out  to  work  on  a  farm  and  at- 
tended school  during  the  winter,  do- 
ing chores  morning  and  evening  for 
his  board.  At  the  age  of  sixteen  he 
purchased  a  farm  and  turned  his  at- 
tention to  farming.  When  twenty 
years  old  he  married  Sarah  E.  Gillett, 
a  Mormon  girl  of  Neversink,  N.  Y. 
Isaac  sold  his  farm  and  went  to 
school-teaching  and  also  engaged  in 


the  grocery  business.  Becoming  a 
convert  to  "Mormonism"  he  was  bap- 
tized by  Elder  Royal  J.  Cutler  Jan. 
1,  1852,  and  was  ordained  an  Elder 
soon  afterwards.  He  was  called  to 
labor  as  a  missionary  in  Sullivan 
county  and  traveled  among  the  local 
branches  of  the  Church.  Being  quite 
successful  as  a  missionary  he  bap- 
tized a  number  of  people.  In  1854 
he  crossed  the  plains  to  Utah,  and  the 
company  in  which  he  traveled  was 
visited  with  cholera,  which  claimed 
many  victims,  among  them  Bro. 
Groo's  father  in  law  (Horace  Gillett). 
Bro.  Groo  himself  was  afflicted,  but 
was  healed  by  the  power  of  God.  The 
company  arrived  in  Salt  Lake  City 
Sept.  19,  1854,  locating  in  the  Ninth 
Ward.  Bro.  Groo  taught  school  dur- 
ing the  winter  of  1854-55;  he  also 
acted  as  first  assistant  superinten- 
dent of  the  Ninth  Ward  Sunday 
school  in  1855;  was  ordained  a  Sev- 
enty and  became  a  member  of  the 
27th  quorum  of  Seventy  in  1855.  In 
1856  he  was  ordained  a  High  Priest 
and  set  apart  as  a  counselor  to 
Bishop  Seth  Taft  of  the  Ninth  Ward. 
From  1858  to  1866  he  served  as  a 
member  of  the  Salt  Lake  City  coun- 
cil. From  1859  to  1864  he  served  as 
street  supervisor  and  water  master 
of  Salt  Lake  City.  In  1864  he  com- 
menced work  for  John  M.  Woolley 
as  foreman  in  a  lumber  business  in 
Little  Cottonwood  canyon.  He  also 
acted  as  a  regent  of  the  University 
of  Deseret  and  was  a  lieutenant-colo- 
nel in  the  Nauvoo  Legion.  In  1860 
he  was  elected  city  recorder  of  Salt 
Lake  City.  After  serving  as  a  coun- 
selor to  John  M.  Woolley  until  1864, 
he  was  chosen  as  counselor  to  Samuel 
A.  Woolley  in  the  Ninth  Ward 
and  served  thus  until  1875.  In 
18  75-7  6  he  filled  a  mission  to  Aus- 
tralia, acting  as  president  of  the 
Mission.  After  his  return  home  he 
engaged  in  the  cattle  business  in 
Wyoming,  but  finally  sold  out  his 
stock  and  returned  to  his  home  in  the 
Ninth  Ward,  Salt  Lake  City,  where 
he    died    Jan.    24,    1895.      Bro    Groo 


94 


LATTER-DAY   SAINT 


married  six  wives,  namely,  Sarah 
E.  Gillett  (already  mentioned)  in 
1847;  Elizabeth  Clark  in  March, 
1856;  Eliza  Lyons,  Feb.  20,  1864; 
Mary  J.  Whitney,  July  4,  1865;  Mar- 
garet C.  Hunter  Jan.  24,  1869  and 
Semira  Mead.  By  these  wives  he 
became  the  father  of  28  children,  of 
whom  his  first  wife  bore  him  ten 
children,  his  second  wife  three  chil- 
dren, his  third  wife  five  children,  his 
fourth  wife  six  children,  his  fifth 
wife  two  children,  and  his  sixth  wife 
two  children. 

GROW,  Henry,  a  prominent  Elder 
in  the  Church,  was  born  Oct.  1,  1817, 
at  Philadelphia,  Pa.,  the  son  of  Henry 
Grow  and  Mary  Riter.  His  great 
grandfather,  Frederick  Grow,  and 
his  wife  emigrated  from  Germany  to 
Pennsylvania  before  the  war  of  the 
revolution,  took  up  a  large  tract  of 
land  and  made  it  into  five  farms  of 
60  acres  each,  dividing  the  same 
among  his  five  children,  four  sons 
and  one  daughter.  This  great  grand- 
father was  in  the  war  of  the  revolu- 
tion. Henry  Grow  was  the  youngest 
of  seven  children,  five  girls  and  two 
sons.  He  learned  the  trade  of  a  mill- 
wright and  bridgebuilder,  after  which 
he  superintended  the  bridges,  cul- 
verts, etc.,  on  the  Norristown  and 
Germantown  railroads,  both  in  con- 
struction and  repairing  the  works. 
Becoming  a  convert  to  "Mormonism," 
he  was  baptized  in  the  Delaware 
river,  Philadelphia,  in  May,  1842,  by 
Wm.  Morton.  He  emigrated  to  Nau- 
voo.  111.,  in  18  43,  where  he  worked 
on  the  Nauvoo  Temple  until  it  was 
finished.  He  passed  through  all  the 
troubles  of  those  days  and  was  one 
of  the  members  of  the  Nauvoo  Le- 
gion. He  was  one  of  the  remnants 
that  'remained  at  Nauvoo  after  the 
departure  of  the  Twelve,  with  the 
advance  companies  of  the  Saints  for 
the  West,  but  in  April,  1846,  before 
the  vanguard  of  the  pioneers  had 
got  barely  on  their  journey,  the  anti- 
Mormons  began  to  rise  and  the  mob 
outrages  on  the  Saints  were  terrible. 


Henry  Grow  was  in  the  famous  battle 
of  Nauvoo.  While  this  battle  was 
going  on  he  heard  a  voice  one  night 
distinctly  say:  "Get  up  and  get  out 
of  here  in  the  morning."  He  arose 
in  the  morning,  hitched  a  yoke  of 
cattle  to  his  wagon,  put  in  utensils, 
bedding  and  tent,  leaving  everything 
in  the  house,  got  his  wife  and  three 
children  in  the  wagon,  and  had 
moved  about  50  yards  from  his  house 
when  the  mob  fired  a  12-pound  ball 
through  the  house,  which  was  a 
frame  building.  After  the  entrance 
of  the  mob  into  Nauvoo  he  crossed 
over  to  Montrose,  Iowa,  where  he  had 
his  family  in  a  tent  during  the  battle. 


Starting  on  his  jojurney  westward,  he 
traveled  alone  with  his  family  across 
the  prairies  of  Iowa  to  Winter  Quar- 
ters, where  they  arrived  late  in  Octo- 
ber, 184  6.  He  first  built  a  log  cabin 
at  Winter  Quarters  and  then  went  to 
Kimball's,  six  miles  above,  where  he 
built  himself  a  house  and  settled  for 
a  year;  but  in  the  fall  of  1847,  after 
the  departure  of  the  pioneer  com- 
panies, he  moved  with  his  family 
into  Missouri,  locating  on  the  Little 
Platte,  twenty  miles  above  Weston, 
where  many  of  the  old  Missouri  mo- 
bocrats  dwelt.  There  he  kept  the 
saw  and  grist  mill  called  Lester's  mill 
in    repair    and    did    other    carpenter 


BIOGRAPHICAL  ENCYCLOPEDIA. 


95 


work.  In  the  spring  of  1851  he  and 
his  family  again  came  up  the  Mis- 
souri river,  bound  for  the  Valley;  he 
was  organized  in  Capt.  James  Cum- 
ming's  hundred,  Alfred  Cordon's  50 
and  Bishop  Kesler's  ten.  Orson 
Pratt  commanded  the  other  fifty.  On 
account  of  high  water  the  companies 
headed  the  Elk  Horn  river  and  came 
on  to  the  Platte  below  Laramie.  On 
the  Sweetwater,  below  Independence 
Rock,  the  company  was  surrounded 
by  a  war  party  of  Cheyennes  and  had 
a  narrow  escape  from  being  destroyed 
by  the  savages.  The  next  day,  above 
Independence  Rock,  they  met  a  thou- 
sand Snake  Indian  warriors  w^aiting 
for  the  Cheyennes.  Henry  Grow  ar- 
rived in  Great  Salt  Lake  City  on  his 
birthday,  Oct.  1,  1851,  and  located 
at  Mound  Fort,  north  of  Ogden.     In 

1852  he  was  called  to  Salt  Lake  City 
by  President  Young  to  work  for  him 
in    building    mills,    bridges,    etc.      In 

1853  he  built  the  first  suspension 
bridge  built  in  Utah  across  the  Weber 
river.  In  1854  he  went  to  work  at 
Sugar  House  to  build  the  sugar 
works  under  Bishop  Fred  Kesler,  and 
in  1855  he  assisted  in  building  the 
two  saw  mills  in  Big  Cottonwood  can- 
yon known  as  A  and  B.  In  185  6 
he  moved  a  saw  mill  from  Cotton- 
wood to  the  forks  of  City  creek,  seven 
miles  above  Salt  Lake  City,  for  Pres. 
Brigham  Young,  and  the  same  fall 
he  went  up  Big  Cottonwood  again 
and  framed  and  put  up  Mill  D,  sawed 
two  logs  and  left  Dec.  17,  1856,  with 
five  men  on  seven  feet  of  snow  with 
snowshoes.  It  took  them  two  days 
to  get  out  of  the  snow  at  the  risk  of 
their  lives.  In  185  7  Elder  Grow  went 
up  and  built  Mill  E,  at  the  head  of 
Big  Cotonwood  canyon,  near  Silver 
Lake;  in  185  8  he  went  to  Provo  and 
put  up  temporary  buildings  at  the 
time  of  the  move;  he  also  built  the 
suspension  bridge  over  the  Provo 
river.  In  1859  he  tore  the  works 
out  of  the  old  grist  mill  at  the  mouth 
of  Canyon  Creek  and  placed  the  cot- 
ton and  woolen  machinery  in  the  mill 
for  Pres.  Brigham  Young.     This  was 


the  first  machinery  of  the  kind  put 
up  in  Utah,  and  this  machinery  was 
afterwards  taken  down  to  St.  George. 
In  1861  he  built  a  suspension  lattice 
bridge  across  the  Jordan  river.  At 
the  time  of  putting  up  the  theatre 
he  built  a  water  wheel  on  the  water 
ditch  opposite  Dr.  Sprague's  house 
to  hoist  all  the  rock  and  timbers  for 
the  theatre.  He  also  made  the  heavy 
beams  and  principal  rafters  out  of 
plank  for  the  work  and  fitted  up  the 
footlights.  During  the  following 
years  he  did  a  great  deal  of  mill  work 
for  Pres.  Young  at  different  places. 
In  1863  the  President  called  on  him 
in  regard  to  the  construction  of  the 
big  tabernacle  in  Salt  Lake  City. 
Asked  him  if  he  could  construct  a 
large  bowery  after  the  same  struc- 
tural work  as  the  Jordan  bridge, 
drawing  the  outline  on  the  ground 
with  his  umbrella,  and  he  also  asked 
Bro.  Grow  how  large  he  could  build 
it  Bro.  Grow  replied,  "One  hundred 
and  fifty  feet  wide  and  as  long  as  you 
want  it."  Then  they  figured  out  the 
design  and  the  dimensions  of  the  con- 
templated building  and  Bro.  Grow 
built  the  Tabernacle  according  to  the 
directions  given  him  by  Pres.  Young; 
the  building  was  finished  in  18  67. 
In  1868  the  President  called  on 
Bro.  Grow  to  put  up  the  Z.  C. 
M.  I.  building;  the  plan  was 
drawn  by  Obed  Taylor  and  the  work 
of  construction  was  superintended  by 
Henry  Grow  throughout.  From  that 
time  till  the  spring  of  1876  he  had 
charge  of  all  the  carpentry  work 
on  the  Temple  Block.  In  1876-77 
he  filled  a  mission  to  the  United 
States,  laboring  principally  in  Penn- 
sylvania, Delaware  and  Maryland, 
and  visited  all  his  relatives  and  the 
old  family  homestead.  On  his  re- 
turn from  that  mission  he  was  en- 
gaged in  tearing  down  the  Old  Tab- 
ernacle and  erecting  the  Assembly 
Hall,  superintending  the  practical 
work  under  Architect  Obed  Taylor. 
It  was  completed  in  1879.  Later  El- 
der Grow  built  two  brick  houses  for 
Pres.  John  Taylor  and  superintended 


96 


LATTER-DAY    SAINT 


all  the  buildings  and  carpentry  work 
for  the  Church,  including  the  scaf- 
folding and  hoisting  apparatus  for 
the  Temple.  In  1880  he  was  called 
by  Pres.  Taylor  to  go  east  to  look 
at  improvements  of  paper  mills  for 
the  purpose  of  putting  up  a  new 
paper  mill  at  the  mouth  of  Big  Cot- 
tonwood Canyon.  After  visiting  the 
principal  cities  in  the  east,  he  re- 
turned home  and  drafted  and  com- 
menced the  building  of  the  new  Des- 
eret  Paper  Mill  at  the  mouth  of  Big 
Cottonwood  canyon.  This  paper  mill 
was  completed  and  put  in  running 
order  in  1883.  Bro.  Grow  became 
known  as  a  skilful  mechanic  and  an 
experienced  practical  builder  and  was 
well  liked  by  all  the  hands  who 
worked  under  his  superintendency; 
among  all  his  works  the  roof  of  the 
Big  Tabernacle  in  Salt  Lake  City  is 
the  most  unique  and  stupendous  of 
his  works.  Soon  after  he  joined  the 
Church  Elder  Grow  was  ordained  to 
the  Priesthood;  he  was  ordained  a 
Seventy  in  1844,  at  Nauvoo,  111.,  and 
for  many  years  he  acted  as  one  of  the 
presidents  of  the  30th  quorum  of 
Seventy  and  was  a  member  of  the 
Nineteenth  Ward,  Salt  Lake  City. 
He  was  also  active  in  military  af- 
fairs, and  served  as  a  member  of  the 
Salt  Lake  City  council  from  1870  to 
1876.  In  the  East  he  married  two 
wives,  Mary  Moyer,  who  bore  him 
six  children,  and  Ann  Elliott,  who 
has  borne  him  seven  children.  After 
arriving  in  Utah  he  married  Julia 
Veach,  who  bore  him  fourteen  chil- 
dren. Thus  he  became  the  father  of 
27  children.  Bro.  Grow  died  Nov.  4, 
1891,  in  Salt  Lake  City,  Utah,  as  a 
highly  respected  citizen  and  a  faith- 
ful member  of  the  Church. 

GRIFFIN,  Ernest  Adelbert,  second 
Bishop  of  the  Escalante  Ward  (Pan- 
guitch  Stake),  Garfield  county,  Utah, 
was  born  March  3,  1863,  in  Salt  Lake 
City,  Utah,  the  son  of  Chas.  Emerson 
Griffin  and  Sarah  Smith.  He  was 
baptized  August  17,  1873,  by  Josiah 
Rhead    and   ordained   a   Deacon    and 


an  Elder;  was  ordained  a  Seventy  by 
Albert  Norton;  ordained  a  High 
Priest  August  2  3,  I'dOS,  by  David 
Cameron  and  set  apart  as  second 
counselor  to  Bishop  Andrew  P. 
Schow.  Prior  to  this  he  had  acted 
as  a  counselor  in  the  86th  quorum  of 
Seventy.  In  1892-95  he  filled  a  mis- 
sion to  the  Southern  States,  laboring 
part  of  the  time  as  president  of  the 
North  Carolina  conference.  He  acted 
as  county  commissioner  at  home 
fourteen  years,  was  a  member  of  the 
first  Escalante  town  board  and  a 
president  of  the  second  town  board. 
Bishop  Griffin  is  a  farmer  and  stock- 
grower  by  vocation.     He  moved  with 


his  father's  family  to  Kanarra,  thence 
to  Long  Valley,  thence  back  to  Ka- 
narra, thence  to  Coalville,  Summit 
county;  thence  to  Farmington,  Davis 
county,  thence  to  Ogden,  thence  back 
to  Kanarra  and  settled  more  perma- 
nently at  Escalante  in  1879.  In  1885 
(Oct.  2  8th),  he  married  Christina 
Adams  (daughter  of  David  B. 
Adams),  who  was  born  April  3,  1868, 
at  Adamsville,  Beaver  county,  Utah, 
and  died  June  9,  1887.  Bro.  Griffin 
married  Amanda  E.  Riggs,  March  21, 
1888;  she  was  born  Oct.  15,  1871,  In 
Kanarra,  the  daughter  of  Wm.  S. 
Riggs  and  Sarah  Reeves.  This  mar- 
riage has  been  blessed  with  ten  chil- 


BIOGRAPHICAL  ENCYCLOPEDIA. 


97 


dren,  namely,  Sarah  R.,  Ella  May, 
Vaunie,  Ernest  U.,  Mildred,  Harold, 
Albern  S.,  Eva,  Nellie  and  Edith. 

G  U  N  N  E I J  L ,       Charles      Edwards, 

Bishop  of  Howell  Ward,  Bear  River 
Stake,   Box  Elder  county,  Utah,  was 


born  Sept.  8,  1861,  at  Wellsville, 
Cache  county,  Utah,  the  son  of  Fran- 
cis Gunnell  and  Polly  Ann  Edwards. 
He  was  baptized  in  18  69  by  Robert 
Leatham;  was  ordained  to  the  lesser 
Priesthood  and  subsequently  to  the 
higher  Priesthood.  He  was  ordained 
an  Elder  in  1882,  by  Wm.  Maughan; 
later  he  was  ordained  a  Seventy,  and 
ordained  a  High  Priest  Feb.  4,  1912, 
by  Richard  Brenchley.  He  labored 
in  the  superintendency  of  the  Wells- 
ville Sunday  school  for  a  number  of 
years,  presided  over  the  Elders 
quorum  at  Wellsville,  was  appointed 
presiding  Elder  of  the  Howell  branch. 
Bear  River  Stake.  July  28,  1912,  and 
labored  in  that  capacity  until  April 
18,  1915,  when  he  was  ordained 
a  Bishop  by  Apostle  Reed  Smoot  and 
set  apart  to  preside  over  the  Howell 
Ward.  Bishop  Gunnell  has  followed 
farming  for  a  living,  and  his  family 
consists  of  a  wife  and  thirteen  chil- 
dren. He  married  his  wife  (Sarah 
Ann  Brown  »  Feb.  23,  1882;  she  was 
born    at    Wellsville,     Cache     county, 


Utah,    Sept.     28,     1861,    and     is    the 
mother  of  thirteen  children,  namely, 
Rosella     B.,     born     June     12,     1883 
Sarah    Vida,    born    April    27,     1885 
C-harles     B.,     born     March     5,     1887 
Pollyann,     born     March     21,     1889 
Mary,  born  July   13,   1891;    Lorenzo, 
born    July    8,    18^)3;     Almeda,    born 
Feb.  18,  1895;  Francis,  born  Nov.  26, 
1896;    Melba,   born  August  8,   1898; 
Joshua,    born    Oct.    2  6,    1900;    Mar- 
garite,    born    Dec.    18,    1902;    Annie, 
born   July    17,    19(t4,   and    Leo,    born 
Oct.     11,    1908.       All     were    born    in 
Wellsville. 

HALK,  Hol»ei-  Quiiicy,  president  of 
the  Boise  Stake  of  Zion,  was  born 
March  5,  18S0,  at  Thatcher,  Ban- 
nock county,  Idaho,  the  son  of  Solo- 
mon II.  Hale  and  Anna  Clark.  He  was 
baptized  March  5,  ISSS,  by  his  father 
(Solomon  II.  Hale)  and  confirmed 
March  8,  1888,  by  Jeppe  G.  Folkman. 
When  ten  years  old  he  moved  with 
his  parents  to  Preston,  Idaho,  where 
he  subsequently  entered  the  Oneida 
Stake  Academy,  from  which  he  grad- 


uated in  1899.  The  two  following 
winters  he  attended  the  Brigham 
Young  College  at  Logan,  taking  the 
business  course  and  other  special 
studies.  He  was  ordained  a  Deacon 
Oct.   29,   1893,  by  Wm.  C.  Parkinson 


\''.i.  1 1 1,  .\. 


.[iil\.  lOls. 


98 


LATTER-DAY   SAINT 


and  later  acted  as  secretary  of  the 
Deacons'  quorum;  was  ordained  a 
Teacher  January  9,  1899.  Having 
joined  the  Ward  choir,  he  was  ap- 
pointed secretary  of  the  choir  Feb.  19, 
1899;  became  a  member  of  the  Oneida 
Stake  choir  Jan.  16,  1899,  and  ap- 
pointed secretary  of  the  choir  the 
same  day;  appointed  secretary  of  the 
Preston  Ward  Y.  M.  M.  I.  A.  Oct.  1, 
1899;  was  ordained  an  Elder  March 
20,  1901,  by  Marriner  W.  Merrill; 
ordained  a  Seventy  April  24,  1901, 
by  George  Teasdale  and  filled  a  mis- 
sion to  Germany  in  1901-04,  laboring 
first  in  the  Frankfurt  conference  and 
afterwards  as  president  of  the  Stutt- 
gart conference.  On  this  mission  he 
baptized  25  persons.  At  home  Bro. 
Hale  served  as  a  Ward  teacher  at 
Preston  and  as  a  special  missionary 
in  the  Oneida  Stake  in  1904;  served 
as  clerk  in  the  Idaho  State  Senate 
in  1904-05  and  at  the  close  of  the 
session  was  appointed  By  Gov.  Frank 
R.  Gooding,  assistant  commissioner 
of  immigration,  labor  and  statistics, 
which  posittion  he  held  until  March, 
1909.  He  was  appointed  by  the  State 
board  of  land  commissioners  to  the 
more  important  position  of  assistant 
registrar  of  the  State  land  depart- 
ment June  23,  1909.  This  position 
he  held  till  Sept.  4,  1915,  when  he 
was  made  registrar  of  the  depart- 
ment. In  1905  (April  23rd)  he  was 
set  apart  as  second  counselor  to  the 
President  of  the  Boise  branch  of  the 
Church,  and  on  July  16,  1905,  was 
appointed  and  set  apart  as  president 
of  the  Boise  branch.  This  position 
he  held  till  Nov.  3,  1913,  when  the 
Boise  Stake  was  organized  and  he 
was  chosen  as  president  of  the  same. 
On  the  same  day  he  was  ordained  a 
High  Priest  and  set  apart  to  that 
position  by  Pres.  Francis  M.  Lyman. 
From  1905  to  1913  Elder  Hale  was 
the  special  correspondent  of  the 
"Deseret  News,"  and  wrote  during 
that  time  many  illuminating  articles 
for  special  editions  of  said  paper  and 
other  periodicals  and  magazines  on 
the  great  resources  and   beauties  of 


his  native  State.  In  1914  he  was 
appointed  a  member  of  the  board  of 
education  of  the  Cassia  Stake  Acad- 
emy, and  in  September,  1915,  he  was 
appointed  a  member  of  the  advisory 
board  of  the  children's  home-finding 
and  aid  society  of  Idaho.  In  1906 
(Jan.  17th)  he  married  Miss  Bessie 
Eleanor  Gudmundson  of  Springville, 
Utah,  who  has  borne  her  husband 
two  sons,  namely  Stanton  Gudman, 
born  July  1,  1910,  and  Preston 
Quincy,  born  June  9,  1914.  President 
Hale's  home  is  in  Boise,  Idaho.  On 
account  of  his  public  career  and  his 
travels  he  has  a  broad  acquaintance 
and  is  everywhere  respected.  He 
takes  a  keen  interest  in  all  questions 
that  concern  the  public  welfare  and 
is  always  found  in  the  councils'  of 
his  fellows.  Politically,  he  is  actively 
and  prominently  affiliated  with  the 
Republican  party  and  is  a  man  of  the 
strong  construciive  and  progressive 
type.  President  Hale  can  say  with 
comparatively  few  men  that  he  has 
never  entered  a  saloon  in  his  life  or 
tasted  tobacco  or  liquor.  It  is  this 
rigid  self-control  and  self-direction 
that  have  largely  made  him  so  suc- 
cessful in  life. 

HALLS,  George,  Bishop  of  the 
Mancos  Ward,  Colorado,  was  born 
Oct.  18,  1846,  in  the  parish  of  Orsett, 
county  of  Essex,  England,  the  son  of 
John  Halls  and  Susannah  Selstone. 
His  parents  being  quite  poor,  George 
had  but  little  schooling,  having  to 
begin  working  for  wages  when  yet 
very  young.  H's  parents  became  con- 
verts to  "Mormonism"  when  George 
was  six  years  old.  His  father  died  in 
1861  and  in  1862  George  left  his 
native  land  with  his  mother  for  Utah, 
crossing  the  Atlantic  in  the  ship 
"Wm.  Tapscott"  and  the  plains  in 
Ilorton  D.  Haight's  company.  He 
drove  a  team  of  four  yoke  of  oxen 
across  the  plains.  On  his  arrival  in 
Utah  he  settled  at  Huntsville,  Weber 
county,  and  in  18  66  went  back  to  the 
Missouri  river  as  a  teamster  in  Hor- 
ton   D.   Haight's  company  after  emi- 


BIOGRAPHICAL   ENCYCLOPEDIA. 


99 


grants.  During  his  first  few  years  in 
Huntsville  he  worked  for  wages  in 
the  summer  and  attended  school  in 
the  winter.  He  spent  most  of  his 
time  as  a  sheepherder,  but  used  his 
leisure  time  in  the  camp  studying 
grammar,  etc.,  being  very  persistent 
in  his  efforts  to  obtain  knowledge. 
While  at  home  he  was  an  active 
worker  in  the  Sunday  school  and 
other  associations,  was  a  member  of 
the  Ward  choir  and  a  leading  actor 
for  many  years  in  the  Huntsville 
Dramatic  Association.  In  1876  (Oct. 
13th)  he  married  Mary  Moiselle  Ham- 
mond, daughter  of  Francis  A.   Ham- 


mond and  Jane  Dilworth.  For  twelve 
years,  commencing  with  1872,  he  en- 
gaged in  farming  and  stock-raising, 
and  in  company  with  his  brother, 
William,  owned  and  operated  a  sec- 
tion of  land,  a  dairy  and  a  cheese 
factory  with  success.  In  1885  he 
accompanied  Francis  A.  Hammond 
to  Bluff,  San  Juan  county,  and  in 
188  6  moved  to  Mancos,  Colorado. 
The  same  year  the  Saints  at  Mancos 
were  organized  as  a  Ward  and  Bro. 
Halls  was  chosen  and  ordained  as 
Bishop  of  the  same,  which  position 
he  held  for  25  years,  when  he  was 
succeeded  by  his  nephew,  Thomas 
Halls.  During  this  time  he  also 
acted  as  superintendent  of  the  Ward 


Sunday  school  and  as  a  choir  leader, 
and  was  an  active  helper  in  Ward 
associations.  His  Ward  accounts 
were  always  settled  to  date  and 
nothing  ever  went  by  default.  He 
served  a  term  as  commissioner  of 
Montezuma  county  and  has  taken 
a  prominent  part  in  educational  mat- 
ters. Bro.  Halls  has  the  confidence 
of  the  leaders  of  the  Church  and  the 
esteem  and  respect  of  the  leading 
citizens  of  the  county.  He  possesses 
an  extensive  library  and  is  well  in- 
formed on  general  history;  is  a  con- 
stant reader  of  current  literature 
and  is  up  to  date  in  a  knowledge  of 
the  world's  work.  He  owns  a  good 
home  and  farm  with  pleasant  sur- 
roundings, where  many  prominent 
men  and  women  of  the  Church  and 
State  have  receeived  a  warm  welcome 
and  generous  hospitality,  for  which 
he  and  his  kind  wife  are  especially 
noted.  Many  of  the  visitors  have  left 
their  benediction  of  peace  upon  the 
heads  of  Bro.  Halls  and  his  wife.  He 
is  still  healthy  and  active  and  bids 
fair  to  live  to  a  ripe  old  age.  He  is 
firm  in  the  gospel  of  Christ  and  has 
an  abiding  testimony  in  the  Divine 
mission  of  the  Prophet  Joseph  Smith. 

HALLS,  Mary  Moi.selle,  wife  of 
George  Halls,  was  born  May  18,  185  7, 
at  Beaver  Dams,  near  the  junction 
of  the  Santa  Clara  and  Rio  Virgen 
rivers  in  Southern  Utah,  the  daughter 
of  Francis  A.  Hammond  and  Jane 
Dilworth,  her  parents  at  that  time 
being  on  their  way  home  from  a  mis- 
sion to  the  Sandwich  Islands.  After 
staying  at  Ogden  the  family  moved 
to  Huntsville  in  18  63,  where  Mary 
was  baptized  when  nine  years  of  age 
by  Elder  Thomas  Wilson.  As  a  young 
girl  she  learned  to  spin,  knit,  quilt 
and  do  all  kinds  of  housework  and  to 
milk  the  cows  and  churn  the  butter. 
She  attended  school  during  the  win- 
ter, but  had  very  little  chance  for 
education.  She  was  married  to 
George  Halls  Oct.  13,  1876,  and  be- 
came active  in  the  Ward  affairs.  She 
was  a  teacher  in  the  Sunday  school 


100 


LATTER-DAY    SAINT 


and  a  counselor  in  the  Ward  Y.  L. 
M.  1.  A.  for  six  years  and  president  of 
said  association,  and  also  president 
of  the  Primary  Association  for  a 
number  of  years.  In  all  these  posi- 
tions she  acted  with  zeal  and  success. 


In  1XS5  she  accompimied  her  hus- 
band to  Bluff,  in  the  San  Juan 
country,  and  the  following  sprint? 
went  to  Mancos,  Colorado,  where  the 
family  still  lives.  While  at  lUuff  she 
Jicted  as  presidiMit  of  the  Y.  L. 
M.  I.  A.  of  the  San  Juan  Slake,  which 
position  she  held  for  25  years.  In 
the  Mancos  Ward  she  is  a  teacher  of 
the  Sunday  school  and  was  orKanisI 
twelve  years.  When  the  ^'oiuik 
Stake  was  orKanized  she  was  aj)- 
pointed  as  president  of  (he  Relief 
Society  in  that  Stake,  which  position 
she  still  holds.  To  visit  all  the  Wards 
of  the  San  Juan  Slake  she-  had  to 
travel  six  hundred  miles  by  team  over 
a  mountainous  country  mul  cani|t  out, 
exposed  to  all  kinds  of  weather,  but 
she  never  hesitat(ul,  faltered  or  mur- 
mured. Jler  endurance  is  marvelous, 
and  she  never  tires  at  Church  work. 
For  integrity  and  devotion  to  duty 
she  lias  no  su])erior,  and  now,  though 
advanced  in  years,  she  b;is  the  fire 
and  energy  of  iini)ulsive  youth.  :ni(l 
is  very  hospituble  and  kind  t  )  all. 


HAMIllil.N,  Jacob,  a  distinguished 
Indian  missionary  and  faithful  Church 
worker,  was  born  April  2,  1819,  at 
Salem,  Ashtabula  county,  Ohio,  the 
son  of  Isaiah  Ilamblin  and  Daphne 
llaynes.  Hecoraing  a  convert  to 
"Mormonism"  he  was  baptized  March 
3,  1842,  by  Elder  Lyman  Stoddard  in 
Wisconsin,  and  went  to  Nauvoo,  111., 
that  year.  Ih;  had  the  privilege  of 
baptizing  his  jiarcmts  in  Illinois  on 
the  11th  of  April,  1S15.  He  started 
for  Utah  in  the  spring  of  1850,  ar- 
rived in  Salt  Lake  City  with  a  num- 
ber of  his  relatives,  Sept.  1,  1850,  and 
settled  in  Tooele  valley,  whence  he 
was  appointed  to  establish  an  Indian 
Mission  in  Southern  Utah  in  1S54. 
With  a  few  others  he  established  a 
settlement  on  the  Santa  Clara,  a 
tributary  to  the  Rio  Virgen.  He  was 
ordained  an  AposfIr>  to  the  Lamanites 
on  Friday.  Dec.  1.^),  1876,  at  St. 
Ceorge  by  I'residenI  Hrigham  Young. 
His  direct  experi<rn<-e  with  the  native 
tribes  of  the  West  began  in  Tooele 
Valley  in  IS.'il,  the;  valley  then  l)eing 
sparsely  settled  by  whiles,      it  was  in 


liial  v;illc\  ihiri.i?.,'  au  engagement 
with  some  maiaudiim  Indians  that 
one  of  the  savaues  was  e.ilirely  in 
.lacobs  i)ower,  and  wilh  trusty  rifle 
raised  he  was  about  to  |)\ill  I  he  trig- 
ger,    when     an     inspiiai  io;i     came     to 


BIOGRAPHICAL   ENCYCLOPEDIA. 


101 


him:  "If  you  do  uot  shed  the  blood 
of  an  Indian,  not  one  of  them  shall 
ever  have  power  to  shed  yours."  The 
rifle  was  immediately  lowered  and 
the  astonished  Lamanite  was  told  to 
■go  away."  Jacob  was  a  famous 
frontiersman,  and  under  the  "Mor- 
mon" rule  assisted  in  locating  and 
establishing  settlements  in  Southern 
Utah,  in  Arizona  and  New  Mexico. 
He  enjoyed  the  confidence,  friend- 
ship, esteem  and  trust  of  Brigham 
Young,  as  well  as  that  of  his  entire 
accjuaintance.  His  duties  under  the 
"Mormon"  authorities  reciuired  con- 
stant intercourse  for  many  years  with 
the  wild  Indians,  and  his  life,  on 
several  occasions,  was  in  imminent 
peril,  but  he  possessed  an  abiding 
faith  that  he  was  in  many  instances 
protected  from  bodily  harm  from  the 
wild  Indians  by  special  interposition 
of  Divine  providence.  It  can  be  said 
to  his  everlasting  honor  and  wisdom 
that  during  all  his  business  relations 
with  them  he  never  killed  an  Indian, 
and  that  they  placed  great  confidence 
in  him,  saying  that  "Jacob  never 
lied."  Prof.  H.  A.  Thompson,  of  the 
U.  S.  Geological  Survey,  said  of  him: 
'I  would  trust  my  money,  my  life 
and  my  honor  in  the  keeping  of  Jacob 
Hamblin,  knowing  all  would  be  safe." 
Bro.  Hamblin  removed  from  Kanab, 
Utah,  to  Arizona  with  part  of  his 
family  in  18  78;  the  rest  of  the  family 
followed  in  1881.  He  located  in 
Amity  and  stayed  there  until  the 
fall  of  1882,  when  he  moved  to 
Pleasanton,  New  Mexico,  where  he 
died  Aug.  31,  1886.  As  the  settle- 
ment of  Pleasanton  was  broken  up,  his 
brother,  Frederick  Hamblin,  brought 
his  remains  to  Alpine,  Arizona,  where 
several  of  his  family  resided.  To  the 
honor  of  the  authorities  of  the 
("hurch,  of  which  he  had  been  a  con- 
sistent and  devout  member  for  44 
years,  five  months  and  28  days,  we 
will  state  that  a  monument  has  been 
erected  at  his  grave,  bearing  the  fol- 
lowing inscription:  "In  Memory  of 
Jacob  V.  Hamblin,  born  April  2, 
1819;    died    Aug.    ."U,    1886;    Peace- 


maker in  the  Camp  of  the  Lamanites; 
Herald  of  Truth  to  the  House  of 
Israel."  Bro.  Jacob  was  the  hus- 
band of  four  wives  and  the  honored 
father  of  twenty-four  children. 

HANSEN,  Alfred,  Bishop  of  the 
Clawson  Ward  (Teton  Stake),  Teton 
county,  Idaho,  was  born  June  10, 
1877,  at  Providence,  Cache  county, 
Utah,  the  son  of  Poul  Hansen  and 
Marie  Larsen  Hansen.  He  was  bap- 
tized August  11,  1889,  by  David 
Mathews;  was  ordained  to  the 
Aaronic  Priesthood  when  quite 
young;  was  ordained  an  Elder  by 
Fred  Theurer  March  10,  1899,  and 
married  Mctte  Siirensen  of  the  [..ogan 


4th  Ward,  March  22,  1899,  in  the 
Logan  Temple.  About  two  weeks 
after  their  marriage  they  left  their 
home  in  Cache  valley  and  journeyed 
by  team  to  the  Teton  valley,  a  dis- 
tance of  about  two  hundred  and  fifty 
miles,  where  Alfred  had  previously 
taken  up  a  homstead.  There  he  found 
a  small  Ward  called  Leigh  (since 
changed  to  Clawson),  arriving  April 
17,  1899.  He  soon  became  an  active 
man,  both  in  ecclesiastical  and  temp- 
oral affairs.  For  years  he  labored  as 
a  Teacher  and  librarian  In  the  Ward 
Sunday  school  and  also  took  an  active 
l)art  in  the  Ward  Y.  M.  M.  I.  A.     He 


102 


LATTER-DAY   SAINT 


finally  became  president  of  that  asso- 
ciation, and  on  May  21,  1905,  he  was 
chosen  and  set  apart  as  second  coun- 
selor to  Bishop  H.  D.  Fullmer  of  the 
Leigh  Ward,  being  ordained  a  High 
Priest  by  Stake  Pres.  Don.  C.  Driggs. 
Later   he   became    first   counselor   to 
the  same  Bishop  and  at  a  Stake  con- 
ference held  in  November,   1913,  he 
was  called  to  act  as   Bishop   of  the 
Clawson  Ward;    he  was  ordained  to 
that  position  Feb.  15,  1914,  by  David 
O.    McKay.    Bishop    Hansen    was    a 
pioneer   in    the    Teton   valley,    living 
there    16    years   before   any   railroad 
was  built  into  the  valley     He  has  fol- 
lowed the  occupation  of  a  farmer  and 
stockraiser.     Since  he  became  Bishop 
a  new  chapel  has  been  erected  in  the 
Clawson  Ward.     The  names  of  Bishop 
Hansen's    children    are:     Paul    Wm., 
born   April    25,    1900;    James    Cleve, 
born  April   13,    1902;    Arnold   Peter, 
born  Jan.  20,  1904;  Oren  Alfred,  born 
Nov.    4,    1905;    May    Christine,    born 
May    3,    1907;     Dean    Earlese,    born 
April     1,     1909;     Marie    Marguerite, 
born  March  7,  1911,  and  Metta  Gen- 
eva, born  Jan.  27,  1913. 

HANSEN,  Peter  Marker,  president 
of  the  Bear  River  Stake  of  Zion,  was 
born  May  24,  1855,  at  Aaker  sogn, 
Bornholm,  Denmark,  the  son  of 
Mogens  Marker  Hansen  and  Cecelia 
Christina  Hansen.  He  was  baptized 
when  ten  years  of  age,  had  the  priv- 
ilege of  attending  a  common  school 
for  a  number  of  years  and  graduated 
from  the  college  of  "hard  knocks" 
when  sixteen  years  of  age;  his  prac- 
tical early  training  has  always  been  a 
blessing  to  him  in  his  journey 
through  life.  He  emigrated  to  Utah 
in  1872.  Leaving  Copenhagen, 
August  29,  1872.  he  crossed  the 
Atlantic  Ocean  in  the  steamship 
"Minnesota,"  and  arrived  in  Ogden, 
Sept.  26,  18  72.  He  was  ordained  a 
Deacon  in  December,  1875,  and  set 
apart  as  secretary  of  the  Y.  M.  M.  I. 
A.  of  Bear  River  City  Ward;  ordained 
an  Elder  in  May,  187  6;  was  called  on 
a  mission  by  President  Lorenzo  Snow 


to  labor  as  a  stone  cutter  on  the  Salt 
Lake  Temple,  June  1,  1876,  and  was 
honorably  released  June  9,  1877.  He 
was  called  again  to  labor  on  the 
Logan  temple  as  a  stone  cutter  and 
mason  August  1,  1877,  and  was  hon- 
orably released  from  said  mission 
Nov.  6,  1882.  Bro.  Hansen  married 
Annie  Anderson  Dec.  2,  1880.  The 
issue  of  this  union  is  five  sons  and 
three  daughters.  In  1884  he  married 
Hannah  M.  Anderson,  by  whom  he  has 
two  sons  and  four  daughters.  He 
was  ordained  a  Seventy  Jan.  27, 
1884,  by  Seymour  B.  Young  and  set 
apart  as  one  of  the  presidents  of  the 
5th  quorum  of  Seventy  by  Christian 
D.  Fjeldsted  Jan.  3,  1886.     He  acted 


as  president  of  the  Y.  M.  M.  1.  A. 
in  Bear  River  City  Ward  from  1879 
to  Sept.  1,  1889;  was  superintendent 
of  Fairview  Branch  Sunday  school 
from  Sept.  8,  1889,  to  Nov.  9,  1890, 
and  labored  as  superintendent  of  the 
Bear  River  City  Sunday  schools  from 
Nov.  23,  1890,  to  Jan.  6,  1901.  In 
the  fall  of  1893  he  received  a  call 
from  the  First  Presidency  of  the 
Church  to  go  to  the  B.  Y.  University 
of  Provo  as  a  Sunday  school  normal 
student  and  take  a  twenty  weeks 
course.  Being  successful  in  his 
studies,  he  completed  the  course,  re- 
ceived   his    certificate    and    returned 


BIOGRAPHICAL  ENCYCLOPEDIA. 


103 


home  May  26,  1894.  Dec.  16,  1900, 
he  was  ordained  a  High  Priest  and 
Bishop  and  set  apart  by  Apostle  Rud- 
ger  Clawson  to  preside  over  the  El- 
wood  Ward,  which  was  organized  at 
that  time.  At  the  organization  of 
the  Bear  River  Stake  of  Zion  Oct.  11, 
1908,  he  was  honorably  released  as 
Bishop  of  the  Elwood  Ward  ana 
called  to  act  as  first  counselor  in  the 
Stake  presidency  by  Apostle  George 
F.  Richards.  In  civil  life  Bro.  Han- 
sen has  held  a  number  of  political 
positions  such  as  county  commis- 
sioner, town  board  president,  school 
trustee  (  for  twelve  years  (,  a  member 
of  the  board  of  education  of  Box 
Elder  county  (for  twelve  years),  etc. 
Six  years  of  this  period  he  was  presi- 
dent of  the  board.  In  the  discharge 
of  his  official  duties  he  has  ever 
sought  and  followed  the  advice  of  his 
superiors.  He  has  the  courage  of  his 
convictions  and  his  fidelity  to  prin- 
ciples has  never  been  questioned  by 
anyone.  He  is  outspoken  in  what  he 
conceives  to  be  right,  correcting  a 
friend  as  readily  as  those  who  are  un- 
friendly. The  same  attribute  has 
dominated  his  financial  affairs  to 
the  extent  that  for  years  it  has  been 
the  rule  in  his  family  that  no  debt 
must  exist,  and  that  there  is  safety 
only  in  living  within  the  means  they 
are  able  to  acquire  by  right  and 
honest  living,  and  ever  striving  to 
keep  the  commandments  of  God. 
A  few  months  ago  Bro.  Hansen  suc- 
ceeded M.  H.  Welling  in  the  presi- 
dency of  the  Bear  River  Stake. 

HANSEN,  Peter  O.  Jr.,  fourth 
Bishop  of  Paradise  Ward,  (Hyrum 
Stake),  Cache  county,  Utah,  was  born 
Feb.  12,  1868,  at  Mantua,  Box  Elder 
county,  Utah,  the  son  of  Peter  O. 
Hansen  and  Christina  Larsen.  He 
was  baptized  August  3,  1876,  by  Lars 
Hailing;  ordained  a  Deacon  Dec.  16, 
1882,  by  his  father;  ordained  a 
Teacher  Nov.  1,  1884,  by  Fred  Christ- 
ensen;  ordained  a  Priest  Nov.  29, 
1885;  ordained  an  Elder  Dec.  31, 
1892,  by  Pres.  Chas.  Kelley;  ordained 


a  Seventy  Oct.  12,  1894,  by  Apostle 
John  Henry  Smith,  and  ordained  a 
High  Priest  Sept.  28,  1901,  by  Ing- 
vald  C.  Thoreson  and  set  apart  as  a 
High  Councilor  in  the  Hyrum  Stake. 
He  labored  in  that  capacity  until  June 
22,  1907,  when  he  was  ordained  a 
Bishop  and  set  apart  by  Apostle  Fran- 
cis M.  Lyman  to  preside  over  the 
Paradise  Ward.  Prior  to  this,  while 
residing  at  Mantua,  Box  Elder  county, 
Utah  he  had  labored  as  a  faithful  and 
energetic  Y.  M.  M.  I.  A.  and  Sunday 
school  worker.  In  a  civil  capacity 
Bishop  Hansen  has  filled  a  number 
of  responsible  positions  and  figures 
prominently    in    business    generally. 


He  has  acted  as  director  and  presi- 
dent of  the  Paradise  Irrigation  and 
Reservoir  Company,  is  a  director  of 
the  Farmers  and  Merchants  Savings 
Bank  at  Logan,  and  has  served  as  a 
director  and  officer  in  other  corpor- 
ations. In  1894-95  he  was  on  a  mis- 
sion to  Scandinavia,  laboring  prin- 
cipally in  the  Drammen  branch  of  the 
Christiania  conference.  In  1890 
(Jan.  2nd)  he  married  Minnie  Schow 
(daughter  of  Michael  Schow  and 
Christina  Hansen),  who  was  born 
Nov.  2,  1869,  at  Mantua.  The  child- 
ren by  this  marriage  are  Orice  S., 
Hazel  S.,  Elmer  S.,  Minnie  S.,  Vernice 
S.,    Mattie    S.,    Alton    S.,    Ralph    S., 


104 


LATTER-DAY   SAINT 


and    Ellis    S.      Bishop    Hansen    is    a 
farmer  and  stockraiser  by  occupation. 

HANSEN,  Victor  Lavan,  third 
Bishop  of  Elwood  (Bear  River 
Stake),  Box  Elder  county,  Utah,  was 
born  August  24,  1881,  at  Bear  River 


City,  Utah,  the  son  of  Peter  M.  Han- 
son and  Annie  Andersen.  He  was 
baptized  Sept.  5,  1889.  by  his  father; 
ordained  a  Deacon  by  Jacob  Hansen; 
ordained  a  Teacher  March  16,  1901, 
and  a  Priest  March  15,  190  2,  by 
James  Peter  Christensen,  ordained  an 
Elder  Nov.  5,  1904,  by  John  D.  Burt; 
ordained  a  Seventy  Nov.  19,  1910,  toy 
Jonathan  G.  Kimball  and  ordained  a 
High  Priest  Dec.  13,  1914,  by  Jos. 
F.  Smith  .  In  1911-13  he  filled  a 
mission  to  the  Northwestern  States, 
laboring  principally  in  the  State  of 
Washington,  and  presided  at  Spokane 
for  one  and  one-half  years.  In  his 
early  youth  Brother  Hansen  acted  as 
a  counselor  to  the  president  of  a 
Deacons'  quorum,  was  second  assist- 
ant superintendent  in  the  Elwood 
Ward  Sunday  school  from  June,  1901, 
to  December,  1904,  first  assistant 
from  December,  1904,  to  December, 
1910,  and  superintendent  from  De- 
cember 1910,  to  August,  1911,  at 
which  time  he  left  for  his  mission. 
On   returning    (September,    1913)    he 


was  sustained  as  second  assistant  in 
the  Stake  Y.  M.  M.  I.  A.,  and  was  also 
chosen  as  one  of  the  presidents  of  the 
153rd  quorum  of  Seventy,  both  of 
which  offices  he  held  at  the  time  he 
was  ordained  a  Bishop  Dec.  13,  1914. 
He  also  acted  as  Ward  clerk  from 
1906  to  1911.  In  1905  (Nov.  22nd) 
he  married  Lettie  Munns  (daughter 
of  Charles  Munns  and  Annie  Austin), 
who  was  born  March  21,  1885,  at 
Lehi,  Utah.  A  pair  of  twins  (Vernon 
and  Vera)  were  born  to  them  Dec.  3, 
1900.  Bishop  Hansen  is  a  farmer  by 
occupation. 

HAIIKEK,  Levi,  Bishop  of  the 
Magrath  Ward,  Alberta,  Canada,  was 
born  April  16,  1865,  at  Taylorsville, 
Salt  Lake  county,  Utah,  the  son  of 
Joseph  Harker  and  Susan  Sneath.  He 
was  baptized  in  April,  1874,  by  his 
father;  ordained  a  Deacon  when 
about  twelve  years  old;  ordained  an 
Klder.in  November,  1884,  by  Robert 
Walters;  married  Miss  Martha  Burns, 
Nov.  21,  1884,  in  the  Logan  Temple; 
resided    at    Taylorsville    until     1892, 


when  he  removed  to  Cardston,  Can- 
ada, arriving  there  June  10,  1892. 
Here  he  acted  as  a  Ward  teacher, 
school  trustee  and  as  an  assistant 
superintendent  in  the  Cardston  Ward 
Sunday  school.     Being  chosen  as  first 


BIOGRAPHICAL    ENCYCLOPEDIA. 


105 


counselor  to  Bishop  Josiah  Hammer, 
he  was  ordained  a  High  Priest  by 
Apostle  John  \V^  Taylor  in  1895.  He 
filled  this  position  until  June,  1899, 
when  he  was  chosen  and  ordained  a 
Bishop  by  yXpostle  John  W.  Taylor 
and  set  apart  to  preside  over  the 
Magrath  Ward.  He  spent  some  time 
in  locating  people  on  lands  obtained 
by  the  Church  for  building  the  first 
large  Irrigation  canal  in  Canada,  and 
the  following  year  took  contract  from 
the  Irrigation  Company  to  build  the 
Magrath  lateral  for  irrigating  the 
Church  lands,  thus  securing  work 
for  the  people  of  his  Ward.  The  fol- 
lowing year  he  took  a  contract  for 
the  building  of  eleven  miles  of  rail- 
road and  sub-contracted  the  same  to 
the  people  in  small  jobs.  In  1903  he 
was  elected  president  of  the  Deseret 
Agricultural  Society  and  served  ten 
straight  terms.  He  was  elected  the 
first  mayor  of  the  town  of  Magrath, 
and  served  two  terms.  His  wife  has 
borne  him  nine  sons  and  one  daugh- 
ter as  follows:  Nophi,  Levi  Linus, 
Joseph  Charles,  Earl,  James,  Mable, 
Orrin,  Rulon,  Golden,  and  Burns.  In 
taking  contracts  Bro.  Harker  has 
merely  kept  enough  money  to  pay 
his  expenses,  as  he  gave  the  people 
all  there  was  in  the  contract.  The 
Bishop's  principal  avocation  is  that 
of  farmer  and  stockraiser. 

HARRIS,  Charles  Zera,  a  promin- 
ent Klder  ol  Richmond,  Cache  county, 
Utah,  -was  born  March  9,  1864,  at 
Richmond,  Utah,  the  son  of  Wm. 
Harris  and  p]mmeline  Whittle.  He  was 
ordained  an  Elder  In  1886;  ordained 
a  Seventy  Nov.  27,  1910,  by  Charles 
H.  Hart;  acted  as  assistant  Sunday 
school  superintendent  of  the  Benson 
Stake  in  1888-1890,  and  was  presi- 
dent of  the  Stake  Y.  M.  M.  I.  A.  He 
has  also  held  several  civil  offices; 
was  city  recorder  at  Richmond  from 
1886  to  1890;  served  as  a  member  of 
the  house  of  representatives  in  the 
Utah  legislature  in  1899-1900;  was 
a  member  of  the  Cache  county  school 
board    and    mayor    of    Richmond    In 


1914  and  1915.  Having  graduated 
from  the  Deseret  University  in  1885 
he  taught  school  at  Richmond  for 
five  years;  was  secretary  and  treas- 
urer of  the  produce  firm  of  Gibson 
&  Smurthwaite  six  years;  manager  of 
the  Peoples  Mercantile  Company  and 


Union  Creamery  Company  for  seven 
years  (1896-1903);  was  one  of  the 
principal  organizers  and  managers  of 
the  Utah  Condensed  Milk  Company 
(1903-1907),  and  is  now  owner  of 
the  Peoples  Mercantile  and  Creamery 
Company.  Bro.  Harris  is  public 
spirited,  and  as  a  result  of  his  enter- 
prise it  may  be  mentioned  that  he 
was  the  main  mover  in  securing 
water  works  for  the  city  of  Rich- 
mond, in  the  establishment  at  Rich- 
mond of  the  Utah  Condensed  Milk 
Company  and  the  Carnegie  Library 
of  which  he  is  now  president.  In 
1886  (April  14th)  he  married  Sarah 
Alice  Anderson  of  Richmond  who 
bore  him  three  sons,  namely,  M.  C. 
Harris  (now  an  attorney  at  Logan, 
Utah),  Wm.  Z.  Harris  and  George 
McGee  Harris,  now  residents  of  Rich- 
mond, Utah. 

HARRIS,     Martin      Hendcison,     a 

|)ioneer  and  missionary,  was  born 
Sept.  29,  IS  20,  near  Mehoopany, 
Wyoming  county,  I'a.,  the  son  of 
Emer    Harris   and    Debora   Lott.      He 


106 


LATTER-DAY   SAINT 


was  a  nephew  of  Martin  Harris,  one 
of  the  Three  Witnesses  to  the  Book 
of  Mormon,  and  a  descendant  of 
Thomas  Harris,  companion  in  exile 
of  Roger  Williams,  and  one  of  the 
founders  of  Providence,  R.  I.  His 
parents  being  members  of  the 
Church,  Martin  was  baptized  in  Sep- 
tember, 1842,  by  Milton  Stow^  near 
Nauvoo,  111.  While  a  youth  he  served 
as  a  guard  in  Nauvoo  to  protect 
Joseph  the  Prophet  against  sur- 
prises by  mobs.  He  also  served  in 
the  Nauvoo  Legion  and  witnessed  the 
laying  of  the  corner-stone  of  the 
Nauvoo  Temple.  After  being  driven 
with  the  Saints  from  Nauvoo  in  1846, 
he  resided  temporarily  in  St.   Louis, 


Mo.,  until  1850,  when  he  went  to 
Kanesville,  Iowa,  and  thence  crossed 
the  plains  to  Utah  in  Wm.  Snow's 
company,  which  arrived  in  Salt  Lake 
City,  Sept.  23,  1850.  He  went  to 
Ogden  that  fall  and  spent  the  winter 
in  the  so-called  Brown's  Fort.  In 
1851  he  commenced  farming  at 
Harrisville,  built  a  house  and  fenced 
some  land,  his  being  the  first  house 
built  west  of  Four-Mile  creek,  and 
the  only  house  which  remained  stand- 
ing in  that  neighborhood  during  "the 
move,"  in  consequence  of  which  the 
Ward,  when  organized  some  years 
afterwards,    was    named    Harrisville 


after  him.  Bro.  Harris  soon  became 
known  as  a  horticulturist  and  planted 
trees  from  many  climes.  He  was 
president  of  the  first  co-operative 
store  in  Ogden,  served  as  road  com- 
missioner of  Weber  county  eleven 
years  and  assisted  in  locating  most  of 
the  highways  of  that  county.  Bro. 
Harris  was  ordained  a  Seventy  Sept. 
5,  1853,  by  Luman  A.  Shurtliff,  and 
was  secretary  for  many  years  of  the 
38th  quoroum  of  Seventy.  In  the 
summer  of  1863  he  was  appointed 
presiding  Elder  of  the  Eighth  eccles- 
iastical district  (later  Harrisville). 
When  the  so-called  Eighth  District 
was  organized  with  a  president  Nov. 
15,  1863,  he  was  set  apart  as  first 
counselor  to  Luman  A.  Shurtliff.  He 
taught  the  first  school  in  the  Harris- 
ville district  in  his  own  house  with- 
out pay,  and  acted  as  the  first  super- 
intendent of  the  district  Sunday 
school  when  that  was  organized  in 
May,  1865;  he  held  that  position  till 
Sept.  13,  1868.  He  acted  as  district 
or  Ward  clerk  for  many  years  and 
culled  data  from  private  records  and 
other  sources  in  compiling  the  Harris- 
ville Ward  history  for  25  years,  be- 
ginning with  1850.  He  was  the  first 
missionary  called  from  the  district 
or  Ward  to  Salmon  river,  and  during 
the  move  in  1858  he  went  South.  He 
was  also  fifer  in  the  first  military 
band  of  Weber  county.  In  1877  he 
filled  a  one  year's  mission  to  the 
Eastern  States.  On  account  of  sick- 
ness he  returned,  and  never  fully  re- 
covered. He  died  Feb.  14,  1889,  of 
palsy  at  Harrisville.  Bro.  Harris 
married  Georgiana  Maria  Aldous  Jan. 
18,  1855;  she  died  Oct.  30,  1858, 
leaving  a  son  Emer,  born  August  6, 
1856.  Bro.  Harris  married  Louisa 
Sargent  April  3,  18  59,  by  whom  he 
had  six  children,  namely,  Leander  S., 
born  April  20,  1860;  Louisa  G.,  born 
March  4,  18  62;  Nathan  J.,  born  March 
29,  1864;  Martin  D.,  born  May  4, 
1856;  Louisa  P.,  born  May  30,  1868, 
and  Ida  E.,  born  Nov.  27,  1875. 


BIOGRAPHICAL  ENCYCLOPEDIA. 


107 


HARRIS,  Louisa  Sargent,  wife  of 
Martin  Henderson  Harris,  was  born 
Dec.  18,  1841,  at  Newberry,  Berk- 
shire, England,  the  daughter  of  John 
Sargent  and  Sarah  Allen.  She  was 
baptized    in    1850    by    John    Spiers; 


emigrated  to  Utah  in  1852,  crossing 
the  Atlantic  in  the  ship  "Kennebec," 
and  the  plains  in  Eli  B.  Kelsey's  com- 
pany. On  the  passage  by  steamboat 
up  the  Missouri  river  at  Lexington, 
Mo.,  the  boat  was  blown  up  by  an  ex- 
plosion; a  number  of  people  were 
killed  and  Sister  Louisa  was  badly 
scalded  and  picked  up  unconscious. 
Her  father  and  brother  were  both 
killed  by  the  explosion.  This  left  her 
an  orphan,  as  her  mother  had  died 
when  she  was  quite  young.  At  the 
time  of  the  explosion  her  father  had 
$3,000  on  his  person,  but  when  his 
body  was  found  the  money  was  miss- 
ing. This  left  her  in  a  destitute  con- 
dition financially.  In  crossing  the 
plains  she  narrowly  escaped  death 
by  an  accident;  she  was  walking  by 
a  wagon  still  suffering  from  the  ef- 
fects of  the  scalding  received  at  the 
time  of  the  explosion  and  stumbling, 
she  fell  under  the  wagon,  which  stop- 
ped with  the  wheel  on  her  head.  Her 
jaw  was  injured  for  the  rest  o,f  her 
life.  She  became  the  wife  of  Martin 
H.  Harris  April  3,  1859,  and  bore  her 


husband  six  children,  all  born  at 
Harrisville,  Weber  county,  Utah.  Sis- 
ter Harris  was  the  first  treasurer  of 
the  Harrisville  Relief  Society,  which 
position  she  held  for  28  years.  She 
also  acted  as  a  Sunday  school  teacher 
and  as  president  of  the  Ward  Primary 
association.  She  introduced  silk  cul- 
ture in  Harrisville  and  wore  a  silk 
dress  of  her  own  production.  Sister 
Harris  died  May  29,  1915. 

HARRIS,  William  Me  Ghee,  first 
Bishop  of  Trout  Creek  Ward  (Ban- 
nock Stake),  Bannock  county,  Idaho, 
was  born  May  23,  1862,  at  Richmond, 
Cache  county,  Utah,  the  son  of  Wm. 
Harris  and  Emmeline  Whittle.  He 
was  baptized  when  eight  years  old  by 
Christian  H.  Monson;  ordained  a 
Deacon  at  the  age  of  twelve  years  and 
acted  for  some  time  as  a  president  of 
a  Deacons  quorum;  ordained  an  Elder 
and  afterwards  a  Seventy;  ordained  a 
High  Priest  and  Bishop  Dec.  25,  1891, 
by  Apostle  Marriner  W.  Merrill  and 
held  the  position  of  Bishop  till  1915. 
Bro.    Harris   acted   as   Sunday  school 


superintendent  of  the  Trout  Creek 
Ward  three  years  and  served  in  the 
Idaho  legislature  in  18  9  6-97.  In 
1885  (Feb.  24th)  he  married  Harriet 
Ann  Carson  (daughter  of  David  Car- 
son  and   Lillie   Jane   Rawlins),   who 


108 


LATTER-DAY   SAINT 


was  born  June  18,  1861.  at  Draper 
Salt  Lake  county,  Utah.  Seven  child- 
ren (Millie,  Emmeline,  Byron  McGee, 
Uavid,  Earl,  Thomas  Glen,  Guy 
Viola  and  Florence)  are  the  issue  of 
this  marriage.  Bishop  Harris  is  a 
self-educated  man,  attending  only  a 
common  district  school  as  a  boy.  He 
has  been  a  resident  of  Trout  Creek 
since  1885  and  follows  farming  and 
stockraising  for  a  living.  Bro.  Harris 
retired  from  his  position  as  Bishop 
and  moved  to  Grace,  Idaho,  Dec.  10, 

1916,  and  was  elected  one  of  the 
village  board  in  February  1917.  He 
was   ordained    a    Patriarch    Nov.    17, 

1917,  by  Hyrum  M.  Smith. 

HARRISON,  James  Parry  (Con- 
tinued from  Vol.  2:133).  Emigrat- 
ing to  Utah  from  his  home  in  England 
Bro.   Harrison  crossed  the   plains  in 


Joseph  Home's  train,  which  arrived 
in  Salt  Lake  City  Sept.  13,  1861. 
After  his  ordination  to  the  office  of  a 
High  Priest  Nov.  20,  1880,  he  was 
set  apart  to  act  as  second  counselor  to 
Geo.  Stewart  in  the  Malad  Ward  and 
was  ordained  a  Bishop  August  27, 
1884,  by  Francis  M.  Lyman  and  set 
apart  to  preside  over  the  St.  John 
Ward.  Being  called  on  a  mission  he 
left  for  the  Southern  States  Jan.  24. 
1886,  and   returned  about  two  years 


later.  Having  been  convicted  on  a 
charge  of  alleged  unlawful  cohabita- 
tion he  served  a  term  in  the  Boise 
penitentiary  (from  June,  1888,  until 
December,  1888).  Being  released 
from  his  position  as  Bishop  of  the 
St.  John  Ward  in  1908  he  was  set 
apart,  Sept.  27,  1908,  to  preside  over 
the  High  Priests  of  the  Malad  Stake 
by  Rudger  Clawson.  He  was  elected 
coroner  for  Oneida  county,  in  1914, 
and  served  in  that  position  two  years. 
By  his  first  wife,  Elvira  Ann  Will- 
iams (whom  he  married  Dec.  13, 
1869),  he  had  but  one  child  (Elvira 
Jane).  By  his  second  wife  (Emma 
Dredge),  whom  he  married  Nov.  26, 
1884,  he  had  eight  children,  namely, 
James  Exile,  Nora,  Zenith  D.,  Jesse 
D.,  Ellen,  Priscilla,  Emma,  and  Purry 
D.  Bro.  Harrison  has  throughout  his 
entire  life  been  known  as  a  most  lib- 
eral and  benevolent  citizen,  and  a 
faithful  and  energetic  Latter-day 
Saint,  ever  ready  to  assist  with  his 
talents  and  means  to  promote  the 
cause  of  the  Lord  on  the  earth. 

H.AIM'VIGSKN,  .larob  L.,  second 
Bishop  of  Woodland  (Portneuf 
Stake),  Bannock  county,  Idaho,  was 
born  Sept.  27,  1872,  at  Hyrum,  Cache 
county,  Utah,  the  son  of  Niels  J. 
Hartvigsen  and  Amelia  Skanchy.  His 
mother  died  at  the  time  of  his  birth 
and  he  was  reared  in  the  home  of 
Lars  K.  Larsen  of  Hyrum,  Utah.  He 
was  baptized  and  confirmed  Nov.  9, 
1880,  by  Christopher  S.  Winge;  or- 
dained successively  to  the  offices  of 
Deacon,  Teacher  and  Priest.  He  was 
ordained  an  Elder  Jan.  3,  1894,  by 
Lars  K.  Larsen;  ordained  a  Seventy 
April  17,  1906,  by  J.  Golden  Kimball; 
ordained  a  High  Priest  Nov.  20,  1908, 
by  Orson  h\  Whitney,  and  ordained  a 
Bishop  June  19,  1909,  by  John  Henry 
Smith.  In  1906-1908  he  filled  a  mis- 
sion to  Scandinavia,  laboring  prin- 
cipally in  the  Trondhjem  conference. 
Prior  to  his  being  chosen  as  Bishop 
he  acted  as  second  counselor  to 
Bishop  H.  II.  VVukoley.  In  1896  (Dec. 
17th)    he    married    Wilhelniina    Uose 


BIOGRAPHICAL    ENCYCLOPEDIA. 


109 


(daughter  of  Ola  Hansen  Hose  and 
Christina  Jensen  I,  who  was  born  May 
16,  1874,  at  Hyrum,  Cache  county, 
Utah.  This  marriage  has  been  blessed 
with  four  children,  namely,  Leona  A., 
Cora  A.,  Dora  K.,  and  Ruby  Isabelle. 
Hishop  Hartvigsens  principal  avo- 
cation is  that  of  a  farmer  and  stock- 
raiser. 

HATCH,  Stearns,  first  counselor  in 
the  presidency  of  the  South  Davis 
Stake,   Davis  county.   Utah,   was  horn 


Dec.  G,  1S53,  at  South  liountilul, 
Davis  county,  Utah,  the  son  of  Ira  S. 
Hatch  and  Jane  Bee.  He  was  baptized 
June  21,  18  63,  by  Henry  Lee  and  or- 
dained an  Elder  Feb.  7.  1S6S,  by 
Anson  Call,  and  for  tea  years  he 
acted  as  president  of  an  Elders  quor- 
um in  South  and  West  Bountiful.  He 
also  acted  as  assistant  superintend- 
ent and  later  as  superintendent  of  the 
Ward  Sunday  school,  was  counselor 
and  secretary  in  the  Ward  Y.  M.  M. 
I.  A.  and  served  as  a  counselor  in  the 
Stake  organization  of  Y.  M.  M.  1.  .\. 
He  was  ordained  a  Seventy  by  Jacob 
dates  Augusl  7,  lSS7:sft  ;ipartasonc 
«»f  the  presidtMits  of  the  7-4th  (luorum 
of  Seventy  Sept.  7,  1S9(),  and  or- 
dained  a    High    Priest    by    (Jeorge    C^ 


Stake.  He  held  this  position  until 
April  30,  1905,  when  he  was  ordained 
a  Bishop  by  Pres.  Joseph  F.  Smith 
and  set  apart  to  preside  over  the 
Bountiful  South  Ward.  In  a  secular 
way  Bishop  Hatch  has  served  three 
terms  as  a  member  of  the  Bountiful 
city  council,  and  was  constable  for 
the  precinct  two  terms.  In  1876 
(Oct.  9th)  he  married  Elizabeth  J. 
Ellis  (daughter  of  John  Ellis  and 
Harriet  Hales),  who  bore  her  hus- 
band twelve  children,  nine  of  whom 
are  living.  Bishop  Hatch's  main  avo- 
cations have  been  those  of  railroad- 
ing, farming,  sheep  and  stockraising, 
and  he  has  for  a  number  of  years 
l)een  one  of  the  leading  business  men 
of  Davis  county.  When  the  South 
Davis  Stake  was  organized  July  10, 
1915,  Bishop  Hatch  was  chosen  as 
second  counselor  to  James  H.  Robin- 
son, president  of  the  South  Davis 
Stake. 

HAWKES,  Nathan,  a  Patriarch  in 
the  North  Weber  Stake  of  Zion,  was 
born  Nov.  15,  1840,  at  Hockley,  Es- 
sex, England,  the  son  of  Peter 
Hawkes  and  Ann  Brookman.     He  was 


l)apti/,ed     Nov.     9,     ISGI!,     by     David 
Hawkes,  emigrated  to  Utah  with  his 


Cannon   June   1,    lS!>li.   and  sot    ap;nt,     par«>nls  in  IStjt!.  crossing  the  Atlantic 
as    a    High    ("ouncilor    in    the     l»;ivis     in     t  iu;    sliii>     ".Xnierican     Congress," 


110 


LATTER-DAY   SAINT 


which  arrived  at  New  York  July  4, 
1866,  and  the  plains  in  Benjamin 
Halliday's  company,  which  reached 
Salt  Lake  City,  Sept.  25,  1866.  Bro. 
Hawkes  has  followed  the  occupations 
of  a  farmer  and  merchant.  He  acted 
as  school  trustee  for  five  years  and 
as  a  director  in  the  Hooper  Irriga- 
tion Company.  He  was  ordained  a 
Teacher  by  John  Rider  in  1864,  was 
ordained  a  Priest  by  David  Hawkes  in 
1865,  was  ordained  a  Seventy  by 
Isaac  Isaacsen,  July  9,  1869,  and  was 
ordained  a  High  Priest  by  Hans  Mad- 
sen,  March  30,  1907.  He  married 
Elizabeth  Bowman  in  November, 
1869,  which  union  has  been  blessed 
with  five  children,  namely,  Margaret 
Ann,  Sarah  Elizazeth,  Julia  Emily, 
Nathan  Andrew  and  Heber  Bowman. 
Bro.  Hawkes  has  labored  in  the  Sun- 
day schools  for  35  years,  twelve  years 
of  that  time  as  superintendent,  four- 
teen years  as  assistant  superintendent 
and  the  balance  of  the  time  as  a 
teacher.  He  has  filled  two  missions, 
one  to  Indiana  in  1881-83,  and  one  to 
Great  Britain  in  189  6-9  8;  he  has  al- 
so spent  two  years  in  home  mission- 
ary work,  has  labored  40  years  as  a 
Ward  teacher,  twelve  years  as  a  Re- 
ligion Class  worker,  seven  years  of 
that  time  as  superintendent  of  the 
North  Weber  Stake  Religion  Classes 
and  the  remainder  of  the  time  as 
Ward  superintendent  and  Stake 
superintendent.  He  was  ordained  a 
Patriarch  Sept.  27,  1914,  by  Rudger 
Clawson. 

HEATON,  Israel  H.,  second  coun- 
selor in  the  Kanab  Stake  presidency, 
was  born  Jan.  30,  1880.  at  Orderville, 
Kane  county,  Utah,  the  son  of  Jon- 
athan Heaton  and  Clarissa  Amy  Hoyt. 
He  was  baptized  April  8,  1888,  by 
John  J.  Esplin.  After  completing 
the  district  school  he  attended  the 
B.  Y.  Academy  at  Provo  during  the 
years  1898-1900.  In  1900  (Nov. 
28th)  he  married  Charlotte  Cox  of 
Orderville,  and  moved  to  Upper  Kan- 
ab in  the  spring  of  1901,  where  he 
continued  his  occupation  as  a  farmer 


and  as  secretary  of  the  Ward  Y.  M. 
M.  I.  A.  and  as  school  trustee  for 
three  years.  He  was  ordained  an 
Elder  Nov.  23,  1900,  and  soon  after- 
wards chosen  as  first  counselor  to 
Pres.  Henry  C.  Esplin  in  the  presi- 
dency of  the  Elders  of  the  Kanab 
Stake.  He  also  filled  a  home  mis- 
sion in  the  Nebo  Stake  of  Zion  in  the 
interest  of  Y.  M.  M.  I.  A.  He  was 
ordained  a  Seventy  Sept.  9,  1906,  and 
filled  a  mission  to  Australia  in  1907- 
1909.  He  labored  successfully  in  the 
South  Wales  and  South  Australian 
conferences.  About  two  years  after 
his  return  home,  or  on  Dec.  5,  1910, 


he  was  ordained  a  High  Priest  and 
set  apart  as  second  counselor  to  Wm. 
W.  Seegmiller,  president  of  the 
Kanab  Stake,  by  Geo.  F.  Richards. 
He  moved  his  family  from  Mocassin, 
Arizona,  to  Kanab,  April  28,  1913. 
Bro.  Heaton  has  always  been  a  will- 
ing and  conscientious  Church  worker. 

HEINER,  Anthony,  a  High  Coucilor 
in  the  Morgan  Stake  of  Zion,  Morgan 
county,  Utah,  was  born  June  24, 
1844,  in  Saxony  Meiningen,  Germany, 
the  son  of  Martin  Heiner  and  Adel- 
gunda  Deitzel.  He  was  baptized 
April  21,  1855,  by  his  father,  emi- 
grated with  his  parents  to  America 
in   1845  and  after  residing  in  Balti- 


BIOGRAPHICAL  ENCYCLOPEDIA. 


Ill 


more,  Maryland,  and  in  Pennsylvan- 
ia, he  migrated  to  Utah  in  185  9, 
crossing  the  plains  in  Edward  Steven- 
son's company.  On  Sept.  16,  1859, 
he  located  on  Bingham  creek,  two 
miles  east  of  Bingham   canyon,   Salt 


Lake  county,  and  in   ihe  summer  of 

1863  moved  to  North  Morgan,  Mor- 
gan county.  The  following  winter 
he  and  his  brother  Daniel  camped  in 
the  mountains,  engaged  in  herding 
cattle   and   sheep.      In   the   spring   of 

1864  he  assisted  in  surveying  and 
making  the  first  irrigation  ditch  in 
Morgan  county,  where  he  also  helped 
to  build  the  first  log  school  house. 
When  Morgan  City  was  surveyed  in 
1866,  Bro.  Heiner  and  others  moved 
said  school  house  on  to  the  town- 
site.  Subsequently  Bro.  Anthony  took 
an  active  part  as  an  officer  and 
teacher  in  the  Sunday  school.  He 
also  assisted  in  building  the  first 
rock  meeting-house  in  North  Morgan 
and  acted  as  a  school  trustee  for  fif- 
teen years.  He  married  Lucinda 
Henderson  Sept.  16,  1865;  she  bore 
her  husband  eight  children.  In  187  2 
(Dec.  22nd)  he  married  Sarah  Hen- 
derson Morris,  by  whom  he  became 
the  father  of  seven  children.  In 
1887-8  8  Bro.  Heiner  filled  a  mission 
to  the  Southern  States,  laboring  prin- 
cipally    in     North     Carolina.        Bro. 


Heiner  has  followed  farming  and 
stockraising  during  the  most  of  his 
life  and  was  ranching  in  Echo  can- 
yon from  1873  to  1898.  Though  de- 
prived of  a  good  education  in  early 
life  he  has  been  thoroughly  educated 
in  the  school  of  nature  and  is  also 
a  well  read  man,  blessed  with  a  good 
memory  and  seems  to  be  posted  thor- 
oughly in  regard  to  the  history  of 
Morgan  county  and  the  general 
history  of  the  Church.  He  was  or- 
dained a  High  Priest  Sept.  9,  1900, 
by  Reed  Smoot  and  set  apart  as  a 
High  Councilor  in  the  Morgan  Stake. 

HEINER,  George,  counselor  in  tne 
bishopric  of  the  North  Morgan  Ward 
(Morgan  Stake),  Morgan  county, 
Utah,  from  1877  to  190  5,  was  born 
March  26,  1846,  at  Baltimore,  Mary- 
land, the  son  of  Martin  Heiner  and 
Adelgunda  Deitzel.  Becoming  a  con- 
vert to  "Mormonism"  he  was  baptized 
April  21,  1855,  by  his  father,  mi- 
grated to  Utah  in  1859,  crossing  the 
plains  in  Edward  Stevenson's  com- 
pany which  arrived  in  Salt  Lake  City 


Sept.  16,  1859.  After  residing  four 
years  in  Salt  Lake  City  he  moved  to 
North  Morgan  in  1863,  being  one  of 
the  first  settlers  of  that  place.  Prior 
to  this  he  had  been  ordained  an 
Elder   May    10,    1862,   by   Samuel   L. 


112 


LATTER-DAY   SAINT 


Sprague,  and  the  same  year  drove 
an  ox-team  to  the  Missouri  river  as 
a  Church  teamster  going  after  emi- 
grants. In  1866  (Dec.  22nd)  he  mar- 
ried Mary  Henderson  (daughter  of 
David  E.  Henderson  and  Mary  Mc- 
Faggen),  who  was  born  Sept.  2,  1847, 
in  Andrew  county,  Missouri.  She  be- 
came the  mother  of  seven  children 
two  boys  and  live  girls)  and  died 
May  28,  1882.  In  1883  (Feb.  22nd) 
Bro.  Reiner  married  Sarah  Jane  Tag- 
gert  (daughter  of  George  W.  Tag- 
gert  and  Clarissa  Rogers,),  who  was 
born  May  16,  1860,  in  Salt  Lake 
City;  she  became  the  mother  of  six 
children  (three  boys  and  three  girls). 
Bro.  Heiner  was  an  active  Sunday 
school  worker  in  North  Morgan  from 
the  beginning  until  July  1,  1877, 
when  he  was  ordained  a  High  Priest 
and  set  apart  to  act  as  second  coun- 
selor to  Bishop  Wyman  M.  Parker. 
In  1880  he  was  chosen  as  second 
counselor  to  Bishop  Wm.  B.  Park- 
inson and  in  1884  he  became  first 
counselor  to  Bishop  Oluf  B.  Ander- 
son, which  position  he  held  till  1905. 
He  acted  as  a  member  of  the  Ward 
choir  for  fifty  years,  acted  as  post- 
master at  Morgan  from  1904  to  1915, 
and  served  as  mayor  of  Morgan  City 
two  years  (1890-91).  He  has  also 
acted  as  road  supervisor  and  pound- 
keeper;  otherwise  he  is  a  farmer  and 
stockraiser  by  occupation  and  is  also 
a  dealer  in  farming  implements.  Bro. 
Heiner  is  an  unassuming  man  who 
possesses  the  love  and  confidence  of 
the  people  of  the  community  in  which 
he  resides  and  has  always  been  a 
faithful  Latter-day  Saint. 

HK.NDKUSON,  Williuin  .hij^pcr,  Jr., 

Bishop  of  Cannonville  (Panguitch 
Stake),  Garfield  county,  Utah,  was 
born  Sept.  2,  18G;{,  at  Kuysville, 
Davis  county,  Utah,  the  son  of  William 
J.  Henderson  and  Alvira  Aurelia 
Dickson.  He  was  baptized  in  the 
fall  of  1879  by  Kdmuiid  H.  Thomp- 
son; ordained  a  Deacon  November, 
1879,  by  his  father;  married  Sarah 
Ann   Fletcher,   March    25.    1S85;    was 


ordained  an  Elder  March  25,  1887,  by 
William  D.  McAllister;  received  his 
endowments  and  sealings  with  his 
wife  the  same  day  in  the  St.  George 
Temi)le;  was  ordained  a  Seventy  Oct. 
14,  1892,  by  Angus  M.  Cannon,  and 
left  the  same  day  for  a  mission  to  the 
United  States;  ho  labored  in  Penn- 
sylvania, West  Virginia  and  Mary- 
land, and  returned  Nov.  2;!,  1894. 
He  was  ordained  a  High  Priest  Nov. 
30,  18:)4,  by  Mahonri  M.  Steele,  and 
set  apart  as  f^rst  counselor  to  Bishop 
William  W.  Willis  of  the  ('annonville 
Ward;  filled  a  mission  for  the  Y.  M. 
M.  1.  A.  in  the  Bingham  Stake,  Idaho, 


(luring  the  winter  of  189X-'J9;  moved 
with  his  family  to  Price,  Utah,  in 
1900  and  returned  to  ('annonville  in 
1901.  He  filled  another  mission  for 
the  Y.  M.  M.  I.  A.  in  the  Oneida 
Stake.  Idaho,  in  the  winter  of  1901- 
190L';  labored  as  superintendent  of 
the  ('ajinonville  Sunday  school  from 
May,  19(»2,  to  IJecember,  1909;  was 
ordained  a  Bishop  by  Ai)oslle  David 
().  McKay,  Sept.  1.  1909,  and  set 
apart  to  preside  over  the  Cannonville 
Ward.  His  wife,  Sarah  Ann  Fletcher, 
died  in  childbed  with  her  eleventh 
child  May  7th,  191:5.  Three  stalwart 
sons  lal»orod  in  the  missionary  field 
at  thf)  tiino  of  her  death.  The  names 
of    her    chiidrt;!!    are:      Sarah    Ethel. 


BIOGRAPHICAL  ENCYCLOPEDIA. 


ii: 


W.  Jasper.  George  Judson,  John  Car-  of  the  i'aii^uitch  Ward  Y.  L.  M.  I.  A. 
ner,  Bertha,  Warren.  Frank,  Reed  from  190:i  to  19(t9;  was  secretary  of 
Samuel,  Jim  Dickson,  Opal  and  Vir-  the  I'anKiiitch  Ward  Svinday  school 
ginia.  Bishoj)  Henderson  married 
Elizabeth  Sarah  Worthen  Jan.  S, 
1914,  in  the  Salt  Lake  Temple.  He 
has  been  identified  with  the  rapid 
growth  and  development  of  Southern 
Utah  since  18  7  7,  and  is  now  l)usily 
engaged  in  the  sheej)  and  cattle  in- 
dustries of  the  State. 

HKM»KliS<)\.  Saiali  Ann  FleCclirr, 

wife  of  William  .1.  Henderson,  Jr., 
was  born  Sept.  25.  lS7(i,  in  Salt  Lake 
City,  the  daughter  of  Kendall  .\say 
P"'Ietcher  and  Eumer  Asay.  She  was 
baptized  when  about  eight  years  old 
and  was  married  to  William  J.  Hen- 
derson. Jr..  March  25.  18S7.  She 
bor«!  her  husband  eleven  children  and 
<lie(l   a    faithful    Latter-day   Saint    May 


from  1S97  to  l!»n4;  acted  as  Stake 
secretary  of  Sunday  schools  from 
190  1  to  1914;  served  as  Stake  pres- 
ident of  Y.  L.  M.  1.  A.  from  19(i9  to 
1914.  and  was  chosen  as  Ward  presi- 
dent of  the  Y.  L.  M.  I.  A.  of  Cannon- 
villt"  Oct.  :'.l.  1915.  She  became  the 
wift'  of  Bishop  William  J.  Henderson, 
Jr..  Jan.  S.   1914. 

HKPWOItTH.  Tliointon,  Bishop  of 
Springdale  iSt.  (leorge  Stake).  Wash- 
ington county.  I'tah.  was  born  July 
14.  IS  111.  at  Wyoming.  Nebraska,  the 
son  of  Sijuire  Hepworth  and  Emily 
Dyson.  Five  days  after  his  birth  he 
left  Wyoming  together  with  his  par- 
ents to  cross  the  plains  in  William  S. 
Warren's  train,  which  arrived  in  Salt 
Lake  City  Oct.  \.  ISC  I.  The  family, 
after  staying  a  short  time  at  Smith- 
field.  Cache  county.  I'tah,  moved  to 
Oxfiinl.  l(lalu),  whence  they,  on  May 
."..  1ST7.  left  to  make  their  home  in 
Soutbcni  I'tah.  Tbcy  arrived  in  Dixie 
.lune  I  I.  ls77.  and  s(>ttled  at  Spring- 
dale.  When  scviMiteen  years  of  age 
Tlionilon  llci)\vorth  was  ordained  an 
I'MdiM'.  lie  married  lOi/.ina  .lane 
Draper  Jan.  .".0.  1 SS  1.  in  the  St. 
Ccorge   'i'euiple.    and    from    tliis   niar- 


7,  I'.n;!.  Sister  Henderson  was  an 
active  and  energetic  Kelief  Society 
worker,  and  a  failbful  and  denoted 
wife  and   nioilier. 

II  i;  \  IM'.KSON,     Kli/.alielli     Saiah 

Woi-iIm-ii,  wile  of  Hisbop  William  J. 
1  IcMidcrson.  was  born  .Aug.  '2\,  1S75, 
at  I'anguitcb.  I'tali.  tlie  (hnigbter  of 
Samuel  Worthen  and  .lane  Osborne. 
She  was  l)apti/.e(l  .Inly  :;.  LS  S  I .  by 
Martin     W.     \'\>\  :     acted    as    i)resi(lent 


\i.l.    1 1  I,  .\. 


\iimi.-~i.  T.ils. 


114 


LATTER-DAY   SAINT 


riage  sprang  four  children,  namely, 
Melinda,  Thornton,  Jr.,  Marilla,  and 
Joseph  Nelson.  The  wife  died  Sept. 
19,  1898.  Joseph  N.  died  Sept.  14, 
1898,  and  Thornton,  Jr.,  was  killed 
by    lightning    July    28,    1908.      Bro. 


Hepworth  was  ordained  a  High  Priest 
Feb.  25,  1895,  by  Daniel  D.  Mc- 
Arthur,  and  set  apart  as  first  coun- 
selor to  Bishop  Oliver  D.  Gifford. 
This  position  he  held  until  Dec.  7, 
1915,  when  he  was  chosen  as  Bishop 
of  the  Springdale  Ward.  He  was  or- 
dained a  Bishop  March  15,  1914. 
Bro.  Hepworth  married  Edith  Lewis 
Jan.  2,  1901,  by  which  marriage  he 
has  had  seven  children,  namely,  Le 
Grand,  Cambalina,  Cecil  Penn,  Emily 
Francell,  Precillanola,  and  Philip 
Squire.  He  has  acted  as  justice  of 
the  peace,  constable  and  school  trus- 
tee, etc.  Bishop  Hepworth  is  a  farmer 
by  occupation. 

HERD,  James,  a  Patriarch  in  the 
Bannock  Stake  of  Zion,  Bannock 
county,  Idaho,  was  born  Dec.  19, 
1849,  at  Darwen,  Lancashire,  Eng- 
land, the  son  of  William  Herd  and 
Naomi  Kay.  He  was  baptized  Sept. 
15,  1873,  by  John  Kay,  emigrated  to 
America  In  1875,  and  after  residing 
in  the  Sugar  House  Ward,  Salt  Lake 
county,  five  years,  moved  to  Frank- 


lin, Idaho,  in  April,  1881.  Here  he 
acted  as  Ward  superintendent  of  Sun- 
day school  about  ten  years,  and  also 
as  assistant  superintendent  of  Sunday 
schools  in  the  Oneida  Stake  organi- 
zation. He  was  also  leader  of  the 
Ward  choir.  In  1901  he  removed  to 
Thatcher,  Idaho,  where  he  engaged  in 
mercantile  business.  For  twelve 
years  he  acted  as  Stake  chorister  of 
the  Bannock  Stake  and  was  second 
counselor  in  the  presidency  of  the 
High  Priests  quorum  thirteen  years, 
leader  of  the  choir  in  Mound  Valley 
Ward  three  years  and  chorister  in  the 
Thatcher  Second  Ward  two  years. 
For  many  years  he  acted  as  a  Ward 
teacher  and  filled  many  other  re- 
sponsible positions  in  the  Church. 
He  was  ordained  an  Elder  Feb.  8, 
1874,  by  John  Holman;  ordained  a 
Seventy,  March  22,  1887,  by  James 
Packer;  ordained  a  High  Priest  June 
2,  1900,  by  George  C.  Parkinson,  and 
ordained  a  Patriarch  Nov.  17,  1912, 
by     Orson     F.     Whitney.       Patriarch 


Herd  has  married  three  wives,  name- 
ly, Esther  Kirkman,  in  1870;  Grace 
Knowles,  Oct.  22,  1871,  and  Mary 
Hansen,  April  1,   1903. 

HEYWOOD,  James  BeU,  Bishop  of 
Panguitch,  Garfield  county,  Utah, 
was  born  Jan.  24,  1858,  at  Salt  Lake 


BIOGRAPHICAL  ENCYCLOPEDIA. 


115 


City,  Utah,  the  son  of  Joseph  L.  Hey- 
wood  and  Mary  Bell.  He  moved  to 
Washington,  Southern  Utah,  with  his 
parents  in  1862,  and  was  baptized 
when  eight  years  old;  later  he  be- 
came  a   resident   of   New    Harmony. 


With  his  parents  he  arrived  at  Pan- 
guitch  in  1872;  was  ordained  a  Dea- 
con at  Panguitch  and  afterwards  an 
Elder,  and  ordained  a  High  Priest 
in  1879  and  set  apart  as  first  coun- 
selor to  Bishop  George  W.  Sevy  of 
the  Panguitch  Second  Ward.  Later 
he  acted  as  second  counselor  to 
Bishop  Hyrum  S.  Church  of  the  same 
Ward,  filling  that  position  till  18  8  7, 
when  the  two  Panguitch  Wards  were 
igamated  into  one.  He  filled  a 
niibsion  to  the  Northern  States  in 
1884-1885,  laboring  in  the  State  of 
Indiana.  When  the  Panguitch  Ward 
was  reorganized,  in  1887,  he  was 
chosen  as  Ward  clerk  and  served 
in  that  capacity  till  1900,  when  he 
was  chosen  as  Bishop  of  the  Pan- 
guitch Ward,  succeeding  Bishop  Allen 
Miller.  He  acted  as  Bishop  of  Pan- 
guitch until  1916.  Prior  to  his  ser- 
vices as  Bishop  he  acted  as  president 
of  the  Panguitch  Y.  M.  M.  I.  A.,  was 
Stake  secretary  of  Sunday  schools 
and  president  of  the  High  Priests 
quorum.  He  also  served  as  justice 
of  the  peace   of  Panguitch   precinct, 


was  superintendent  of  district  schools 
and  first  surveyor  of  Garfield  county. 
In  1891  (October  14th)  he  married 
Maria  Clarinda  Larsen,  of  Pleasant 
Grove,  Utah  county,  who  has  borne 
her  husband  eight  children,  namely, 
Lawrence,  Irvin  Stanford,  Ida,  Joseph 
Bryant,  Emma,  Ruth,  Ella,  and  Olive. 
Five  of  these  children  are  now  living. 
Bishop  Heywood  is  a  practical  farm- 
er and  store  manager,  and  always 
takes  an  active  interest  in  the  social 
and  material  betterment  of  the  com- 
munity. 

HEYWOOD,  Joseph  Edgar,  second 
counselor  in  the  presidency  of  the 
Panguitch  Stake,  and  a  resident  of 
Panguitch,  Garfield  county,  Utah, 
was  born  Aug.  8,  18  68,  at  New  Har- 
mony, Washington  county,  Utah,  the 
son  of  Joseph  L.  Heywood  and  Mary 
Bell  Heywood.  He  moved  with  his 
parents  to  Panguitch  when  a  boy; 
was  baptized  by  James  I.  Williams 
when  about  eight  years  of  age;  was 
ordained  a  Deacon  when  a  mere  boy; 
ordained  a  Seventy  Oct.   9,   1891,  by 


Heber  J.  Grant;  filled  a  short  mis- 
sion to  the  Southern  States  in  1891, 
laboring  in  Tennessee.  At  home  he 
has  acted  as  assistant  superintendent 
of  the  Panguitch  Sunday  school  and 
acted   as   clerk   of   the   85th   quorum 


116 


LATTER-DAY   SAINT 


of  Seventy.  He  was  ordained  a  High 
I'riest  by  Francis  M.  Lyman  Aug.  :!0, 
1&08,  and  set  apart  to  act  as  second 
counselor  in  the  presidency  of  the 
Panguitch  Stake,  which  position  he 
held  until  1916.  In  1894  (Jan.  3rd) 
he  married  Margaret  E.  Henrie 
(daughter  of  James  Henrie  and 
Ilhoana  Hatch),  who  was  born  Feb. 
10,  1874,  at  Panguitch,  Utah.  Eleven 
children  have  blessed  this  marriage, 
namely,  Mary  Fenella,  Rhoana,  Ed- 
gar True,  Sabra,  Martha,  Joseph 
Karl,  James,  Austin,  Margaret,  Ethel 
and  Mark  K.  Elder  Heywood  re- 
ceived a  good  education  in  his  youth, 
finishing  his  school  studies  at  the 
B.  Y.  Academy  at  Provo.  His  main 
occupations  are  those  of  a  farmer  and 
stockraiser.  He  has  served  his  fellow- 
citizens  in  a  number  of  civil  offices 
and  acted  as  probation  officer  at 
Panguitch  three  years. 

HOLLAND,  John,  a  veteran  Elder 
of  Kaysville,  Davis  county,  Utah,  was 
born  March  23,  1836,  at  Barton.  Staf- 
fordshire, England,  the  son  of  William 
Holland  and  Sarah  Tomlinson.  He 
emigrated  to  America  the  same  year 
with  his  parents,  crossing  the  Atlantic 
in  the  ship  "Fannie"  (which  sailed 
from  Liverpool,  England.  Jan.  2:;, 
1844).  arrived  at  New  Orleans  March 
7.  1844,  and  at  Xauvoo,  111.,  April  13, 
1844.  He  was  baptized  by  Thomas 
Clark  at  Nauvoo  in  the  summer  of 
1844.  His  father  died  Oct.  2,  1844, 
and  young  John  lived  with  a  neighbor 
until  18  4  6,  when  he  started  West,  go- 
ing as  far  as  Garden  Grove,  where  he 
stopped  until  the  spring  of  1847, 
when  he  continued  the  journey  to 
Council  Bluffs  and  crossed  the  Mis- 
souri river  to  Winter  Quarters.  He 
worked  on  a  farm  until  his  mother 
with  a  part  of  her  family  arrived 
from  Nauvoo.  The  mother  being 
sick,  died  Oct.  28,  1847,  at  Winter 
Quarters.  John  then  went  to\Veston, 
Missouri,  where  he  worked  in  a  pork 
house  through  the  winter.  He  made 
several  journeys  between  Weston  and 


Winter  CJuarters  until  1850.  when  a 
few  "'Mormon"  families  left  Weston 
for  rtah.  John  going  with  them. 
That  year  (18ri())  he  crossed  the 
l)lains  in  a  freight  company,  and  in 
18.53  settled  temi)orarily  at  Kays- 
ville. In  18.=).")  he  moved  to  Ogden. 
where  he  assisted  in  building  the 
Ogden  tabernacle.  In  18  65  he  was 
ordained  an  Elder  by  !>r.  Samuel  L. 
Sprague.  Previous  to  this  he  had 
taken  part  in  the  Echo  canyon  war. 
In  1860  (Dec.  yth)  he  married  Mary 
Hurton,  who  bore  him  six  children. 
She  died  Jan.  15.  187  1.  and  ten  years 
later     (Aug.     15.     1S84)     h(>    married 


Julia  Woods.  He  located  at  Plain 
City.  Weber  county,  in  1876,  and 
became  a  resident  of  Kaysville  again 
in  1905.  On  June  24.  1899,  he  was 
ordained  a  High  Priest  by  Joseph 
Parry.  Bro.  Holland  has  had  three 
sons  on  missions  in  England  at  the 
same  time. 

HOL.M.AN,  John   (iiionhal,   one   of 

the  original  Utah  pioneers  of  1847  and 
an  active  and  faithful  Elder  in  the 
Church,  was  born  Oct.  18,  1828,  at 
Byron  Center,  Genessee  county.  New 
York,  the  son  of  Joshua  Sawyer  Hol- 
man  and  Rebecca  Greenleaf.  He  was 
baptized  when  he  was  eight  years 
of   age   and    moved    with    his   parents 


BIOGRAPHICAL   ENCYCLOPEDIA. 


117 


to  Kirtland,  Ohio.  In  1838  he  ac- 
<;omi)anie(l  the  so-called  Kirtland 
canip  on  its  .journey  from  Kirtland, 
Ohio,  to  Missouri.  In  the  spring  of 
1847,  at  Winter  Quarters  (now  in 
Nebraska),  he  was  chosen  as  one  of 
the  14  3  pioneers  who  accompanied 
President  Rrigham  Young  on  the 
lanious  pioneer  trip  to  Great  Salt 
Lake  Valley.  He  returned  to  the 
Kast,  where  he  then  remained  until 
the  spring  of  1850.  In  1849  (Aug. 
23rd)  he  married  Nancy  Clark,  who 
was  born  in  Marion  county,  Indiana, 
Feb.  26,  182a.  She  bore  her  husband 
ten  children,  namely,  John  Dennis, 
born  Sept.  2,  18.^)1,  and  died  Nov.  8, 
18.51;   Artemus,  born  Sept.  2.5.  18.52; 


Nancy  Elizabeth.  John  Clark,  Re- 
becca, Maria  Josephine,  Clarinda, 
Benjamin  Franklin,  and  Lewis  C. 
In  1856  Elder  Holman  married 
Hachel  Stevens,  who  was  born  Dec.  1, 
1834,  in  Upper  Canada.  She  bore 
her  husband  seven  children  and  died 
Feb.  6,  1913,  at  Provo,  Utah  county, 
Utah.  The  names  of  her  children 
follow:  Rachel  Marinda,  Chastina, 
Josephine  Stephens,  Ordell,  William 
Riley,  Sarah  Elin  and  Elvara.  In 
1862-65  he  filled  a  mission  to  Great 
Britain,  and  in  1875  he  married 
Sarah  Loder  Harris,  who  bore  her 
husband    four   children,   namely,   Zil- 


pha  Ann.  Emma  Jane,  Albert  L.  and 
Ezekiel  L.  After  residing  at  Pleasant 
Grove,  Utah  county,  Utah,  he  moved 
to  Santaquin,  in  the  same  county,  in 
1878.  Here  he  resided  for  several 
years,  but  in  1883  he  changed  his 
residence  to  Rexburg,  Idaho,  where 
he  died  Nov.  5,  1888.  Bro.  Holman 
was  known  throughout  his  active  life 
as  a  leader  among  men  and  filled 
many  i)ositions  of  a  religious  and 
secular  character  in  the  communities 
in  which  he  lived.  Thus  he  acted  as 
alderman  and  councilman  in  Pleas- 
ant Grove,  Utah,  a  number  of  terms. 
In  18  68  he  made  a  trip  to  the  termi- 
nus of  the  Union  Pacific  Railroad 
after  emigrants,  and  he  was  always 
on  hand  with  his  means  and  abilities 
to  render  what  aid  he  could  for  the 
building  up  of  Utah,  of  which  he,  as 
stated,  was  one  of  the  original 
pioneers. 

HOTKIN,  James  Samuel,  counselor 
to  Bishop  William  H.  Toone,  of  Croy- 
den,  Morgan  county,  Utah,  was  born 
Dec.  11,  1869,  at  Croyden,  the  son 
of  John  Hopkin  and  Mary  Penning- 
ton. He  was  baptized  by  William  H. 
Toone  when  about  eight  years  old; 
ordained  a  Deacon,  Teacher  and  El- 
der successively,  and  ordained  a  High 
Priest  in  1909  by  Orson  F.  Whitney. 
He  married  Amelia  Francis  Nov.  30, 
1892.  She  was  a  daughter  of  Samuel 
Francis  and  Esther  Weisbrodt  and 
was  born  in  Morgan  county,  Utah, 
Nov.  27,  1871.  Sister  Hopkin  acted 
as  president  of  the  Croyden  Relief 
Society  for  three  years  and  was  also 
a  counselor  in  the  Ward  Y.  L.  M. 
[.  A.  She  bore  her  husband  nine 
children,  namely,  Mary  F.,  born  Sept. 

11,  1893;  Leonora  Francis,  born  Feb. 

12,  1896;  James  V.,  born  July  15, 
1898;  Alonzo  Francis,  born  Oct.  22, 
1900;  Mark  Francis,  born  March  2, 
1903;  Esther  Fay,  born  Oct.  10, 
1905;  Samuel  Francis,  born  Sept.  10, 
1907;  Catherine,  born  April  10,  1911, 
and  Frances,  born  April  27,  1914. 
By  occupation  Bro.  Hopkin  is  a  farm- 


118 


LATTER-DAY   SAINT 


er  and  stockraiser,  and  a  director  of 
the  Croyden  Irrigation  Company. 

HOPKIN,  John,  Bishop  of  Croyden 
Ward  (Morgan  Stake),  Morgan  coun- 
ty, Utah,  was  born  Nov.  27,  1834,  at 
Hill  Top,  Greesley  Parish,  Notting- 
hamshire, England,  the  son  of  James 
Hopkin  and  Elizabeth  Robinson.  In 
1855  he  married  Martha  Housley, 
daughter  of  William  and  Fannie 
Housley,  of  Old  Brownsley,  Notting- 
hamshire, England.  This  marriage 
was  blessed  with  two  children.  In 
1869  (Jan.  16th)  he  married  Mary 
Pennington     (daughter     of     Edward 


Pennington  and  Catherine  Birchell), 
who  was  born  July  12,  1846,  at  Lay- 
thom,  Lancashire,  England.  This 
marriage  was  blessed  with  eleven 
children.  In  1863  Bro.  Hopkin  emi- 
grated to  America  with  his  family, 
crossing  the  Atlantic  in  the  ship 
"Amazon,"  and  the  plains  in  Thomas 
E.  Ricks'  company.  After  living  in 
Coalville,  Utah,  a  few  months  he 
moved  to  Salt  Lake  City  and  had 
charge  of  the  work  connected  with 
building  fourteen  dams  on  North 
Temple  street.  He  then  returned  to 
Coalville  and,  in  1866,  furnished  the 
first  coal  for  the  first  government 
contract  given  in   Utah.      He  settled 


at  Croyden  in  1868,  where  he  has 
resided  ever  since,  and  where  he  has 
engaged  in  farming,  contracting,  etc. 
In  April,  1873,  he  married  Margaret 
Kennedy  (daughter  of  John  Kennedy 
and  Elizabeth  Black),  who  was  born 
Nov.  14,  1857,  in  Scotland.  This 
marriage  was  blessed  with  eleven 
children.  In  1874  Bro.  Hopkin  mar- 
riied  Catherine  Pennington,  a  sister 
of  his  former  wife,  who  bore  her 
husband  seven  children.  Bro.  Hop- 
kin was  ordained  successively  to  the 
offices  of  Deacon,  Teacher,  Elder, 
High  Priest  and  Bishop,  the  later 
ordination  taking  place  under  the 
hands  of  Lorenzo  Snow,  July  1,  1877. 
He  served  as  Bishop  until  1887.  In 
1874-76  he  filled  a  mission  to  Great 
Britain,  acting  as  president  of  the 
Norwich  conference.  In  1901  he 
settled  in  the  Big  Horn  country, 
Wyoming.  From  Nov.  13,  1893,  to 
Jan.  28,  1894,  he  served  a  term  in  the 
Utah  penitentiary,  having  been  con- 
victed for  so-called  unlawful  co- 
habitation. In  1880  he  served  as 
county  commissioner  of  Morgan 
county  and  also  served  a  term  in 
the  Utah  legislature  in   1893-95. 

HORSLEY,  Ernest  Samuel,  Patri- 
arch and  Stake  clerk  of  the  Carbon 
Stake  of  Zion,  Utah,  was  born  June 
16,  1861,  at  Tottenham,  Middlesex, 
England,  the  son  of  Samuel  P.  Hors- 
ley  and  Sarah  Burrows.  He  was  bap- 
tized Aug.  14,  1870,  by  William  Black- 
more,  and  emigrated  to  America  in 
1877,  crossing  the  Atlantic  in  the 
steamship  "Wisconsin."'  The  family 
located  at  Paragoonah,  Iron  county, 
Utah,  where  Bro.  Horsley  was  or- 
dained a  Teacher,  March  6,  1884,  by 
Stephen  S.  Barton.  He  was  ordained 
an  Elder  May  18,  1884,  by  Rufus  C. 
Allen,  and  married  Mercy  Jane  Top- 
ham,  of  Paragoonah,  June  5,  1884, 
in  the  St.  George  Temple.  He  was 
ordained  a  Seventy  Aug.  2,  18  85,  by 
Noah  T.  Guyman,  and  became  a  mem- 
ber of  the  81st  quorum  of  Seventy; 
was  set'  apart  as  a  president  of  the 


BIOGRAPHICAL   ENCYCLOPEDIA. 


119 


101st  quorum  of  Seventy,  by  Chris- 
tian D.  Fjeldsted,  Feb.  5,  1892,  and 
filled  a  mission  to  Great  Britain  in 
1893-95.  After  his  return  from  that 
mission  he  was  chosen  presiding  El- 
der at  Price,  July  12,  1896,  and  was 


ordained  a  High  Priest  and  Bishop 
Aug.  11,  1896,  by  Francis  M.  Lyman, 
and  set  apart  to  preside  over  the 
Price  Ward.  His  wife,  Mercy  Jane, 
having  died  Jan.  19,  1900,  he  mar- 
ried Eliza  Bean  (late  of  Pudsey,  Eng- 
land) Dec.  17,  1902.  In  1909  he  left 
on  a  second  mission  to  England,  ac- 
companied by  his  wife,  on  which  mis- 
sion he  presided  over  the  Leeds  con- 
ference. Returning  home  from  this 
mission  in  1911  he  had  charge  of  a 
company  of  Elders  and  emigrating 
Saints  which  crossed  the  Atlantic  in 
the  steamship  "Laurentic,"  sailing 
from  Liverpool,  July  8,  1911.  Bro. 
Horsley  was  ordained  a  Patriarch 
March  17,  1912,  by  Heber  J.  Grant. 
His  main  occupations  in  life  have 
been  those  of  a  carpenter,  farmer  and 
bookkeeper.  He  served  several  terms 
as  school  trustee  at  Price,  was  clerk 
of  the  Price  town  board  two  years, 
treasurer  two  years,  president  of  the 
board  in  1898-99,  and  city  counselor 
in  1914-15.  Since  Feb.  7,  1913,  he 
has  acted  as  county  clerk  of  Carbon 
county. 


HOVEY,  Joseph  Grafton,  Bishop  of 
Millville,  Cache  county,  Utah,  and  an 
energetic  and  faithful  Elder  in  the 
Church,  was  born  Nov.  17,  1812,  in 
Middlesex  county,  Mass.,  the  son  of 
Thomas  Hovey  and  Elizabeth  Sever. 
Becoming  a  convert  to  "Mormonism," 
he  was  baptized  July  4,  183  9,  by 
Elder  William  Draper;  ordained  an 
Elder  Oct.  6,  1839,  by  Seymour  Bron- 
son;  ordained  a  High  Priest  May  1, 
1856,  and  set  apart  as  a  counselor  to 
Bishop  Alonzo  H.  Raleigh  of  the 
Nineteenth  Ward,  Salt  Lake  City.  In 
October,  1856  he  was  called  on  a  mis- 
sion to  Southern  Utah.  In  1860  he 
moved  to  Cache  valley  where  he  be- 
came one  of  the  first  settlers  of  Mill- 
ville, and  when  that  settlement  was 
organized  as  a  Ward  in  June,  1860, 
he  was  chosen  as  Bishop  of  the  same 
and  served  in  that  capacity  three 
years.  Returning  to  Salt  Lake  City 
he  worked  on  the  Temple  a  great  deal 
of  his  time  until  his  death  which  oc- 
curred May  6,  1868.  Bro.  Hovey 
married  four  wives.  His  first  wife 
was  Martha  Ann  Webster   of  Ports- 


mouth, New  Hampshire,  whom  he 
married  July  2,  1833;  this  wife  bore 
him  Elizabeth  W.  and  Martha  W., 
born  May  11,  1835;  Grafton  W.,  born 
Jan.  11,  1838;  Joseph  G.,  born  June 
8,    1839    Thomas    J.,    born    Dec.    17, 


120 


LATTER-DAY    SAINT 


184  2:  George  W..  born  June  14, 
1844.  and  Hannah  A.,  born  July  17, 
184").  His  wife  and  five  children 
died  en  route  from  Xauvoo  to  Winter 
Quarters  in  184*;.  I'.ro.  Hovey  mar- 
ried Sarah  IJaily  at  Winter  Quarters 
Dec.  2?,,  1847.  and  journeyed  to  Salt 
Lake  City  in  1848,  arriving  in  the 
Valley  Sept.  23,  1848.  His  wife  Sarah 
bore  him  one  rhild,  namely,  Sarah 
Elizabeth,  born  Oct.  8,  1850.  In  1850 
(Oct.  2Sth)  he  married  Sarah  Good- 
ridge,  who  bore  him  a  son  in  1851; 
mother  and  child  both  died.  In  1852 
(Jan.  14th)  Bro.  Hovey  married  L. 
Susannah  E.  Goodridge,  who  ))ore  her 
husband  eight  children,  namely, 
Penelope,  born  in  April,  1853;  James, 
born  June,  13,  1855;  Olive,  born  in 
1857;  Mary  L.,  born  in  1859;  Martha 
C,  born  in  1861;  Esther  A.,  born  in 
1863;  George  B.,  born  in  1865,  and 
Grafton  F.,  born  in  1868.  Bro.  Hovey 
labored  as  a  stone  cutter  on  the 
Temple  Block  several  years,  after 
which  he  moved  to  Cache  valley. 
During  the  general  reformation  in 
1856  Bro.  Hovey  was  known  as  a 
most  energetic  and  successful  worker. 

HVHBARI).  Cliarlos  Wesley,  first 
Bishop  of  Willard  Ward,  Box  Elder 
county,  Utah,  was  born  Oct.  7.  1810, 
at  Sheffield,  Mass.,  the  son  of  Xoah 
Hubbard  and  Cynthia  Clark.  He 
came  to  Utah  in  1848,  crossing  the 
plains  in  Heber  C.  Kimball's  com- 
pany. From  1851  to  1856  he  was  a 
resident  of  Willard,  Box  Elder 
county,  being  one  of  the  first  settlers 
of  that  place  and  also  the  first  Bishop 
of  the  Ward.  In  1856-58  he  filled 
a  mission  to  Great  Britain,  during 
which  he  labored  both  in  England 
and  Scotland.  He  was  called  on  a 
colonization  mission  to  the  Muddy 
(now  in  Southeastern  Nevada),  where 
he  lived  from  1864  to  1870.  There 
he  took  a  most  active  part  in  build- 
ing up  new  settlements  in  that  part 
of  the  country  and  acted  as  mail  car- 
rier between  the  Muddy  and  the 
settlements  of  Pioche  and  Paranagat, 
Nevada,   four  years.     He   returned   to 


Willard  in  1871,  where  he  sjjent  the 
remainder  of  his  days,  and  where 
his  death  occurred  Dec.  lU.  1903. 
Bishop  Hubbards  first  wife  was 
Mary  Ann  Bosworth  (a  daughter  of 
Jared  Bosworth  and  Lucy  Hubbard), 
born  August  12.  1816.  She  became 
the  wife  of  Bro.  Hubbard  in  1832  and 
bore  her  husband  the  following 
named  children:  Noah  Eli,  born  Feb. 
9,  1834;  Emma,  born  Feb.  13,  1836; 
Rhoda  Ann,  lK)rn  June  22,  1S39; 
Lucy,  born  .August  16,  1841;  John, 
born  Oct.  22,  1843;  Heber  William, 
born  Jan.  31,  1845;  Julius  C,  born 
April  3,  1848;  Albert  D.,  born  Feb. 
27,  1850;  Mary  Malinda.  born  Dec. 
31,  1851;  Charles  N.,  born  Dec.  5. 
1853;  Permelia  S.,  born  June  25, 
1856  and  David  Clark,  born  Feb.  7, 
1860.  In  February,  1856,  Bishop 
Hubbard  married  Mary  Edwards 
(daughter  of  John  Edwards  and  Ann 
Jones),  born  May  30,  1835,  in  Cardi- 
ganshire, Wales.  Following  are  the 
names  of  her  children:  Mary  Eliza- 
beth, born  Nov.  5,  1856;  Joseph, 
born  Oct.  20,  1859;  David,  born  Nov. 
30,  1861;  Ann  Rebecca,  born  March 
14,  1864;  John  Hyrum,  born  April 
18,  1867;  Lucynthia,  born  May  22, 
1869;  Jane,  born  Feb.  8,  1872;  Alma 
E.,  l)orn  April  13,  1874  and  Sarah 
Gevennie,  born  Oct.  4,  1877.  In  1851) 
'June  4th)  Bishop  Hubbard  married 
Sophia  Pollard  (daughter  of  James 
Pollard  and  Sarah  Robertshaw),  who 
was  born  Feb.  2  6,  1831,  and  came  to 
Utah  in  1853,  crossing  the  plains  in 
Cyrus  H.  Wheelock's  company.  Sis- 
ter Sophia  bore  her  husband  two 
children,  namely,  James  Willard, 
born  Feb.  12,  1861.  and  Sarah  Ann, 
born  Feb.  7,  18  63 

HUBBARD,  Joseph,  seventh  Bishop 
of  the  Willard  Ward.  Box  Elder 
county.  Utah,  was  born  Oct.  20,  1859, 
at  Willard,  the  son  of  Chas.  W.  Hub- 
bard and  Mary  Edwards.  He  accom- 
panied his  father  on  a  mission  to 
Southern  Utah,  where  he  was  bap- 
tized Oct.  12,  1867,  by  Andrew  Gib- 
bons.     In  1880    (March  4th  t   he  mar- 


HlOGKArillCAL    ENCYCLOl'El^l A. 


121 


ried  Sally  Ann  Marsli  (dauKhter  ot  tion  to  the  meetinf^-house  whi(;h  cou- 
Geo.  A.  Marsh  and  Jane  It.  Andrews),  sisted  of  seven  class  rooms  and  an 
who  was  horn  Nov.  11,  IXGl,  In  Wil-  amusement  hall  e«|uipped  with  the 
lard.  This  marriaKt-  was  blessed  with  modern  conveniences,  which  cost 
six  children,  namel.v,  George  J.,  $ir),()00.  lie  has  lately  assisted  two  ol" 
Althoa  J.,  M.  ('harles,   Lester  A.,  Al-     his  sons  in  fulfilling  foreign  missions, 

namely,  M.  Charles,  who  labored  in 
Germany,  and  Glenn  who  labored  in 
the  S()(i>"ty  Islands. 


lir.NT,  John  Alcxamlcr,  Bishop  of 
St.  Charles,  Hear  Lake  county,  Idaho, 
was  born  May  16,  1830,  in  Gibson 
county,  Tenn.,  the  son  of  Daniel  D. 
Hunt  and  Nancy  Davis.  In  1840  he 
went  to  Nauvoo,  111.,  with  his  father 
where  he  met  the  Prophet  .Joseph 
Smith  and  where  he  was  baptized  by 
Geo.  W.  Bransdon  in  March,  1843. 
Later  he  was  ordained  a  Seventy.  In 
1S50  he  arrived  in  I'tah,  and  in  1852 
started  without  purse  and  scrip  to 
fill  a  mission  to  Great  Britain.  Cross- 
ing the  plains  by  teams  he  finally 
arrived  in  Philadelphia  in  company 
with  Wm.  Woodward,  the  two  having 
only  eleven  cents  between  them,  but 
through  the  providence  of  the   Lord 


vin  Glenn,  and  Iteese  E.  Bro.  Hub- 
bard was  ordained  a  Seventy  Feb. 
10,  1884,  by  Abraham  Zundell,  and 
ordained  a  High  Priest  May  8,  1887, 
by  Henry  Tingey  and  set  apart  as  a 
counselor  to  Acting  Bishop  John  L.' 
Edwards  of  Willard,  laboring  in  that 
position  two  years.  In  1898-1900  he 
filled  a  mission  to  the  Eastern  States, 
presiding  over  the  Virginia  confer- 
ence one  year.  Prior  to  this  he  spent 
one  winter  in  Sevier  and  Carbon 
counties  as  a  Y.  M.  M.  1.  A.  mission- 
ary. He  was  set  apart  as  an  alter- 
nate High  Councilor  in  the  Box  Elder 
Stake  Sept.  19,  1908  and  ordained  a 
Bishop  by  Heber  J.  Grant,  May  29, 
1910,  and  set  apart  to  preside  over 
the  Willard  Ward,  which  position  he 
still  holds.  Bishop  Hubbard  has  al- 
ways been  active  in  Church  matters 
and  labored  for  a  number  of  years  in 
the  superintendency  of  the  Ward  Sun- 
day school  and  also  as  president  of 
the  Ward  Y.  M.  M.  I.  A.  For  several 
years  he  acted  as  a  school  trustee. 
In  the  years  1912  and  1913  he  took 
the   lead   in   the  erection   of  an  addi- 


they  obtained  means  to  continue  the 
journey  to  Europe  where  Bro.  Hunt 
filled  a  splendid  mission.  He  re- 
turned home  in  185  6  in  charge  of  the 
last  wagon  company  which  crossed 
the  plains  that  season;   his  company 


122 


LATTER-DAY   SAINT 


suffered  nearly  as  much  from  cold 
and  hunger  as  the  belated  hand-cart 
companies.  During  the  winter  of 
1856-57  he  labored  as  a  home  mis- 
sionary In  Salt  Lake  City,  and  in  the 
spring  of  1857  he  was  called  to  go 
out  on  the  plains  to  assist  in  the 
mall  service.  During  the  summer  of 
1857  he  had  charge  of  the  mail  sta- 
tion at  Devils  Gate.  In  18  59  (Sept. 
22nd)  he  married  Elizabeth  Tilt  and 
located  at  Grantsville,  Tooele  county, 
where  he  resided  until  1864,  when  he 
moved  to  St.  Charles,  Idaho,  where 
he  was  called  to  preside  in  18  67.  In 
August,  1877,  he  was  ordained  a 
Bishop  by  Apostle  Chas.  C.  Rich, 
which  position  he  held  until  July  28, 
1895.  While  residing  in  Tooele 
county  he  served  as  a  county  com- 
missioner and  filled  the  same  position 
in  Bear  Lake  county,  Idaho.  He 
died  at  his  home  in  St.  Charles, 
Idaho,  Jan.  23,  1913,  leaving  two 
children,  namely,  Nancy  H.  and 
John  A.  Hunt  Jr.  Bishop  Hunt  was 
a  pupil  of  the  old  school,  a  successful 
frontiersman  and  a  faithful  Latter- 
day  Saint. 

HXINTING,  Xathan,  Bishop  of  the 
Riverdale  Ward  (Uintah  Stake), 
Uintah  county,  Utah,  was  born  June 
24,  1839,  in  Worcestershire,  England, 
the  son  of  JameS  Hunting  and  Eliza- 
beth King.  Becoming  a  convert  to 
"Mormonism,"  he  was  baptized  when 
about  eight  years  old,  and  emigrated 
to  Utah  in  1853,  crossing  the  Atlantic 
Ocean  in  the  ship  "Falcon."  His 
first  home  was  in  South  Cottonwood 
Salt  Lake  county,  whence  he  weni 
back  in  1856  to  meet  the  handcart 
companies.  He  also  participated  in 
the  Echo  canyon  campaign  at  the 
time  of  the  Johnston  Army  troubles 
and  moved  to  Springville,  Utah 
county,  in  the  year  1858.  In  1861 
(April  17th)  he  married  ElizabethAnn 
Radmall  and  settled  at  Gunnison, 
Sanpete  county,  Utah,  and  soon  after- 
wards he  moved  back  to  Cottonwood; 
thence  to  Malad  City,  Idaho,  where 
he     resided     seventeen     years     and 


finally  became  a  permanent  settler  in 
Ashley  valley  (now  Vernal)  in  1884. 
He  held  many  positions  in  the  Priest- 
hood and  was  for  a  number  of  years 
Identified  with  the  Seventies.  Hav- 
ing previously  acted  as  a  presiding 
Elder  at  Riverdale,  he  was  ordained 
a  Bishop  May  9,  1887,  and  set  apart 
to  preside  over  the  Riverdale  Ward. 
He  acted  in  that  capacity  about  nine 
years,  or  until  he  was  released  owing 
to  the  loss  of  his  eyesight.  He  died 
a  faithful  Latter-day  Saint  Oct.  11, 
1911,  at  Vernal,  Utah,  leaving  a  large 
posterity.  Following  are  the  names 
of  his  children:  Caroline  Elizabeth, 
born  Feb.  10,  1862;  Nathan,  born 
April   11,   1864;    Mary  Athalia,  born 


Sept.  23,  1866,  Luretta  Radmall, 
born  Dec.  22,  1868;  James  Henry, 
born  Feb.  28,  1871;  Adeline,  born 
April  28,  1873;  Levi  Wm.,  born  Feb. 
26,  1875;  Emma  Estella,  born  April 
18,  1877;  Alison  Steadman,  born 
Oct.  17,  1879;  Viva  Matilda,  born 
Nov.  21,  1881;  Rachel  Josephine, 
born  Sept.  10,  1884,  Nephi  Joseph, 
born  April  1,  1886,  and  Reuben  Hy- 
rum,  born  March  «8,  1889. 

HUXTIXG,  Elizabeth  Ann  Rad- 
mall, wife  of  Nathan  Hunting,  was 
born  April  11,  1846,  in  Chesterfield, 
England,   the   daughter  of  Henry  B. 


BIOGRAPHICAL  ENCYCLOPEDIA. 


123 


Radmall  and  Caroline  Severns.  When 
about  nine  years  of  age  she  was  bap- 
tized by  Wm.  Huggins.  She  emi- 
grated to  Utah  in  1853,  crossing  the 
Atlantic  in  the  ship  "Zetland"  which 
sailed  from  Liverpool,  Jan.  29,  1849, 


and  the  plains  in  Captain  Cooley's 
company  which  arrived  in  Salt  Lake 
City  in  October,  1853.  For  a  num- 
ber of  years,  she  resided  with  her 
parents  in  Springville,  Utah  county, 
Utah,  and  became  the  wife  of  Nathan 
Hunting  April  17,  1861,  to  whom 
she  bore  thirteen  children.  In  the 
different  places  where  the  family 
resided,  Sister  Hunting  proved  a  ver- 
itable helpmate  to  her  husband  dur- 
ing his  busy  life.  She  took  a  very 
active  part  in  the  Relief  Societies  in 
the  different  settlements  where  she 
resided  and  acted  as  a  teacher  in  the 
Malad  Society  and  as  first  counselor 
in  the  Vernal  Society  about  eight 
years.  Sister  Hunting  is  still  active 
and  faithful  to  her  duties  in  the 
Church  and  otherwise. 

HYDE,  George  Tilton,  president  of 
the  Portneuf  Stake,  Bannock  county, 
Idaho,  was  born  Nov.  26,  18  66,  at 
Kaysville,  Davis  county,  Utah,  the 
son  of  Rosel  Hyde  and  Hannah  Maria 
Simmons.  He  was  baptized  June  3, 
1875,  by  John  Bennett,  and  ordained 


successively  to  the  office  of  Deacon, 
Priest,  Elder  and  Seventy.  He  acted 
as  president  of  a  Deacons  quorum 
at  Kaysville,  secretary  of  the  Kays- 
ville Y.  M.  M.  I.  A.  and  secretary  of 
a  branch  Primary  Association.  He 
filled  a  mission  to  the  Southern 
States  in  1893-189  5.  He  was  also 
president  of  the  Cambridge  Ward 
Y.  M.  M.  I.  A.  in  Idaho  and  filled 
many  other  positions  of  responsibility 
and  trust  in  the  Church.  When  yet 
a  young  man  he  became  a  counselor 
in  the  Pocatello  Stake  presidency  of 
Y.  M.  M.  I.  A.  He  was  ordained  a 
High  Priest  and  Bishop  Feb.  19, 
1899,  and  set  apart  as  Bishop  of  the 
Cambridge  Ward.  Eight  years  later 
(June  30,  1907)  he  was  set  apart  as 
Bishop  of  the  Downey  Ward.  He  was 
set  apart  as  president  of  the  Portneuf 
Stake  August  15,  1915,  when  that 
Stake  was  organized.  President 
Hyde  received  a  public  school  edu- 
cation, and  after  leaving  school  he 
remained  at  the  parental  home  assist- 
ing in  farm  duties  until  he  had  at- 
tained his  majority,  when  he  accepted 


a  position  in  a  store  and  began  his 
career  as  a  merchant.  In  18  9  5  he 
moved  from  Utah  to  Downey,  Idaho, 
where  he  joined  his  brother  William 
A.  Hyde,  who  had  previously  be- 
come  established   in   business   there. 


124 


LATTER-DAY   SAINT 


He  is  now  president  and  general  man- 
ager of  the  W.  A.  Hyde  Company, 
which  conducts  one  of  the  largest 
and  busiest  department  stores  in  this 
section  of  Idaho.  President  Hyde  is 
also  president  of  the  Downey  State 
Bank  and  was  one  of  the  original 
promoters  of  the  Portneuf  and  Marsh 
Valley  Irrigation  Company.  In  fact 
President  Hyde  has  taken  a  leading 
part  in  all  the  important  business 
enterprises  in  that  section  of  the 
country  where  he  resides.  In  1897 
(Nov.  18th)  he  married  Emma  Nibley 
(daughter  of  James  Nibley  and  Fan- 
nie Gibbs),  who  was  born  Nov.  6, 
1873,  at  Paradise,  Cache  county, 
Utah.  This  marriage  has  been  blessed 
with  seven  children,  five  sons  and 
two  daughters,  namely,  Osmond, 
Rosel,  Emma  and  Erma  (twins), 
Charles,  Donald  and  Reed.  President 
Hyde's  wife  died  Oct.  13,  1915,  four 
days  after  giving  birth  to  her  eighth 
child.  In  a  civil  capacity  President 
Hyde  has  served  his  fellow-citizens 
as  county  commissioner  of  Bannock 
county,  Idaho,  three  terms.  He  has 
the  reputation  of  being  a  gentleman 
of  quick  discernment,  alert  and  per- 
severing. In  manner  he  is  genial, 
and  unfailing  courtesy  renders  him 
affable  with  all  with  whom  he  has 
business  or  social  relations. 

HYEK,  Andrew  Lars,  Bishop  of  the 
Lewiston  First  Ward  (Benson  Stake). 
Cache  county,  Utah,  was  born  Dec. 
1,  1860,  at  Richmond,  Cache  county, 
Utah,  the  son  of  Christian  Hyer  and 
Caroline  Hogan.  His  parents  came 
to  Utah  in  1849,  locating  at  Bountiful 
Davis  county,  and  afterwards  (1860) 
in  Richmond,  Cache  county.  Andrew 
L.  was  baptized  June  5,  1870,  by 
Goudy  Hogan  and  located  at  Lewis- 
ton  in  April,  1881;  he  was  ordained 
successively  to  the  office  of  Teacher, 
Elder,  Seventy  and  High  Priest,  the 
latter  ordination  taking  place  Dec. 
19,  1905,  under  the  hands  of  Marriner 
W.  Merrill.  Prior  to  that  he  acted 
as  senior  president  of  the  117th  quor- 
um of  Seventy  and  filled  a  mission  to 


Europe  in  1885-1888,  laboring,  in 
Norway  and  England.  At  home  he 
has  served  as  a  member  of  the  Lewis- 
ton  town  board  and  his  chief  occu- 
pation in  life  has  been  that  of  a 
farmer  and  dairyman.  In  1880  he 
married  Ellen  Gilbert,  daughter  of 
James  Gilbert  and  Sarah  Choules, 
which  marriage  has  been  blessed  with 
fourteen  children,  all  of  whom  are 
living.  He  married  Lizzie  Helen  Tel- 
ford May  20,  1885;  she  was  the 
daughter  of  John  D.  Telford  and 
Sarah  Coltrin  and  bore  her  husband 
eleven  children;  by  both  his  wives 
he  had  twelve  boys  and  thirteen 
girls;  two  children  by  his  last  wife 
are  dead. 

IPSOX,  Joseph,  Bishop  of  the  Junc- 
tion Ward  (Panguitch  Stake),  Piute 
county,  Utah,  was  born  April  7,  1879, 


at  Panguitch,  Utah,  the  son  of  Niels 
Peter  Ipson  and  Inger  Christine  Mad- 
sen.  He  was  raised  partly  on  his 
father's  ranch  near  the  Panguitch 
lake,  where  he  attended  Sunday 
school.  The  family  were  in  the  habit 
of  spending  the  summers  at  the  Lake 
and  the  winters  at  Panguitch.  Jo- 
seph was  baptized  July  2,  1887,  by 
William  Prince  in  the  Blue  Spring 
creek  near  Panguitch  lake.  He  was 
ordained  a  Deacon  when  a  boy,  acted 


BIOGRAPHICAL  ENCYCLOPEDIA. 


125 


as  second  counselor  in  the  presidency 
of  the  Deacons  quorum  of  Panguitch; 
was  ordained  an  Elder  in  September, 
1902,  by  Bishop  James  B.  Heywood 
and  filled  a  mission  to  the  United 
States  trom  October,  1902,  to  March, 
1905,  laboring  in  Tennessee,  part  of 
the  time  as  counselor  to  the  confer- 
ence president.  After  his  return  to 
Utah  he  acted  as  Stake  clerk  and 
counselor  in  the  Stake  presidency  of 
Y.  M.  M.  I.  A.  He  also  served  as  an 
officer  in  the  Ward  Y.  M.  M.  I.  A.  and 
was  a  member  of  the  Stake  Sunday 
school  board.  He  moved  to  Junction 
in  1908  and  married  Hattie  Permelia 
Morrill  June  11,  1908,  in  the  Salt 
Lake  Temple;  she  was  the  daughter 
of  Bishop  John  Morrill  and  Ella  E. 
LeBaron  and  has  borne  her  husband 
three  children,  namely,  Ella  Christ- 
ine, Joseph  Morrill  and  Ruby.  Bro. 
Ipson  served  as  president  of  the  Y. 
M.  M.  I.  A.  of  Junction  a  short  time 
and  was  ordained  a  High  Priest  and 
Bishop  by  Orson  F.  Whitney  August 
25,  1915,  and  set  apart  to  preside 
over  the  Junction  Ward. 

JACKSON,  Samuel,  Bishop  of  the 
Manassa  Ward  (San  Luis  Stake), 
Conejos  county,  Colo.,  was  born  July 
13,  1844,  in  Manchester,  Lancashire, 
England,  the  son  of  Benjamin  Jack- 
son and  Ann  Grimshaw.  His  parents 
having  joined  the  Church  he  was  bap- 
tized when  about  eight  years  old.  To- 
gether with  his  parents  he  emigrated 
to  America  in  1856,  crossing  the  At- 
lantic in  the  ship  "Horizon"  and  the 
plains  in  Edward  Martin's  ill-fated 
handcart  company,  which  suffered  so 
dreadfully  by  being  caught  in  the 
snowstorms  of  that  year.  After  rest- 
ing in  Salt  Lake  City  a  few  days,  the 
Jackson  family  proceeded  to  Nephi, 
Juab  county,  Utah,  where  they  be- 
came early  residents.  In  18  63  Samuel 
made  a  trip  to  the  Missouri  river  and 
back  as  a  Church  teamster.  In  Feb- 
ruary, 1866,  he  was  ordained  a  Sev- 
enty by  Daniel  Miller  and  became  a 
member  of  the  71st  quorum  of  Seven- 
ty.    In  1867    (Dec.  2nd)    he  married 


Miss  Hannah  M.  Jacques,  who  has 
borne  him  several  children.  In  1881-83 
he  filled  a  mission  to  the  Southern 
States,  laboring  principally  in  Ala- 
bama and  Tennessee.  Soon  after  his 
return  home  from  this  mission  he 
married  Miss  Martha  J.  Jackson,  and 
in  1882  (Oct.  2nd)  he  was  set  apart 
as  one  of  the  seven  presidents  of  the 
71st  quorum  of  Seventy.  Finally  he 
was  ordained  a  High  Priest  Dec.  2, 
1885,  by  Joel  Grover  and  set  apart 
as  second  counselor  to  Bishop  David 
Udall  of  the  Nephi  Second  Ward.  Ow- 
ing to  the  anti-polygamy  raid  he  was 
forced  to  leave  home  in  March,  1890, 
and  located  in  the  San  Luis  Stake  of 


Zion,  where  he  has  resided  ever  since. 
In  1896  (Feb.  16th)  he  was  ordained 
a  Bishop  by  John  Henry  Smith  and 
set  apart  to  preside  over  the  Manassa 
Ward,  which  position  he  still  holds. 
Bishop  Jackson  has  been  a  diligent 
worker  in  the  Church  since  his  early 
youth  and  now  in  his  advanced  years 
he  is  still  a  diligent  and  faithful 
worker  for  the  cause  which  lies  near- 
est his  heart,  namely,  the  redemption 
of  the  human  race. 

JEFFEKIES,  Richard,  first  Bishop 
of  the  Grantsville  First  Ward  (Tooele 
Stake),  Tooele  county.  Utah,  was 
born   Nov.    2  9.    1867,    at   Grantsville, 


126 


LATTER-DAY   SAINT 


the  son  of  William  Jefferies  and 
Mary  Frances  Ould.  He  was  bap- 
tized Dec.  2,  1875,  by  George  Whit- 
tle; ordained  a  Deacon  Feb.  8,  1882, 
by  Edward  Hunter;  ordained  a  Teach- 
er August  31,  1884,  by  John  T.  Rich; 


ordained  a  Priest  Feb.  9,  18  87,  by 
Wm.  Jefferies;  ordained  an  Elder 
Nov.  23,  1890,  by  Wm.  Jefferies; 
married  Jane  Elizabeth  Rydalch  in 
the  Logan  Temple  Nov.  26,  1890; 
was  ordained  a  Seventy  Oct.  20,  1893, 
by  Brigham  H.  Roberts;  filled  a  mis- 
sion to  Great  Britain  in  1893-95, 
laboring  in  the  Nottingham  confer- 
ence, and  filled  a  second  mission  to 
Great  Britain  in  1907-09,  laboring  in 
the  Sheffield  conference.  He  was 
set  apart  as  a  president  of  the  31st 
quorum  of  Seventy  Dec.  28,  1910; 
set  apart  as  second  assistant  superin- 
tendent of  the  Grantsville  Sunday 
school  in  February,  1910,  and  set 
apart  as  superintendent  of  said  school 
Jan.  8,  1911;  ordained  a  High  Priest 
and  Bishop  March  29,  1914,  by  David 
O.  McKay  and  set  apart  to  preside 
over  the  Grantsville  First  Ward, 
which  was  then  organized.  His  wife 
died  Dec.  7,  1912,  being  the  mother 
of  eight  children.  In  1914  (Sept. 
9th)  he  married  Sarah  Ann  Parkin- 
son, who  has  borne  him  one  child. 


JENSEN,  Niels,  one  of  the  earliest 
converts  to  "Mormonism"  in  Den- 
mark, was  born  Dec.  3,  1806,  at 
Kaierod,  Birkerod  parish,  Frederiks- 
borg  amt,  Denmark,  the  son  of  Jens 
Jensen.  He  learned  the  pottery  trade 
at  Birkerod  and  served  as  a  hussar 
in  the  Danish  army  and  as  a  body 
guard  to  General  Fribo.  He  located 
at  Hirscholm,  near  Copenhagen, 
where  he  established  himself  as  a 
successful  potter.  When  Erastus 
Snow  and  his  fellow-missionaries  ar- 
rived as  the  first  Latter-day  Saint 
Elders  to  Scandinavia  in  1850,  they 
commenced  their  labors  in  Copen- 
hagen, but  they  soon  extended  their 
operations  into  the  country  and  found 
believers  in  a  neighborhood  called 
Hirscholm,  not  far  from  the  city  of 
Copenhagen,  where  Niels  Jensen  and 
his  wife  Gertrude  resided;  they  were 
converted  to  "Mormonism"  and  were 
baptized,  thus  laying  a  foundation 
for  a  little  branch  of  the  Church  at 
that  place.  After  Apostle  Erastus 
Snow  had  finished  his  mission  in 
Scandinavia  and  was  about  to  return 
to  his  home  in  America,   he  invited 


such  of  the  Scandinavian  Saints  as 
were  ready,  or  could  make  ready,  to 
accompany  him  to  Utah,  and  among 
those  who  responded  was  Bro.  Niels 
Jensen,  who  .together  with  his  wife 
and    one    child    (Jensine),    joined    a 


BIOGRAPHICAL   ENCYCLOPEDIA. 


127 


little  company  of  28  souls  who  emi- 
grated to  Utah  in  1852  as  the  first 
fruits  of  "Mormonism"  direct  from 
Scandinavia.  On  his  arrival  in  Salt 
Lake  City,  Elder  Jensen  located  in 
the    Second    Ward,    where    he    estab- 


Gertrude  Jensen,  wife  of  Niels  Jensen. 


lished  himself  as  a  potter  and  where 
he  resided  until  the  time  of  his 
death.  Bro.  Jensen  was  ordained  a 
High  Priest  and  set  apart  to  act  as 
a  counselor  to  Bishop  Isaac  Hill  of 
the  Second  Ward,  Salt  Lake  City. 
He  was  also  appointed  by  President 
Brigham  Young  to  preside  over  the 
Scandinavian  meetings,  which  were 
held  in  the  Social  Hall  and  in  the 
Second  Ward  school  house.  These 
positions  he  held  as  long  as  he  lived. 
Brother  Jensen  was  a  man  of  great 
faith  and  intelligence  and  his  wise 
counsels  and  suggestions  were  always 
listened  to  in  the  Bishop's  monthly 
meetings  with  interest.  At  the  time 
of  "the  move"  in  1858,  he  located 
temporarily  at  Spanish  Fork,  Utah 
county,  where  he  built  a  comfortable 
home  for  his  family,  but  when  the 
war  troubles  were  over  he  moved 
back  to  Salt  Lake  City.  During  the 
grasshopper  famine  in  1855-56  he 
suffered  much.  He  was  known  as  a 
benefactor  to  many  suffering  emi- 
grants   of    his    own    nationality    and 


others  who  arrived  from  the  plains, 
and  he  also  assisted  several  Scandi- 
navians with  means  to  emigrate  to 
Zion.  He  assisted  in  establishing  a 
tannery  in  the  Second  Ward  and 
manufactured  the  first  glazed  pot- 
tery ware  made  in  Utah.  Yielding 
obedience  to  the  higher  law  he  mar- 
ried, as  a  plural  wife,  the  widow  of 
the  late  Lars  Jensen,  who  bore  her 
husband  a  son  (Niels  Jensen)  to 
whom  Bro.  Jensen  taught  the  pot- 
ter's trade,  and  who  later  established 
a  pottery  in  Salt  Lake  City.  He  also 
taught  that  trade  to  Frederick  Peter- 
sen, Ferdinand  Hansen  and  James  J. 
Hansen,  the  first  of  whom  established 
a  pottery  in  Brigham  City,  the  second 
in  Logan  and  the  third  in  Hyrum, 
Cache  county.  Bro.  Jensen  died  at 
his  home  in  the  Second  Ward,  Salt 
Lake  City,  May  5,  1860.  His  first 
wife,  Gertrude,  was  the  daughter  of 
Ole  Jorgensen  and  was  born  Feb.  10, 
1807,  at  Kaierod,  the  same  as  her 
husband.  She  died  in  Salt  Lake  City 
May  21,  1877.  Niels  and  Gertrude 
Jensen  were  both  beloved  by  all  who 
knew  them  and  both  died  as  faithful 
members  of  the  Church. 

JEXSEX,  Soren,  presiding  Elder  at 
Crescent    (Jordan   Stake),   Salt  Lake 


county,  Utah,  was  born  Dec.  4,  1835, 
at   Hormested,    Hjorring   amt..    Den- 


128 


LATTER-DAY   SAINT 


mark,  the  son  of  Jens  C.  Christensen 
and  Mette  Marie  Jensen.  He  re- 
ceived a  common  school  education 
and  learned  the  trade  of  a  brick 
maker,  at  which  he  worked  about 
twenty  years.  He  was  also  engaged 
as  a  lime  burner  for  six  years.  In 
March,  1858,  he  married  Nielsine  K. 
Jensen,  who  was  born  at  Nykjobing 
on  Morso,  Denmark,  Nov.  14,  1836. 
This  marriage  was  blessed  with  elev- 
en children,  namely,  Jens  Peter, 
Christine  M.,  Christian  L.,  Stephen, 
Carl  E.,  Else  M.,  Christiane,  Jacob, 
Jacob  W.,  Martin  T.,  and  Elvine.  Be- 
coming a  convert  to  "Mormonism" 
Bro.  Jensen  and  wife  joined  the 
Church  in  1877,  being  baptized  by 
Soren  Christiansen.  Soon  after  his 
baptism  he  was  ordained  a  Priest 
and  subsequently  an  Elder.  He  emi- 
grated to  Utah  in  1881  and  located 
at  Crescent  and  afterwards  at  Dra- 
per. He  was  ordained  a  High  Priest 
April  29,  1893,  by  Jos.  E.  Taylor 
and  acted  as  presiding  Elder  at 
Crescent  about  eight  years.  Bro. 
Jensen  has  had  several  of  his  sons 
on  missions  and  one  of  them  (Jens 
Peter)  acted  for  several  years  as 
Bishop  of  the  Crescent  Ward. 

JENSEN,  Siiren,  a  veteran  Elder 
of  the  Church  and  a  resident  of  the 
Forest  Dale  Ward,  Salt  Lake  county, 
Utah,  was  born  June  14,  1838,  at 
Hvirring,  Jutland,  Denmark,  the  son 
of  Jens  Peter  Sorensen  and  Ane  Kjer- 
stine  Jensen.  He  was  baptized  in 
1857  by  Jens  Hansen  and  ordained  a 
Teacher  Nov.  1,  1857,  by  Christopher 
O.  Folkman.  Soon  afterwards  he  was 
called  to  labor  as  a  local  missionary 
and  was  thus  engaged  for  two  years. 
In  the  meanttime  he  was  ordained  an 
Elder  by  Peter  Nielsen  (Jan.  30, 
1859).  In  1860  he  emigrated  to 
America,  crossing  the  Atlantic  in  the 
ship  "William  Tapscott"  and  the 
plains  in  Capt.  Oscar  O.  Stoddard's 
hand-cart  company.  On  the  journey 
(at  Omaha)  he  married  Elna  Peter- 
sen with  whom  he  made  his  honey- 
moon   trip    by    pulling    a    hand-cart 


across  the  plains.  He  found  employ- 
ment in  Salt  Lake  City  and  after  a 
few  years  commenced  work  at  his 
trade  as  a  carpenter  on  the  Taber- 
nacle. He  was  ordained  a  Seventy 
Feb.  17,  18  61,  by  W.  S.  Brundage 
and  became  a  member  of  the  62nd 
quorum  of  Seventy.  In  1867  (March 
9th)  he  marriea  Kjerstine  Rasmus- 
sen.  In  1868  (April  8th)  he  mar- 
ried Karen  Juliusen.  In  1878  (Sept. 
12)  he  married  Ane  J.  K.  Jensen 
and  in  188  4  (Feb.  21st)  he  married 
Petrea  C.  Hansen.  By  these  five 
wives  he  became  the  father  of  25 
children,  sixteen  of  whom  are  still 
alive.       In    1885,     during     the    anti- 


polygamy  raid,  he  moved  to  St. 
John,  Arizona,  where  he  spent  two 
years,  after  which  (in  1887)  he  went 
to  Mancos,  Colo.,  where  he  spent  23 
years  and  engaged  in  ranging  on  a 
large  scale.  In  1909  he  located  in 
the  Forest  Dale  Ward,  Salt  Lake 
county,  Utah,  on  the  same  ground 
that  he  originally  purchased  from 
Zina  D.  H.  Young  about  1878,  he 
being  one  of  the  settlers  at  Forest 
Dale.  Elder  Jensen  spent  most  of 
his  time  laboring  in  the  interest  of 
the  Church,  filling  many  positions 
both  at  home  and  abroad.  In  187  6-78 
he  filled  a  mission  to  Scandinavia, 
laboring  a  part  of  the  time  as  presi- 


BIOGRAPHICAL   ENCYCLOPEDIA. 


129 


dent  of  the  Aarhus  conference,  Den- 
mark, and  later  revived  missionary 
labors  very  successfully  on  the  island 
of  Bornholm.  Bro.  Jensen  died  April 
27,  1917,  survived  by  two  wives,  six- 
teen children,  40  grandchildren  and 
ten  gfeat-grandchildren. 

JENSON,  James,  fourth  Bishop  of 
the  Millville  Ward  (Hyrum  Stake), 
Cache  county,  Utah,  was  born  April 


Lund  and  Christianstad  branches. 
After  his  return  home  he  presided 
over  the  Millville  Y.  M.  M.  I.  A.  In 
1903  he  was  ordained  a  High  Priest 
by  Geo.  Teasdale  and  set  apart  as 
second  counselor  to  Bishop  John  E. 
Roueche.  He  acted  in  that  capacity 
until  January,  1909,  when  Bishop 
Roueche  was  released  and  Bro.  Jen- 
son  appointed  presiding  Elder  at  Mill- 
ville. Finally  he  was  ordained  a  Bish- 
op by  Geo.  F.  Richards  July  25,  1909, 
and  set  apart  to  preside  over  the 
Millville  Ward,  with  Henry  C.  Hen- 
ninger  as  first  and  Orson  Olson  as 
second  counselor.  In  1901  Bro.  Jen- 
son  married  Emma  Olsen  of  Millville; 
she  has  borne  her  husband  eight 
children. 

JEX,  William,  a  Patriarch  in  the 
Nebo  Stake,  Utah  county,  Utah,  was 
born  Sept.  5,  1831,  at  Crostwick, 
Norfolk,  England,  the  son  of  Wm. 
Jex  and  Ann  Ward.  Becoming  a 
convert  to  "Mormonism"  he  was  bap- 
tized March  10,  1853,  by  James 
Woods  and  soon  afterward  ordained 


10,  1866,  at  Swedale,  Malmohus  Ian, 
Sweden,  the  son  of  Rasmus  Jenson 
and  Kjersti  Poulson.  His  parents 
became  converts  to  "Mormonism" 
and  emigrated  to  Utah  in  1883. 
James  followed  the  next  year  and 
located  at  Millville  where  he  has 
resided  ever  since.  Here  he  became 
a  convert  to  "Mormonism"  and  was 
baptized  Sept.  1,  1887,  by  John  King. 
Soon  afterwards  he  was  ordained  a 
Deacon  and  took  an  active  part  in  the 
Ward  auxiliary  organizations.  He 
was  ordained  an  Elder  Feb.  10,  1889, 
by  Richard  Jessop,  and  on  Feb.  13, 
188  9,  he  married  Christina  Ander- 
son of  Millville  (daughter  of  Johan- 
nes Anderson),  who  bore  him  four 
children  and  then  died  in  childbirth 
July  11,  1900.  Bro.  Jenson  filled  a 
mission  to  Scandinavia  in  1897-98, 
laboring  in  the  Goteborg  and  SkS.ne 
conferences    and    presiding    over    the 

Vol.  III.  No.  9. 


a  Priest  by  John  Hyde.  He  emigrat- 
ed to  Utah  in  1854,  crossing  the  At- 
lantic in  the  ship  "Windermere,"  and 
the  plains  in  Capt.  Darwin  Richard- 
son's company,  which  arrived  in  Salt 
Lake  City  Sept.  30,  18  54.  He  lived 
September,  1918. 


130 


LATTER-DAY   SAINT 


in  Salt  Lake  City  until  1858  and  then 
became  an  early  resident  of  Spanish 
Fork,  Utah  county.  He  was  ordained 
an  Elder  by  Dr.  Samuel  L.  Sprague 
in  1856,  ordained  a  Seventy  by  Ben- 
jamin Clapp  in  1857,  ordained  a  High 
Priest  by  Geo.  A.  Smith  Feb.  18, 
19d5,  and  ordained  a  Patriarch  by 
Chas.  W.  Penrose,  June  7,  1912.  In 
1883-84  he  filled  a  mission  to  Great 
Britain,  laboring  as  president  of  the 
Norwich  conference.  To  summarize 
Bro.  Jex's  labors,  it  may  be  said  that 
he  acted  for  twenty  years  as  a  presi- 
dent in  the  50th  quorum  of  Seventy, 
acted  as  a  Ward  teacher  for  many 
years,  served  six  years  in  the  city 
council  at  Spanish  Fork  and  acted 
several  years  as  a  school  trustee.  He 
has  been  general  watermaster,  and 
had  charge  of  the  United  Order  dairy 
and  saw  mill,  and  was  active  in  open- 
ing canyon  roads.  He  made  several 
missionary  tours  to  the  Indians,  one 
in  Grass  valley  with  Geo.  W.  Bean 
and  Albert  K.  Thurber;  also  to  Fish 
Lake  and  other  places.  In  1855  he 
assisted  in  taking  care  of  Church 
cattle  in  Cache  valley,  participated 
in  the  Echo  canyon  campaign  in 
1857,  was  in  the  Diamond  creek  fight 
with  the  Indians  when  John  Ed- 
munds was  killed  and  scalped. 
Throughout  his  life  he  has  been  most 
active  and  faithful  for  the  Church 
and  the  community.  Bro.  Jex  mar- 
ried two  wives  and  is  the  father  of 
fifteen  children  and  113  grandchil- 
dren; he  has  at  the  present  time  215 
direct  descendents. 

JEX,  Eliza  Goodson,  wife  of  Wil- 
liam Jex,  was  born  Jan.  1,  1826,  at 
Beeston,  Norfolk,  England,  the  daugh- 
ter of  John  Goodson  and  Sarah  Trax- 
en.  She  was  baptized  in  18  49  by 
John  Hart  at  Norwich,  emigrated  to 
Utah  in  1854,  and  while  crossing  the 
Atlantic  in  the  ship  "Windermere" 
she  was  married  to  William  Jex  Feb. 
22,  1854,  Daniel  Kearns,  president 
of  the  company,  performing  the  cere- 
mony. On  this  voyage  smallpox 
broke  out  among  the  passengers  and 


a  number  of  the  children  died.  Pro- 
ceeding up  the  Mississippi  river,  Sis- 
ter Jex  and  her  husband  crossed  the 
plains  in  a  company  which  arrived 
in  Salt  Lake  City  Sept.  30,  1854.  The 
family  first  resided  in  Salt  Lake  City, 
where  Sister  Jex  taught  school  in  the 
Eleventh  Ward,  and  when  provisions 
were  so  low  in  185  6,  owing  to  the 
destruction  of  the  crops  the  previous 
year  by  the  grasshoppers,  the  Jex 
family,  like  other  colonists,  had  to 
resort  to  eating  roots  in  order  to 
live.  At  one  time  they  lived  three 
weeks  without  tasting  bread.  After 
the  Echo  canyon  troubles  the  family 
moved  to  Spanish  Fork  in  1858,  leav- 


ing their  home  ready  for  the  torch  to 
be  lighted.  Sister  Jex  at  present  is 
the  mother  of  eleven  children  and 
has  113  grandchildren,  and  alto- 
gether 215  direct  descendants.  Sis- 
ter Jex  is  the  only  one  of  her  father's 
household  who  ever  joined  the 
Church.  Besides  carding  and  spin- 
ning clothes  and  caring  for  her  own 
children,  she  took  charge  of  three 
children  left  by  her  husband's  second 
wife. 

JOHNSON,  John  Henry,  fifth  Bish- 
op of  the  Tropic  Ward  (Panguitch 
Stake),  Garfield  county,  Utah,  was 
born  Jan  7,  1881,  at  Johnson,  Kane 
county,   Utah,   the  son  of  Joel  Hills 


BIOGRAPHICAL  ENCYCLOPEDIA. 


131 


Johnson  and  Margaret  Threlkeld.  He 
came  with  his  mother  from  Kanab 
and  settled  at  Tropic  Sept.  25,  1897, 
where  he  has  resided  ever  since.  He 
was  baptized  July  4,  1889,  by  Wm. 
Derby  Johnson,  was  ordained  an  El- 


der by  Mahonri  M.  Steele  and  mar- 
ried Mary  E.  Ahlstrom  Nov.  15,  1900, 
which  marriage  has  been  blessed  with 
seven  children.  Bishop  Johnson  acted 
as  a  counselor  in  a  Deacons  quorum 
at  Tropic  and  was  ordained  a  Bishop 
by  Geo.  F.  Richards  May  28,  1916, 
and  set  apart  to  preside  over  the 
Tropic  Ward,  having  been  sustained 
by  the  people  in  that  position  March 
2  6,  1916.  He  succeeded  Thomas 
Henry  Cope  as  Bishop  of  Tropic. 

JOHNSON,  Nephi,  a  Patriarch  in 
the  Church,  was  born  Dec.  12,  1833, 
at  Kirtland,  Ohio,  the  son  of  Joel  H. 
Johnson  and  Annie  Johnson.  He  was 
baptized  in  May,  18  42,  by  John  Smith, 
the  Prophet's  uncle,  and  migrated  to 
Utah  with  his  parents  in  184  8,  cross- 
ing the  plains  in  Franklin  D.  Rich- 
ards' company.  As  a  boy  he  became 
well  acquainted  with  the  Prophet 
Joseph  Smith,  who  stayed  at  the 
Johnson  family  home  many  times 
when  visiting  Ramus,  Hancock  coun- 
ty, 111.  Together  with  his  parents 
and    co-religionists   generally,    Nephi 


endured  many  of  the  hardships  and 
persecutions  through  which  the 
Saints  passed  in  those  early  days. 
From  1851  to  1853  he  lived  at  Cedar 
City,  Iron  county,  Utah,  being  one 
of  the  first  settlers  in  Iron  county, 
whence  he  was  called  on  a  mission 
to  the  Indians  in  Souhtern  Uta>h  and 
Nevada,  and  for  many  years  after 
that  he  worked  diligently  and  effi- 
ciently assisting  in  settling  the  val- 
leys along  the  Rio  Virgen  and  the 
Muddy.  In  1858  he  went  out  with 
Col.  Wm.  H.  Dame's  exploring  com- 
pany to  explore  the  desert  west  of 
Utah,  and  Bro.  Johnson  led  some  of 
the  party  as  far  west  as  Death  valley. 
The  same  year  he  led  an  exploring 
party  and  built  the  road  into  Upper 
Virgen  valley,  locating  the  town  of 
Virgen  City,  where  he  lived  for  four- 
teen years.  While  a  resident  of  that 
place  he  acted  as  presiding  Elder, 
acting  Bishop  and  Bishop's  counselor. 
In  1871  he  moved  to  Kanab,  Kane 
county,  Utah,  where  he  acted  as  first 
counselor  to  the  Bishop;  he  also 
served   three   terms   as   county   com- 


missioner, acted  as  town  president 
for  several  years,  was  superintendent 
of  waterworks  three  years  and  road 
commissioner  ten  years.  In  January, 
1856,  while  living  at  Cedar  City,  he 
married     Mandana     R.    Merrill,    who 


132 


LATTER-DAY   SAINT 


bore  him  ten  children,  namely,  Lov- 
inia,  Nephi,  Joel,  Justin,  Editha, 
Susan,  Sixtus,  Wallace,  Lillian,  and 
Seth.  In  October,  1860,  he  married 
Conradina  A.  Mariger,  who  bore  him 
sixteen  children,  namely,  Elsie,  An- 
nie, Sixtus  E.,  John,  Lawrence, 
George,  Willie,  Eliza,  Minnie,  Sad- 
die,  Alfa,  Alice,  Nephi,  Orson,  Jessie, 
and  Alfred.  In  1889  he  married  Mrs. 
Bodel  M.  Jensen,  a  widow  with  six 
children,  who  also  bore  him  one  child 
(Bodel  M.)  Bro.  Johnson  has  always 
been  a  very  active  and  efficient 
Church  worker  wherever  he  has  re- 
sided. He  has  worked  considerable 
in  the  Temples  and  occupied  many 
important  positions  in  the  Priest- 
hood. 

JOHNSON,  Bodel  Margaret  Jensen, 

wife  of  Nephi  Johnson,  was  born  Dec. 
27,  1847.,  at  Bromby,  Samso,  Den- 
mark ,the  daughter  of  Anders  Jorgen 


Jensen  and  Anne  Marie  Petersen. 
She  emigrated  to  Utah  as  a  convert 
to  "Mormonism"  in  1882,  was  mar- 
ried when  quite  young  to  Hans 
Christian  Jensen  by  whom  she  had 
six  children  (Johanne,  Sophie, 
Josephine,  Christen,  Knud  C,  and 
John).  After  her  arrival  in  Utah  she 
located  with  her  family  at  Fountain 
Green,    Sanpete    county,    where    her 


husband  died  Oct.  18,  18  87.  She  be- 
came the  wife  of  Nephi  Johnson 
April  24,  1889,  and  moved  with  him 
to  Juarez,  Mexico,  in  December,  1889. 
Here  she  gave  birth  to  a  daughter 
(Bodel  Margaret).  In  1894  the 
family  moved  to  Mesquite,  Nev., 
which  was  then  a  branch  of  the 
Bunkerville  Ward,  St.  George  Stake. 
When  a  Relief  Society  was  organized 
at  that  place  in  1897,  Sister  Johnson 
was  chosen  as  president  of  the  same. 
In  which  capacity  she  labored  faith- 
fully until  her  demise  which  took 
place  Jan.  13,  1917.  During  these 
nineteen  years  a  Ward  was  organized 
at  Mesquite  and  a  number  of  Elders 
called  to  foreign  fields.  For  each  of 
these  a  grand  farewell  was  arranged 
by  the  Relief  Society  under  the  direc- 
tion of  Sister  Johnson  and  a  nice  sum 
raised  in  each  case.  Sister  Johnson 
was  a  cheerful,  earnest  worker  in  the 
Church,  sacrificing  the  association  of 
her  relatives  and  friends  in  the  old 
country  for  the  gospel,  to  which  she 
so  faithfully  devoted  the  remainder 
of  her  life. 

JOHNSON,  Swen  Fredcrik,  first 
counselor  in  the  presidency  of  the 
Portneuf  Stake  of  Zion  (Idaho),  was 
born  In  Sweden,  Dec.  6,  1869.  He 
grew  to  a  man's  estate  in  his  native 
land  and  acquired  a  good  practical 
education,  first  attending  the  public 
schools  and  later  completing  a  course 
in  the  college  of  Latin  at  Goteborg, 
Sweden.  When  about  twelve  years 
of  age  he  began  to  learn  the  printer's 
trade,  and  after  serving  an  ap- 
prenticeship for  seven  years  mastered 
said  trade  in  its  several  details.  Be- 
coming a  convert  to  "Mormonism" 
he  was  baptized  April  8,  1888;  was 
ordained  an  Elder,  Dec.  25,  1888,  and 
filled  a  mission  in  Norway  in  1888- 
1890.  He  emigrated  to  America  in 
1890  and  located  in  Salt  Lake  City, 
Utah,  where  he  for  eight  years  was 
associated  with  the  Danish-Norwe- 
gian paper  "Bikuben"  published  in 
that  city.  He  came  to  Downey,  Idaho, 
in   1899  to  act  as  head  clerk  of  the 


BIOGRAPHICAL  ENCYCLOPEDIA. 


133 


W.  A.  Hyde  Mercantile  Establish- 
ment, of  which  he  is  also  a  stock- 
holder. He  also  owns  a  200-acre 
farm  near  Downy,  which  he  operates 
with  much  success.  Besides  being 
chosen  the   first   mayor   of   Downey, 


Elder  Johnson  has  given  other  able 
and  efficient  service  as  a  justice  of 
the  peace,  land  commissioner  under 
the  Carey  act,  school  trustee,  presi- 
dent of  the  Bannock  County  Fair 
Association,  etc.  Whether  as  a 
printer,  a  business  man,  or  a  Church 
official,  he  has  always  been  devoted 
to  duty.  For  several  years  he  acted 
as  Stake  superintendent  of  Sunday 
schools  in  the  Pocatello  Stake  and 
also  acted  as  president  of  an  Elders 
quorum.  He  was  ordained  a  High 
Priest  by  Orson  F.  Whitney  May  17, 
1914,  and  was  set  apart  as  second 
counselor  in  the  Portneuf  Stake 
presidency  August  15,  1915.  Later 
he  was  chosen  as  first  counselor.  In 
1891  (March  11th)  Elder  Johnson 
married  Marthine  Petersen,  a  native 
of  Norway,  which  union  has  been 
blesFied  with  nine  children,  five  sons 
and  four  daughters,  namely,  Henry 
J.,  John  F.,  Ijnar  N.,  Viggo  A.,  Alida 
J.,  Florence  E.,  Sigrid  V.,  Arley  W., 
and  Nina  L. 


JONES,  Daniel  Philemon,  presi- 
dent of  the  High  Priests  quorum  of 
the  Maricopa  Stake  and  a  resident  of 
Lehi,  Maricopa  county,  Arizona,  was 
born  April  1,  1856,  at  Provo,  Utah 
county,  Utah,  the  son  of  Daniel  W. 
Jones  and  Harriet  Emily  Colton.  He 
was  baptized  Sept.  6,  18  67,  by  Bishop 
Edwin  D.  Woolley  in  the  Thirteenth 
Ward,  Salt  Lake  City;  was  ordained 
an  Elder  by  John  D.  T.  McAllister 
and  subsequently  ordained  a  Seventy; 
ordained  a  High  Priest  and  set  apart 
as  a  High  Councilor  when  the  Mari- 
copa Stake  was  organized  in  Decem- 
ber, 1882,  which  position  he  still 
holds.  He  acted  as  a  counselor  to 
Bishop  Ira  Hinckley  of  the  Papago 
Ward  about  two  years  and  after- 
wards as  counselor  to  Bishop  C.  S. 
Peterson  of  the  same  Ward.  After 
that  he  was  ordained  a  Bishop  and 
presided  in  that  capacity  over  the 
Papago  Ward  about  eight  years,  until 
it  was  decided  that  it  was  improper 
to  act  as  a  High  Councilor  and  Bishop 
at  same  time.  Bro.  Jones  has  acted 
as  a  Sunday  school  superintendent  at 


Lehi,  president  of  the  Ward  Y.  M. 
M.  I.  A.,  justice  of  the  peace  of  the 
Lehi  precinct,  chairman  of  Salt  River 
Valley  Water  Users  Association  eight 
years,  served  as  a  member  of  the  first 
Arizona     State    legislature,     and     at 


134 


LATTER-DAY   SAINT 


present  occupies  the  position  of 
superintendent  of  irrigation  in  the 
Salt  River  Project,  taking  charge  of 
about  60,000  acres  of  farming  land 
with  headquarters  at  Mesa.  Bro. 
Jones  married  Mary  Ellen  Merrill 
August  26,  1877,  which  marriage  has 
been  blessed  with  the  following  child- 
ren: Daniel  Dudley,  Orin  Cloyd, 
Wm.  Orlando,  Guy  Wesley,  Bentran 
Merrill,  Rollin  Philemon,  Doctor 
Byron,  Collins  Ray,  Elmer  and  Emily 
(twins),  Lora  Mary  and  Hugh  Colton. 

JONES,  Kumen,  Patriarch  and 
Bishop  and  a  resident  of  Bluff,  San 
Juan  county,  Utah,  was  born  May  5, 
1856,  at  Cedar  City,  Iron  county, 
Utah,  the  son  of  Thomas  Jones  and 
Sage  Traharne.  He  was  baptized  in 
May,  1864,  by  Richard  R.  Birkbeck; 
was  ordained  an  Elder  Dec.  19,  1878, 
by  David  H.  Cannon,  and  on  the  same 
day  married  Mary  Nielsen  in  the  St. 
George  Temple;  was  ordained  a  High 
Priest  Sept.  3,  1880,  by  Apostle  Brig- 
ham  Young  Jr.,  and  set  apart  as 
second  counselor  to  Bishop  Jens  Niel- 
sen at  Bluff,  Utah;  was  ordained  a 
Patriarch  May  21,  1908,  by  Apostle 
Geo.  Albert  Smith,  and  ordained  a 
Bishop  Nov.  13,  1910,  by  Apostle 
Geo.  P.  Richards.  In  the  fall  of 
1878  he  was  called  together  with  a 
number  of  others  (mostly  young  men 
from  Iron  county)  to  locate  on  the 
San  Juan  river,  near  the  point  where 
four  states  (Utah,  Colorado,  New 
Mexico  and  Arizona)  corner  together. 
He  left  his  home  in  Cedar  City  to  fill 
this  mission  April  14,  1879,  and  since 
that  year  he  has  been  a  resident  of 
Bluff.  By  his  first  wife  Mary  Niel- 
sen, one  son  (Leonard  K.)  was  born 
Nov.  6,  1889.  He  married  Lydia 
May  Lyman  in  the  St.  George  Temple 
Dec.  2,  1882,  by  which  wife  the  fol- 
lowing children  were  born  to  him: 
Franklin  L.,  Kumen  S.,  Thomas  A., 
Marvin  Willard,  Edward  C,  Leland 
H.,  Mary  Lydia,  Marion,  Alma  U., 
and  Francis  W.  Most  of  these  child- 
ren are  still  alive.  His  wife  Lydia 
May   died   April   17,    1906.      Besides 


being  an  active  Church  worker, 
Bishop  Jones  has  acted  as  county 
superintendent  of  district  schools  for 
a  number  of  terms,  served  as  school 
trustee  about  twenty  years,  been  jus- 
tice of  the  peace  for  Bluff  precinct, 
acted  as  road  supervisor,  director 
and  superintendent  of  the  San  Juan 
Co-op  twenty  years,  superintendent 
of  the  Bluff  Cattle  Pool,  director  and 
secretary  of  the  Elk  Cattle  Company, 
director  of  the  San  Juan  State  Bank, 
etc.  Of  his  many  Church  positions 
may  be  mentioned  that  he  has  acted 
as  Stake  and  Ward  president  of  Y. 
M.  M.  I.  A.  and  assistant  superin- 
tendent of  the  Ward  Sunday  schools. 

JUDD,  Zadok  Knapp,  a  member  of 
the  Mormon  Battalion,  was  born  Oct. 
15,  1827,  at  Johnstown,  Upper  Can- 
ada,  the  son   of  Arza   Judd  Jr.,   and 


Lucinda  Adams.  Becoming  a  convert 
to  "Mormonism,"  together  with  his 
parents,  he  was  baptized  April  26, 
183  6,  in  Canada,  by  James  Blakesley. 
He  gathered  with  the  Saints  to  Kirt- 
land,  Ohio,  but  went  to  Missouri  in 
1838  with  his  father's  family,  and 
located  at  DeWitt,  with  John  E. 
Page's  company.  Being  expelled  from 
DeWitt  in  the  fall  of  1838,  they  fled 
to  Far  West  and  finally  were  driven 
out  of  Missouri  together  with  their 


BIOGRAPHICAL  ENCYCLOPEDIA. 


135 


co-religionists  in  183d.  After  resid- 
ing temporarily  at  Quincy,  111.,  the 
family  went  to  Nauvoo,  111.,  in  1840, 
and  traveled  west  as  far  as  the  Mis- 
souri river  during  the  exodus  of  1846. 
Here  Zadok  K.  Judd  enlisted  in  the 
Mormon  Battalion  and  marched  as  a 
private  in  Company  E  to  California. 
After  being  discharged,  he  spent  some 
time  at  the  mines  before  coming  to 
the  Valley  in  1848.  After  residing  a 
short  time  in  Salt  Lake  City,  he  was 
called  to  Little  Salt  Lake  valley  with 
Geo.  A.  Smith  and  company  and  thus 
became  one  of  the  founders  of  Paro- 
wan  in  1851.  After  residing  there 
a  few  years  he  married  Mary  M.  Dart, 
and  then  settled  temporarily  at  Santa 
Clara.  Thence  he  removed  to  Eagle 
valley,  Nevada,  and  finally  settled 
at  Kanab  in  1871,  being  one  of  the 
early  settlers  of  that  place  when  it 
was  resettled  after  the  Indian  wars. 
Bro.  Judd  died  Jan.  29,  1909,  at 
Kanab,  Utah. 

KELLER,  Alvin,  Bishop  of  the  Tre- 
monton  Ward,  (Bear  River  Stake), 
Box  Elder  county,  Utah,  was  born 
July  1,   1874,  at  Mantua,  Box  Elder 


1886,  by  Peter  Jensen;  ordained  a 
Teacher  March  2,  1890  by  Lars  J. 
Hailing;  ordained  a  Priest  Dec.  9, 
1894,  by  Julius  Keller;  ordained  an 
Elder  Sept.  3,  1898,  by  Wm.  L.  Wat- 
kins,  and  ordained  a  Seventy  Nov.  19, 
1910,  by  J.  Golden  Kimball.  He  was 
set  apart  as  superintendent  of  the 
Tremonton  Sunday  school  August  16, 
1908;  was  set  part  as  presiding  Elder 
of  the  Tremonton  branch  July  7, 
1912;  was  chosen  as  Bishop  of  the 
Tremonton  Ward  Nov.  29,  1914,  and 
ordained  a  High  Priest  and  Bishop 
Dec.  13,  1914,  by  Pres.  Joseph  F. 
Smith.  In  1898  (Sept.  21st)  he 
married  Annie  J.  Keller,  who  has 
borne  him  six  children,  namely,  Jean 
Alvin  and  Justin  Peter  (twins),  born 
June  2,  1899;  Verne  James,  born 
July  11,  1901;  Doyle  Joseph,  born 
Feb.  23,  1906;  Lisle  Hyrum,  born 
March  22,  1909,  and  Marguerite, 
born  June  25,  1912. 

KEMPTON,  Alvin  Bradford,  Bishop 
of  the  Eden  Ward  (St.  Joseph  Stake), 
Graham  county,  Arizona,  was  born 
Oct.  1,  1844,  at  Nauvoo,  Hancock 
county.  111.,  the  son  of  Richard  Kemp- 


county,  Utah,  the  son  of  Jens  M.  Kel-  ton   and    Caroline   Bradford.      When 

ler   and   Margaret   Larsen.      He   was  eighteen  months  old,  his  father  died, 

baptized  Sept.   3,   1882,  by  Peter   C.  after    which    his    mother    moved    to 

Jensen;    ordained   a   Deacon  Nov.    6,  Winter     Quarters     and     thence     to 


136  LATTER-DAY   SAINT 

Brownells'  camp,  where  his  mother  parents  to  Kirtland,  Ohio,  in  1833, 
married  Erastus  H.  Rudd.  Later  and  later  to  Illinois.  During  the 
they  moved  to  Harris's  Grove,  Iowa,  exodus  of  the  Saints  from  Nauvoo 
He  crossed  the  plains  in  1852  in  in  1846  he  joined  the  Mormon  Bat- 
Robt.  Wimer's  company  and  located  talion  and  marched  with  that  body 
in  Bountiful,  Davis  county,  where  he  to  California.  Returning  to  the 
was  baptized  by  Bishop  David  Stoker  Missouri  river  he  married  Electa 
in  185  2.  The  following  spring  the  Snider,  March  31,  1850;  she  was 
family  moved  to  Farmington  and  dur-  born  at  Earnestown,  Ontario,  Canada, 
ing  "the  move  South,"  at  the  time  Nov.  8,  1828,  and  died  at  Devils  Gate 
of  the  Johnston  army  trouble,  Alvin  en  route  for  Utah  August  9,  1850, 
made  five  trips  with  passengers  In  July,  1851,  Bro.  Lake  married 
traveling  south.  After  the  move  he  Lucy  Jane  Herrick,  a  twin  sister  of 
located  at  Payson,  Utah  county,  and  Hon.  Lester  J.  Herrick.  She  had 
while  there  took  part  in  the  Black-  crossed  the  plains  in  1850  and  set- 
hawk  war.  In  1866  he  moved  to  tied  at  Ogden.  With  his  family  Bro. 
Burrville,  Sevier  county,  where  he  Lake  moved  to  Hyrum,  Cache  county, 
acted  as  the  first  superintendent  of  Utah,  in  1862,  but  later  located  at 
the  Burrville  Sunday  school.  In  1868  Huntsville,  Weber  county.  He  also 
he  was  ordained  an  Elder  by  Bishop  resided  for  a  short  time  at  Five 
John  F.  Shields.  In  1877  he  started  Points,  near  Ogden,  whence  he  re- 
fer Arizona,  and  after  spending  two  moved  in  1875  to  Clifton,  Idaho, 
years  on  the  road,  arrived  at  Eden,  Thence  he  moved  to  Fairview,  Idaho, 
where  he  was  chosen  as  the  first  in  1881,  where  he  resided  with  his 
superintendent  of  the  Eden  Sunday  family  until  his  death,  which  oc- 
school.  In  1885  he  was  ordained  a  curred  at  Logan,  Utah,  June  18, 
Seventy  by  James  Larsen.  In  1896-  i893,  following  a  surgical  operation 
98  he  filled  a  mission  to  Great  ^^j.  ^^q  removal  of  tumor  of  the 
Britain.  After  his  return  from  that  bowels.  Bro.  Lake  was  a  Seventy,  be- 
mission    he    was    ordained    a    High  j^^^.^^    ^^    ^^^    ^^^^    Quorum,    and 

Priest  by  Andrew  Kimball  and  chosen  .  ,,         ,     .        .                ..          .      .     , 

followed    farming    as    his    principal 
as  Bishop  of  the  Eden  Ward.    Bishop 

-^  ^  ,  ,,  ,  ^^  ^.  .  avocation  in  life.  He  was  a  man  of 
Kempton   followed   the   avocation   of 

farmer  and  carpenter.     He  acted  as  ^^^'  '''''^'^^'  ^^^  ^^^  ^°^«^^'  i^^dustri- 

postmaster  at  Eden  fifteen  years  and  ^^^     and     law-abiding.       He     would 

was  justice  of  the  peace  five  years,  rather  suffer  wrong  than  do  wrong 

In  1868   (Jan.  1st)  while  residing  at  and  was  one  of  a  class  of  men  who 

Payson,  Utah,  Bro.  Kempton  married  do  not  push  themselves  to  the  front. 

Sarah  Jane  Curtis  ,who  bore  him  ten  His  faith  in  the  gospel  and  his  love 

children,  namely,  Alvin  Joseph,  Rich-  for    the    servants    of    God    was    un- 

ard  Hyrum,  Asa  Bradford,  Zeta  Jane,  bounded.     He  labored  faithfully  for 

Eliza  Annie,  Laura  Sophronia,  Delia  several     years     in     the     Endowment 

Caroline,  Zilpha  Mariam,  Heber  Cur-  House  and  in  the  Logan  Temple  for 

tis    and    Calvin    Ira.      Bishop    Kemp-  the  salvation  of  the  dead.     The  names 

ton  died  at  his  home  in  Eden,  Ari-  ^^  ^^^  children  are  as  follows:  Electa 

'°T;  "l^.T.  '^'   '^''^'  ''^''^''^  ^  ""'''•  Diana,  born  August  22,   1852;    Mary 

eight  children  and  forty-two   grand-  „         ,      ^          ,,       T..-,or^      ti- 

,  .,,         ^                   ^.     /    .^  Sarepta,   born  March   4,    1854;    Julia 
children  to  mourn  his  death. 

Ann,  born  May  19,  1857;  Lucy  Jane, 

LAKE,  Barnabas,  a  member  of  the  ^^^^^  May  22.   1859;    Sarah  Lucinda, 

Mormon  Battalion,  was  born  June  3,  ^°rn    May    3,    1861;    Lyman   James, 

1827,   at  Earnestown,   Ontario,   Can-  born  June  21,  1863;  Philomela,  born 

ada,  the  son  of  James  Lake  and  Phil-  Oct.    17,    1865,    and    Lawrence,    born 

omela  Smith.    He  removed  with  his  Oct.  18,  1867. 


BIOGRAPHICAL   ENCYCLOPEDIA. 


137 


LAMBERT,  James  X.,  second  coun- 
selor in  the  bishopric  of  the  Seventh 
Ward  (Pioneer  Stake  of  Zion)  is  the 
son  of  Geo.  C.  and  Mary  Alice  Need- 
ham,  and  was  born  June  18,  1876,  in 
Salt  Lake  City.  As  a  child  he  was 
bright  and  precocious,  and  was  pur- 
posely restrained  rather  than  en- 
couraged in  his  attendance  at  school; 
in  fact  alternated  between  work  in 
a  store  and  attending  district  school 
during  his  youth.  When  eighteen 
years  old  he  was  sent  on  a  mission  to 
New  Zealand,  where  he  labored  ex- 
clusively among  the  Maories.  He 
learned  the  language  quickly  and 
became  a  successful  and  popular  mis- 
sionary, and  during  the  last  year  he 
spent  much  time  visiting  different 
branches  of  the  mission.  He  returned 
from  his  mission  in  1898.  In  1900 
(Feb.  8th)  he  married  Maria  G. 
James  (daughter  of  David  James  and 
Lydia  Griffen),  who  was  born  Dec. 
26,  1876,  in  Salt  Lake  City,  Utah.  He 
became  associated  with  his  father  and 
brothers  in  the  Lambert  Paper  Com- 
pany, in  which  he  has  ever  since 
taken  an  active  and  responsible 
part.  When  the  Pioneer  Stake  was 
organized  he  was  chosen  as  Stake 
superintendent  of  Sunday  schools,  in 
which  capacity  he  served  for  three 
and  one-half  years.  He  was  also  one 
of  the  presidents  of  the  23rd  quorum 
of  Seventy  until  called  to  act  as 
counselor  to  Bishop  C.  P.  Margetts, 
which  office  he  still  holds.  He  has 
ever  since  its  organization  been  one 
of  the  most  active  members  of  Zion's 
Maori  Association,  and  has  taken  a 
keen  interest  in  the  local  Maori 
Saints.  For  several  years  past  he 
has  been  one  of  the  most  earnest  and 
efficient  workers  in  connection  with 
the  Bureau  of  Information  on  the 
Temple  Block.  He  has  two  children, 
Phyllis,  aged  fourteen  years,  and 
Claude,  aged  twelve  years.  In  1917 
he  was  called  on  a  second  mission  to 
Australasia,  and  now  presides  over 
the  New  Zealand  Mission. 


LAMPH,  William  Topping,  late 
Bishop  of  Castle  Gate,  Carbon  county, 
Utah,  was  born  October  31,  18  54, 
at  Consett,  Durham  county,  Eng- 
land, the  son  of  Daniel  Lamph 
and  Eleanor  Topping.  He  was 
baptized  November  11,  1877,  by 
Thos.  E.  Bennett;  ordained  a  Priest 
in  the  spring  of  1878  by  Thos.  Evans; 
ordained  an  Elder  in  the  summer  of 
1879  by  Geo.  Crane;  presided  over 
the  Spennymoor  branch  from  its  or- 
ganization till  he  emigrated  from 
England  in  1881.  He  crossed  the 
Atlantic  in  the  steamship  "Wyoming" 
which  sailed  from  Liverpool,  May  21, 
1881.  After  a  temporary  sojourn  in 
Coalville,  Summit  county,  Utah,  he 
located  at  Winter  Quarters,  and  later 
at  Castle  Gate,  Carbon  county,  where 


he,  on  Nov.  11,  1890,  was  set  apart 
to  preside  over  the  Castle  Gate 
branch.  He  was  ordained  a  High 
Priest  and  Bishop  and  set  apart  to 
preside  over  the  Castle  Gate  Ward 
May  8,  1893,  by  Francis  M.  Lyman. 
This  position  he  filled  till  the  fall  of 
1899.  Elder  Lamph  has  always  been 
a  diligent  worker  in  organizing 
branches  and  Wards  both  in  England 
and  Utah,  and  has  held  many  posi- 
tions of  trust  and  responsibility.  He 
has  followed  the  occupations  of  an 
ironworker,   miner,   and  farmer,   an4 


138 


LATTER-DAY  SAINT 


has  served  his  fellow-citizens  since 
coming  to  America  as  justice  of  the 
peace,  school  trustee,  president  of  a 
canal  company,  secretary  of  a  pro- 
ducers association,  vice  president  of 
a  co-op  store,  etc.,  and  has  through- 
out led  a  most  busy  and  active  life. 
Ecclesiastically  he  has  acted  as  Sun- 
day school  superintendent,  president 
of  Y.  M.  M.  I.  A.,  choir  leader,  etc.; 
in  fact  he  has  held  every  position 
from  class  teacher  to  Bishop.  He  has 
also  labored  as  a  home  missionary. 
In  1884  (March  9th)  Elder  Lamph 
married  Jane  Chinick  Bennett  who 
has  borne  her  husband  eleven  child- 
ren, seven  sons  and  four  daughters. 
Their  names  follow:  Eleanor  Pearl, 
Nephi  Albert,  Wm.  Leigh,  David  Dan- 
iel, Lillias  Myrtle,  John  Ivor,  Jennie 
Irene,  George  Bennett,  Grace  Inez, 
and  Edward  Arthur.  Since  March 
2,  1903,  Bishop  Lamph  has  been  a 
permanent  resident  of  Cleveland, 
Emery  county,  Utah. 

liARSEN,  Henry,  Bishop  of  the 
Cleveland  Ward  (Bannock  Stake), 
Bannock    county,    Idaho,    was    born 


Priesthood  in  1888;  ordained  an 
Elder  in  October,  1892,  by  Ernest 
F.  Hale;  ordained  a  Seventy  March 
10,  1897,  by  Seymour  B.  Young;  or- 
dained a  High  Priest  Jan.  27,  1901, 
by  Denmark  Jensen  and  set  apart  as 
first  counselor  to  Bishop  Ernest  F. 
Hale.  He  acted  in  that  capacity  until 
June  5,  1905,  when  he  was  sustained 
as  Bishop  of  the  Cleveland  Ward.  He 
was  ordained  to  that  office  by  Charles 
W.  Penrose  Sept.  14,  1905.  Bishop 
Larsen  filled  a  mission  to  the  Eastern 
States  in  1897-1899,  laboring  prin- 
cipally in  Pennsylvania.  He  mar- 
ried Mary  E.  Jensen  in  the  Logan 
Temple  Nov.  3,  18  92,  and  is  by  occu- 
pation a  farmer  and  stockraiser. 

LARSEN,  Marinus,  Bishop  of  the 
Spanish  Fork  Third  Ward  (Nebo 
Stake),  Utah  county,  Utah,  was  born 
Nov.  15,  1849,  at  Hurup,  Als  parish, 
Aalborg  amt,  Denmark.  He  received 
a  common  school  education,  and  be- 
coming a  convert  to  "Mormonism"  he 
was  baptized  Jan.  9,  1862,  by  Elder 
John  Andersen,  and  confirmed  by 
Hans   C.    Hogsted.     He   emigrated   to 


May  17,  1872,  at  Logan,  Cache  Utah  in  1862  with  his  parents,  cross- 
county,  Utah,  the  son  of  Hendrik  ing  the  Atlantic  in  the  ship  "Elec- 
Larsen  and  Mary  Hansen.  He  was  trie,"  and  the  plains  in  Christian  A. 
baptized  in  October,  1881,  by  Jeppe  Madsen's  train.  In  order  to  cross  the 
G.  Folkman;    ordained  to  the  lesser  plains  his  father  and  a  man  by  the 


BIOGRAPHICAL  ENCYCLOPEDIA. 


139 


name  of  Anders  Vestergaard  bought 
two  cows  each  and  an  old  wagon 
with  which  they  safely  made  the 
journey.  The  family  located  at  Span- 
ish Fork,  Sept.  28,  1862,  where 
Bishop  Larsen  has  resided  ever  since. 
He  was  ordained  a  Teacher  in  the 
spring  of  1863  and  an  Elder  in  the 
spring  of  1866.  In  1868  he  went  to 
the  terminus  of  the  Union  Pacific 
Railroad  in  Capt.  McArthur's  train 
after  the  poor.  In  1869  (Dec.  20th) 
he  married  Johanna  Johnson,  who 
bore  her  husband  eleven  children, 
four  sons  and  seven  daughters.  Bro. 
Larsen  was  ordained  a  Seventy  Sept. 
12,  1886,  by  Andrew  Engberg.  When 
Spanish  Fork,  Dec.  20,  1891,  was 
divided  into  four  Wards,  he  was  or- 
dained a  High  Priest  and  Bishop  and 
set  apart  by  Apostle  John  W.  Taylor 
to  preside  over  the  Spanish  Fork 
Third  Ward,  which  position  he  held 
until  Nov.  8,  1903.  Bishop  Larsen 
served  as  a  member  of  the  Spanish 
Fork  city  council  fifteen  years,  served 
two  terms  as  mayor  of  the  city,  one 
term  as  alderman,  and  nine  years 
as  councilman.  He  also  served  two 
terms  in  the  Utah  State  legislature. 
Bishop  Larsen  is  known  as  one  of  the 
most  faithful  and  energetic  Elders 
in  the  city  of  Spanish  Fork,  and  has 
always  been  true  and  faithful  in  the 
discharge  of  his  duties  in  whatsoever 
calling  he  has  been  chosen  to  act. 

LARSEN,  Niels,  an  active  Elder  in 
the  Vineyard  Ward,  Utah  county, 
Utah,  was  born  March  13,  1841,  at 
Kallehave,  Praesto  amt.,  Denmark,  the 
son  of  Lars  Pedersen  and  Johanna 
Nielsen.  While  yet  a  boy  he  went 
to  sea  and  spent  eleven  years  before 
the  mast,  during  which  time  he  made 
many  long  voyages  and  also  partici- 
pated in  the  Danish-Prussian  war  in 
1864.  Becoming  a  convert  to  "Mor- 
monism,"  he  was  baptized  March  30, 
1868.  Being  very  desirous  of  emi- 
grating to  Utah  he  left  his  wife  and 
four  children,  his  parents  and  friends 
to  work  his  way  to  Zion;  his  wife 
agreed  to  let  him  go,  believing  that 


he  would  soon  be  glad  to  return.  He 
gave  his  wife  a  deed  to  their  home 
and  all  the  money  he  had,  after 
which  he  took  his  departure  Sept. 
11,  1870,  as  a  sailor  on  a  Norwegian 
bark  which  sailed  from  Liverpool, 
England.  He  worked  on  board  that 
vessel  for  nine  months  and  earned 
2  3  pounds  Sterling.  After  landing 
in  New  York  he  paid  $51  for  his 
passage  from  that  port  to  Salt  Lake 
City  and  crossed  the  plains  in  Capt. 
Robert  F.  Neslen's  company.  His 
wife  became  desirous  of  joining  him, 
and  by  letters  indicated  that  if  he 
would  come  back  to  Denmark  she 
would  return  with  him  to  Utah. 
After  obtaining  counsel  from  Presi- 
dent   Brigham    Young,    Bro.    Larsen 


returned  to  Denmark.  On  his  arrival 
there  he  was  appointed  to  labor  as 
a  traveling  Elder  until  the  following 
year,  when  he  set  sail  for  America 
once  more,  with  his  wife  and  three 
children,  his  oldest  boy  having  died 
the  year  before.  After  arriving  in 
Salt  Lake  City,  July  24,  1873,  he 
located  with  his  family  on  the  Provo 
river,  near  Utah  lake,  in  which  neigh- 
borhood he  has  resided  ever  since. 
Having  previously  been  ordained  an 
Elder,  he  and  his  wife  received  their 
blessings  in  the  Endowment  House, 
Salt  Lake  City,  May  4,  1874.  In  the 
winter  of  1874-75  he  labored  on  the 


140 


LATTER-DAY   SAINT 


St.  George  Temple,  and  when  the 
Lake  View  Ward  was  organized,  in 
1877,  he  was  chosen  as  second  assist- 
ant in  the  superintendency  of  the 
Ward  Sunday  school.  He  also  pre- 
sided over  the  Deacons  in  the  Ward, 
and  in  1880  was  set  apart  as  first 
counselor  in  an  Elders  quorum.  In 
August,  1888,  his  wife  died;  she  was 
the  mother  of  thirteen  children.  In 
1889  (September  5th)  he  married 
Sine  Pedersen,  who  was  born  at 
Hormested,  Hjorring  amt,  Denmark, 
March  31,  1844.  Elder  Larsen 
was  ordained  a  High  Priest  Jan- 
uary 14,  1900,  by  Apostle  George 
Teasdale,  and  set  apart  to  act  as 
second  counselor  to  Bishop  William 
Lewis  of  the  Vineyard  Ward. 
In  1902-04  he  filled  a  mission  to 
Scandinavia,  laboring  first  in  Nor- 
way and  afterwards  in  Denmark.  In 
January,  1908,  together  with  his 
wife,  he  commenced  work  for  the 
dead  in  the  Salt  Lake  Temple,  which 
labor  he  has  continued  during  the 
past  eight  years  each  winter,  and  has 
done  ordinance  work  for  1,800  dead 
relatives.  Elder  Larsen  possesses  a 
strong  testimony  in  regard  to  the 
divinity  of  the  great  Latter-day  work 
and  feels  confident  that  by  the  help 
of  God  he  shall  be  enabled  to  prove 
faithful  to  the  end  of  his  earthly 
career. 

LARSEN,  Peter  Christian,  Bishop 
of  Clear  Creek  Ward  (Carbon  Stake), 
Carbon  county,  Utah,  was  born  March 
23,  1874  at  Spring  City,  Sanpete 
county,  Utah,  the  son  of  Soren  Larsen 
and  Maria  Hansen.  He  was  baptized 
July  2,  1882,  by  Marinus  Mortensen; 
was  ordained  an  Elder  March  10, 
1899,  by  Bishop  James  A.  Allred; 
ordained  a  High  Priest  Dec.  11,  1911, 
by  Joseph  F.  Smith,  Jr.,  and  set  apart 
as  second  counselor  to  Bishop  David 
McMillan;  was  ordained  a  Bishop 
Sept.  14,  1913,  by  Elder  Heber  J 
Grant  and  set  apart  to  preside  over 
the  Clear  Creek  Ward.  In  1899 
(April  19th)  he  married  Nellie 
Acord,   who  has   borne  her  husband 


four  children,  namely,  Leslie  Acord, 
Henry  Clarence,  Hugh  Ernest  and 
David   Arthur.      Bishop   Larsen   is  a 


farmer   by  avocation,   and  a  faithful 
and  diligent  Church  worker. 

LARSON,  Lehi,  Bishop  of  the  Mat- 
thews Ward  (St.  Joseph  Stake),  Gra- 
ham county,  Arizona,  was  born  Feb. 
17,  1857,  at  Rorum,  Sweden,  the  son 
of  Mons  Larson  and  Ellen  Malstrom, 
He  emigrated  with  his  parents  to 
Utah  in  1859,  crossing  the  Atlantic 
in     the     ship     "William     Tapscott," 


which  landed  at  New  York  May  14, 
1859,  and  crossed  the  plains  In  Capt. 


BIOGRAPHICAL  ENCYCLOPEDIA. 


141 


George  Rowley's  hand-cart  company, 
which  left  Florence,  Neb.,  May  25, 
1859.  In  the  spring  of  1865  the 
family  moved  to  Santaquin,  Utah 
county,  and  stayed  there  thirteen 
years.  Here  Elder  Larson  was  bap- 
tized in  185  6,  by  William  McBride, 
and  later  ordained  to  several  offices 
in  the  lesser  Priesthood.  From  the 
beginning  he  was  an  active  Church 
worker  in  the  Santaquin  Ward.  In 
January,  1876,  he  was  ordained  an 
Elder  by  Bishop  George  Halliday, 
and  in  1876  he  was  called  to  settle 
on  the  Little  Colorado  river  in  Ari- 
zona. In  1880  (April  22nd)  he  mar- 
ried Letitia  Freeman  Carter,  in  the 
Salt  Lake  Temple,  who  has  borne  her 
husband  eleven  children,  namely, 
Lehi,  Jr.,  Charles  Oliver,  Zelpha  E., 
James  Alma,  Zelma  E.,  Silas,  Seth, 
Earl,  Josie,  Clare  and  Lexi.  Bro. 
Larson  was  ordained  a  High  Priest 
Feb.  17,  1900,  by  President  Andrew 
Kimball,  acted  as  superintendent  of 
the  Matthews  Ward  Sunday  school  a 
number  of  years  and  also  as  second 
counselor  to  Bishop  David  H.  Mat- 
thews. He  was  ordained  a  Bishop 
Sept.  18,  1901,  by  Matthias  F.  Cow- 
ley, and  set  apart  to  preside  over 
the  Matthews  Ward,  which  position 
he  still  holds. 

LARSON,  Alof,  second  counselor 
in  the  presidency  of  the  Snowflake 
Stake  of  Zion  (Arizona),  was  born 
Aug.  3,  1860,  at  Tooele,  Tooele 
county,  Utah,  the  son  of  Mons  Lar- 
son and  Ellen  Jenson.  He  was  bap- 
tized Oct.  25,  18  68,  by  David  H.  Hol- 
liday,  at  Santaquin,  Utah  county, 
Utah,  and  soon  afterwards  ordained 
a  Priest.  He  was  ordained  an  Elder 
Oct.  26,  1881,  by  William  Fawcett; 
married  May  Louise  Hunt,  Oct.  26, 
1881;  was  ordained  a  Seventy  Dec. 
14,  1884,  by  Seymour  B.  Young,  and 
became  a  member  of  the  83rd  quorum 
of  Seventy;  served  as  a  Ward  Teacher 
at  Snowflake  from  1880  to  1887; 
was  ordained  a  High  Priest  Jan.  8, 
1888,  by  Apostle  John  Henry  Smith, 
and   set   apart   as   a   member   of   the 


High  Council;  served  as  first  assist- 
ant superintendent  in  the  Snowflake 
Ward  Sunday  school  and  afterwards 
as  superintendent;  was  second  coun- 
selor in  the  first  organization  of  Y. 
M.  M.  I.  A.  in  the  Eastern  Arizona 
Stake  of  Zion  when  Smith  D.  Rogers 
was  president;  also  served  as  a  coun- 
selor to  Joseph  W.  Smith  in  the 
Stake,  presiding  over  the  Y.  M.  M. 
I.  A.,  and  was  president  of  Snowflake 
Ward  Y.  M.  M.  I.  A.  for  a  number 
of  years.  He  filled  a  mission  to  the 
Northern  States  in  1898-1900,  labor- 
ing principally  in  Indiana,  and  was 
set  apart  as  second  counselor  in  the 
Stake  presidency  Feb.  11,  1907.  Bro. 
Larson  is  the  father  of  thirteen  chil- 
dren, seven  of  whom  are  still  living. 


His  oldest  son,  A.  P.  Larson,  Is 
Bishop  of  the  Lakeside  Ward,  Ariz.; 
his  second  son  is  filling  a  mission  in 
Australia;  his  third  son  has  filled  a 
three  years'  mission  to  the  Southern 
States;  his  fourth  son  is  second 
counselor  in  the  bishopric  of  the 
Snowflake  Ward;  the  husband  of  his 
eldest  daughter  has  filled  a  mission 
in  the  Southern  States,  and  his  sec- 
ond daughter's  husband  is  a  professor 
in  the  Oregon  Agricultural  College  at 
Corvallis,  Ore. 

LAYTON,  David  Edwin,  first  Bishop 
of    the    West    Layton    Ward    (North 


142 


LATTER-DAY  SAINT 


Davis  Stake),  Davis  county,  Utah, 
was  born  Oct.  17,  1860,  at  Kaysville, 
Davis  county,  Utah,  the  son  of  Chris- 
topher Layton  and  Sarah  Barnes.  He 
was  baptized  Dec.  16,  1869,  by  James 
Ware;  subsequently  he  was  ordained 


an  Elder  and  afterwards  a  Seventy. 
In  1891-93  he  filled  a  mission  to  the 
Southern  States,  laboring  principally 
in  West  Virginia,  part  of  the  time  as 
president  of  a  conference.  He  was 
ordained  a  High  Priest  and  Bishop 
Feb.  22,  1895,  by  Apostle  Francis  M. 
Lyman.  Since  the  reorganization  of 
the  West  Layton  Ward,  in  1914,  he 
has  acted  as  a  member  of  the  High 
Council,  first  as  an  alternate  and 
later  as  a  regular  member.  In  1886 
(Jan.  6th)  he  married  Alice  Watt, 
daughter  of  George  D.  Watt  and 
Elizabeth  Golightly,  who  was  born 
May  21,  1865.  This  marriage  has 
been  blessed  with  eight  children,  two 
boys  and  six  girls.  Bishop  Layton  is 
a  farmer  by  avocation. 

LAU,  Daniel  Frederick,  first  Bishop 
of  Soda  Springs,  Bear  Lake  county, 
Idaho,  was  born  Aug.  24,  1832,  in 
Schwerin,  Mecklenburg,  Germany, 
the  son  of  John  Lau  and  Louisa 
Elizabeth  Gaedke.  Becoming  a  con- 
vert to  "Mormonism,"  he  was  bap- 
tized in  April,  1852,  by  Hans  Peter 


Jensen,  and  emigrated  to  America  in 
1853  with  the  first  company  of  Ger- 
man Saints  which  ever  went  to 
America.  Crossing  the  plains  in 
Daniel  Garn's  company,  he  arrived 
in  Salt  Lake  City  Oct.  1,  1854,  and 
settled  in  Salt  Lake  City.  He  took 
part  in  the  Echo  Canyon  war  and 
was  among  others  delegated  to  guard 
the  City  and  burn  it  during  the  time 
of  "the  move."  He  became  a  resi- 
dent of  Providence,  Cache  county, 
Utah,  in  1859,  and  in  1863  he  went 
back  to  the  Missouri  river  as  a 
Church  teamster  after  emigrants.  In 
1864  he  furnished  a  team  to  send 
back  across  the  plains  after  the  poor. 
In  1870  he  was  called  to  Soda  Springs 
to  help  settle  that  part  of  Idaho,  and 
here  he  became  presiding  Elder  of 
a  branch  of  the  Church  organized 
there  in  1883.  This  position  he  filled 
until  1887,  when  he  was  chosen  as 
Bishop,  and  set  apart  to  preside  over 
the  Soda  Springs  Ward.  He  held 
that  position  until  April,  1901,  when 
he  was  ordained  a  Patriarch.  In 
18  62    (March  28th)   he  married  Dor- 


othy Zollinger  (daughter  of  Johannes 
Zollinger  and  Elizabeth  Ury),  who 
was  born  Feb.  14,  1841,  in  Zurich, 
Switzerland.  He  became  the  father 
of  twelve  children,  namely,  Louise 
D.,    Daniel    J.,    Dorothy,    Joseph    E., 


BIOGRAPHICAL  ENCYCLOPEDIA. 


143 


Hyrum  M.,  Anna  E.,  Rosetta  M., 
Ernest  E.,  Minnie  L,  Emma  D.,  Ar- 
thur F.  and  Clarence  H.  Bishop  Lau 
was  a  farmer  and  stockraiser  during 
most  of  his  life.  He  died  at  Soda 
Springs  Feb.  6,  1914,  highly  respect- 
ed by  all  who  knew  him. 

LAWSOX,  James,  a  Patriarch  and 
a  Utah  pioneer  of  1847,  was  born 
July  20,  1820,  at  Kinross,  Scotland, 
of  a  distinguished  family.  One 
brother  a  physician,  another  a  lawyer 
— and  both  of  some  renown.  James 
thought  he  saw  a  future  in  ship- 
building and  in  his  youth  engaged 
for  five  years  with  Robert  Napier  & 


Sons  of  Glasgow,  a  firm  that  built 
the  first  steam-driven  battleships  of 
the  British  navy.  During  this  period 
he  assisted  in  building  some  of  the 
first  steamships  that  ever  crossed  the 
Atlantic,  such  as  the  "Britannia," 
"Arabia,"  "Caledonia,"  "Arcadia" 
and  "Cambria,"  all  belonging  to  the 
Cunard  line  of  steamers.  He  also 
worked  on  a  number  of  warships 
built  for  the  British  government,  and 
several  vessels  ordered  for  Turkey 
and  the  East  India  Company.  The 
fame  of  the  new  nation,  America,  ap- 
pealed to  his  adventurous  spirit,  and 
from  Liverpool  on  the  ship  "Mitoka" 
he    sailed,    Sept.    5.    1843,    for    New 


Orleans.  Working  his  way  thence 
on  the  river  boats,  he  arrived  at 
Nauvoo  in  1844.  The  tragic  death 
of  the  Prophet  Joseph,  the  persecu- 
tion of  the  Saints,  and  the  breadth 
and  beauty  of  their  doctrines,  coupled 
with  the  heroism  which  he  witnessed 
in  them,  decided  him  in  their  favor, 
and  he  was  soon  enrolled  in  the  com- 
pany of  Parley  P.  Pratt  on  the  long 
and  perilous  journey  to  the  valley  of 
the  Great  Salt  Lake.  In  his  diary  we 
read  that  in  February,  1846,  the 
leading  members  of  the  Church  and 
all  others  that  could  go  were  leaving 
Nauvoo,  that  the  snow  was  three  feet 
deep  when  they  got  across  the  river 
on  the  ice,  and  that  many  were  sick 
with  fever  and  ague;  he  himself  "was 
making  carriages  and  wagons  and 
standing  on  guard."  After  he  had 
"ironed  off"  two  wagons  and  a  car- 
riage for  Sister  Mary  Smith  (widow 
of  the  martyred  Patriarch),  he  tells 
how  the  mob,  900  strong,  came  upon 
her  farm  just  after  he  had  succeeded 
in  getting  her  and  others  across  the 
river.  Then  he  "returned  to  Nauvoo 
to  help  the  men  fight  the  mob,"  un- 
til Sept.  7,  18  47,  when  he  united  with 
a  party  that  set  out  for  Winter  Quar- 
ters. The  loss  and  recovery  of  their 
flock  of  sheep,  the  shortage  of  food 
and  the  "famishing  condition"  of 
many  of  the  company,  the  great 
flight  of  quails  that  so  providentially 
furnished  them  with  enough  to  sus- 
tain life,  how  people  were  robbed  of 
all  that  they  had,  how  some  were 
thrown  into  the  Mississippi  river,  and 
some  were  whipped  and  abused  in  a 
most  shameful  manner,  and  how  the 
Temple  was  desecrated  by  the  faith- 
less mobs,  which  "broke  their  agree- 
ment with  the  people" — those  are 
among  the  earlier  entries  of  the  jour- 
nal kept  by  Bro.  Lawson  during  the 
great  move  westward.  He  left  Win- 
ter Quarters  on  June  11,  1847,  with 
the  first  company,  under  Captains 
Perregrine  Sessions  and  John  Van 
Cott.  For  some  time  they  halted  at 
the    Elkhorn    river,    catching    many 


144 


LATTER-DAY   SAINT 


fish  and  allowing  their  cattle  to  re- 
cuperate. "On  the  19th  day  we 
started  out  on  our  journey,"  writes 
Elder  Lawson,  "went  about  twelve 
miles,  and  camped  on  a  beautiful 
plain,  the  place  interspersed  with 
flowers  of  various  hues  and  with 
trees.  Learning  that  a  man  had  been 
killed  by  Indians  in  a  company  ahead 
of  us,  we  awaited  here  the  arrival  of 
more  of  the  pioneers.  On  the  22nd 
of  June  we  rolled  out,  Bro.  Charles 
E.  Rich  in  front,  Parley  P.  Pratt 
next,  John  Taylor  third,  Jedediah  M. 
Grant  fourth,  etc.  On  the  prairies 
many  buffalo  were  encountered, 
some  of  which  were  killed  for  food." 
In  an  attempt  to  round  up  some  wild 
horses,  several  of  the  men,  including 
Bro.  Lawson,  went  afoot.  He  became 
exhausted  from  lack  of  water  when 
far  from  camp,  where  he  was  dis- 
covered and  brought  back.  The  rest 
of  the  journey  was  mostly  pleasant, 
"for  everything  was  union  and  har- 
mony through  the  whole  camp."  The 
progress  of  the  journey  was  marked 
by  more  buffalo,  and  a  great  many  In- 
dians, who  were  "all  the  while  dig- 
ging for  something,"  and  who  grew 
very  friendly,  but  fled  in  terror  when 
the  men  fired  off  a  cannon  for  their 
entertainment.  The  Indians  liked 
music  and  traded  elk  skins  for  var- 
ious articles.  After  leaving  Fort 
Laramie,  then  in  a  state  of  decay, 
food  became  scarce,  and  while  search- 
ing for  it  they  "came  to  a  place 
where  there  was  a  natural  bridge — 
the  height  150  feet,  width  about  80 
feet,  and  rather  narrow — about  21 
feet."  Near  this  "grand  sight"  they 
killed  some  buffalo.  The  country 
was  very  bleak,  with  many  hills.  On 
one  steep  hill  they  had  to  yoke  many 
cattle  to  each  wagon.  At  the  top  of 
this  hill  they  found  clear  springs  of 
water,  and  laid  over  there  for  a  day. 
They  passed  through  alkali  lands  and 
were  in  great  danger  of  being  mired 
in  the  mud  flats.  Near  Rock  Inde- 
pendence, where  they  rested  again, 
were     many     salaratus     lakes.       At 


Devil's  Gate  "the  ledges  hang  over 
on  both  sides,  almost  meeting,  sev- 
eral hundred  feet  high,  and  perpen- 
dicular." Here  the  roads  became 
heavy  and  full  of  sand.  Soon  the 
pilgrims  were  among  the  friendly 
Shoshone  Indians,  and  very  cold 
weather  came  on  as  they  reached 
Bear  river.  Bro.  Lawson  lost  a  cow 
that  fell  over  a  precipice.  A  few  more 
hard  days  brought  the  weary  trav- 
elers into  the  Salt  Lake  Valley,  near 
the  Fort,  which  they  entered  Sept.  4, 
1847.  The  scenes  of  this  strenuous 
lifs  changed  at  this  point.  Now  came 
the  building  of  a  log  house  with  flat 
roof;  the  resort  to  "wild  onions" 
(sego  lilies)  and  other  Indian  foods 
during  the  starvation  period  that  im- 
mediately followed;  the  trading  with 
the  Indians  for  horses;  the  growing 
of  the  first  crops;  the  incursion  of 
the  crickets  and  their  destruction  by 
the  gulls;  the  labor  of  constructing 
irrigation  ditches;  the  curious  condi- 
tion of  having  a  good  deal  of  money 
and  not  being  able  to  buy  anything 
with  it;  the  early  harvest  that  saved 
the  people  from  famine;  the  winter 
work  in  the  deep  snow  of  the  canyons 
getting  out  firewood;  the  division  of 
the  land  by  lot  among  the  people; 
the  arrival  of  people  on  the  way  to 
California  and  the  trading  with  them 
— these  are  among  the  incidents  re- 
ferred to  in  Bro.  Lawson's  diary  of 
this  period.  Called  to  go  to  Iron 
county,  Bro.  Lawson  made  this  jour- 
ney, with  many  notable  experiences, 
and  signalized  his  southern  trip  by 
smelting  the  first  iron  that  was  made 
from  the  immense  deposits  of  iron 
that  were  discovered  in  this  region. 
Returning  north  in  the  summer  of 
1851,  he  began  the  construction,  in 
Salt  Lake  City,  of  his  home.  This 
house,  at  the  time  of  its  erection,  the 
largest  in  Utah,  continued  for  years 
to  hold  this  distinction,  and  was  used 
for  many  public  purposes,  including 
night  school  and  entertainments,  for 
which  uses  its  construction — all  the 
rooms   opening   into   one — admirably 


BIOGRAPHICAL   ENCYCLOPEDIA. 


145 


adapted  it.  In  1852  and  again  in 
1865  he  engaged  in  missionary  work 
in  the  Sandwich  Islands,  where,  as 
usual,  his  mechanical  skill  was  em- 
ployed in  establishing  shops  and  in 
the  building  of  houses.  On  his  re- 
turn to  Utah  he  became  identified 
with  the  construction  department  of 
the  Utah  Central  Railway,  for  his 
achievements  in  iron-working  had 
long  been  recognized.  The  earliest 
heavy  iron-forging  in  Utah,  including 
the  making  of  the  first  mill  irons  used 
here,  were  the  work  of  his  hands. 
Among  other  interesting  things  he  is 
known  to  have  done  are,  when  other 
mechanics  failed  at  the  task,  he  as- 
sembled the  parts  of  an  oil  mill, 
brought  from  the  East  in  the  early 
sixties,  to  make  oil  from  flax  grown 
in  Utah.  The  first  paint  that  was 
used  upon  the  Salt  Lake  Theatre  and 
the  Tabernacle  was  mixed  with  lin- 
seed oil  from  this  mill.  He  produced 
the  first  forge  to  treat  gold  dust,  and 
constructed  the  drop  forge  from 
which  the  first  "Mormon"  coins  were 
stamped.  Though  he  twice  took  part 
in  colonizing  enterprises,  once  in  Iron 
county  and  once  in  Carson  valley, 
Nevada,  in  each  instance  he  came 
back  to  Salt  Lake  City,  always  mak- 
ing that  city  his  home.  At  the  age 
of  70  he  retired  from  regular  employ- 
ment, living  at  the  old  great  home 
which  he  had  built  at  an  early  day, 
and  which  is  still  standing  sturdily  at 
129  North  Second  West  Street.  Even 
after  he  had  reached  the  age  of  90, 
his  vitality  persisted,  and  at  the  time 
of  his  death  from  bronchitis,  Sept. 
14,  1912,  his  mind  was  clear  and  his 
faculties  unclouded  till  the  moment 
of  his  departure.  The  leading  char- 
acteristics of  this  pioneer,  who  had 
participated  in  the  founding  of  sev- 
eral different  commonwealths,  are 
plainly  indicated  from  incidents  of 
his  history.  Independence  and  fond- 
ness for  adventure  in  distant  lands 
are  strikingly  brought  out.  Presence 
of  mind  is  illustrated  by  his  almost 
miraculous  escape  during  the  steam- 

Vol.  Ill,  No.  10. 


boat  wreck  as  he  was  proceeding 
from  New  Orleans  to  Nauvoo.  In 
the  middle  of  the  night  the  steamer 
struck  a  snag,  and  sank  in  a  few 
minutes,  carrying  down  almost  every 
passenger.  But  Mr.  Lawson,  with 
rare  insight,  sprang  from  his  bed  and 
jumped  at  once  into  a  flat  boat,  and, 
with  only  a  few  others,  finally  floated 
to  the  shore.  Courage  and  resource- 
fulness in  the  presence  of  grave 
danger  were  exemplified  on  numer- 
ous occasions  of  mob  violence,  and 
soldier  or  police  duty.  When  Nauvoo 
surrendered,  Mr.  Lawson  crossed 
the  river  to  the  Montrose  side,  but 
was  immediately  surrounded  by 
about  300  of  the  mobbers  and  or- 
dered to  lay  down  his  arms.  Raising 
his  double  shooter,  he  declared  he 
would  kill  the  first  man  that  molested 
him;  and  he  was  permitted  to  move 
away.  In  a  similar  encounter  with 
five  well-armed  and  picked  men,  the 
latter  were  content  to  retreat  without 
a  battle.  Patience  and  self-sacrifice 
came  out  in  clear  relief  when  he  gave 
up  the  lands  he  had  toiled  to  culti- 
vate in  Salt  Lake  Valley  and  took  the 
barren  allotment  made  to  him  in  the 
general  plan.  Keen  foresight  was 
shown  when,  sent  on  a  mission  to 
Carson  valley  by  way  of  Humboldt 
river,  he  bought  for  the  sum  of 
$3,200  the  Eagle  Valley  Ranch,  now 
the  site  of  Carson  City,  Nevada.  For 
this  valuable  property  he  received  no 
compensation.  As  a  scout,  Indian 
fighter,  guard  and  peace  officer  other 
interesting  episodes  are  related  to 
his  credit.  He  was  a  lover  of  fine 
horses,  and  during  the  gold  rush  to 
California  secured  many  of  the  best 
animals  from  the  travelers,  who  had 
worn  them  out  in  the  long  journey 
by  the  time  they  had  reached  Salt 
Lake  Valley.  By  proper  attention 
these  horses  recovered,  under  Mr. 
Lawson's  management,  and  his  enter- 
prise in  handling  them  amounted  to  a 
very  profitable  business.  His  gener- 
osity was  manifested  by  the  free  use 
of  his  money  in  all  public  or  charit- 
October,  1918. 


146 


LATTER-DAY   SAINT 


able  exercises,  and  in  the  help  in 
home-building  which  he  frequently 
rendered  to  others.  His  children 
unite  in  emulating  his  kindness, 
firmness,  and  manly  ^qualities.  He 
was  a  lover  of  nature,  an  admirer  of 
the  beautiful,  and  a  patron  of  edu- 
cation. In  stature  he  was  tall  and 
powerful,  of  athletic  build,  and 
capable  of  great  feats  of  strength 
and  endurance.  He  was  of  handsome 
countenance,  with  dark  eyes  and 
brown  hair,  and  made  a  good  im- 
pression upon  those  whom  he  en- 
countered. His  life  was  one  of  action 
and  achievements.  It  was  filled  with 
adventure,  replete  with  difficult  sit- 
uations, inspired  by  hope,  ennobled 
by  selfi-sacrifice,  exalted  by  faith, 
purified  by  religion,  and  fulfilled  by 
accomplishment.  To  him  each  day 
brought  opportunity  for  good.  He 
lived  long,  yet  wasted  no  time.  He 
met  the  issue  of  his  day  with  calm- 
ness and  fortitude  and  was  never 
wholly  defeated.  The  monuments  of 
his  life's  work  remain  for  our  en- 
couragement and  gratitude.  His  in- 
fluence abides,  his  example  inspires 
and  his  memory  endures. — Isabel. 

LEATHAM,  William,  a  Patriarch 
in  the  Salt  Lake  Stake  of  Zion,  was 
born  Jan.  31,  1844,  at  Garthamlock, 
Lanarkshire,  Scotland,  the  son  of 
Robert  Leatham  and  Janet  Urquhart. 
He  was  baptized  June  30,  1861,  by 
David  M.  Stuart.  In  early  youth  he 
learned  coal  and  iron  mining,  and 
while  yet  in  his  teens  he  went  to 
Govan,  on  the  River  Clyde,  and 
learned  the  trade  of  a  blacksmith 
and  machinist,  in  the  meantime  at- 
tending night  school.  In  1865  he 
became  an  officer  in  the  St.  Andrews 
League  and  a  member  of  the  Broug- 
han  Literary  Institute.  In  18  67  he 
returned  to  his  work  as  a  miner  and 
became  foreman  of  the  Craigend  Col- 
liery, near  Glasgow.  In  1870  he  en- 
gaged as  collier  manager  for  the 
West  of  Fife  Coal  Company,  where 
he  remained  until  June,  1871,  when 


he  left,  very  much  against  the  wishes 
of  his  employers,  for  America,  cross- 
ing the  Atlantic  in  the  steamship 
"Wyoming,"  and  arrived  in  Salt  Lake 
City  July  12,  1871.  While  yet  in  his 
native  land  he  was  ordained  a  Dea- 
con in  1862,  by  Robert  Sands;  he 
was  ordained  a  Teacher  in  1864  and 
ordained  an  Elder  in  1867;  he  also 
did  missionary  labor  in  Fifeshire.  On 
July  2  5,  1871,  thirteen  days  after  his 
arrival  in  Utah,  he  married  Margaret 
Buchanan,  who  has  borne  him  twelve 
children.  Oct.  23,  1885,  he  married 
Martha  A.  Salisbury,  who  has  borne 
him  eight  children.  In  1877  Bro. 
Leatham  moved  to  Leeds,  Washing- 
ton county,  Utah,  and  in  1886  (March 
7th)  he  was  ordained  a  High  Priest 
and   set  apart   as   first   counselor   to 


Bishop  Brigham  Y.  McMullin  of  the 
Leeds  Ward.  He  returned  to  Salt 
Lake  City  in  1894  and  located  with 
his  family  in  the  Sixteenth  Ward,  but 
worked  as  a  mechanic  in  the  mines 
and  mills  at  Ophir,  Mercur  and  Lion 
Hill.  In  1902  he  was  master  me- 
chanic of  mines  and  mill  at  Sunshine, 
and  president  of  the  branch  there 
(Alpine  Stake).  Since  1904  he  has 
spent  most  of  his  time  at  home. 
Bro.  Leatham  was  ordained  a  Patri- 
arch Dec.  28,  1914,  by  Francis  M. 
Lyman. 


BIOGRAPHICAL  ENCYCLOPEDIA. 


147 


LECHTENBERG,Peter  Paul,  Bishop 

of  the  Lund  Ward  (Bannock  Stake), 
Bannock  county,  Idaho,  was  born 
June  2  7,  18  66,  in  Salt  Lake  City, 
Utah,  the  son  of  Paul  Lechtenberg 
and  Susannah  E.  Nebeker.  He  was 
baptized  when  eight  years  of  age  by 
Benjamin  Jones;  ordained  a  Seventy 
Nov.  15,  1893,  by  John  Henry  Smith; 
ordained  a  High  Priest  Sept.  21, 
1899,  by  Rudger  Clawson,  and  set 
apart  as  second  counselor  in  the 
bishopric  of  the  Lund  Ward;  later  he 
became  first  counselor.  He  was  or- 
dained a  Bishop  June  13,  1915,  and 
set  apart  to  preside  over  the   Lund 


Ward.  In  1894-96  he  filled  a  mission 
t  e  Southern  States,  laboring  prin- 
cipally in  Mississippi.  He  married 
Delia  Sophia  Crockett,  May  5,  1897, 
which  marriage  has  been  blessed 
with  eight  children,  namely,  Naomi 
Lapreo,  Susannah  Noriner,  Alvin 
Carl,  Paul  Theron,  Uorda,  Delia  Al- 
thea,  Donald  and  Elden  Ray.  Bishop 
Lechtenberg  died  at  Lund,  Oct.  20, 
1915,  faithful  and  energetic  in  his 
calling  to  the  last.  He  was  a  farmer 
and  stockraiser  by  avocation  and  took 
an  active  part  in  the  Farmers'  So- 
ciety of  Equity. 

LEE,    Thomas    Wolkitt,    a    Patri- 
arch in  the  Bingham  Stake,   Bonne- 


ville county,  Idaho,  was  born  March 
29,  1853,  at  Tooele,  Tooele  county, 
Utah,  the  son  of  Thomas  Lee  and 
Harriet  Wolkitt.  He  was  baptized 
Oct.  3,  1868,  by  Thomas  Lee;  or- 
dained a  Priest  in  18  69;  ordained  a 
Seventy  by  John  Shields,  Sept.  13, 
1874,  and  became  a  member  of  the 
4  3rd  quorum  of  Seventy;  ordained  a 
High  Priest  Oct.  31,  1880,  by  Joseph 
F.  Smith,  and  ordained  a  Patriarch 
Aug.  2,  1914,  by  George  F.  Richards. 
His  main  occupations  in  life  have 
been  those  of  a  herder,  teamster, 
tanner,  carpenter,  builder,  miner, 
bee-keeper,  school  teacher  and  ranch- 
er. He  has  always  been  a  diligent 
Church  worker,  laboring  as  assistant 
superintendent  of  Ward  and  Stake 
Sunday  schools,  Ward  and  Stake 
president  of  Y.  M.  M.  I.  A.,  treasurer 
of  Y.  M.  M.  I.  A.  in  the  Tooele  Stake, 
and  organizer  and  leader  of  the  Sun- 
day School  Flute  and  Drum  Band  of 
Tooele.  He  also  acted  as  leader  of 
the  Freedom  Ward  choir,  acted  as 
Ward  Teacher,  as  home  missionary 
and  Religion  Class  supervisor.  High 
Counselor  in  the  Star  Valley  and 
Bingham  Stakes,  Bishop's  counselor 
at  Tooele  and  counselor  to  President 
Heber  J.  Grant  and  Hugh  S.  Gowans 
in  the  presidency  of  the  Tooele  Stake. 
In  a  civil  capacity  he  h<is  acted  as 
school  trustee,  deputy  city  marshal, 
city  assessor  and  collector,  city  coun- 
cilman, justice  of  the  peace,  county 
attorney,  bugler  in  a  cavalry  com- 
pany (in  Tooele  county),  notary  pub- 
lic, etc.  In  1874  (Sept.  21)  he  mar- 
ried Martha  Louisa  Bowen  in  the 
Endowment  House,  Salt  Lake  City; 
she  was  the  daughter  of  Lewis  Bowen 
and  Mary  Ann  Harris  and  was  born 
Feb.  2,  1856,  at  Abersuchen,  Mon- 
mouthshire, South  Wales.  The  chil- 
dren by  this  marriage  are:  Thomas 
Bowen,  born  June  20,  1878;  Lewis 
Albert,  born  July  14,  1880;  Mary 
Ann,  born  Feb.  13,  1882;  Arthur 
Wolkitt,  born  May  6,  1884;  Blanche 
Newell,  born  Dec.  24,  1886;  Eugene 
Harris,   born   July    6,    1889;    Ernest, 


148 


LATTER-DAY   SAINT 


born  Nov.  12,  1891;  Alice  Ottella, 
born  Nov.  19,  1892;  Franklin  Bowen, 
born  Sept.  18,  1895  ,and  Wilford  De 
Loy,  born  May  8,  1898.  Bro.  Lee 
has  resided  successively  at  Tooele, 
Utah,  Freedom,  Wyoming,  and  lona, 
Idaho.  He  went  into  the  bee  business 
in  1877,  and  organized  the  Tooele 
County  Bee  Keepers'  Association  in 
1879,  acting  as  its  president  until 
1890.  By  his  bee  industry  he  has 
produced  tons  of  honey  which  has 
been  marketed  in  Utah,  Wyoming  and 
Idaho.  He  moved  from  Utah  to  Wy- 
oming in  1890  and  to  Idaho  in  1896. 
In  1901  he  organized  the  Bingham 
and  Fremont  County  Bee  Keepers' 
Association  and  acted  as  president  of 
the  company  for  several  years. 

LEWIS,  Clair,  an  Elder  who  died 
in  the  missionary  field,  was  born 
Nov.     15,     l^^^r     at     Logan,     Cache 


county,  Utah,  the  son  of  Edward 
Lewis  and  Ida  Benson  and  grandson 
of  the  late  Apostle  Ezra  T.  Benson 
and  Prof.  Alexander  Lewis.  After 
attending  the  public  schools  he  stud- 
ied four  years  in  the  Utah  Agricul- 
tural College,  after  which  he  served 
four  years  for  the  Oregon  Short  Line 
Railway,  advancing  to  the  position 
of  cashier.      In    1914   he   received   a 


call  for  a  mission  to  Australia.  On 
his  arrival  at  Sydney  he  was  appoint- 
ed to  labor  at  Adelaide,  where  he 
made  many  friends.  His  life  was  an 
inspiration  to  his  companions  and  his 
testimony  up  to  a  few  minutes  be- 
fore his  death  never  wavered.  While 
out  tracting  in  a  suburb  of  Adelaide, 
April  18,  1915,  he  was  seized  with  a 
severe  cramp;  medical  aid  was  sum- 
moned and  the  faith  and  fasting  of 
both  Saints  and  Elders  were  exercised 
in  his  behalf,  but  he  died  April  23, 
1915,  after  an  operation  for  appen- 
dicitis. His  remains  were  shipped 
home,  arriving  at  Logan  May  30, 
1915,  five  weeks  after  his  death. 
Bro.  Lewis's  life,  though  he  lived 
only  24  years,  is  an  example  of 
what  a  young,  clean  and  energetic 
Elder  can  do.  He  will  always  live 
in  the  memory  of  his  associates  as  a 
most  pleasant  and  worthy  companion 
and  a  firm  Latter-day  Saint. 

LEWIS,  Theodore  Belden,  an  en- 
ergetic Church  worker  and  one  of 
Utah's  foremost  educators,  was  born 
Nov.  18,  1843,  in  St.  Louis,  Mo.,  the 
son  of  Thomas  Anderson  Lewis  and 
Martha  J.  O.  B.  Lewis,  and  a  grand- 
son of  Judge  Henry  Lewis  of  How- 
ard county,  Mo.  He  lost  both  parents 
when  he  was  quite  young,  but  was 
left  with  sufficient  means  to  rear  and 
educate  him,  living  with  his  mother's 
parents  (William  Norman  Byrd  and 
Mary  Fitzgerald)  in  St.  Louis,  Mo., 
until  1855,  when  he  went  to  his 
grandfather  Lewis's  house  where  he 
had  spent  his  vacations,  while  attend- 
ing Central  College,  in  Howard 
county,  Mo.,  and  later  the  Fairview 
Academy.  When  the  Civil  war  broke 
out,  he  joined  the  Southern  army  and 
served  under  General  Price.  He  was 
in  the  battle  of  Boonville,  June  17, 
1861,  and  in  a  number  of  engage- 
ments later.  Being  captured  In 
battle  Dec.  19,  18  61,  he  was  taken 
to  Gratiot  Street  prison  and  later 
to  Alton,  but  was  finally  parolled  in 
the  spring  of  18  62  and  commenced 
reading   law.      In    1865    he    came    to 


BIOGRAPHICAL   ENCYCLOPEDIA. 


149 


Utah  and  commenced  teaching  school 
in  the  Mill  Creek  Ward.  Becoming  a 
convert  to  "Mormonism,"  he  was  bap- 
tized in  May,  1866.  In  1868-70  he 
filled  a  mission  to  the  Southern 
States,  laboring  principally  in  Ken- 
tucky and  Virginia;  he  traveled  with- 
out purse  or  scrip  and  much  of  the 
time  alone,  was  greatly  blessed  in  his 
labors,  baptized  108  souls,  and  made 
many  friends  for  his  people  by  his 
great  faith  and  upright  life.  He  was 
especially  powerful  and  successful  in 
administering  to  the  sick.  After  his 
return  to  Utah  in  1870  he  lived  in 
Provo,  Utah  county,  and  became  a 
teacher  in  the  Brigham  Young  Acad- 


emy. He  moved  to  Payson  in  1871 
to  teach  school.  From  1872  to  1876 
he  resided  at  Nephi,  Juab  county, 
where  he  was  ordained  a  High  Priest 
and  acted  as  superintendent  of  dis- 
trict schools  and  justice  of  the  peace. 
He  taught  school  there  and  organized 
a  large  improvement  association.  In 
May,  1876,  he  moved  to  Salt  Lake 
City  and  taught  a  school  in  the 
Twentieth  Ward,  previously  taught 
by  Karl  G.  Maeser.  In  1879  he  was 
elected  county  superintendent  of  Salt 
Lake  county.  By  diligent  and  hard 
study  he  resumed  and  completed  the 
course    in    the    study    of    law.       He 


worked  earnestly  for  free  schools  in 
Utah.  In  November,  1885,  he  be- 
came principal  of  the  Ogden  High 
school,  which  position  he  held  for 
twelve  years.  In  August,  1894,  he 
was  appointed  territorial  commis- 
sioner of  public  schools  by  the 
supreme  court,  which  position  he 
filled  with  abillity  until  Utah  became 
a  State.  When  the  Sunday  schools 
in  Ogden  were  graded  he  conducted 
the  very  large  theological  department 
in  the  Second  Ward  until  his  death. 
The  department  was  visited  by  many 
non-Mormons,  to  whom  he  bore  a 
strong  testimony  of  the  truth  of  the 
gospel  as  restored  through  the  Pro- 
phet Joseph  Smith.  Many  young  men 
who  studied  under  him  have  since 
filled  honorable  missions  and  ascribe 
their  success  in  life  to  the  impres- 
sions received  under  his  instructions. 
Elder  Lewis  also  labored  as  a  home 
missionary  many  years.  He  was  an 
earnest,  broad,  deep  and  clear-headed 
thinker,  a  powerful  and  convincing 
orator  and  lecturer;  his  voice  was 
pleasing  and  his  gesticulations  digni- 
fied and  graceful.  In  both  public 
and  private  life  he  exhibited  the  char- 
acteristics of  a  fine  cultured  South- 
ern gentleman  of  the  noblest  type 
of  his  Virginian  ancestors.  He 
passed  to  his  final  rest  July  20,  1899. 
Following  is  an  exerpt  from  his  dy- 
ing testimony:  "I  wish  to  add  my 
testimony  to  my  children  and  for  all 
the  world.  I  testify  my  faith  in  and 
knowledge  of  the  gospel  of  salvation 
as  revealed  to  Joseph  Smith  and  as 
established  in  the  Church  of  Jesus 
Christ  of  Latter-day  Saints,  which  I 
dearly  love.  .  .  .  Through  obe- 
dience to  its  sacred  principles  and  the 
observance  of  its  holiest  ordinances 
the  most  endearing  ties  are  formed 
and  sanctified  and  all  the  rational 
hopes  of  the  human  soul  may  be 
realized,  if  not  in  this  life,  then  in 
the  great  beyond.  .  .  .  Let  my 
family  in  all  its  entirety  seek  earn- 
estly the  light  which  has  guided  my 


150 


LATTER-DAY   SAINT 


footsteps  and  walk  in  it.  God  bless 
you  all!  God  bless  mankind!"  In 
1870  (August  r^th)  Prof.  Lewis  mar- 
ried Martha  J.  Coray  (daughter  of 
Howard  Coray  and  Martha  J.  Knowl- 
son),  who  was  born  Feb.  19,  1844, 
at  Nauvoo,  111.,  and  she  became  the 
mother  of  ten  children,  namely,  Gen- 
evieve, Theodore  Belden,  William 
H^nry,  Frank  Wilbur,  Maude  Mary, 
Ginevra,  Martha  Jane,  Owen  Byrd, 
Thomas  Clyde,  Marcia  Woodson  and 
Laura  Eppie.  Five  of  the  children 
were  still  living  in  1918.  Bro. 
Lewis's  second  wife  was  Ephrina 
Sarepa  Coray  (a  sister  of  his  former 
wife),  born  Feb.  4,  1850,  at  Fort 
Kearney,  Nebraska.  She  became  the 
mother  of  seven  children,  five  of 
whom  are  stil  Hiving. 

LIDDELL,     LawTence     Thompson, 

sixth  Bishop  of  Batesville  Ward 
(Tooele  Stake),  Tooele  county,  Utah, 
was  born  Nov.  23,  1888,  at  Bates- 
ville,   Tooele   county,    Utah,    the    son 


dained  a  Seventy  March  30,  1911,  by 
David  O.  McKay;  ordained  a  High 
Priest  Nov.  6,  1911,  by  Joseph  C. 
Orme,  and  set  apart  as  second  coun- 
selor to  Bishop  Edward  C.  Ekman. 
He  was  set  apart  as  first  counselor 
to  Bishop  John  C.  Bryan,  Dec.  31, 
1912,  and  was  ordained  a  Bishop  by 
Heber  J.  Grant  June  30,  1915,  and 
set  apart  to  preside  over  the  Bates- 
ville Ward.  Prior  to  this  he  acted 
as  president  of  the  Ward  Y.  M.  M. 
I.  A.  and  filled  a  mission  to  the 
Southern  States  in  1910,  laboring 
principally  in  East  Tennessee.  He  re- 
turned home  on  account  of  sickness 
after  a  few  months.  In  1913  (June 
2  5th)  he  married  Blanche  Benson 
(daughter  of  Andrew  G.  Benson  and 
Lula  May  Sabin),  who  was  born  Oct. 
12,  18-94,  at  Grantsville,  Utah;  she 
has  borne  her  husband  two  children. 

LINDSAY,  Joseph  Shanks,  a  presi- 
dent of  the  115th  quorum  of  Seven- 
ty,   and    a    faithful    Church    worker 


of    John     C.     Liddell     and     Hannah  in  the  Taylorsville  Ward,  Salt  Lake 

Brower.      He    was    baptized    Aug.    4,  county,    Utah,    was    born    March    31, 

1899,  by  Ed.   C.  Ekman;    ordained  a  1849,  in  Liverpool,  England,  the  son 

Deacon    and     a    Priest    when     quite  of     John      Lindsay      and      Elizabeth 

young;  ordained  an  Elder  in  Decem-  Shanks.      He    emigrated    to    America 

ber,   1909,  by  Hugh   S.   Gowans;    or-  with  his  parents  in  1851  and  located 


BIOGRAPHICAL   ENCYCLOPEDIA. 


151 


temporarily  in  St.  Louis,  Mo.,  where 
his  father  presided  over  a  branch  of 
the  Church  until  1859,  when  the  fam- 
ily  migrated   to    Utah,    crossing   the 
plains     in     a     freight    train.       They 
settled    at    Taylorsville,     Salt    Lake 
county,    where   Joseph    was    baptized 
in  the  fall  of  1859  and  ordained  an 
Elder  Dec.  6,  18  69.     On  this  date  he 
married  Emma  Bennion  (daughter  of 
Samuel  Bennion  and  Mary  Bushel), 
who  was  born  Nov.  8,  1851,  at  Tay- 
lorsville.    In  1867  he  participated  in 
the  Blackhawk  war,  and  went  to  Ari- 
zona    as     an     intended     colonization 
settler    in    1873.      In    1891-1893    he 
filled    a    mission    to    Great    Britain, 
laboring  in  Ireland.     Prior  to  this  he 
was  ordained  a  Seventy,  and  after  his 
return  from  his  mission  he  became  a 
president    in    the    115th    quorum    of 
Seventy.     He  filled  a  second  mission 
to    Great    Britain    in    1906-8,    labor- 
ing in  the  Liverpool  conference  and 
presided  over  the  Blackburn  branch 
seven  months.     He  returned  home  in 
charge   of  a   company   of  emigrating 
Saints.     Elder  Lindsay  was  by  occu- 
pation a  farmer,  but  served  his  fel- 
low-citizens  as   constable,   justice   of 
the  peace,  etc.     He  contributed  of  his 
time  and  means  most  liberally  in  the 
interests  of  the  Church.     Bro.  Lind- 
say died  at  Taylorsville  Feb.  2,  1918. 
He  was  the  father  of  eleven  children, 
three  boys  and  eight  girls.     Eight  of 
his    children    are    still    alive    and    all 
faithful  members  of  the   Church. 

LITTLE,  Jesse  Carter  (continued 
from  Vol.  1,  page  242),  Bro.  Little 
acted  for  a  number  of  years  as  U.  S. 
marshal  for  Utah,  was  the  first  sex- 
ton of  Salt  Lake  City,  which  city  he 
also  served  as  assessor  and  collector. 
In  1839  (Sept.  28th)  he  married 
Eliza  Greenwood  French  (daughter 
of  Col.  Whitecomb  French  and  Mary 
Kendall),  who  was  born  Sept.  2, 
1818,  and  died  Oct.  23,  1899;  she 
became  the  mother  of  eleven  chil- 
dren.    About  the  year  1856  Jesse  C. 


Little  married   Emily  Hoagland  and 
Mary    M.    Holbrook.      By    these    two 


wives  he  had  sixteen  children,  eleven 
by  Emily  and  five  by  Mary. 

LLOYD,  Archie  E.,  a  High  Coun- 
cilor in  the  Bannock  Stake  of  Zion 
(Idaho),  was  born  Nov.  4,  1888,  at 
Wellsville,    Cache   county,   Utah,   the 


son  of  Thomas  W.  Lloyd  and  Eliza- 
beth Lea.  He  was  baptized  when 
eight  years  old,  by  Robert  Redford; 
ordained    successively   to   the   offices 


162 


LATTER-DAY   SAINT 


of  Deacon,  Teacher,  Priest  and  El- 
der; ordained  a  High  Priest  in  1909, 
by  Heber  J.  Grant;  acted  as  one  of 
the  superintendents  of  Sunday  schools 
in  the  Bannock  Stake  for  three  years. 
After  being  a  member  of  the  Sunday 
school  Stake  board  six  years,  he  of- 
ficiated on  the  Y.  M.  M.  I.  A.  Stake 
board  for  two  years,  and  has  been 
superintendent  of  Stake  Religion 
Classes  since  July,  1916.  He  is  also 
a  member  of  the  town  board  of  Grace 
and  vice-president  and  a  director  in 
the  Gem  State  Development  Com- 
pany, president  of  Elk  Basin  United 
Oil  Company,  secretary  and  manager 
of  Liberty  Bond  &  Mortgage  Com- 
pany, and  a  member  of  the  County 
Council  of  Defence.  In  1905  (June 
17th)  he  married  Agnes  Meddo 
(daughter  of  Isaac  J.  Meddo  and 
Pauline  Burridge),  who  was  born 
Jan.  6,  1889.  This  marriage  has 
been  blessed  with  five  children, 
namely,  Afton  Echo  (who  was  killed 
by  an  automobile  at  San  Diego,  Cal., 
Dec.  24,  1915,  while  her  father  was 
filling  a  mission  in  California),  Ag- 
nes Pearl,  Archie  Winslow,  Luther 
Meddo  and  Orville  Meddo.  In  1907 
Bro.  Lloyd  settled  at  Central,  Ban- 
nock county,  Idaho,  moved  to  Soda 
Springs  in  1912  and  located  at  Grace 
in  1914,  where  he  has  taken  a  most 
active  part  in  the  development  of  that 
part  of  the  country,  being  especially 
interested  in  real  estate.  Bro.  Lloyd 
received  a  good  education,  and  is  a 
graduate  of  the  Brigham  Young  Col- 
lege of  Logan. 

LOVELL,  John,  was  born  May  9, 
1812,  at  Worrell,  Somersetshire, 
England,  the  son  of  Edmond  Lovell 
and  Silvia  Williams.  He  married 
Ann  Parsons  at  Bitton,  Somerset- 
shire, England,  Feb.  15,  1835,  and 
emigrated  to  Canada  the  same  year. 
Here  he  and  his  wife  were  converted 
to  "Mormonism"  through  the  testi- 
mony of  John  Taylor  and  others  and 
were  baptized  in  February,  1837,  by 
Almon  W.  Babbitt.   He  gathered  with 


the  Saints  to  Nauvoo,  111.,  and  being 
a  stone  mason  by  trade  he  worked 
on  the  Nauvoo  Temple.  Being  driven 
out  of  Nauvoo  by  the  mob,  together 
with  his  co-religionists,  he  settled  at 
Big  Bend,  Pottawattamie  county, 
Iowa,  where  his  wife  died  from  ex- 
posure. Here  he  also  married  Eliza- 
beth Smith,  and  crossed  the  plains 
in  1852,  arriving  in  Salt  Lake  City 
Oct.  2,  1852.  After  residing  tempo- 
rarily at  Provo,  Utah  county,  he 
moved  to  Fillmore,  Millard  county, 
in  1853.  Here  he  married  Anna 
Anderson  in  1856;  moved  to  Deseret 
in  1860;  was  ordained  a  High  Priest 
May  2,  18  61,  by  John  A.  Ray,  and  set 
apart  as  first  counselor  to  President 
Jacob    Croft    at    Deseret.      Later    he 


acted  as  a  counselor  to  President  B. 
H.  Robinson.  He  moved  to  Oak  City 
in  18  68  and  presided  over  the  Oak 
Creek  branch  until  Feb.  21,  1871, 
after  which  he  acted  as  first  coun- 
selor to  Platte  D.  Lyman  until  1878. 
His  wife,  Elizabeth,  bore  him  seven 
children,  namely,  George,  Sylvia,  Ed- 
mund, John,  Joseph  H.,  William  and 
Martha  Ann.  His  third  wife,  Anna 
Anderson  Lovell,  bore  him  five  chil- 
dren, namely,  Christina,  Ann  Eliza- 
beth, Brigham,  John  Edmond  and 
Sylvia   Ann.      Bro.    Lovell    died   Jan. 


BIOGRAPHICAL  ENCYCLOPEDIA. 


153 


13,    1881,    at   Oak   City,    Utah,    as   a 
faithful  Latter-day  Saint. 

LYMAN,  Frederick  Rich,  counselor 
in  the  presidency  of  the  Millard 
Stake,  was  born  Oct.  12,  1856,  in 
Salt    Lake    City,    Utah,    the    son    of 


Amasa  M.  Lyman  and  Caroline  E. 
Partridge.  He  was  a  grandson  of 
Edward  Partridge,  the  first  Bishop 
of  the  Church.  With  his  parents  and 
others  of  his  father's  family  he 
moved  to  Fillmore  in  the  early  sixties 
and  was  baptized  Nov.  18,  1865,  by 
Daniel  Thompson.  About  the  year 
1871,  together  with  his  brothers 
Platte  D.,  Edward  L.,  Joseph  A.  and 
Walter  C.  Lyman,  George  Finlinson, 
John  W.  Dutson  and  others,  he  was 
called  by  President  Thomas  Callister 
to  settle  on  Oak  creek  for  the  purpose 
of  strengthening  the  small  colony 
which  was  then  located  at  that  place. 
There  he  commenced  the  eventful 
career  which  characterized  his  life's 
labor.  In  1875  (Dec.  6th)  he  mar- 
ried Ann  Elizabeth  Lovell  (daughter 
of  John  Lovell  and  Ann  Georginsen), 
who  was  born  at  Fillmore  Dec.  13, 
1859,  and  their  only  child,  Edith 
Elzina  Lyman,  was  born  at  Oak  City 
Aug.  4,  1879.  Bro.  Lyman  was  or- 
dained a  Seventy  and  later  a  High 
Priest  by  Apostle  Francis  M.  Lyman. 


In  1884-8  6  he  filled  a  mission  to  the 
Southern  States  and  shortly  after  his 
return  he  was  called  to  act  as  a  coun- 
selor to  Bishop  Peter  Anderson  at 
Oak  Creek,  in  which  capacity  he 
labored  for  about  twenty  years.  In 
1907  he  was  called  to  labor  as  first 
counselor  to  President  Alonzo  A, 
Hinckley  in  the  Millard  Stake,  which 
position  he  held  the  remainder  of 
his  life.  He  also  became  connected 
with  the  settlement  of  Delta  and  was 
president  of  the  irrigation  company 
at  that  place  from  its  inception.  He 
died  at  Oak  City  Feb.  4,  1911.  His 
demise  occurred  34  years  to  a  day 
after  that  of  his  father;  2  65  relatives 
and  friends  attended  his  funeral. 
Bro.  Lyman  was  an  intense  lover  of 
nature  and  could  see  its  beauties  in 
all  its  creations.  He  was  a  leading 
spirit  in  all  public  improvements  and 
his  energetic  labors  were  visible  on 
every  hand  in  his  home  town  and  In 
that  of  the  town  of  Delta. 

LYMAN,   Platte    De   Alton,    presi- 
dent   of    the    San    Juan    Stake,    San 


Juan  county,  Utah,  was  born  in  a 
wagon  on  the  Platte  river,  near  Fort 
Laramie,  Nebraska  (now  Wyoming), 
Aug.  20,  1848,  while  his  mother  was 
traveling  from  Winter  Quarters  to 
Salt  Lake  City.     He  was  the  son  of 


X54  LATTER-DAY   SAINT 

Amasa  Mason  Lyman  and  Eliza  Maria  Having  bought  cattle,  he  sought 
Partridge.  He  was  baptized  when  range  for  them  in  the  western  part 
about  eight  years  of  age,  and  until  he  of  San  Juan  county,  but  after  tend- 
was  fifteen  years  of  age  resided  in  ing  them  there  six  years  he  found  it 
Salt  Lake  City  and  Farmington,  best  to  live  again  in  Bluff.  He  was 
Davis  county,  Utah,  and  then  accom-  sustained  in  November,  1890,  as  sec- 
panied  his  parents  to  Fillmore,  Mil-  ond  counselor  to  President  Francis 
lard  county,  Utah.  In  1867  (May  A.  Hammond  of  the  San  Juan  Stake, 
18th)  he  married  Adelia  Robison  and  and  moved  his  family  to  Bluff  in 
left  home  May  24,  1867,  on  a  mission  April,  1891.  In  October,  ISdS,  he 
to  Great  Britain.  He  labored  as  was  called  to  preside  over  the  Euro- 
president  of  the  London  conference  pean  Mission,  with  James  L.  Mc- 
and  returned  to  Fillmore  In  Septem-  Murrin  and  Henry  W.  Naisbitt  as  his 
ber,  1869.  Soon  after  his  return  he  counselors.  He  left  immediately, 
was  sustained  as  a  High  Councilor  in  traveled  much  in  Great  Britain  and 
the  Millard  Stake  and  called  to  take  on  the  European  continent,  and  held 
charge  of  the  Oak  Creek  branch.  In  the  positian  of  president  until  June, 
February,  1872,  he  was  sent  from  1901,  when  he  was  released  to  pre- 
Millard  county  to  the  Territorial  con-  side  over  the  San  Juan  Stake.  He 
vention.  He  became  superintendent  reached  home  in  July,  and  died  Nov. 
of  the  county  co-operative  herds,  en-  13,  1898,  at  Bluff,  Utah,  leaving  two 
gaged  variously  in  farming,  saw-  wives  and  seven  children.  His  living 
milling  and  stockraising,  and  went  children  are:  Mrs.  Evelyn  Bayles, 
with  the  rest  of  Millard  Stake  into  Albert  Robison,  Mrs.  Mary  Reeve, 
the  United  Order  in  1874.  In  1875-  Mrs.  Lucretia  Ranney,  Edward  Part- 
76  he  filled  another  mission  to  Eng-  ridge,  Mrs.  Caroline  Bayles  and  Mrs. 
land,  where  he  was  appointed  presi-  Emma  Brown, 
dent  of  the  Nottingham  conference. 

In  July,  187  7,  he  was  set  apart  as  LYMAN,  Walter  Clisbee,  president 
Bishop  of  Oak  Creek  Ward.  In  1879  of  the  San  Juan  Stake  of  Zion,  San 
he  married  Annie  Maud  Clark,  thus  Juan  county,  Utah,  was  born  Oct.  1, 
obeying  the  law  of  plural  marriage. 
In  August  of  that  year  he  received 
a   call    from    the    presidency    of    the 

Church   to   assist   Silas   S.    Smith   In 
bringing  a  company  of  Saints  through 

to  colonize  on  the  San  Juan.      They 

reached  the  present  site  of  Bluff  in 

April,     1880.       Bro.    Lyman    became 

counselor  to  Silas  S.  Smith,  president 

of  the  San  Juan  and  San  Luis  Mis- 
sions in  September  of  that  year,  and 

was  called  in  April,  1882,  to  preside 

over  the  San  Juan  Mission.     He  acted 

as    the    first    president    of    the    San 

Juan    Co-op    and    was    one    of    the 

original    board    of    selectmen    when 

San  Juan  county  was  first  organized. 

In  September,  1884,  he  was  released 

from    his    labors    in    San    Juan,    and 

settled  in  Scipio,  Utah.     The  follow-    1863,    at    Fillmore,    Millard    county, 

ing  February  he  was  sustained  as  a    Utah,   the   son   of  Amasa  M.   Lyman 

High  Councilor  in  the  Millard  Stake,    and  Caroline  E.  Partridge.   He  moved 


BIOGRAPHICAL  ENCYCLOPEDIA. 


155 


with  his  mother  to  Oak  Creek  when 
eight  years  old  and  later  engaged  in 
farming  and  saw-milling.  He  mar- 
ried Silvia  Lovell,  Oct.  4,  1883,  and 
in  188  6  moved  to  Salt  Lake  City, 
obtaining  employment  with  the  Co-op. 
Wagon  and  Machine  Company.  He 
was  one  of  the  original  incorporators 
of  the  Utah  Implement  Company, 
held  one-third  of  its  stock  and  acted 
as  its  vice-president.  His  wife  died 
in  1887,  leaving  him  three  children. 
In  1889  he  married  Libbie  Finlinson, 
whose  children  are  Ethel,  Marvin  F., 
Zola,  Susan,  Lucile,  Ramond  F.,  Lynn 
T.,  Margaret,  George  F.  and  Barton 
F.  In  18  9  6  he  sold  his  interests  in 
the  Utah  Implement  Company  and 
soon  afterwards  became  the  origin- 
ator of  a  scheme  to  make  a  canal 
from  Johnson  Creek  to  White  Mesa, 
San  Juan  county,  Utah.  The  under- 
taking was  extremely  unpopular  at 
that  time  and  was  condemned  gener- 
ally as  impracticable.  In  1899-1900 
Bro.  Lyman  filled  a  mission  to  the 
Northern  States,  after  which  he  pre- 
sided over  said  mission  until  1902, 
when  he  was  called  to  preside  over 
the  San  Juan  Stake,  which  position 
he  filled  until  1911.  During  the  nine 
years  he  presided  over  the  San  Juan 
Stake  he  witnessed  his  proposed  canal 
finished  and  water  brought  onto  the 
White  Mesa,  where  he  had  his  home 
and  where  the  flourishing  Ward  of 
Grayson  (now  Blanding)  sprang  up 
in  what  was  before  a  sage-brush  soli- 
tude. Elder  Lyman  has  served  San 
Juan  county  as  a  commissioner  and 
has  represented  the  same  in  the 
Utah  legislature.  He  has  ever  taken 
a  leading  part  in  developing  the  re- 
sources of  the  country.  Today  he 
possesses  the  love  and  good  will  of 
the  people  of  San  Juan. 

LYONS,  William  Orvil,  Bishop  of 
Grassy  Lake  (Taylor  Stake),  Alberta, 
Canada,  was  born  July  27,  1878,  at 
Clarkston,  Cache  county,  Utah,  the 
son  of  Caleb  W.  Lyons  and  Sarah 
Minerva  Rice.  He  was  baptized 
August  6,   1885  by  Thomas  Godfrey 


at  Clarkston,  married  Anna  M.  Smith 
in  Fremont  county,  Idaho,  June  15, 
1902,  and  removed  to  Alberta,  Can- 
ada the  same  year.  From  19  06  to 
1910  he  acted  as  Sunday  school 
superintendent  of  the  Taber  Ward, 
Alberta,  Canada.  He  then  moved  to 
Grassy  Lake  where  he  opened  up  a 
harness  business  April  22,  1910.  He 
was  ordained  a  Bishop  by  Orson  F. 
Whitney,  August  10,  1912,  and  set 
apart  to  preside  over  the  Grassy  Lake 
Ward  which  position  he  still  holds. 
Bishop  Lyon  has  ever  taken  part  in 
public  affairs  and  has  since  his  early 


youth  worked  diligently  for  the  bene- 
fit of  his  fellow  citizens,  having  held 
several  positions  of  responsibility  in 
the  interests  of  the  communities 
where  he  has  resided. 

MAGLEBY,  Or.son,  Bishop  of  the 
Monroe  Ward,  Sevier  county,  Utah, 
was  born  Nov.  8,  1865,  the  son  of 
Hans  Olsen  Magleby  and  Eliza  Olsen. 
He  was  baptized  by  his  father  at 
Milton,  Morgan  county,  Utah,  August 
6,  1874;  ordained  an  Elder  Oct.  14, 
1884,  by  Bishop  E.  T.  Larsen  (having 
been  ordained  a  Priest  about  four 
years  previously);  ordained  a 
Seventy  Oct.  26,  1884,  by  Hans  P. 
Miller;  attended  the  B.  Y.  Academy 
at   Provo   in    1884,    1886    and    1888; 


156 


LATTER-DAY   SAINT 


labored  in  the  Manti  Temple  six 
months  In  18  90;  married  Margaret 
Ann  Warnock  May  23,  1890;  was  or- 
dained a  High  Priest  and  Bishop 
May  20,  1891,  by  Apostle  Anthon  H. 
Lund  and   set  apart  to  preside  over 


the  Monroe  Ward,  which  position  he 
filled  for  about  twelve  years.  In 
1895-1896  he  filled  a  mission  to 
Scandinavia,  laboring  in  the  Copen- 
hagen conference.  He  has  also  filled 
a  short  mission  to  California.  Bro. 
Magleby  is  still  an  active  and 
respected  citizen  of  Monroe. 

MARTINEAU,     James     Henry,      a 

Patriarch  and  prominent  Church 
worker  was  born  March  13,  1828,  in 
Amsterdam,  Montgomery  county, 
New  York,  the  son  of  John  Mar- 
tineau  and  Eliza  Mears.  He  writes: 
My  father  went  to  England  in 
his  youth,  graduated  as  physician 
and  surgeon,  married  the  widow  of 
Captain  Hawkins  of  the  British  Navy, 
the  daughter  of  the  Earl  of  Stanhope 
by  whom  he  had  two  daughters,  Julia 
and  Lucretia.  His  wife  died  in  Balti- 
more, Maryland,  and  he  next  married 
my  mother  in  1824,  she  being  then 
about  seventeen  years  of  age.  In 
1831  he  was  chief  engineer  in  build- 
ing the  Camden  &  Armboy  railroad, 
one  of  the  first  railroads  built  in  the 


United  States.  He  was  employed  by 
the  government  on  some  important 
works,  and  was  chief  engineer  of  the 
Croton  waterworks  of  New  York  City 
and  its  chief  of  construction  when  he 
died.  He  invented  the  central  dis- 
charge water  wheel,  the  turbine  prin- 
ciple, which  has  revolutionized  water 
power;  also  horse  power  machine  for 
threshing  grain,  which  displaced  the 
flail  or  the  treading  out  grain  by 
horses  or  cattle.  He  was  of  Hugue- 
not descent,  thence  dating  back  to 
ancient  Rome,  the  family  name  in 
Latin  being  Martinus,  changed  to 
Martino  or  Marino  in  Italian,  Mar- 
tinho  in  Portuguese,  Martin,  Martinot 
and  Martin  in  ancient  French,  Martin 
in  German  and  English,  and  in  Slav 
dialects  Martinovich.  I  have  an  un- 
broken lineage  of  twenty-two  gener- 
ations back  to  A.  D.  1250  on  the 
paternal  side  and  twenty-one  on  the 
maternal  to  A.  D.  1255,  unbroken.  I 
graduated  at  Monroe  Academy,  N. 
Y.,  at  the  age  of  sixteen  and  entered 
the  office  of  the  "Cayuga  Tocsin"  in 
Andover,   N.   Y.,   as   "printers  devil" 


working  up  to  compositor  and  press- 
man on  one  of  the  first  Hoe  presses 
made.  When  the  Mexican  war  com- 
menced in  1846  I  enlisted  in  the 
U.  S.  regular  army  to  serve  during 
the  war.     Just  two  hours  before  I  was 


BIOGRAPHICAL   ENCYCLOPEDIA. 


157 


to  go  to  the  front  my  mother  came, 
demanded  my  release  as  a  minor,  and 
led  me  home.  Refusing  to  return  to 
the  printing  office,  I  went  to  Mil- 
waukee, Wis.,  entering  the  office  of 
the  "Milwaukee  Sentinel"  as  press- 
man, but  soon  enlisted  again,  and 
with  many  other  recruits  was  sent  to 
Newport  Barracks.  Serving  in  var- 
ious ways  on  detached  service  until 
the  war  ended  I  was  honorably  dis- 
charged in  July,  1848,  and  returned 
to  Milwaukee.  In  1849  I  started  for 
California,  but  on  my  arrival  at  the 
Missouri  river  I  was  told  that  it 
would  be  impossible  so  late  in  the 
season  to  safely  cross  the  plains  and 
so  I  stayed  in  Western  Missouri  until 
the  spring  of  18  50,  teaching  school. 
Early  in  185  0  I  again  started  on  my 
journey  to  the  Pacific  Coast,  during 
which  my  life  was  twice  miraculously 
preserved,  and  I  arrived  in  Salt  Lake 
City,  July  22,  1850.  I  was  impressed 
to  stop  there  for  the  season  and  go 
on  west  the  next  year.  But  I  went 
no  farther,  for  two  women,  the  wife 
of  Elder  P.  P.  Pratt  and  the  widow 
of  Don  Carlos  Smith  taught  me  the 
gospel,  and  I  was  baptized  Jan.  19, 
1851,  just  where  the  Temple  stands 
in  Salt  Lake  City  before  I  heard  a 
sermon  by  a  "Mormon"  Elder.  In 
February,  1851,  I  was  ordained  a 
Seventy  by  Jedediah  M.  Grant,  and 
placed  in  the  27th  quorum.  About 
three  hundred  others  were  ordained 
at  the  same  time.  In  March,  1851, 
I  went  with  William  K.  Rice  to  the 
new  town  of  Parowan,  established 
three  months  before,  ours  being  the 
first  company  which  reinforced  the 
settlement.  I  joined  the  Nauvoo 
Legion  as  sergeant  major  of  the  Iron 
regiment  under  Col.  George  A.  Smith, 
became  second  lieutenant,  and  finally 
adjutant  of  Iron  Military  District, 
comprising  all  of  Utah  south  of  Fill- 
more. I  was  the  first  county  clerk 
of  Iron  county  and  the  first  city  re- 
corder of  Parowan.  I  also  served  as 
city  councilor  and  alderman;  served 
as  county  surveyor  and  sheriff;  was 
Bishop's  clerk  and  Bishop's  Councilor 


and  on  May  21,  1854,  I  was  ordained 
a  High  Priest  by  Elder  George  A. 
Smith  and  set  apart  as  a  counselor  to 
Stake  President  John  C.  L.  Smith.  I 
was  Ward  clerk,  and  Stake  clerk  for 
a  time,  and  kept  record  of  all  military 
operations,  explorations  and  Indian 
difficulties  which  at  times  were  very 
serious,  threatening  our  destruction. 
I  was  one  of  a  company  of  sixty  men 
in  1858  sent  out  by  Governor  Brig- 
ham  Young  to  hunt  a  place  of  refuge 
for  the  Saints,  when  the  U.  S.  Army 
was  invading  Utah,  and  as  its  histor- 
ian made  a  report  of  the  expedition 
to  Governor  Young.  As  military  in- 
structor I  frequently  drilled  the  com- 
panies and  battalions  of  the  Legion, 
at  one  of  which,  the  Parowas  Battal- 
ion, Col.  John  C.  Fremont  was  a  spec- 
tator. Dining  with  me  that  day  he 
said  to  me  "Mr.  Martineau,  if  I  had 
10,0  00  such  men,  I  could  conquer 
Mexico."  He  did  not  see  our  awk- 
wardness. This  was  on  his  last  trip 
of  exploration  for  a  railway  route 
across  the  continent.  I  surveyed 
Parowan  town  plat,  also  Paragoonah, 
Ft.  Johnson  and  the  first  city  plat  of 
Beaver,  besides  much  farm,  pasture 
and  hay  land.  I  was  one  of  the  party 
which  crossed  the  mountains  to  the 
Panguitch  Lake.  With  a  canoe, 
which  we  made  we  were  the  first 
whites  to  navigate  it.  In  May,  1855, 
I  was  appointed  to  make  out  the 
consecration  deeds  of  the  property 
of  the  people  to  the  Church.  All 
heads  of  families  in  Parowan  con- 
secrated cheerfully,  myself  included. 
In  1852  (Jan.  8th)  I  married  Susan 
Ellen  Johnson,  daughter  of  Joel  H. 
Johnson,  who  joined  the  Church 
June  1,  1831,  and  who  was  present 
when  the  "Word  of  Wisdom"  was 
given  in  1833.  My  wife  was  born  in 
Kirtland,  Ohio,  July  11,  1836,  and 
has  remained  a  faithful  and  true 
Latter-day  Saint  from  that  date  until 
the  present  time,  through  all  the 
trials  of  the  Church.  During  these 
years  spent  in  ardous  public  service, 
Indian  wars  and  explorations,  I  re- 
ceived   only    $10.00    for    four    years 


15S 


LATTER-DAY   SAINT 


service  as  sheriff.  We  all  worked  for 
nothing,  expecting  no  temporal  re- 
ward. In  Salt  Lake  City,  Jan.  18, 
1857,  I  married  Susan  Julia  Sherman, 
daughter  of  Lyman  Royal  Sherman 
and  Delcena  Diadamie  Johnson,  born 
in  Far  West,  Missouri,  Oct.  21,  1838. 
She  became  the  mother  of  eight  child- 
ren, five  now  living.  She  died  Jan. 
28,  1874,  having  lived  as  a  true  Lat- 
ter-day Saint  all  her  life.  Removing 
to  Salt  Lake  City  in  18  60  I  was  ad- 
vised by  Pres.  Young  to  go  to  Logan, 
where  I  was  needed  as  a  surveyor, 
Cache  valley  being  then  rapidly  set- 
tled. I  went  there  in  July,  1860,  and 
located  many  large  canals  and  in- 
stalled the  Logan  City  water  works. 
I  also  became  county  clerk,  county 
surveyor,  city  recorder  of  Logan  City, 
and  engaged  in  farming.  I  was  also 
U.  S.  deputy  internal  revenue  col- 
lector, served  as  a  "minute  man"  for 
more  than  twenty  years  in  many 
military  expeditions  in  Indian 
troubles,  at  the  same  time  serving  as 
brigade  adjutant  of  Cache  Military 
District,  of  three  full  regiments,  and 
as  their  military  instructor,  and  as 
a  member  of  the  staff  of  Gen.  Daniel 
H.  Wells,  until  the  Nauvoo  Legion 
was  annulled.  In  1868  1  assisted  in 
locating  the  Union  Pacific  Railroad 
from  Echo  Canyon  to  Central,  Ne- 
vada, its  first  western  terminal,  as 
topographical  and  construction  en- 
gineer. After  this  I  made  a  geodetic 
survey  for  the  Smithsonian  Institute 
from  Central,  Nevada,  to  Ogden, 
Utah.  In  1869  I  located  the  railroad 
from  Ogden  to  Salt  Lake  City,  and  in 
1871-72  as  chief  engineer  located 
the  Utah  Northern  Railroad  from 
Ogden  to  Franklin,  Idaho.  By  direc- 
tion of  Pres.  John  Taylor  I  laid  out 
the  foundations  of  the  Logan  Temple 
and  its  grounds  in  1877  and  wrote 
an  official  history  of  its  construction 
as  a  Church  record.  In  November, 
1882  I  went  with  Elders  Erastus 
Snow  and  Moses  Thatcher  to  Sonora, 
Mexico,  to  find  a  refuge  for  Saints, 
returning  in  January,  1883.  In  1884 
I    was    called   to    Arizona   to    act    as 


second  Counselor  to  President  Chris- 
topher Layton.  On  this  trip  we  visited 
every  settlement  and  scattered  fam- 
ilies in  Southern  Arizona,  organiz- 
ing the  St.  Joseph  Stake,  comprising 
the  Maricopa,  Pima  and  Mesa  settle- 
ments with  all  their  Wards,  ordain- 
ing High  Councilors  and  other  offi- 
cers, after  which  we  explored  North- 
ern Sonora  as  far  south  as  Magda- 
lena,  visiting  various  estates,  but 
making  no  purchases,  the  prices 
charged  being  too  high.  During  my 
twenty-four  years  residence  in  Logan 
I  surveyed  large  additions  to  Logan 
City  plat,  and  also  surveyed  the  fol- 
lowing city  plats  with  their  farm, 
pasture,  hay  lots  and  irrigation 
canals:  Providence,  Millville,  Hyrum, 
Paradise,  Wellsville,  Mendon,  New- 
ton, Clarkston,  Richmond,  Smithfield, 
Hyde  Park  and  Benson  in  Utah  and 
Weston,  Oxford,  Franklin,  Blackfoot 
and  Idaho  Falls  in  Idaho.  While  In 
Utah  and  Arizona  I  also  surveyed 
much  public  land  as  U.  JB.  deputy  sur- 
veyor under  eight  U.  S.  surveyor 
generals.  I  laid  out  altogether  thirty- 
five  towns.  In  September,  1888,  I 
removed  to  St.  David,  in  Arizona, 
which  I  surveyed  as  a  city  plat,  and 
1  also  surveyed  Pima,  Curtis,  Gra- 
ham, Fort  Thomas,  Thatcher,  Sol- 
omonville  and  Duncan,  with  their 
fields  and  canals.  I  served  four  years 
as  county  surveyor  and  was  offered  a 
seat  in  the  Arizona  legislature  and 
the  county  judgship  by  both  political 
parties,  but,  advised  by  Elder  Erastus 
Snow,  I  declined  both  offices.  I  also 
served  as  U.  S.  deputy  land  and  min- 
eral surveyor  under  three  U.  S.  sur- 
veyor generals.  Having  great  desire 
to  go  to  Mexico,  I  applied  in  1885  to 
President  Taylor  for  release  as  coun- 
selor in  the  St.  Joseph  Stake  presi- 
dency, which  was  afterwards  granted, 
and  in  18  88  I  removed  to  Colonia 
Juarez,  Chihuahua,  Mexico,  and  I 
surveyed  the  town  plats  of  Chuichu- 
pa  and  Dublan,  and  the  Colonia 
Juarez  land  purchase,  with  many 
other  large  tracts,  one  of  which  was 


BIOGRAPHICAL   ENCYCLOPEDIA. 


159 


an  800-square-mile  tract  of  moun- 
tain timber  land  on  the  Sierra  Madre 
Range  for  the  California  Land  Com- 
pany. Anxious  to  continue  my  work 
for  my  dead  I  visited  Utah  in  1903 
and  finally  in  1908  made  my  resi- 
dence there  permanent,  my  wife  soon 
joining  me,  a  son  caring  for  our 
home  in  Mexico  until  1912,  when  all 
my  family  in  Mexico,  sixty  in  num- 
ber were  forced  to  fly  to  the  United 
States  for  safety,  abandoning  almost 
all  they  possessed,  including  homes, 
farms,  orchards  and  live  stock  to 
bandits  called  Mexican  soldiers,  who 
looted  and  destroyed  as  they  pleased, 
and  killed  men  and  women.  I  lost 
all  the  savings  of  a  life  time,  thou- 
sands of  dollars  and  now,  past  88 
years  of  age,  my  wife  80,  we  are  left 
feeble  and  nearly  helpless  except  for 
the  care  of  my  son  Lyman  R  and 
daughter  Elizabeth  Nebeker,  but  very 
thankful  that  none  of  my  family  were 
slain.  I  was  ordained  a  Patriarch 
Nov.  30,  1898,  by  Marriner  W.  Mer- 
rill. 

MATTHEWS,  Samuel,  a  High 
Councilor  in  the  Bear  Lake  Stake  of 
Zion,  Idaho,  was  born  May  4,  1843, 
at  Northill,  Bedfordshire,  England, 
the  son  of  Wm.  Matthews  and  Eliza- 
beth Flinders.  He  was  baptized  in 
the  summer  of  18  52  by  Samuel 
Howard  and  emigrated  from  England 
to  America  in  1850,  crossing  the 
Atlantic  in  the  ship  "James  Pennell," 
which  arrived  at  New  Orleans  Nov.  22, 
1850.  Thence  he  went  by  the  steamer 
"Amaranth"  to  St.  Louis,  Mo., 
where  the  family  stayed  five  years, 
and  then  crossed  the  plains  in  the 
summer  of  1855,  part  of  the  way  in 
John  Warden's  freight  train,  and 
later  Bro.  Matthews  hired  out  as 
teamster  in  Wm.  S.  Godbe's  train, 
which  arrived  in  Salt  Lake  City  Oct. 
26,  1855.  Bro.  Matthews  went  back 
to  the  Missouri  river  as  a  Church 
teamster  after  emigrants  in  18  63  and 
1866;  was  ordained  an  Elder  in  18  65 
by  Thos.  H.  Clark,  and  ordained  a 
High    Priest    and    Bishop    Nov.     11, 


1883,  by  Moses  Thatcher  and  set 
apart  to  preside  over  the  Montpelier 
Ward.  Since  July  19,  1915,  he  has 
been  a  member  of  the  High  Council 
of  the  Bear  Lake  Stake.  Of  secular 
offices  held  by  Bro.  Matthews  are 
those  of  justice  of  the  peace,  county 
commissioner,  etc.  Otherwise  he  is 
a  farmer  and  stockraiser  by  occu- 
pation. He  married  Elizabeth  Keetch 
Oct.  12,  1864,  who  has  borne  him 
seven  children,  namely,  Samuel  Wil- 
liam, Elizabeth  Ann,  Emily  M.,  Char- 
lotte A.,  Eliza  A.,  Martha  E.,  and 
Ella.  He  married  Annie  E.  Kenning- 
ton  Feb.  28,  1884,  who  bore  her  hus- 
band   six    children,    namely,    George 


T.,  Alonzo  H.,  Annie  Ada,  Edna  A., 
Harvey  K.,  and  Esther  S.  In  1869 
Bro.  Matthews  was  called  to  Bear 
Lake  to  help  settle  that  country.  He 
made  his  home  at  Liberty,  where  he 
has  resided  ever  since. 

McBRIDE,  Loren  Dyphus,  Bishop 
of  the  Hyrum  First  Ward  (Hyrum 
Stake),  Cache  county,  Utah,  was 
born  Jan.  19,  1880,  at  Hyrum,  Utah, 
the  son  of  James  McBride  and  Ruth 
Ann  Miller.  He  was  baptized  March 
7,  1889,  by  A.  A.  Allen  Jr.;  ordained 
a  Deacon  Feb.  28,  1894,  by  Lorentz 
Peterson  and  set  apart  as  president 
of  the  2nd  quorum  of  Deacons  in  the 


160 


LATTER-DAY   SAINT 


Hyrum  Ward;  subsequently  he  was 
ordained  a  Teacher.  He  was  or- 
dained an  Elder  Feb.  4,  1901,  by 
John  F.  Wright  and  presided  over  the 
2nd  quorum  of  Elders  in  the  Hyrum 
Stake  about  two  years.  In  1905- 
1907  he  filled  a  mission  to  the 
Eastern  States,  laboring  principally 
in  New  York  and  at  Toronto,  Canada. 
In  the  latter  place  he  had  charge  of 
the  branch  about  six  months.  He  was 
ordained  a  High  Priest  Sept.  7,  1907, 
by  Pres.  Wm.  C.  Parkinson  and  set 
apart  as  an  alternate  member  of  the 


High  Council;  labored  as  second 
assistant  superintendent  of  the  Hy- 
rum Second  Ward  Sunday  school  and 
later  as  first  assistant  superintend- 
ent. He  became  a  regular  member  of 
the  High  Council  Feb.  4,  1911;  acted 
as  president  of  the  Hyrum  Second 
Ward  Y.  M.  M.  I.  A.  and  was  ordained 
a  Bishop  July  19,  1913,  by  Geo.  F. 
Richards  and  set  apart  to  preside 
over  the  Hyrum  Second  Ward.  Bro. 
McBride  married  Annie  Catherine 
Lauritzen  Feb.  13,  1901;  his  child- 
ren are  James  Loran,  born  Nov.  8, 
1901;  Wm.  Leroy,  born  August- 24, 
1903;  Hazel  Annie,  born  March  20, 
1908;  Elva  Minnie,  born  July  21, 
1910,  and  Mable  Irene,  born  August 
25,  1913. 


McCUNE,      Henry      Frederick,      a 

faithful  and  diligent  Temple  worker 
and  formerly  a  High  Councilor  in  the 
Juab  Stake  of  Zion,  was  born  May 
31,  1840,  at  Calcutta,  India,  the  son 
of  Matthew  McCune  and  Sarah  Eliza- 
beth Caroline  Scott.  Becoming  a  con- 
vert to  "Mormonism"  as  a  boy  he 
was  baptized  July  12,  1852,  by  Mat- 
hew  McCune,  his  father.  When  four- 
teen years  of  age  he  held  the  position 
of  midshipman  in  the  British  Navy 
and  emigrated  with  his  parents  to 
America  in  1856.  During  the  winter 
of  1857-58  he  participated  in  the  so- 
called  Echo  Canyon  war,  and  in  1865- 
67  he  took  an  active  part  in  the  so- 
called  Black  Hawk  war,  during  which 
he  was  often  exposed  to  the  greatest 
danger.  He  was  ordained  an  Elder 
and  subsequently  a  Seventy  by  Joseph 
Young.  In  1879  he  was  ordained  a 
High  Priest  by  Erastus  Snow  and 
chosen  to  act  as  first  counselor  to 
Bishop  William  McMillan  at  Milford, 
Beaver  county.  In  1880  he  located 
at  Nephi  where  he  was  chosen  to  act 
as  a  High  Councilor,  which  position 
he  held  until  1906.  Later  he  held  the 
same  position  in  the  Weber  Stake, 
where  he  also  acted  as  president  of 
the  High  Priests  quoroum  from  1908 
to  1916.  In  1889-1891  he  labored  in 
the  Manti  Temple  as  an  ordinance 
worker,  and  in  1893  he  was  called  to 
labor  as  an  ordinance  worker  in  the 
Salt  Lake  Temple,  where  he  is  still 
officiating.  In  June,  1884,  he  left 
Salt  Lake  City  on  a  mission  to  India; 
after  laboring  there  until  June,  1885, 
he  was  transferred  to  New  Zealand, 
and  returned  home  in  February, 
1886.  Bro.  McCune  acted  as  assessor 
and  collector  in  Juab  county  four 
years,  and  served  as  postmaster  at 
Nephi  from  1890  to  1893.  In  1861 
(Dec.  24th)  he  married  Elizabeth 
Grace  (  daughter  of  Isaac  Grace  and 
Elizabeth  Williams),  who  was  born 
July  23,  1843,  in  Liverpool,  England, 
and  emigrated  to  Utah  in  18  51,  cross- 
ing the  Atlantic  in  the  ship  "Ellen." 
Bro.  McCune  is  the  father  of  thirteen 


BIOGRAPHICAL   ENCYCLOPEDIA. 


161 


children,   eight   boys   and   five   girls, 
eleven  of  whom  are  still  living. 

McCUNE,  Matthew,  a  High  Coun- 
cilor in  the  Juab  Stake,  Juab  county, 
Utah,  was  born  July  27,  1811,  on  the 
Isle  of  Man,  Great  Britain,  the  son  of 
Robert  McCune  and  Agnes  Jelly.  As 
an  infant  he  moved  with  his  parents 
to  Scotland,  and  in  1835  he  left  Scot- 
land and  traveled  to  London,  where 
he  joined  the  British  Army  and  went 
to  India  with  his  young  wife  Sarah 
Elizabeth  Caroline  Scott,  whom  he 
had  married  in  1835.  Bro.  McCune 
served  in  the  army  until  1856.  He 
belonged  to  a  religious  organization 
known  as  the  Plymouth  brethren,  and 
while  holding  a  meeting  at  Bro.  "Mc- 
Cune's  house  one  evening  two  sailor 
boys  (Benjamin  Riches  and  George 
Barber)  asked  for  admittance.  They 
were  admitted,  and  after  the  meeting 
they  told  Bro.  McCune  and  Dr.  James 
P.  Meik  and  Maurice  White  (who 
were  present)  that  they  had  heard 
and  accepted  the  true  gospel  of  Christ 
as  it  had  been  revealed  to  the  Pro- 
phet Joseph  Smith  in  America.  They 
further  stated  that  they  had  been 
baptized,  but  had  as  yet  not  received 
the  Priesthood.  The  hearts  of  the 
three  were  pricked  and  they  immed- 
iately wrote  to  Apostle  Lorenzo  Snow 
in  Liverpool,  England,  for  gospel 
literature,  and  three  months  later 
they  wrote  another  letter  to  Bro. 
Snow  requesting  that  a  missionary 
be  sent  to  India;  they  promised  that 
his  expenses  would  be  paid  by  the 
three  investigators.  Bro.  Joseph 
Richards,  a  sailmaker  in  the  British 
Merchant  Marine,  was  consequently 
sent  from  Great  Britain  to  India,  and 
while  his  ship  lay  at  anchor  at  Cal- 
cutta June  22,  1851,  he  baptized  Dr. 
James  P.  Meik,  Maurice  White,  and 
Matthew  McCune  as  the  first  fruits 
of  the  preaching  of  "Mormonism"  in 
India.  These  three  brethren  were 
subsequently  ordained  Elders  by  Bro. 
Richards  and  Matthew  McCune  was 
sent  as  a  missionary  to  open  up  the 
gospel    door    to    the    inhabitants    of 

Vol.  Ill,  No.  11. 


Burmah,  being  a  member  of  the  army. 
There  he  labored  as  opportunity  af- 
forded from  1854  to  1856  and 
preached  the  gospel  mostly  at  night. 
Emigrating  to  America  together  with 
his  family,  he  sailed  from  Calcutta, 
India,  Dec.  10,  18  56,  in  the  ship 
"Escort,"  Capt.  Alfred  Hussey,  and 
landed  in  New  York  March  3,  1857. 
He  crossed  the  plains  in  the  so-called 
Delaware  company,  of  which  Jacob 
Hoffeins  was  the  captain,  and  ar- 
rived in  Salt  Lake  City  Sept.  21,  1857. 
The  family  spent  the  following  winter 
at  Farmington,  Davis  county,  and 
during  "the  move"  in  1858  they 
went  to  Nephi,  Juab  county,  which 
became  the  permanent  family  home. 
Bro.  McCune  filled  two  missions  to 
Great  Britain,  the  first  in  1862-64 
and  the  second  in  1870.  For  over 
thirty  years  he  acted  as  a  High  Coun- 
cilor in  the  Juab  Stake  of  Zion  and 
remained  faithful  and  true  to  the 
Church  until  the  time  of  his  death, 
which  occured  at  Nephi  in  October, 
1889.  About  the  year  1859  Bro.  Mc- 
Cune married  Ann  Midgley  and  about 
six  years  later  he  married  Isabella 
Chalmers.  By  his  three  wives  he  had 
nineteen  children,  among  whom  are 
Henry  F.  McCune,  a  well-known 
Temple  worker,  and  Alfred  W.  Mc- 
Cune, a  distinguished  mining  and 
railroad  man. 

McGregor,     WlUlam     CampbeU, 

first  counselor  in  the  presidency  of 
the  Bannock  Stake  and  a  resident  of 
Mound  Valley,  Bannock  county, 
Idaho,  was  born  August  17,  1876,  at 
Mound  Valley,  Idaho,  the  son  of 
James  Davis  McGregor  and  Mary 
Perry.  He  was  baptized  August  17, 
1884,  by  Ephraim  Bennett;  ordained 
a  Deacon  and  subsequently  an  Elder; 
ordained  a  Seventy  June  24,  1897, 
by  Seymour  B.  Young;  ordained  a 
High  Priest  Jan.  27,  1902,  by  Heber 
J.  Grant  and  set  apart  as  second 
counselor  to  Bishop  Wm.  W.  Wil- 
liams; was  chosen  as  first  counselor 
in  1904;  ordained  a  Bishop  May  17, 
1913,  and  set  apart  to  preside  over 
November,  1918. 


162 


LATTER-DAY  SAINT 


the  Mound  Valley  Ward,  which  posi- 
tion he  filled  until  May  14,  1916, 
when  he  was  chosen  as  first  counselor 
in  the  Stake  presidency  of  the  Ban- 
nock Stake.  In  his  younger  years 
Bro.  McGregor  acted  as  president  of 


the  Mound  Valley  Ward  Y.  M.  M.  I. 
A.;  served  as  justice  of  the  peace,  etc. 
He  filled  a  mission  to  the  Society 
Islands  in  1897-1900  and  married 
Nancy  Mary  Anderson  June  10,  1903. 
She  was  born  June  13,  1882,  in  Bear 
River  City,  Box  Elder,  county,  Utah, 
the  daughter  of  James  P.  Anderson 
and  Mary  Christensen.  Six  children 
(William  J.,  Mary  H.,  Grace,  Lola, 
Dona,  and  Ora  A.  )have  blessed  this 
marriage.  Bro.  McGregor  is  a  farmer 
and  dairyman  and  also  a  merchant 
by  avocation. 

McLELLAND,   Edward  Murphy,   a 

prominent  Elder  of  the  Farmers 
Ward  (Granite  Stake),  was  born 
August  9,  1858,  in  Salt  Lake  City, 
Utah,  the  son  of  Thos.  McLelland  and 
Mary  Murphy.  He  was  baptized 
August  1,  1866,  by  Wm.  Thorne.  In 
his  youth  the  family  moved  to  what 
is  now  known  as  Farmers  Ward,  and 
in  1879  (May  1st)  he  married 
Melissa  Evaline  Morton,  who  bore 
him  seven  children,  namely,  Mary  E. 
(Dixon),     Eva     Lucille      (Simpson), 


Edward  M.,  Lillian  M  (Kaup),  Otto 
M.,  Wm.  Harry,  and  Geo.  B.  His  wife 
died  Dec.  17,  1891,  and  he  married 
Pearl  O.  Perry  Dec.  11,  1906,  by 
whom  he  had  three  children,  namely, 
Olive  Pearl,  James  Perry  and  Richard 
Stayner.  Bro.  McLelland  was  one  of 
Salt  Lake  City's  pioneer  promoters 
and  managers  of  clean  amusements. 
For  many  years  he  took  a  deep  in- 
terest in  providing  good  amusements 
for  the  young.  He  was  always  active 
in  Church  affairs  and  was  a  favorite 
with  the  young  people.  When  the 
Wandamere  Park  was  opened  he  took 
charge  of  the  same  as  manager.  He 
was  an  active  worker  in  the  Farmers 


Ward  and  was  a  member  of  the  Stake 
Board  of  the  Y.  M.  M.  I.  A.  of  the 
Granite  Stake  at  the  time  of  his  death 
which  occurred  June  7,  1914,  in 
Farmers  Ward,  Salt  Lake  City,  Utah. 

3IcMULLIX,  Henry  Luflin,  a  High 

Counselor  in  the  Wasatch  Stake  of 
Zion,  was  born  Sept.  4,  1852,  in  the 
State  of  Maine,  the  son  of  Henry  Mc- 
Mullin  and  Mary  Pierce.  He  came  to 
Utah  with  his  parents  in  1855,  cross- 
ing the  plains  in  John  Hindley's  com- 
pany. He  was  baptized  in  18  62  and 
married  Janet  O.  Murdock  in  1875. 
This  marriage  has  been  blessed  with 
seven  children,  namely,  Sarah  Jane. 
Henry    Pierce,    John    Edwin,    Gladys, 


BIOGRAPHICAL   ENCYCLOPEDIA. 


163 


Mary  Isabelle,  Annie,  Janet,  and 
Thomas  Heber.  Elder  McMullin  has 
filled  many  ecclesiastical  positions 
and  performed  a  mission  to  the 
Northern  States  in  18  94-9  6.  He  also 
filled  a  mission  in  the  interest  of  the 


Y.  M.  M.  I.  A.  in  Sanpete  and  Wa- 
satch counties  in  1898,  and  has  been 
a  High  Counselor  for  a  number  of 
years. 

MECHAM,    Leonidas    Americus,    a 

High  Councilor  in  the  Oneida  Stake, 
Franklin  county,  Idaho,  and  a  resi- 
dent of  Preston,  Idaho,  was  born  Oct. 
19,  1854,  in  Salt  Lake  City,  Utah,  the 
son  of  Leonidas  Clinton  Mecham  and 
Margaret  Emma  Champlin.  He  was 
baptized  in  June,  18  64,  by  Samuel 
Gem;  ordained  an  Elder  when  seven- 
teen years  old;  ordained  a  Seventy 
July  20,  1884,  by  Wm.  Woodward 
and  ordained  a  High  Priest  and 
Bishop  July  19,  1885,  by  Milo  Andrus 
and  set  apart  to  preside  over  the 
Riverdale  Ward  Oneida  county, 
Idaho.  He  served  in  this  capacity 
until  Nov.  15,  1908,  when  he  was 
honorably  released,  having  been  set 
apart  to  act  as  a  High  Councilor, 
Sept.  6,  1908.  In  1876  (May  1st)  he 
married  Eliza  Smart,  who  bore  her 
husband  eight  children,  namely, 
Leonidas  S.,  Joanna  S.,  Maud  S., 
Ollie  S.,  Arnold  S.,  Milando  S.,  Avilda 


S.  and  Vera  S.  Bro.  Mecham  has 
labored  as  Ward  clerk,  secretary  of 
the  Riverdale  Y.  M.  M.  I.  A.,  clerk 
of  the  Riverdale  Sunday  school, 
superintendent  and  member  of  the 
Preston  village  board  (1909-1911), 
etc.  He  has  acted  as  postmaster  of 
Preston  since  August  1,  1914. 

]\IEEKS,  Heber  Jesse  (Continued 
from  Vol.  2,  page  132).  Bro.  Meeks 
served  in  the  High  Council  of  the 
Kanab  Stake  and  as  Stake  superin- 
tendent of  Y.  M.  M.  I.  A.  until  Dec. 
5,  1910,  when  he  was  chosen  as  first 
counselor  to  Pres.  Wm.  W.  Seeg- 
miller  of  the  Kanab  Stake.  In  the 
spring  of  1911,  at  the  request  of  the 
general  authorities  of  the  Church  he 
moved  to  Kanab  so  that  the  Stake 
presidency  could  be  constantly  in 
touch  with  each  other.  In  1907  he 
was  elected  a  member  of  the  Utah 
State  legislature  as  a  representative 
from  the  26th  district.  He  was  again 
re-elected  to  the  legislature  in  1915. 
He  also  served  as  mayor  of  Kanab 
two  years  and  as  school  trustee  a 
number  of  terms.  At  present  he  is 
a  director  in  several  live  stock  asso- 
ciations and  irrigation  companies  and 
among  others  the  Kanab  Roller  Mill 
and  Power  Company.  In  1889  (Dec. 
30th)  he  married  Clarissa  Amanda 
Bowers  (daughter  of  Isaiah  Bowers 
and  Harriet  Hoyt),  who  was  born 
Oct.  8,  1871.  She  has  borne  her 
husband  eleven  children,  namely, 
Heber,  Wilford  P.,  Isaiah,  Dalton, 
Erwin,  Leah,  Mason,  Jonathan,  Jo- 
seph, Clara  and  Athe. 

MENDENHALL,     WilUam    Henry, 

president  of  the  Bannock  Stake  (con- 
tinued from  Vol.  1,  page  7  69).  Bro. 
Mendenhall  served  as  second  coun- 
selor to  Pres.  Pond  until  Jan.  18, 
1904,  when  he  was  chosen  as  first 
couneslor  to  Pres.  Pond,  and  at  a 
conference  held  May  21,  1916,  he 
was  chosen  and  set  apart  as  president 
of  the  Bannock  Stake  of  Zion,  which 
position  he  still  holds.  Bro.  Menden- 
hall  served    four   years   as   a   repre- 


164 


LATTER-DAY   SAINT 


sentative  in  the  Idaho  State  legis- 
lature, serving  in  the  house  during 
the  12th  session  and  as  senator  dur- 
ing the  13th  session.  He  has  also 
acted  as  clerk  of  the  Thatcher  Rural 
High    School   No.    2,    and    served    as 


school  trustee  a  number  of  terms. 
His  wife,  Naomi  Herd,  was  born  Oct. 
29,  1873,  at  Darwin,  Lancashire, 
England,  the  daughter  of  James  Herd 
and  Grace  Knowles;  she  has  borne 
her  husband  nine  children,  namely, 
Vernon  Herd,  Lovell  James,  Wm. 
Thomas,  Murat  H.,  Mill6n  H.,  Naomi 
H.,  Ruth  H.,  Elease  H.,  and  Kay  H. 

MERRILL,  Alberto  John,  an  active 
Elder  of  the  Smithfield  Ward,  Cache 
county,  Utah,  was  born  June  13, 
1864,  at  Smithfield,  Cache  county, 
Utah,  the  son  of  Jeston  J.  Merrill  and 
Elizabeth  Ann  Ainscough.  His  par- 
ents separated  shortly  after  his  birth 
and  Alberto  was  raised  principally  by 
his  grandmother,  Mrs.  Wm.  Ains- 
cough. He  was  baptized  May  18, 
1873,  by  Preston  T.  Morehead;  or- 
dained a  Deacon  when  a  boy;  or- 
dained a  Teacher  March  16,  1874,  by 
Benjamin  Lloyd;  ordained  an  Elder 
October  16,  1884,  by  Preston 
Morehead;  ordained  a  Seventy  Oc- 
tober 20,  1884,  by  Wilford  Wood- 
ruff and  set  apart  for  a  mission  to 


the  Sandwich  Islands,  where  he  la- 
bored three  years,  during  which  time 
he  visited  every  inhabited  island  of 
the  Hawaiian  group  and  also  labored 
some  on  the  sugar  plantation  at 
Laie.  In  1890  (Nov.  14th)  he  mar- 
ried Ida  Harper  (daughter  of  Rich- 
ard Harper  and  Susan  Faulkner)  who 
was  born  Dec.  24,  18  66.  This  mar- 
riage has  been  blessed  with  six  chil- 
dren, namely,  Alberto  Eugene,  Gale 
Theresa,  Wendall  William,  Villa 
Wayne,  Ford  and  Alton.  In  1904-07 
he  filled  a  mission  to  the  Central 
States,  presiding  for  some  time  over 
the  Texas  conference  and  afterwards 
over  the  St.  Johns  conference.  At 
home  Elder  Merrill  has  labored  as 
a  member  of  the  Benson  Stake  Sun- 
day school  board,  was  Stake  president 
of  Y.  M.  M.  I.  A.  three  years,  has 
acted  as  an  officer  in  the  Smithfield 
Ward  Y.  M.  M.  I.  A.,  labored  as  a 
teacher  in  Religion  Class  Work,  etc. 
He  has  also  served  as  a  member  of 
the  Smithfield  city  council  and  been 


marshal  of  Smithfield  and  deputy 
game  warden.  He  was  raised  on  a 
farm,  but  has  lately  engaged  in  the 
furniture  business. 

MESERVY,  Oliver  K.  (Continued 
from  Vol.  2,  page  103).  Brother 
Meservy     married     Charlotte     Elea- 


BIOGRAPHICAL   ENCYCLOPEDIA. 


165 


nor  Bagley,  daughter  of  Emanuel 
Bagley  and  Mary  Isabel  Pope,  Oct, 
8,  1909,  in  the  Salt  Lake  Temple. 
Their  children  thus  far  are  Joseph 
Roberts  Meservy,  born  Feb.  8,  1911; 
Loa  Gertrude,  born  June  30,  1913, 
and  Mary,  born  August  3,  1915.  Dur- 
ing the  season  of  1913  Oliver  planted 
some  forty  acres  of  peas  which  made 
vigorous  growth  until  the  morning 
of  July  14th,  when  they  were  severe- 
ly frosted.  At  this  date  a  dry  warm 
spell  of  weather  began,  and  the  North 
Fork  of  Snake  River,  from  which  he 
obtained  water,  having  fallen  to  low 
water  mark,  his  crops  began  to  burn 
exceedingly,  he  not  being  able  to 
secure  enough  water  to  save  them. 
Being  much  in  debt  he  besought  the 
Lord  to  spare  what  was  left  of  his 
crops.  While  in  the  field  at  about 
1  p.  m.,  July  21st,  he  raised  his 
hands  and  eyes  toward  heaven  and 
cried  "O,  where  is  the  God  of  Jacob?" 
and  as  he  implored  the  Lord  an 
inspiration  came  to  him  saying,  "I 
will  water  your  crops,"  to  which 
Oliver  replied,  "Even  so,  Father,  let 
it  not  only  rain,  but  let  it  storm  in 
the  mountains  over  the  head  of  the 
streams  and  let  the  river,  even  the 
North  Fork  of  Snake  river,  raise 
three  feet  so  that  all  the  canals  may 
be  filled  and  all  the  people  be 
blessed."  In  a  few  hours  it  began 
to  rain,  and  thus  continued  until  the 
ground  was  wet  down  the  depth  of 
the  plowing.  The  water  in  the  North 
Fork  of  Snake  river  rose  to  high 
water  mark.  All  the  canals  were 
filled  and  the  volume  of  water  con- 
tinued abundant  to  the  end  of  the  ir- 
rigating season.  Much  of  the  crops 
that  had  seemed  utterly  lost  were 
miracuously  revived  and  saved.  Never 
before,  nor  since,  during  the  34  years 
that  this  region  has  been  inhabited, 
has  any  incident  similar  to  this  oc- 
curred, but  whenever  the  river  has 
fallen  in  July  it  has  continued  to  fall 
until  the  middle  or  latter  part  of 
August,  and  any  amount  of  rain  had 
never  before  varied  its  flow  enough 
to   be   noted.      Bro.   Meservy   relates 


a  number  of  instances  in  which  his 
life  and  person  have  been  preserved, 
where  he  has  been  singularly  blessed 
in  answer  to  prayers  and  has  enjoyed 
the  gift  of  healing  to  an  imminent 
degree.  He  has  also  been  very  suc- 
cessful as  a  public  speaker  and  as 
an  expounder  of  the  gospel. 

>nLLER,  Henry  William,  a  Church 
veteran,  was  born  in  1807  in  Green 
county,  N.  Y.,  the  son  of  James  G. 
Miller  and  Ruth  Arnold.  In  his 
youth  he  learned  the  trade  of  a  car- 
penter and  builder.  In  1831  (June 
19th)  he  married  Elmira  Pond 
(daughter  of  Thadeus  Pond  and 
Louisa  Miner)  who  was  born  Feb.  14, 
1811,  in  Barlow,  Washington  county, 
Ohio.  Bro.  Miller  moved  to  Illinois 
about  182  9,  and  while  living  there 
became  a  convert  to  "Mormonism." 
Joining  the  Church  in  1839,  he  soon 
afterwards  moved  to  Nauvoo,  111.  In 
1841-42  he  assisted  in  getting  out 
timber  for  the  Nauvoo  House  and 
the  Nauvoo  Temple.  He  was  with 
the  saints  in  all  their  first  persecu- 
tions and  mobbings  in  Illinois  and 
participated  in  the  exodus  west, 
crossing  the  plains  to  the  "Valley  in 
1850  with  Apostle  Orson  Hyde.  He 
returned  to  Council  Bluffs  the  same 
year,  and  during  the  winter  of  1850- 
51  he  visited  his  relatives  in  New 
York.  In  1852  he  migrated  with  his 
family  to  the  Valley,  crossing  the 
plains  as  captain  of  a  company.  He 
settled  at  Farmington,  Davis  county, 
Utah.  In  185  4-5  6  he  went  on  a  mis- 
sion to  the  Cherokee  Nation,  and  in 
1862  went  to  the  Missouri  river  as 
a  captain  of  a  Church  train,  with 
which  he  returned  safely  to  Salt  Lake 
City  Oct.  17,  1862.  In  the  fall  of 
18  62  he  married  Fanny  Gunn  who 
bore  him  five  children,  four  boys 
and  one  girl.  In  18  63  he  was  called 
to  make  a  settlement  at  Beaver 
Dams  on  the  Rio  Virgen  river  (now 
in  Nevada),  and  spent  the  remainder 
of  his  life  in  Southern  Utah.  While 
making  a  visit  to  his  son  William  H. 
Miller  (who  was  a  resident  of  Farm- 


166 


LATTER-DAY   SAINT 


ington)  lie  took  sick  and  died  Oct.  9, 
1885.  He  died,  as  he  had  always 
lived,  strong  in  the  faith. 

MLLLER,    AVilliam    Henry,    a    vet- 
eran   Elder    of    the    Syracuse    Ward, 


Davis  county,  Utah,  was  born  Dec.  22, 
1838,  at  Quincy,  Adams  county.  111., 
the  son  of  Henry  W.  Miller  and  El- 
mira  Pond.  He  emigrated  with  his 
parents  to  Utah  in  1852,  and  settled 
at  Farmington  where  he  was  or- 
dained a  Seventy  in  1855,  becoming 
a  member  of  the  40th  quorum.  Here 
he  took  an  active  part  in  ecclesiasti- 
cal afairs  and  during  the  Johnston 
army  troubles  in  1857  he  went  out 
with  the  first  company  of  militia 
into  Echo  canyon,  and  did  efficient 
military  service.  In  the  spring  of 
1858  he  accompanied  Capt.  Haight 
to  Fort  Limhi  (now  in  Idaho)  to  help 
bring  in  the  "Mormon"  missionaries 
who  had  settled  among  the  Indians 
In  that  part  of  the  country.  After 
that  he  engaged  in  freighting,  farm- 
ing and  stock  raising.  In  1862  he 
went  back  to  Green  River  to  meet 
his  father's  company  going  with 
freight  for  the  Overland  Coach  Com- 
pany. In  1880  he  went  to  Santa  Fe, 
New  Mexico,  to  engage  in  railroading, 
and  subsequently  he  went  to  Col- 
orado, where  he  stayed  two  years 
assisting  in  building  the  Denver  and 


Rio  Grande  Railroad  into  Utah.  In 
1887  he  became  a  permanent  settler 
of  Syracuse,  Davis  county.  In  1858 
(March  2nd)  Elder  Miller  married 
Helen  Aurelia  Hinman  (daughter  of 
Laman  Hinman  and  Aurelia  Hin- 
man) who  was  born  Sept.  20,  1840, 
in  Berkshire  county,  Mass.,  and  emi- 
grated with  her  parents  to  the  Valley 
in  1848.  She  bore  her  husband 
twelve  children,  5  boys  and  seven 
girls.  Bro.  Miller  has  filled  many 
positions  of  honor  and  responsibility. 
Thus  he  acted  as  school  trustee  a 
number  of  years,  was  county  inspec- 
tor for  horticulture,  etc.,  located  and 
opened  up  one  of  the  first  farms  at 
Garland,  Box  Elder  county,  started 
the  first  commercial  apple  orchard 
in  Utah  at  Syracuse,  etc.  His  wife, 
Helen  A.  Miller,  was  president  of  the 
first  Primary  Assoiation  at  Syracuse 
for  several  years,  until  failing  health 
compelled  her  to  resign. 

MILLER,  Reuben,  Bishop  of  Mill 
Creek  Ward,  Salt  Lake  county,  Utah, 
was  born  Sept.  4,  1811,  at  Reading, 
Berks  county.  Pa.,  the  son   of  Isaac 


Miller  and  Esther  Gline.  He  spent 
his  early  days  in  Pennsylvania  and 
later  located  temporarily  in  Chicago, 
111.,  working  at  his  trade  as  a  mill- 
wright.    Later  he  moved  to  Ottawa, 


BIOGRAPHICAL   ENCYCLOPEDIA. 


167 


where  he  commenced  farming.  There 
he  was  converted  to  "Mormonism," 
was  baptized  Oct.  19,  1846,  and  at 
once  ordained  a  High  Priest.  He 
emigrated  to  Utah  in  1849,  crossing 
the  plains  in  Daniel  Spencer's  com- 
pany which  arrived  in  the  Valley 
Sept.  24,  184d.  He  made  his  home 
in  Mill  Creek,  Salt  Lake  county, 
where  he  acted  as  Bishop  from  1850 
until  his  death.  He  was  elected 
county  commissioner  at  an  early  day 
and  held  the  office  about  3  6  years. 
Under  his  administration  and  direc- 
tion most  of  the  earlier  canals  were 
constructed  as  well  as  the  principal 
county  roads,  both  north  and  south, 
east  and  west  of  Salt  Lake  City.  It 
is  said  that  some  of  the  irrigation 
systems  which  he  planned  were  laid 
out  with  an  old  water  level  and  a  tea 
kettle  as  surveying  instruments.  He 
was  industrious,  thrifty  and  a  man 
of  improved  justice  in  practical  af- 
fairs, a  wise  counselor  and  a  father 
among  the  people.  He  sat  in  the  con- 
vention of  1862,  when  a  constitution 
was  framed  for  the  State  of  Deseret 
and  a  memorial  was  adopted  asking 
for  Utah's  admission  into  the  Union. 
He  occupied  many  other  positions  of 
prominence  and  trust  to  the  satis- 
faction of  his  constituents.  In  1836 
he  married  Rhoda  Ann  Letts,  who 
bore  him  ten  children.  In  18  49  he 
married  Orice  Burnham,  who  bore 
him  three  children  and  died  Feb.  14, 
1890.  In  1857  he  married  Ann 
Cramer,  who  bore  him  eleven  chil- 
dren and  in  1869  (Jan.  11th)  he 
married  Jane  Heuges  who  bore  him 
six  children.  At  his  demise  July 
22,  1882,  he  left  a  very  large  pos- 
terity and  in  his  death  the  whole 
community  felt  a  sense  of  loss.  His 
posterity  at  the  present  time  (1918) 
numbers  360. 

MITTON,  Samuel  Bailey,  a  mem- 
ber of  the  High  Council  in  the  Cache 
Stake  of  Zion  and  a  resident  of 
Logan,  Cache  county,  Utah,  was  born 
March  21,  18  63,  at  Wellsville,  Cache 
county,  Utah.     His  early  training  was 


deeply  religious,  his  parents  being 
faithful  Latter-day  Saints  who  had 
joined  the  Church  in  England  and 
crossed  the  plains  with  ox-teams,  and 
afterwards  suffering  the  privations 
incident  to  the  settling  of  a  new 
country.  At  an  early  age  he  was 
ordained  a  Priest  and  acted  as  secre- 
tary of  his  quorum  during  most  of 
the  time  he  was  a  member.  From 
early  childhood  he  manifested  great 
love  for  music  and  all  through  his 
life  it  has  been  his  inseparable  com- 
panion. At  the  age  of  fourteen  he 
became  organist  for  the  "Wellsville 
Ward,  serving  in  this  capacity  most 
of  the  time  for  23  years.  He  served 
for  some  time  as  one  of  the  presi- 
dency of  the  Y.  M.  M.  I.  A.  in  Wells- 


ville Ward  and  made  a  missionary 
tour  of  Cache  Stake  with  Elder 
Matthias  F.  Cowley.  Cache  Stake 
then  comprised  the  whole  of  Cache 
valley.  Jan.  8,  1884,  he  was  ordained 
a  Seventy  and  served  as  clerk  of  the 
28th  quorum  of  Seventy.  On  March 
28,  1888,  he  married  Miss  Mary 
Hawkins,  of  Samaria,  Idaho,  in  the 
Logan  Temple.  For  seven  years  he 
acted  as  chorister  of  the  Cache  Stake 
Sunday  schools.  In  the  winter  of 
1889-90  he  was  called  by  Apostle 
Moses  Thatcher  to  serve  as  a  home 
missionary  for  six  months  in   Cache 


168 


LATTER-DAY  SAINT 


Stake,  remaining  out  among  the  peo- 
ple most  of  the  time.  In  the  sum- 
mer of  1890  he  moved  to  Ogden, 
and  remained  there  two  years.  While 
there  he  took  an  active  part  in  the 
Wards,  especially  in  a  musical  way, 
and  served  for  a  short  period  as 
organist  of  the  Ogden  Tabernacle 
choir.  In  the  spring  of  1900  he 
moved  to  Logan,  Utah.  Later  he 
was  ordained  a  High  Priest  and  set 
apart  as  a  member  of  the  Cache 
Stake  High  Council  by  Apostle 
Charles  W.  Penrose,  which  position 
he  still  holds.  He  was-  sustained  as 
director  of  the  Logan  Tabernacle 
choir  Nov.  23,  1915. 

MONSON,  Hiram,  second  Bishop  of 
the  St.  John  Ward  (Malad  Stake), 
Oneida  county,  Idaho,  was  born  July 


Southern  States  from  Oct.  17,  1897, 
to  Nov.  7,  1899.  He  has  served  as 
a  member  of  the  House  of  Represen- 
tatives in  the  Idaho  legislature  since 
1914  and  acted  as  a  constable  in  the 
St.  John  precinct  for  two  years.  In 
1887  (Dec.  8th)  he  married  Mary 
Ann  Deshamps  (daughter  of  Lewis 
Deshamps  and  Ann  S.  Stevens),  who 
was  born  April  7,  1869,  at  Willard, 
Box  Elder  county,  Utah.  This  mar- 
riage has  been  blessed  with  three 
children,  namely,  Miriam,  born  Nov. 
21,  1888;  Ann  M.,  born  August  23, 
1891;  Lewis,  born  Oct.  16,  1895,  and 
Anna  M.,  who  died  in  infancy. 

MORGAN,  William  Roberts,  Bish- 
op of  the  Liberty  Ward  (Bear  Lake 
Stake),  Idaho,  was  born  July  27, 
1870,  at  Liberty,  Bear  Lake  county, 


27,  1863,  at  Hyrum,  Cache  county, 
Utah,  the  son  of  Andrew  Monson 
and  Matilda  Anderson.  He  was  bap- 
tized in  1875,  ordained  an  Elder  in 
1887;  ordained  a  High  Priest  by 
Oliver  C.  Hoskins  in  18  91  and  set 
apart  as  second  counselor  to  Bishop 
James  P.  Harrison,  of  the  St.  John 
Ward;  ordained  a  Bishop  March  23, 
1908,  by  John  Henry  Smith  and  set 
apart  to  preside  over  the  St.  John 
Ward.  Prior  to  this  he  had  acted  as 
superintendent  of  the  Ward  Sunday 
school  and  had  filled  a  mission  to  the 


Idaho,  the  son  of  Evan  Samuel  Mor- 
gan and  Margaret  Roberts.  He  was 
baptized  July  30,  1878,  by  John  Hy- 
mas;  ordained  a  Deacon  when  a  boy; 
ordained  a  Priest  by  Hyrum  H.  Hy- 
mas  March  30,  1888;  ordained  an 
Elder  by  John  U.  Stucki  June  4,  1898; 
ordained  a  Seventy  by  J.  Golden  Kim- 
ball July  2,  1898;  ordained  a  High 
Priest  by  Wm.  Budge  Dec.  10,  1900, 
and  ordained  a  Bishop  by  Joseph  F. 
Smith  Jr.  March  11,  1911.  Most  of 
Bishop  Morgan's  early  life  was  spent 
in  herding  his  father's  sheep  in  the 


BIOGRAPHICAL  ENCYCLOPEDIA. 


169 


summer  time,  while  he  attended  the 
district  schools  for  a  few  months  dur- 
ing the  winter.  Later,  he  attended 
the  B.  Y.  College  at  Logan.  In  1898 
(June  15th)  he  married  Martha  A. 
Christensen  in  the  Logan  Temple.  In 
1898-1900  he  filled  a  mission  to  the 
Eastern  States,  laboring  principally 
in  the  East  Pennsylvania  conference. 
In  December,  1900,  he  was  chosen  as 
second  counselor  to  Bishop  Edwin  N. 
Austin  of  the  Liberty  Ward  and  in 
February,  1901,  he  was  called  to  pre- 
side over  the  Ward  Sunday  school, 
which  position  he  held  until  Jan.  15, 
1911,  when  he  was  called  to  act  as 
Bishop  of  the  Ward,  which  position 
he  still  holds.  Bishop  Morgan  fol- 
lows the  occupation  of  a  farmer  and 
has  held  the  office  of  justice  of 
peace.  Following  are  the  names  of 
his  children:  Iris  T.,  Evan  W.,  Cas- 
sie  L.,  Clifford  C,  Larue,  Eunice  and 
Mary. 

MORRILL,  John,  Bishop  of  the 
Junction  Ward  (Panguitch  Stake), 
Piute   county,   Utah,    was   born   Feb. 


21,  1848,  at  Garden  Grove,  Iowa,  the 
son  of  Laban  Morrill  and  Permelia 
H.  Drury.  He  came  to  Salt  Lake 
Valley  with  his  parents  in  1852  and 
lived  at  Springville,  Utah  county, 
thence  he  moved  with  his  parents  to 
Iron    county,    Utah,    and    settled    at 


Cedar  City.  He  was  baptized  when 
eight  years  old  at  Johnson's  Fort  in 
Cedar  City  Ward;  was  ordained  a 
Seventy  and  acted  as  a  clerk  of  the 
63rd  quorum  of  Seventy  for  several 
years.  He  became  one  of  the  first 
settlers  at  Bellevue,  Washington 
county,  Utah,  after  which  he  moved 
north.  He  married  Esther  Ellis  Le 
Baren  in  187  4  and  settled  at  Spring 
Lake  Villa,  Utah  county;  thence  he 
moved  to  Junction,  Piute  county,  in 
the  spring  of  18  79  and  there  acted 
as  second  and  later  as  first  counselor 
to  Bishop  Wm.  King  in  the  Kingston 
Ward,  which  at  that  time  included 
Junction  and  other  adjacent  towns. 
When  the  Junction  Ward  was  organ- 
ized March  29,  1887,  he  was  chosen 
as  first  counselor  to  Rufus  A.  Allen, 
which  position  he  held  until  1895, 
when  he  became  Bishop  of  the  Junc- 
tion Ward,  having  previously  acted 
as  presiding  Elder  locally  in  the 
Junction  part  of  the  Kingston  Ward. 
Elder  Morrill  continued  as  Bishop  of 
the  Junction  Ward  until  March  2, 
1914,  when  he  was  succeeded  by 
John  H.  Stoney.  Elder  Morrill  is  the 
father  of  nine  children,  three  of 
whom  are  yet  alive  and  are  faithful 
members  of  the  Church. 

MOSS,  John,  an  active  Elder  in  the 
South  Bountiful  Ward,  Davis  county, 
Utah,  was  born  March  31,  1820,  at 
Newton,  Yorkshire,  England,  the  son 
of  Hugh  Moss  and  Elizabeth  Rush- 
ton.  He  emigrated  from  England  to 
America  in  1835  and  settled  in  Illi- 
nois. In  March,  1844,  he  married 
Rebecca  Wood  (daughter  of  Daniel 
Wood  and  Mary  Snyder),  who  was 
born  May  11,  1826,  at  Lohara,  Can- 
ada; she  bore  her  husband  twelve 
children  and  died  March  4,  1882. 
Bro.  Moss  migrated  to  Utah  in  1848, 
crossing  the  plains  in  Brigham 
Young's  company  with  his  wife  and 
two  children  (Mary  and  Daniel).  He 
settled  in  Bountiful,  Davis  county, 
in  1849,  where  he  took  an  active  part 
in  building  up  that  part  of  the  coun- 
try. While  a  resident  of  Bountiful 
he  was  ordained  a  president  of  the 


170 


LATTER-DAY  SAINT 


76th  quorum  of  Seventy;  later  he  1880,  she  was  chosen  president  of 
was  ordained  a  High  Priest.  In  the  board  of  teachers  in  the  South 
1865  (March  25th)  he  married  Emma  Bountiful  Relief  Society,  and  died  as 
Alexander,  who  bore  him  eight  chil- 
dren. In  1856  he  went  out  with 
many  others  to  meet  Edward  Martin's 
handcart  company.  His  avocation 
was  that  of  a  farmer  and  stock- 
raiser,  being  specially  interested  in 
the  sheep  business.  Bro.  Moss  died 
August  4,    1884,  leaving  a  wife  and 


eighteen  children  to  mourn  the  loss 
of  a  loving  and  respected  father. 
Altogether  he  was  the  father  of 
twenty  children  and  had  27  grand- 
children at  the  time  of  his  demise. 

MOSS,  Rebecca  Wood,  wife  of 
John  Moss,  was  born  May  11,  1826, 
at  Longborough,  Upper  Canada,  the 
daughter  of  Daniel  Wood  and  Mary 
Snyder.  As  a  convert  to  "Mormon- 
ism,"  she  gathered  with  the  Saints 
to  Kirtland,  Ohio  and  was  baptized 
when  eight  years  of  age.  Afterwards 
she  was  with  the  Saints  in  Missouri 
during  the  persecutions  there.  From 
Missouri  she  went  to  Illinois  ai!d 
married  John  Moss  in  Pike  county, 
111.,  March,  1844,  with  whom  she 
became  the  mother  of  twelve  chil- 
dren. She  emigrated  to  Utah  in 
1848  and  labored  for  many  years  as 
a  faithful  teacher  in  the  Bountiful 
Ward    Relief    Society.      In    January, 


a  faithful  Latter-day  Saint  March  4. 
1882. 

MOSS,  Emnia  Alexander,  wife  of 
John  Moss,  was  born  April  14,  1846, 
in    Calne,    Wiltshire,    England,    the 


daughter  of  Abel  and  Sarah  Alexan- 
der. She  was  baptized  when  eight 
years  of  age  by  Geo.  Hatt,  emigrated 
to  America  in  18  64,  crossing  the  At- 
lantic in  the  ship  "Hudson,"  which 
sailed  from  Liverpool,  England,  June 
3,    18  64,    and   arrived    at   New   York 


BIOGRAPHICAL.  ENCYCLOPEDIA. 


171 


July  19,  1864;  crossed  the  plains  in 
Warren  Snow's  company,  whicti  ar- 
rived in  Salt  Lake  City  Nov.  2,  18  64. 
Her  father's  family  settled  at  Boun- 
tiful where  Sister  Emma  became  ac- 
quainted with  John  Moss,  to  whom 
she  was  married  March  25,  1865; 
she  became  the  mother  of  eight  chil- 
dren, six  of  whom  are  still  alive. 
Sister  Moss  has  been  an  active 
teacher  in  the  Ward  Relief  Society 
and  been  a  member  of  the  Ward 
choir  about  twenty  years. 

MOSS,  Daniel,  a  veteran  Elder  in 
the  South  Bountiful  Ward,  Davis 
county,  Utah,  was  born  Jan.  11,  1847, 
in  Pottawattamie  county,   Iowa,   the 


son  of  John  Moss  and  Rebecca  Wood. 
He  came  to  Utah  with  his  parents  as 
a  babe  in  1848  and  became  an  early 
resident  of  Bountiful,  where  he  was 
baptized  when  eleven  years  of  age 
by  Chester  Loveland.  He  was  or- 
dained an  Elder  by  John  Stoker,  or- 
dained a  Seventy  March  25,  1884, 
by  Wm.  S.  Muir  and  became  a  pres- 
ident of  the  74th  quorum  of  Seventy 
Jan.  29,  1893,  and  was  ordained  a 
High  Priest  April  16,  1905,  by  Ezra 
F.  Richards.  In  1890-92  he  filled 
a  mission  to  the  Southern  States, 
laboring  principally  in  Alabama  and 
Mississippi.  In  1866  he  took  part  in 
the  Black  Hawk  war  and  at  different 


times  hauled  rock  for  the  foundation 
of  the  Salt  Lake  Temple.  In  1871 
(Feb.  2  0th),  he  married  Melvina 
Rushton  (the  daughter  of  Fredric 
James  Rushton  and  Eliza  Hundy), 
who  was  born  July  31,  1853,  in  St. 
Louis,  Mo.;  she  became  the  mother 
of  ten  children,  eight  of  whom  are 
still  alive.  The  names  of  the  chil- 
dren are:  Eliza  R.,  John  H.,  Mary  M  , 
Clara  A.,  Louisa,  Daniel  R.,  Ida  L., 
Elmer  H.,  Lelia  A.  and  Glen  W. 

MOSS,  Melvina  Rushton,  wife  of 
Daniel  Moss,  was  born  July  31,  1853, 
at  St.  Louis,  Mo.,  the  daughter  of 
Fredric    James    Rushton    and    Eliza 


Hundy.  She  migrated  to  Utah  with 
her  parents  in  1855,  crossing  the 
plains  in  Richard  Ballantyne's  com- 
pany, which  arrived  in  Salt  Lake 
Sept.  25,  1855.  She  first  lived  in 
Salt  Lake  City,  and  was  baptized 
Nov.  22,  1863,  by  Daniel  Wood,  after 
moving  to  Bountiful  or  Woods  Cross, 
where  she  has  lived  ever  since  and 
where  she  has  taken  an  active  part 
in  the  Relief  Society  and  Church 
work  generally.  During  the  past 
seven  years  she  has  presided  over 
the  South  Bountiful  Relief  Society. 
Previous  to  that  she  acted  as  a 
counselor  to  Sister  Mary  Ann  Page 
in  said  Society. 


172 


LATTER-DAY   SAINT 


MULLEB,  Jacob,  an  active  Elder 
in  the  Logan  Seventh  Ward,  Cache 
county,  Utah,  was  born  Feb.  13, 
1841,  at  Thumligen,  Wurttemberg, 
Germany,  the  son  of  Peter  MuUer 
and  Elizabeth  Schittenhelm.  When 
thirteen  years  of  age  he  was  left  an 
orphan  and  had  to  make  his  own 
way  in  life.  Becoming  a  convert  to 
"Mormonism"      he      was      baptized 


March  29,  1861,  at  Thurgau,  Swit- 
zerland, and  three  days  later  he  was 
called  on  a  mission.  He  was  ordained 
a  Priest  April  3,  1861,  and  started 
the  same  day  on  a  missionary  tour 
to  Germany.  For  four  years  after 
that  he  traveled  and  labored  as  a 
missionary  in  Germany  and  Switzer- 
land, suffering  at  times  considerable 
persecution.  Thus  he  was  arrested 
nineteen  times  and  imprisoned  seven- 
teen times  for  the  gospel's  sake.  In 
1865  he  started  for  Utah  with  a 
company  of  emigrating  Saints,  placed 
in  his  charge  until  they  embarked  at 
Liverpool,  England,  on  the  "Belle 
Wood"  and  crossed  the  ocean  under 
the  care  of  William  H.  Shearman. 
The  company  reached  Salt  Lake 
City,  Utah,  Nov.  9,  1865.  Bro. 
Muller  settled  at  Providence,  Cache 
county,  Utah,  in  December,  1865, 
and  on  the  24th  of  that  month  he 
married    Barbara    Schubel.      In    the 


spring  of  1874  he  was  caught  in  a 
snowslide  while  working  in  the 
mountains  and  severely  injured  in- 
ternally, but  in  due  course  of  time 
he  was  healed  by  the  power  of  God. 
In  1877-78  he  filled  a  mission  to 
Switzerland  and  Germany.  He  was 
released  early  to  take  charge  of  a 
company  of  emigrating  Saints.  Hav- 
ing been  convicted  of  unlawful  co- 
habitation, he  served  two  months  in 
the  Utah  penitentiary  early  in  1888. 
In  1891  he  was  called  to  labor  in  the 
Logan  Temple,  continuing  thus  one 
year.  In  1899-1901  he  filled  a  third 
mission  to  Germany  and  Switzerland, 
during  which  he  was  banished  from 
Germany.  He  again  returned  home 
in  charge  of  a  company  of  Saints.  In 
the  spring  of  1903  he  again  became 
a  worker  in  the  Logan  Temple,  in 
which  glorious  work  he  is  still  en- 
gaged. 

MURDOCK,  Brigham,  third  Bishop 
of  the  Farnum  Ward  (Yellowstone 
Stake,  Fremont  county,  Idaho),  was 
born  Nov.  3,  1870,  at  Heber  City, 
Wasatch  county,  Utah,  the  son  of 
John  Murray  Murdock  and  Isabella 
Crawford.  He  was  baptized  May  17, 
1883,  by  James  H.  Molten,  ordained 


an  Elder  Dec.  16,  1891;  ordained  a 
High  Priest  Jan.  22,  1911,  by  Marion 
J.    Kerr;    was    set    apart    as    second 


BIOGRAPHICAL   ENCYCLOPEDIA. 


173 


counselor  to  Bishop  Henry  W.  Smith 
of  the  Farnum  Ward  Jan.  22,  1911; 
was  sustained  as  Bishop  of  the 
Farnum  Ward  in  November,  1913, 
and  ordained  a  Bishop  Feb.  1,  1914, 
by  Hyrum  G.  Smith.  He  married 
Mary  Blanch  Alexander  Dec.  16, 
1891;  she  died  June  22,  1893,  leav- 
ing one  son,  seven  months  old  (Rob- 
ert Rue).  In  1903  Bro.  Murdock 
married  Martha  Louannie  Hammon; 
this  union  has  been  blessed  with  five 
children,  namely,  Blanch  Priscilla, 
Brigham  Dallas,  Reed  Chase,  Thomas 
Hammon,  and  Laura  Jean. 

MURDOCK,  Joseph,  a  veteran 
Elder  in  the  Church,  was  born  Nov. 
14,  1783,  in  Lebanon,  Windham 
county,  Connecticut,  the  son  of  Wil- 
liam and  Sarah  Murdock.  He  mar- 
ried Sally  Stacey  about  1827.  Be- 
coming converts  to  "Mormonism" 
Bro.  Murdock  and  his  wife  were 
baptized  about  1840  and  traveled 
across  the  country  by  wagon  to  Kirt- 
land,  Ohio,  where  they  remained  a 
short  time  and  then  continued  the 
journey  to  Nauvoo,  111.,  where  they 
arrived  in  the  early  part  of  1841. 
Here  Joseph  Murdock  died  in  1844, 
but  the  family  remained  until  the 
exodus  of  1846.  One  of  the  sons 
contracted  a  severe  cold,  swimming 
cattle  across  the  Missouri  river  at  the 
time  of  the  exodus,  from  the  effects  of 
which  he  died;  he  was  the  first  man 
buried  on  the  Nebraska  side  of  the 
river.  The  family  now  consisted  of 
the  mother  and  her  two  sons,  Nym- 
phas  Cordion  and  Joseph  Stacey. 
They  settled  temporarily  at  Winter 
Quarters  and  came  to  Utah  in  Ira 
Eldredge's  company  in  1847. 

MURDOCK,  Sally  Stacey,  wife  of 
Joseph  Murdock,  was  born  April  22, 
1788,  near  New  Salem,  Franklin 
county,  Mass.,  the  daughter  of  Nym- 
phis  and  Sarah  Stacey.  As  the  wife 
of  Joseph  Murdock  she  came  to  the 
Valley  in  the  fall  of  1847  with  the 
first  families  that  crossed  the  plains 
and  endured  hardships  and  priva- 
tions in  common  with  the  Saints  until 


the  time  of  her  death,  through  all  of 
which  she  evinced  unshaking  faith 
and  confidence  in  the  truths  of  the 
gospel.      She  died  Sept.  25,   1864,  of 


general  debility,  aged  7  6  years,  leav- 
ing a  large  family  and  numerous 
friends  to  mourn  her  loss. 

MURDOCK,  Joseph  Stacey,  first 
Bishop  of  Heber  City,  Wasatch 
county,  Utah,  was  born  June  26, 
1822,  in  Madison  county.  New  York, 


the  son  of  Joseph  Murdock  and  Sally 
Stacey,  and  died  Feb.  15,  1899,  in 
Heber  City. 


174 


LATTER-DAY  SAINT 


MURDOCH,  Nymphas  Cordion,  one 

of  the  Utah  pioneers  of  1847,  was 
born  May  12,  1833,  at  Hamilton, 
Madison  county,  N.  Y.,  the  son  of 
Joseph  Murdock  and  Sally  Stacey. 
Together    with    his    father's    family 


he  participated  in  the  exodus  from 
Nauvoo  in  1846,  and  after  spending 
the  winter  of  1846-47  at  Winter 
Quarters,  he  started  for  the  Valley 
in  the  spring  of  1847,  crossing  the 
plains  in  Capt.  Ira  Eldredge's  fifty, 
which  was  the  first  company  to  arrive 
in  the  Valley  after  the  pioneer  com- 
pany. He  married  Melissa  Barney 
Oct.  21,  1854.  She  was  the  daughter 
of  Royal  Barney  and  Sarah  Bowen 
Estabrook  of  Amherst,  Ohio,  and 
came  to  Utah  in  1852.  In  1857 
(Nov.  12th)  he  married  Esther  Maria 
Davis,  daughter  of  Franklin  Judson 
Davis  and  Anna  Richmond.  Follow- 
ing are  the  names  of  his  children  by 
his  first  wife:  Nymphas  Cordion, 
Sarah  Melissa,  Joseph  Royal  and  Bet- 
sy Emeline.  The  children  by  his  sec- 
ond wife  were  Franklin  Judson, 
Stanley,  Unice  Louisa,  Alva  Nymphas, 
Alphonso  J.,  Annie  Mariah,  Freder- 
ick, Ella  Maria  and  Melissa.  Bro. 
Nymphas  also  married  Elizabeth 
Chadwich  Green  (a  former  wife  of 
Alphonzo  Green)  Oct.  2,  1912.  Bro. 
Murdock    was   ordained    successively 


to  the  office  of  Deacon,  Teacher, 
Priest,  Elder,  Seventy,  High  Priest 
and  Bishop.  From  July  15,  1877,  to 
1891  he  acted  as  Bishop  of  the 
Charleston  Ward,  where  he  settled 
in  18  64  and  to  which  place  he  had 
moved  his  family  in  1865.  In  1867- 
68  he  filled  a  mission  to  the  Eastern 
States.  He  participated  in  the  early 
troubles  in  Utah,  taking  part  in  the 
so-called  Echo  canyon  war  in  1857 
and  later  in  the  Walker  and  Black 
Hawk  Indian  wars;  he  was  a  mem- 
ber of  the  company  known  in  early 
Utah  days  as  minute  men.  At  Charles- 
ton particularly  he  took  a  most  active 
part  in  all  matters  pertaining  to  the 
improvement  and  upbuilding  of  the 
place.  He  was  one  of  the  organizers 
of  the  co-operative  store  there,  and 
was  throughout  one  of  Utah's  repre- 
sentative men.  He  was  ordained  a 
Patriarch  April  6,  1-901,  by  Apostle 
Abraham  O.  Woodruff  and  in  1908 
became  a  resident  of  Heber  City, 
Utah,  where  he  died  April  29,  1917. 

MURDOCK,  Joseph  R.,  president 
of  the  Wasatch  Stake.  (Continued 
from  Vol.   1,  page  3  61.)      At  the  re- 


quest of  President  Wm.  H.  Smart, 
President  Joseph  R.  Murdock  moved 
to  Heber  City  in  December,  1902. 
At  the  quarterly  conference  at  Heber 
City,  August  12,  1906,  he  was  chosen 


BIOGRAPHICAL  ENCYCLOPEDIA. 


175 


and  set  apart  as  president  of  the 
Wasatch  Stake,  with  James  C.  Jensen 
as  his  first  and  Edward  D.  Clyde  as 
his  second  counselor.  This  call  came 
to  President  Murdock  in  consequence 
of  President  Wm.  H.  Smart  having 
been  appointed  to  preside  over  the 
Uintah  Stake  of  Zion.  After  the  new 
presidency  assumed  their  position  in 
the  Wasatch  Stake  they  continued 
the  noble  work  commenced  by  their 
predecessors  in  fighting  the  liquor 
traffic,  which  resulted  in  all  the  sa- 
loons in  the  county  being  closed,  and 
the  sale  of  liquor  practically  sus- 
pended. They  also  arranged  for 
amusements  in  the  Stake  to  be  placed 
under  the  supervision  of  the  Church 
authorities.  Before.  President  Smart 
left  the  Stake,  President  Murdock 
was  appointed  by  the  presidency  of 
the  Wasatch  Stake  to  assist  in  vari- 
ous irrigation  projects,  looking  to  the 
reclaiming  of  the  arid  lands  in  what 
was  then  known  as  the  Uintah  Indian 
Reservation.  In  this  capacity  Presi- 
dent Murdock  took  the  initiative  in 
getting  out  the  waters  upon  the  lands 
in  what  is  known  now  as  the  Dry 
Gulch  Irrigation  Company,  which 
represents  about  80,000  acres  of  agri- 
cultural land.  This  project  has  been 
carried  out  successfully  and  thou- 
sands of  homes  have  been  benefitted 
thereby.  In  developing  the  water 
rights  of  the  Provo  river.  President 
Murdock's  services  have  been  extend- 
ed into  Utah  and  Salt  Lake  counties, 
where  two  irrigation  companies  have 
been  organized,  providing  for  the 
storing  of  waters  of  the  Provo  river, 
and  of  the  pumping  of  water  out  of 
the  Utah  Lake  to  an  elevation  of  100 
feet  from  where  it  is  carried  into 
Salt  Lake  county  as  far  as  Little 
Cottonwood  on  the  east  and  Bennion 
Ward  on  the  west  side.  By  these 
projects  over  10,000  acres  of  land 
have  been  brought  under  cultivation, 
and  when  the  canals  are  completed 
20,000  acres  more  will  be  benefited 
thereby.  President  Murdock  has 
taken  part  in  the  development  of 
many   of   the   resources   of   Wasatch 


county  and  is  now  president  of  the 
Bank  of  Heber  City,  and  the  Heber 
Mercantile  Company.  Together  with 
his  sons  and  sons-in-law  he  is  largely 
interested  in  farming  and  sheep-rais- 
ing. 

NAISBITT,  Henry  W.,  a  prominent 
Elder  in  the  Church,  was  born  Nov. 
7,  1826,  in  the  village  of  North  Aller- 
ton,  England,  the  son  of  John  Nais- 
bitt  and  Martha  Neede.  His  parents 
were  religious  people;  his  father,  be- 
ing very  zealous,  left  impressions  up- 
on his  son  never  afterwards  de- 
stroyed. The  father  died  when  Hen- 
ry was  a  lad,  and  the  boy  had  to  help 
the  widowed  mother  to  the  neglect 
of  schooling.  Being  of  a  mechanical 
turn  of  mind,  he  was  apprenticed  to 
a  man  who  was  skilled  in  the  making 
of  copper  kettles  from  the  solid 
metal.  Leaving  this  he  learned  how 
to  make  silk  hats  and  later  learned 
the  carpenter's  trade.     From  the  car- 


penter's bench  he  went  into  the  gro- 
cery business,  at  which  he  spent  his 
remaining  years  while  in  England. 
From  his  early  youth  Henry  W.  Nais- 
bitt  had  a  great  love  for  reading, 
especially  was  he  fond  of  reading 
religious  books.  In  1850  he  became 
a  convert  to  "Mormonism"  and  emi- 
grated to  America  with  his  wife  in 


176 


LATTER-DAY   SAINT 


1854.  After  his  arrival  in  Utah  he 
became  associated  with  Wm.  Jen- 
nings in  business.  In  187  6-78  he 
filled  a  mission  to  Great  Britain 
where  he  labored  principally  as  as- 
sistant editor  of  the  "Millennial 
Star."  Upon  his  return  to  Utah  he 
took  up  his  labors  in  Z.  C.  M.  I.,  Salt 
Lake  City,  and  became  universally 
known  as  one  of  the  expounders  of 
"Mormonism"  in  the  large  taber- 
nacle meetings  in  Salt  Lake  City.  He 
also  wrote  for  the  newspapers  and 
magazines.  In  1898-1901  he  filled 
another  mission  to  Great  Britain,  this 
time  acting  as  a  counselor  to  Pres. 
Platte  D.  Lyman  in  the  presidency 
of  the  European  Mission.  Elder  Nais- 
bitt  was  72  years  of  age  when  he 
went  on  this  last  mission.  His  almost 
fifty  years  of  study  and  his  faithful 
living  of  the  principles  of  the  gospel 
marked  him  a  superior  man.  Not 
only  was  he  an  able  speaker  and  an 
able  writer  of  prose,  but  he  also  ex- 
hibited great  skill  in  writing  poetry, 
and  in  1901  published  a  book  of  poems 
entitled  "Rhymelets  in  Many  Moods." 
After  a  well  spent  life  he  passed  to 
his  final  rest  Feb.  2  6,  1908.  During 
his  lifetime  Elder  Naisbitt  married 
five  wives.  His  first  wife  was  Eliza- 
beth Paul,  whom  he  married  in  Eng- 
land Dec.  24,  1853;  she  emigrated 
to  Utah  with  her  husband  in  1854 
and  after  bearing  her  husband  eight 
children  died  March  17,  1869,  in  Salt 
Lake  City.  He  married  his  second 
wife,  Mary  Ann  Luff,  in  October, 
1862;  she  became  the  mother  of  six 
children  and' died  April  5,  1877.  His 
third  wife  was  Catherine  Hagell 
whom  he  married  April  13,  1867; 
she  crossed  the  plains  with  ox-teams 
in  1865,  passed  through  many  hard- 
ships before  reaching  Utah,  and  after- 
wards became  the  mother  of  eight 
children.  Elder  Naisbitt  married 
Elizabeth  Irvine  April  13,  1870;  she 
bore  her  husband  five  children.  His 
fifth  wife  was  Frances  Hurst,  who 
was  married  to  him  in  1879  and  be- 
came the  mother  of  four  children. 


NEBEKER,  John,  a  Utah  pioneer 
of  1847,  and  an  active  Church  worker, 
was  born  August  1,  1813,  at  New- 
port, Delaware,  the  son  of  George 
Nebeker  and  Susannah  Meredith.  He 
was  the  eldest  of  eight  brothers,  five 
of  whom  were  among  the  earliest 
settlers  of  Utah.  Three  besides  him- 
self (Henry,  Peter  and  George)  came 
to  Salt  Lake  Valley  in  1847  and  the 
other  (Lewis)  arrived  a  few  years 
later.  All  the  Nebekers  in  Utah  are 
descendants  of  these  brothers  and  all 
of  that  name  in  America  are  no  doubt 
related  to  them.  The  Nebeker  family 
came  to  America  from  Germany  some 
time  prior  to  1730  and  settled  in 
Delaware.  John  received  a  common 
school    education    and    also    finished 


a  commercial  school  education  under 
the  tutelage  of  his  father,  who  had 
finished  a  commercial  education.  His 
father  was  a  foreman  of  a  cotton 
factory  in  Delaware,  a  farmer  in  Illi- 
nois, and  a  government  surveyor  in 
Ohio.  John's  mother  was  an  intelli- 
gent and  thoroughly  good  woman,  the 
daughter  of  a  Baptist  clergyman  of 
Wilmington,  Delaware.  John  became 
proficient  in  mathematics  and  learned 
the  saddle  and  harness-making  trade 
as  well  as  farming.  He  married  Lur- 
ena  Fitzgerald,  a  native  of  Pennsyl- 
vania, in  Ohio,  Oct.  25,  1835.    During 


BIOGRAPHICAL  ENCYCLOPEDIA. 


177 


a  visit  to  Nauvoo,  111.,  in  the  winter 
of  1845-46  he  became  a  Latter-day 
Saint,  his  wife  and  mother  having 
previously  been  converted  to  that 
faith.  Prior  to  taking  this  step  he 
had  thought  of  going  to  Oregon,  but 
now  he  determined  to  follow  the 
fortunes  of  the  Saints.  With  a  good 
outfit  of  wagons  and  cattle  he  left 
Vermillion  county,  111.,  in  the  fall  of 
184  6  and  arrived  at  Winter  Quarters 
on  the  Missouri  river  in  time  to  assist 
in  fitting  out  the  pioneers,  one  of 
whom  (Perry  Fitzgerald)  was  his 
wife's  brother.  After  their  departure 
he  joined  the  general  emigration 
which  in  June,  1847,  set  out  for  the 
Rocky  Mountains.  He  was  chosen 
as  a  captain  of  ten  in  Geo.  B.  Wal- 
lace's fifty  and  Abraham  O.  Smoot's 
hundred.  On  the  journey  his  son 
Ashton  was  run  over  by  a  wagon 
and  had  his  thigh  broken.  The  frac- 
tured bones  were  set  by  Luke  S. 
Johnson  and  Henry  I.  Doremus,  the 
boy  playing  with  a  pocket  knife  while 
the  operation  was  in  progress.  The 
company  arrived  in  Salt  Lake  Val- 
ley Sept.  2  6,  184  7.  Bro.  Nebeker 
and  his  family,  having  lived  in  the 
South  Fort,  an  adjunct  of  the  Old 
Fort,  until  the  spring  of  1849,  moved 
onto  a  city  lot  (Lot  4,  Block  116, 
Plat  A.,  Salt  Lake  City  survey).  In 
the  summer  of  1848,  it  is  claimed, 
John  Nebeker  cut  the  first  wheat 
that  ripened  and  was  harvested  in 
this  intermountain  region,  on  a  lot 
lying  between  Third  and  Fourth 
West  streets  and  Second  and  Third 
North  streets,  near  the  southeast  cor- 
ner of  where  the  West  Side  high 
school  now  stands.  He  chose  some 
knolls  on  which  to  plant  his  wheat. 
It  is  also  said  that  he  had  one  of  two 
apple  trees  that  first  bore  fruit  in 
Utah,  the  other  tree  being  raised  by 
Pres.  Brigham  Young.  Bro.  Nebeker 
took  a  great  interest  in  the  cultiva- 
tion of  fruit  trees,  he  and  his  bro- 
thers bringing  with  them  from  Illi- 
nois a  quantity  of  apple  seeds  and 
peach  pits.  The  young  trees  that 
sprang  from  these  plantings  are'  be- 
Vol.  Ill,  No.  12. 


lieved  to  have  stocked  most  of  the 
early  orchards  of  Salt  Lake  Valley. 
Prior  to  the  organization  of  the  pro- 
visional State  of  Deseret,  and  while 
yet  a  resident  of  the  Fort,  John  Neb- 
eker acted  as  a  deputy  marshal,  his 
duties  corresponding  with  a  deputy 
of  today.  Many  tough  characters 
coming  with  the  gold  seekers  on  their 
way  to  California,  Deputy  Nebeker 
more  than  once  arrested  such  per- 
sons, and  for  lack  of  a  better  place 
of  confinement  would  take  them  to 
his  home  and  board  and  lodge  them 
there  until  their  cases  were  disposed 
of  by  due  process  of  law.  He  also 
acted  as  justice  of  the  peace  of  Salt 
Lake  City,  but  as  such  was  more  of 
an  arbitrator  than  a  judicial  officer, 
it  being  his  practice  to  get  the  par- 
ties, plaintiff  and  defendant  to- 
gether out  of  court  and  in  a  neigh- 
borly way  induce  them  to  an  amic- 
able settlement  of  their  difficulties. 
In  the  fall  of  1853  he  presided  over 
the  missionary  company  which  locat- 
ed and  built  Fort  Supply  on  Smith's 
Fork,  near  Fort  Bridger,  a  movement 
intended  to  exert  a  civilizing  influ- 
ence over  the  Shoshone  Indians. 
While  there  he  represented  Green 
River  county  in  the  Territorial  legis- 
lature. In  the  fall  of  1861  Elder 
Nebeker  moved  with  a  portion  of  his 
family  (he  having  married  a  plural 
wife,  Mary  Woodcock,  in  September, 
1854)  to  Toquerville  in  Washington 
county,  Utah,  where  he  raised  cot- 
ton and  built  and  operated  a  cotton 
gin.  He  was  closely  associated  with 
Apostle  Erastus  Snow  in  the  settle- 
ment of  Southern  Utah,  including 
what  is  now  a  part  of  Nevada.  In 
1869-70  he  went  on  a  mission  to 
Illinois  and  Indiana.  From  1870  to 
1872  he  acted  as  probate  judge  of 
Kane  county,  Utah.  Soon  afterwards 
he  returned  north  and  located  a  part 
of  his  family  at  Laketown  in  Rich 
county,  Utah,  which  section  he  repre- 
sented in  the  Utah  legislature  of 
1874.  Ecclesiastically  he  was  presi- 
dent of  the  Elders  quorum  for  sev- 
eral years   after  the  settlement  and 

December,  1918. 


178 


LATTER-DAY  SAINT 


at  a  later  period  was  a  member  of 
the  High  Priests  quorum.  Elder 
Nebeker  died  Oct.  26,  1886,  at  his 
home  in  Laketown,  Rich  county, 
Utah.  He  was  a  man  of  veracity,  of 
character  and  integrity.  Possessed 
of  a  keenly  sympathetic  nature,  he 
was  ready  at  all  times  to  render 
assistance  to  any  one  in  trouble.  He 
practiced  self-denial,  despised  effem- 
inancy  and  was  noted  for  his  impar- 
tiality and  high  sense  of  justice.  He 
was  the  father  of  twelve  sons  and 
nine  daughters,  most  of  whom  grew 
to  maturity. 

NEBEKER,      Lurena      Fitzgerald, 

wife  of  John  Nebeker,  was  born  April 
25,  1819,  in  Monongahela  county,  Pa., 


the  daughter  of  John  Fitzgerald  ind 
Leah  Phillips.  The  Fitzgeralds  are  a 
very  ancient  branch  of  the  noble  and 
illustrious  race  of  Geraldines,  seated 
at  an  early  period  at  the  Castle  of 
Pallice,  in  the  county  of  Limerick, 
Ireland.  Maurice  Fitzgerald,  one  of 
the  first  and  principal  invaders  of 
Ireland  first  assumed  that  surname 
instead  of  Geraldine.  He  landed  in 
Ireland  in  the  reign  of  King  Henry 
II  A.  D.  1169.  Lurena  Fitzgerald 
was  the  youngest  of  a  family  of  five 
children.  On  her  mother's  side  she 
descended   from  an   old  Pennsylvan- 


ian  Dutch  family,  her  mother  being 
the  daughter  of  a  Methodist  min- 
ister. When  a  child  her  father  moved 
to  Reily,  Butler  county,  Ohio,  which 
locality  at  that  time  was  a  dense 
forest.  As  a  child  she  was  a  Bible 
reader,  and  she  received  valuable 
training  in  sewing  from  her  mother 
who  had  been  a  tailoress.  At  the 
age  of  sixteen  she  was  married  to 
John  Nebeker  Oct.  25,  1835.  They 
made  their  home  at  Reily,  Ohio,  for 
a  time  and  then  moved  to  Vermillion 
county,  111.,  where  she  became  a  con- 
vert to  "Mormonism"  in  1842.  She 
was  the  first  person  bearing  the  name 
of  Nebeker  who  joined  the  Church. 
Pour  years  later  her  husband  was 
baptized.  When  the  Elders  first 
brought  the  gospel  to  her  home  they 
were  frequently  in  need  of  cloth- 
ing and  on  such  occasions  she  would 
get  busy  with  her  needle  and  fit  them 
out  with  what  they  needed.  In  the 
fall  of  1846,  with  her  husband,  she 
left  her  home  in  Vermillion  county 
and  journeyed  to  the  Missouri  river, 
near  Council  Bluffs,  Iowa,  where 
they  spent  the  following  winter.  With 
their  own  family  of  five  children, 
George  Nebeker,  her  husband's 
youngest  brother,  and  her  older  sis- 
ter Barbara  Fitzgerald,  they  crossed 
the  plains  in  Capt.  George  B.  Wal- 
lace's fifty,  her  husband  being  the 
captain  of  ten  in  said  fifty.  They 
arrived  in  Salt  Lake  Valley  Sept.  26, 
1847.  Sister  Nebeker  endured  the 
hardships  and  privations  connected 
with  the  settling  of  Salt  Lake  City, 
and  during  the  cricket  famine  she 
was  eleven  weeks  without  a  loaf  of 
bread  in  the  house,  and  there  were 
nine  in  the  family.  Sister  Nebeker 
was  very  industrious,  economical  and 
thoroughly  practical.  In  making 
homespun  cloth,  stocking  yarn  and 
other  needed  articles  she  could 
scarcely  be  excelled  by  any  other 
woman.  She  was  unusually  benev- 
olent and  hospitable,  and  become  uni- 
versally known  and  beloved  because 
of  her  acts  of  charity.  She  waited 
on  prisoners   who   were   confined  in 


BIOGRAPHICAL  ENCYCLOPEDIA. 


179 


her  home  with  ball  and  chain  from 
lack  of  other  quarters,  at  the  time 
her  husband  was  assistant  marshal  to 
John  Van  Cott  and  Horace  S.  El- 
redge.  The  loss  of  an  eight-year-old 
boy  (Wiley)  by  drowning  at  the 
Warm  Springs,  July  23,  1860,  was  a 
most  severe  blow  to  her.  In  the  early 
sixties,  when  her  husband  was  coloni- 
zing Southern  Utah  he  ran  into  a 
band  of  Piede  Indians  who  had  a 
seven  or  eight-year-old  boy  whom  they 
were  going  to  kill  because  his  par- 
ents were  dead.  Bro.  Nebeker  traded 
the  Indians  some  horses  for  the  boy 
and  brought  him  to  Salt  Lake  City, 
where  he  was  reared  in  the  Nebeker 
home.  The  Indian  boy  (Richard) 
was  a  dutiful  boy  to  his  foster 
mother.  The  John  Nebeker  home, 
located  at  446  West  Second  North 
Street  and  built  in  1856,  was,  when 
first  erected,  one  of  the  best  houses 
in  Salt  Lake  City,  and  it  was  always 
a  place  of  hospitality  and  good  cheer. 
Sister  Nebeker  was  the  mother  of 
thirteen  children.  Of  these  five  boys 
and  four  girls,  namely,  Perry,  Ira, 
Aaron,  Ashton,  Rosella,  Almira  J., 
Prescinda,  Laura  and  Aquila,  grew  to 
manhood  and  womanhood.  Sister  Neb- 
eker was  also  a  mother  to  her  weakly 
sister,  Barbara,  for  over  forty  years. 
When  over  sixty  years  of  age  she 
took  a  motherless  infant  (a  grand- 
daughter) to  raise,  and  also  raised 
two  older  granddaughters  who  had 
1.  their  mother.  Sister  Nebeker 
was  fond  of  poetry  and  took  great 
interest  in  current  events.  She  died 
Feb.  7,  18  9  8,  in  Salt  Lake  City,  Utah. 

NEBEKER,  Mary  Woodcock,  wife 
of  John  Nebeker,  was  born  Nov.  19, 
1830,  at  Pilley  Green,  Yorkshire, 
England,  the  daughter  of  William 
Woodcock  and  Hannah  Stone.  Be- 
coming a  convert  to  "Mormonism" 
(the  first  in  the  family)  she  was 
baptized  in  1851.  Her  relatives  be- 
ing bitterly  opposed  to  her  joining 
the  Church  and  utterly  refusing  to 
help  her,  she  emigrated  to  Utah, 
crossing  the  ocean  In  the  ship  "Alvira 


Owen,"  which  sailed  from  Liverpool, 
Feb.  15,  1853.  She  walked  all  the 
way  across  the  plains,  and  being  af- 
flicted with  rheumatism  she  had  to 
walk  with  two  sticks  part  of  the  time, 
but  she  arrived  safely  in  Salt  Lake 
City,  Oct.  6,  18  53,  and  was  married 
to  John  Nebeker  Sept.  12,  1854.  She 
passed  through  the  grasshopper 
famine  and  was  one  of  the  few  women 
left  in  Salt  Lake  City  when  the  Saints 
went  south  during  "the  move"  in 
1858.  After  living  a  short  time  at 
Bountiful,  Utah,  she  moved  to  To- 
querville,  Southern  Utah,  her  hus- 
band being  called  on  a  mission  to 
Dixie  in  18  61.  In  1871  the  family 
was  called  to  Bear  Lake  Valley  and 


located  at  Laketown,  where  Sister 
Nebeker  died  Feb.  12,  1902.  Sister 
Nebeker  was  of  a  retiring  disposition, 
very  patient,  humble  and  religious; 
her  hospitality  was  almost  unlimited. 
For  a  number  of  years  she  acted  as 
a  midwife  and  was  always  ready  and 
willing  to  assist  the  sick  and  desti- 
tute. She  presided  over  the  Relief 
Society  at  Laketown  from  the  time 
of  its  first  organization  until  poor 
health  compelled  her  to  resign.  She 
was  the  mother  of  eight  children,  of 
whom  the  following  grew  up  to  ma- 
turity: Alfred  Woodcock,  Sarah  Ann, 
George  Washington  and  Zettie  May. 


180 


LATTER-DAY   SAINT 


Sister  Nebeker  was  dearly  loved   by 
her  children. 

NEBEKER,  Ashton,  an  active  El- 
der in  the  Church,  was  born  at  Dan- 
ville, 111.,  Sept.  23,  1843,  the  son  of 
John     Nebeker     and     Lurena     Fitz- 


^HL.   i 


gerald.  Together  with  his  father's 
family  he  arrived  in  the  Great  Salt 
Lake  Valley  in  September,  1847,  and 
was  baptized  about  1851.  In  March, 
1865,  he  married  Lucy  Pratt,  at 
Tooele,  Utah,  and  was  called,  together 
with  his  father,  to  settle  the  so-called 
Dixie  country  in  Southern  Utah.  He 
was  finally  released  and  returned  to 
Salt  Lake  City,  while  his  brother. 
Perry,  was  filling  a  mission  to  Ger- 
many. Later  he  was  again  called  to 
the  Dixie  Mission,  where  he  resided 
continuously  until  1886,  during 
which  time  he  held  many  positions  of 
trust  and  responsibility,  both  of  an 
ecclesiastical  and  secular  nature. 
From  1873  to  1877  he  acted  as  sher- 
iff of  Kane  county,  and  was  also 
assessor  and  collector  of  said  county 
for  some  time.  He  was  with  Major 
Powell's  expedition  exploring  the 
Grand  Canyon  of  the  Colorado,  being 
one  of  the  first  white  men  to  go 
through  all  of  the  rapids  of  the  Grand 
Canyon.  As  a  major  in  the  Utah 
militia  he  participated  in  several  In- 


dian expeditions  and  filled  a  mission 
to  the  Moguls  Indians.  From  1886 
to  1890  he  resided  at  Jerome,  Ari- 
zona, having  government  mail  con- 
tracts, at  the  expiration  of  which  he 
returned  to  his  old  home  at  Toquer- 
ville.  In  1892  he  moved  to  Tuba, 
Arizona,  where  he  resided  until  1903, 
during  which  time  he  acted  as  deputy 
sheriff  of  Coconino  county,  Arizona, 
upon  leaving  which  he  moved  to  Ala- 
mo, Lincoln  county,  Nevada,  where 
he  resided  until  his  death,  which  oc- 
curred August  29,  1911.  At  the  time 
of  his  death  he  was  postmaster  at 
Alamo  and  a  notary  public  for  the 
State  of  Nevada.  In  1878  Ashton 
Nebeker  married  Elizabeth  Theobald 
in  the  St.  George  Temple.  The  fol- 
lowing named  children  were  the  is- 
sue of  this  marriage:  Aquila  A., 
Theobald,  Arthur  and  Deronda.  The 
children  by  his  first  wife  were:  Lucy 
Lurena,  Wiley,  Amy  Belle,  Grace, 
Hazel  and  Ashton  Stokes. 

NEBEKER,  William  Perry,  a  Utah 
pioneer  and  prominent  Church  work- 
er, was  born  Sept.  5,  1836,  at  Riley, 


Butler  county,  Ohio,  the  son  of  John 
Nebeker  and  Lurena  Fitzgerald.  At 
the  age  of  eleven  years  he  crossed 
the  plains  with  his  parents,  driving 
a  team  of  two  yoke  of  oxen  most  of 
the  way,  until  prostrated  with  moun- 


BIOGRAPHICAL   ENCYCLOPEDIA. 


1-81 


tain  fever,  and  arrived  in  the  Valley 
Sept.  26,  1847.  On  the  journey  he 
was  baptized  in  the  Platte  river  by 
Apostle  John  Taylor.  Young  Nebeker 
assisted  in  raising  the  first  crops  in 
Utah,  and  with  the  rest  of  the  pioneer 
settlers  passed  through  many  hard- 
ships, subsisting  on  thistle  roots, 
fighting  crickets,  and  living  on  half 
rations.  He  was  a  studious  boy  and 
obtained  his  early  education  in  a 
most  unique  way.  When  his  father 
was  deputy  marshal,  under  John  Van 
Cott,  in  1849,  the  prisoners  were 
lodged  and  fed  at  Deputy  Marshal 
Nebeker's  home,  encumbered  with 
ball  and  chain,  in  the  same  room  as 
his  family.  One  of  the  prisoners  who 
had  quite  a  long  sentence  to  serve 
proved  to  be  a  man  of  more  than 
ordinary  education.  He  took  a  liking 
to  the  boy  Perry  and  spent  the  weary 
winter  days  in  tuitoring  him.  The 
mother  learned  to  appreciate  the 
prisoner's  friendship  in  the  house  on 
account  of  the  good  training  he  gave 
her  boy.  During  the  winter  of  1857- 
58  Perry  acted  as  body-guard  to  Pres- 
ident Brigham  Young.  At  the  age  of 
24  (August  6,  1860)  he  was  elected 
as  a  representative  to  the  Territorial 
legislature  from  Salt  Lake  county 
and  served  in  a  special  session  called 
by  Gov.  Cummings  and  at  the  regular 
session  of  18  60-61.  He  was  the  first 
unmarried  man  who  sat  in  the  Utah 
legislature.  He  served  also  as  a 
member  of  the  first  State  legislature 
in  1895.  Elder  Nebeker  filled  many 
other  positions  of  honor  and  respon- 
sibility, such  as  county  superintend- 
ent of  district  schools,  justice  of  the 
peace,  notary  public,  deputy  regis- 
tration officer,  U.  S.  census  enumer- 
ator, special  U.  S.  irrigation  commis- 
sioner, director  of  the  Agricultural 
College  of  Utah,  etc.  In  1863-67  he 
filled  an  important  mission  to  Europe, 
during  which  he  presided  over  the 
missions  in  Switzerland,  Italy,  France, 
Germany  and  Holland.  In  1868  he 
was  called  to  colonize  the  Bear  Lake 
country  and  established  his  home  at 
Falula  Springs,  near  Laketown,  Rich 


county,  Utah — a  town  which  he  named 
after  receiving  President  Young's 
approval  of  the  same.  In  1870  (Oct. 
31st)  Elder  Nebeker  married  Sarah 
Ivins  McKean,  daughter  of  Theodore 
McKean  and  Mary  Page  Gulick.  The 
following  named  children  were  born 
to  them:  Theodore  McKean,  Maud, 
Sarah  Lurena,  William  Perry,  Laura, 
Mary  Page  and  Ethel.  His  wife  died 
Feb.  21,  1880,  at  Falula  Springs, 
leaving  six  small  children.  On  Feb. 
19,  1885,  Bro.  Nebeker  married 
Phoebe  Stafford  Tingey,  daughter  of 
Bishop  John  Tingey  and  Phoebe  Staf- 
ford. From  that  union  three  sons 
were  born,  namely,  Charles  Stafford, 
Leo  Stokes  and  Harold  Wesley.  In 
the  fall  of  18  89  Bro.  Nebeker  re- 
moved with  his  family  to  Salt  Lake 
City.  He  was  ordained  a  High  Priest 
by  William  B.  Dougall,  July  19,  1906. 
He  died  Oct.  16,  1910,  in  Salt  Lake 
City. 

NEBEKER,   Sarah  Ivins   McKean, 

wife  of  William  Perry  Nebeker,  was 


;as  -^f  ■>>-  *• 


born  April  11,  1849,  at  Toms  River, 
Ocean  county.  New  Jersey,  the  daugh- 
ter of  Theodore  McKean  and  Mary 
Page  Gulick.  She  was  a  grand- 
daughter of  Washington  McKean  and 
Margaret  Ivins  and  Captain  Stephen 
Gulick  and  Deborah  Holmes  Page. 
Mrs.    Nebeker    descended    from    the 


182 


LATTER-DAY   SAINT 


Shreve  family,  which  traces  its  an- 
cestry in  America  to  the  middle  of 
the  seventeenth  century,  or  to  1641. 
They  were  of  English-Dutch  birth 
and  settled  in  Rhode  Island  and  Long 
Island,  whence  they  went  to  New 
Jersey,  where  they  were  known  as 
planters.  They  were  Quakers  in  be- 
lief. The  Shreves  were  prominent 
in  the  Revolutionary  war,  and 
among  them  were  Colonel  Israel 
Shreve,  Colonel  William  Shreve  and 
Captain  Samuel  and  Captain  John 
Shreve.  Another  line  of  her  ances- 
try, the  Gulicks,  were  distinguished 
for  their  valor  during  the  Revolu- 
tionary war;  one  was  captain  in  the 
Continental  army  and  another  lost 
an  arm  in  the  service  of  his  country. 
The  McKean  family  was  also  promi- 
nent in  the  early  history  of  the 
United  States  and  were  of  Scottish 
origin.  In  1857,  at  the  age  of  eight 
years,  she  crossed  the  plains  with  her 
parents,  who  settled  in  Salt  Lake 
Valley.  She  received  a  better  edu- 
cation than  most  of  the  girls  of  her 
age,  her  parents  being  people  of  cul- 
ture. Having  musical  talent,  she 
taught  music  in  her  younger  days. 
She  was  an  expert  at  fine  needle 
work  and  as  a  girl  also  learned  to  be 
an  excellent  cook  and  housekeeper. 
On  Oct.  31,  1870,  she  became  the 
wife  of  William  Perry  Nebeker,  and 
made  her  home  in  Bear  Lake  Valley. 
Once  when  journeying  there  she  had 
a  marrow  escape  from  drowning  in 
the  Ogden  river.  Sister  Nebeker 
died  Feb.  21,  1880,  at  her  home  at 
Falula  Springs,  near  Laketown,  Rich 
county,  Utah,  leaving  six  small  chil- 
dren to  battle  with  the  world  without 
a  mother,  the  eldest  being  six  years 
old  and  the  youngest  eleven  days 
old.  Her  oldest  child,  Theodore,  pre- 
ceded her  to  the  grave.  Sister  Nebe- 
ker was  a  lover  of  nature's  beauties, 
the  birds,  the  flowers,  the  wild 
beauty  of  the  mountains  and  mead- 
ows, and  the  animals,  all  appealed 
to  her.  The  windows  of  her  pioneer 
log  house  were  always  full  of  bloom- 
ing plants.     Her  whole  heart  was  in 


her  home  and  she  was  a  queen  of  the 
kitchen  and  parlor. 

NEBEKER,  Phebe  Stafford  Tingey, 

wife  of  William  Perry  Nebeker,  was 
born  Dec.  24,  1854,  in  Salt  Lake  City, 
the  daughter  of  John  Tingey  and 
Phebe  Stafford.  Her  parents  left 
England  for  the  United  States  Oct. 
17,  1850;  arrived  in  St.  Louis,  Mo., 
December,  1850;  left  St.  Louis  April 
26,  1852;  arrived  in  Salt  Lake  City 
Sept.  1,  1852,  and  located  in  the 
Seventeenth  Ward,  Salt  Lake  City, 
where  Sister  Nebeker  was  raised.  She 
was  married  to  William  P.  Nebeker 
Feb.  19,  1885,  and  bore  her  husband 
three  sons,  namely,  Charles  S.,  Leo 
S.    and    Harold    W.      Sister   Nebeker 


has  always  been  a  faithful  and  dili- 
gent worker  in  the  Church  and  has 
held  prominent  positions  in  differ- 
ent organizations  in  the  Seventeenth 
Ward.  She  acted  as  counselor  in  the 
Ward  Y.  L.  M.  I.  A.  and  in  the  Pri- 
mary Association,  was  a  member  of 
the  Ward  choir  and  a  Sunday  school 
teacher.  She  has  the  reputation  of 
being  a  most  faithful  wife  and  mother 
who  has  raised  her  children  in  the 
ways  of  the  Lord,  and  by  precept  and 
example  been  a  pattern  to  all  with 
whom  she  has  been  associated. 


BIOGRAPHICAL   ENCYCLOPEDIA. 


183 


NELSON,  Carl  Magnus,  first  pre- 
siding Elder  of  the  Greenville 
branch,  Cache  county,  Utah,  was  born 
Oct.  17,  1852,  at  Helsingborg,  Mal- 
mohus  lS,n,  Sweden,  the  son  of  Jons 
Nilson  and  Ingrid  Monson.     His  par- 


ents were  among  the  first  converts 
to  "Mormonism"  in  the  little  city  of 
Helsingborg,  being  baptized  in  the 
spring  of  185  3.  They  participated 
in  the  first  conference  of  the  Church 
ever  held  in  Sweden.  There  being 
no  religious  liberty  in  Sweden  at 
that  time,  Jons  Nilson  and  family,  in 
order  to  escape  persecution,  disposed 
of  their  property  in  Sweden  in  1854 
and  moved  to  Copenhagen,  Denmark, 
where  Carl  was  raised.  He  was  bap- 
tized Sept.  2  6,  1861,  ordained  a  Dea- 
con Nov.  3,  1869;  ordained  a  Teacher 
August  10,  1870;  ordained  a  Priest 
Nov.  29,  1870,  by  Peter  F.  Madsen, 
and  was  called  to  labor  as  a  mis- 
sionary in  the  Copenhagen  confer- 
ence. This  work  he  continued  until 
June,  1874,  when  he  sailed  from 
Copenhagen,  emigrating  to  Utah.  He 
crossed  the  Atlantic  in  the  steam- 
ship "Idaho"  and  arrived  in  Salt 
Lake  City,  July  15,  1874.  Soon  after- 
wards he  moved  to  Bear  River  City 
and  subsequently  labored  in  the 
United  Order  in  Brigham  City.  In 
1876  (March  24th)  he  married  Anna 


Laurena  Jensen,  who  bore  him  seven 
children.  When  the  United  Order  In 
Brigham  City  broke  up,  he  moved 
back  to  Bear  River  City.  In  1882  he 
filled  a  mission  to  the  Indian  farm, 
"Washakee."  He  was  ordained  a 
Seventy  Jan.  27,  188  4,  by  Wllford 
Woodruff,  and  in  the  spring  of  the 
same  year  was  called  to  labor  on  the 
Logan  Temple.  Locating  at  Green- 
ville, Cache  county,  he  became  the 
first  superintendent  of  the  Greenville 
Sunday  school,  organized  Dec.  23, 
1890,  and  was  also  chosen  as  pre- 
siding Elder  of  the  Greenville  branch 
of  the  Logan  Fifth  Ward.  When  the 
Greenville  Ward  was  organized,  July 
26,  18  91,  he  was  sustained  as  first 
counselor  to  Bishop  N.  W.  Crookston, 
and  was  ordained  a  High  Priest  May 
9,  1892,  by  Apostle  Moses  Thatcher. 
In  1896-98  he  filled  a  mission  to 
Scandinavia,  laboring  in  the  Aarhus 
conference.  He  is  now  a  resident  of 
North  Logan. 

NELSON,  Daniel  Morgan,  presiding 
Elder  of  the  Manila   branch.  Wood- 


ruff Stake,  Wyoming,  was  born  Jan. 
12,  1854,  at  St.  Louis,  Mo.,  the  son 
of  Edward  B.  Nelson  and  Agnes  Mor- 
gan. He  was  baptized  when  a  boy, 
came  to  Utah  with  his  parents  in 
1864  and  settled  at  Logan.     In  the 


184 


LATTER-DAY   SAINT 


spring  of  1865  he  moved  to  Beaver 
and  resided  there  till  1896.  His 
father  being  a  shingle-maker,  the 
boy  put  in  most  of  his  time  in  the 
mountains,  but  attended  school  as  a 
rule  during  the  winter.  In  1876  he 
married  Sarah  Warby.  After  rearing 
six  children  she  died  in  June,  1887; 
subsequently  Bro.  Nelson  married 
Maltilda  Warby  (his  first  wife's  sis- 
ter), who  bore  him  thirteen  children. 
In  August,  1896,  he  settled  in  Lucern 
valley,  where  he  succeeded  in  getting 
a  Sunday  school,  a  day  school  and  a 
branch  of  the  Church  organized.  In 
the  organization  of  the  branch  he 
was  chosen  as  second  counselor  to  the 
presiding  Elder,  and.  subsequently 
became  Ward  clerk,  which  position 
he  held  till  Jan.  4,  1914,  when  he 
was  installed  as  presiding  Elder. 
Elder  Nelson  has  held  various  posi- 
tions, such  as  being  secretary,  treas- 
urer and  president  of  a  canal  com- 
pany, recorder  of  vital  statistics,  jus- 
tice of  the  peace,  registration  agent, 
clerk  of  the  school  board,  and  is  at 
the  present  time  postmaster  of  Manila. 

NELSON,  Waldemar  Theodore,  an 

early  pioneer  of  Utah  and  a  faithful 
Elder  in  the  Church,  was  born  Feb. 
15,  1854,  at  Skjeldskor,  Denmark, 
being  the  eldest  son  of  Anders  Niel- 
sen and  Dorthea  Hansen.  He  emi- 
grated to  Utah  with  his  father's  fam- 
ily in  18  61,  crossing  the  Atlantic  in 
the  ship  "Monarch  of  the  Sea."  He 
became  one  of  the  early  settlers  of 
Morgan  county,  where  he  still  re- 
sides. Since  his  arrival  in  Utah,  Bro. 
Nelson  has  been  a  faithful  and  prac- 
tical Church  worker,  one  of  the 
strongest  of  the  commoners,  a  con- 
structor and  builder  of  the  common- 
wealth, a  pioneer  and  subduer  of  the 
earth.  He  has  always  stood  for  the 
best  and  highest  ideals  of  the  com- 
munty.  Possessing  a  deep  religious 
conviction  and  a  strong  moral  char- 
acter, he  has  ever  served  his  con- 
science without  fear  or  favor.  For 
a  number  of  years  he  was  an  active 
Sunday  school  worker  at  Milton,  be- 


ing first  assistant  superintendent. 
Though  handicapped  by  nature  in  be- 
ing hard  of  hearing,  he  was  a  great 
reader,  a  lover  of  books,  a  student  of 
nature,  a  fearless  defender  of  right, 
and  a  safe  counselor.  His  main  ob- 
ject in  life  was  to  so  rear  his  children 
that  they  should  surpass  him  in  mak- 
ing the  world  better.  On  Jan.  16, 
1877,  he  married  Caroline  Olsen, 
who  was  born  March  9,  1859.  Two 
children  were  born  to  bless  this 
union:  Rozetta  and  Walter.  Nine 
days  after  the  birth  of  Walter  the 
young  wife  and  mother  departed 
from  this  life.  In  1881  (Jan.  20th) 
Bro.  Nelson  married  Mary  Jensen. 
Thirteen  children  resulted  from  this 
union,  ten  of  whom  are  living,  and 


each  bearing  the  family  name  with 
honor.  Their  names  follow:  Linda, 
born  Sept.  8,  1881;  William  Porter, 
born  July  24.  1883,  and  died  July 
25,  1883;  Mabel,  born  July  29,  1884; 
Maud,  born  Dec.  25,  1887,  and  died 
Feb.  12,  1890;  Andrew  Hyrum,  born 
Jan.  14,  1890;  Irvin  Theodore,  born 
April  17,  1892;  Minnie,  born  July  21, 
1894;  Nellie,  born  April  1,  1897; 
Victor  Joseph,  born  Feb.  27,  1899; 
Naomi,  born  Dec.  18,  1900;  Lula 
May,  born  March  17,  1903;  Leslie 
Waldemar,  born  April  21,  1905,  and 
Paul  Reed,   born  Sept.   27,    1909. 


BIOGRAPHICAL   ENCYCLOPEDIA. 


185 


NIELSEN,  Anders,  one  of  the  first 
pioneers  of  Morgan  county,  Utah,  was 
born  Sept.  4,  1818,  at  Jestrup,  Sjael- 
land,  Denmark.  He  married  Dorthea 
Hansen,  who  was  born  Feb.  2  6,  1826. 
Becoming  converts  to  "Mormonism," 


he  and  his  wife  were  baptized  and 
emigrated  to  Utah  in  18  61,  crossing 
th'e  Atlantic  in  the  ship  "Monarch  of 
the  Sea,"  which  sailed  from  Liver- 
pool, England,  May  16,  1861;  they 
crossed  the  plains  in  Samuel  A. 
Woolley's  company  which  arrived  in 
Salt  Lake  City  Sept.  2  2,  1861.  Bro. 
Nielsen,  with  his  family,  located  the 
same  month  in  Morgan  county,  where 
he  took  an  active  part  in  all  Church 
matters  from  the  beginning  and  had 
a  special  gift  as  a  peacemaker,  ren- 
dering most  efficient  service  in  the 
Ward  in  which  he  lived  in  settling 
difficulties  that  sometimes  arose 
among  the  brethren.  In  1867  he 
married  a  second  wife,  Sophia,  who 
was  born  in  Denmark  Sept.  2,  1820. 
His  first  wife  died  Nov.  16,  1868, 
and  Bro.  Nielsen  himself  passed  to 
his  final  rest  June  3,  1911.  Bro. 
Nielsen  was  a  man  of  wonderful  char- 
acter and  great  physical  strength.  At 
one  time  he  packed  a  sack  of  flour 
from  Uintah  through  Weber  canyon 
to  his  family  at  Milton,  there  being 
no    other    means    of    transit    at    that 


time,  and  his  folks  were  sadly  In 
need  of  bread.  He  always  attributed 
his  strength  to  the  fact  that  he  was 
a  strict  observer  of  the  Word  of  Wis- 
dom. His  adherence  to  this  prin- 
ciple he  often  summed  up  in  these 
words,  "I  have  never  bought  five 
cents  worth  of  tea,  coffee,  whiskey 
or  tobacco  for  myself."  He  occu- 
pied many  important  positions  in  the 
Church,  among  which  was  a  seven- 
teen years'  service  in  the  High  Coun- 
cil of  the  Morgan  Stake.  He  was 
universally  beloved  by  all  who  knew 
him,  and  for  several  years  he  trav- 
eled through  Morgan  county  as  a 
home  missionary.  By  his  first  wife, 
Dorthea  Hansen  (who  died  Nov.  16, 
18  68),  he  had  eight  children,  namely, 
Waldemar  Theodore,  born  Feb.  15, 
1854;  Matilda,  born  Oct.  23,  1855; 
Laura,  born  Jan.  30,  1858;  Joseph, 
born  Feb.  20,  18  60;  Hyrum,  born 
Dec.  10,  1861;  Emma,  born  April  16, 
1865;  Mary,  born  Sept.  23,  1866, 
and  Willard,  born  Nov.  1,  1868.  By 
his  second  wife,  Sophia,  he  had  one 
child,  namely,  Anna,  born  June  2, 
1868. 

NEVILLE,    George    A.,    Bishop    of 
the      Woodruff      Ward       (Woodruff 


Stake),  Rich  county,  Utah,  was  born 
Feb.  14,  1868,  at  Basingstoke,  Hamp- 
shire,   England,    the   son   of  William 


186 


LATTER-DAY   SAINT 


Neville  and  Elizabeth  Fisher.  He  em- 
igrated to  America  with  his  parents 
in  May,  1880;  was  baptized  in  Aug- 
ust, 1877,  by  Lorenzo  D.  Young,  in 
Basingstoke,  Hampshire,  England; 
ordained  an  Elder  in  1889;  ordained 
a  High  Priest  July  2,  1898,  by  John 
M.  Baxter,  and  set  apart  as  a  coun- 
selor to  Bishop  McKinnon  of  the 
Woodruff  Ward,  which  position  he 
held  until  Sept.  9,  1905.  After  that 
he  served  as  a  member  of  the  High 
Council  for  three  years.  He  was  or- 
dained a  Bishop  Aug.  2,  1908,  by 
Rudger  Clawson  and  set  apart  to 
preside  over  the  Woodruff  Ward, 
which  position  he  held  until  1913, 
when  he  resigned,  expecting  to  move 
to  Willard,  Box  Elder  county,  Utah. 
He  was  reinstated  as  a  member  of 
the  High  Council  of  the  Woodruff 
Stake  in  November,  ldl3,  which  posi- 
tion he  still  holds.  Bishop  Neville 
has  followed  ranching  as  his  main 
occupation  and  has  also  been  active 
in  public  affairs  generally.  He  was 
elected  on  the  Republican  ticket  for 
county  commissioner  and  served  the 
years  1915  and  1916;  he  was  re- 
nominated for  a  four-year  term,  but 
lost  out  by  the  Wilson  wave  in  the 
fall  of  1916.  In  1889  (Sept.  19th) 
Bro.  Neville  married  Selina  Hatch, 
who  bore  him  two  children,  Reva 
and  Harold.  In  1905  his  wife  died, 
and  on  Nov.  20th  of  the  same  year 
he  married  Helen  Marr  Ellis  Atkin- 
son, who  has  borne  him  three  chil- 
dren, namely,  Sarah  A.,  Stephen  El- 
lis and  Ellis  A. 

OLIVER,  Samuel,  a  Patriarch  in 
the  Cottonwood  Stake,  Salt  Lake 
county,  Utah,  was  born  Dec.  2  5,  1840, 
at  Whaddon,  Cambridgeshire,  Eng- 
land, the  son  of  William  Oliver  and 
Susan  Fletcher.  He  was  baptized 
May  7,  1860,  by  John  Jacklin,  and 
ordained  a  Deacon  soon  afterwards. 
In  1861  he  emigrated  to  Utah,  cross- 
ing the  Atlantic  in  the  ship  "Under- 
writer," and  the  plains  in  Captain  Ira 
Eldredge's  company,  which  arrived  in 
Salt  Lake  City  Sept.   15.   1861.     He 


located  in  the  Thirteenth  Ward,  Salt 
Lake  City,  and  was  ordained  an  Elder 
Nov.  30,  1861,  by  Samuel  L.  Sprague. 
In  March,  1864,  he  located  tempo- 
rarily at  Smithfield,  Cache  county; 
was  ordained  a  Seventy  by  Lyman  O. 
Littlefield,  in  1864,  and  married  Fan- 
nie Emma  Barnes  Sept.  5,  1870; 
she  was  the  daughter  of  John  S. 
Barnes  and  Jane  Lee.  This  union  has 
been  blessed  with  eight  children, 
namely,  Minnie  A.,  Samuel  William, 
Sarah  Jane,  Susan  Ada,  Lydia  May, 
Mary,  Joseph  Smith  and  John  Lee. 
With  his  family  Bro.  Oliver  moved 
to  Mill  Creek  in  April,  1873,  and  act- 
ed as  a  Teacher  until  July,  1877. 
When  the  East  Mill  Creek  Ward  was 
organized,  July  15,  1877,  he  was  or- 
dained a  High  Priest,  by  Daniel  H. 
Wells,  and  sustained  as  second  coun- 
selor to  Bishop  John  Neff.  He  held 
this  position  till  Jan.  22,  1911,  when 


he  was  sustained  as  first  counselor 
to  Bishop  Neff,  acting  thus  for  about 
a  year,  or  until  the  Ward  bishopric 
was  reorganized.  He  labored,  to- 
gether with  Bishop  John  Neff,  in  the 
bishopric  about  35  years.  Finally 
he  was  ordained  a  Patriarch,  March 
7,  1912,  by  Charles  W.  Penrose.  It 
may  here  be  mentioned  that  Elder 
Oliver  acted  as  superintendent  of  the 
Ward  Sunday  school  two  years,  was 


BIOGRAPHICAL  ENCYCLOPEDIA. 


187 


justice  of  the  peace  nine  years  and 
school  trustee  ten  years. 

OLSEN,  Christian,  a  faithful  Elder 
in  the  Church,  was  born  March  15, 
1821,  in  Christiania,  Norway,  the 
son  of  Ole  Hansen  and  Maren  Halvor- 
sen.  He  received  a  common  school 
education  and  married  Christine  Niel- 
sen Nov.  24,  1843.  Though  brought 
up  in  the  Lutheran  faith,  he,  in  early 
manhood,  discerned  the  hollow  creed 
of  that  denomination  and  took  a  dis- 
like to  "the  form  of  Godliness"  found 
in  the  State  religion,  prescribed  by 
law.  Despising  the  hypocrite,  he  nat- 
urally detested  the  sanctimonious 
cant  and  affectation  of  the  hired 
clergy,  "teaching  things  which  they 
ought  not,  for  filthy  lucre's  sake." 
Hence,  when  the  true  gospel  of  Christ 
found  him,  he,  together  with  his  wife, 
was  ready  to  embrace  it,  both  join- 
ing the  Church  of  Jesus  Christ  of 
Latter-day  Saints,  April  1,  1861. 
Bro.  Olsen  soon  became  a  zealous 
laborer  in  the  Lord's  vineyard,  do- 
ing considerable  missionary  work, 
both  in  the  city  of  Christiania  and 
outside;  and  many  a  "watery  grave," 
say  ZVzxl  feet,  through  ice  from  two 
to  three  feet  thick,  did  he  cut  for 
prospective  candidates  for  baptism, 
after  a  hard  day's  work  and  in  the 
dead  of  night.  His  own  home,  on 
Bentzebakken,  in  Christiania,  was  a 
haven  of  rest  for  the  missionaries, 
who  named  the  humble  cottage  "Lille 
Zion"  (Little  Zion).  Here  meetings 
were  held  regularly  every  week  for 
years.  Bro.  Olsen  emigrated  to  Utah 
in  1869,  leaving  Christiania  April 
19th  and  arriving  in  Salt  Lake  City 
August  8th  the  same  year,  a  passen- 
ger on  the  first  Scandinavian  immi- 
grant train  that  pulled  into  Ogden. 
He  settled  in  Santaquin,  Utah  county, 
Utah,  in  July,  1872,  and  resided 
there  continuously  until  his  death 
December  24,  1912.  He  was  the 
father  of  twelve  children  and  the  pro- 
genitor of  a  numerous  posterity.  He 
was  stauch,  firm  and  full  of  integ- 
rity,  yearned   for   justice  and   right- 


eousness, urged  caution  and  sought 
to  live  an  exemplary  life.  Being 
humble,  unobtrusive  and  of  retiring 
habits,  he  never  "blew  his  own  horn," 
hence  he  did  not  become  widely 
known,  nor  even  received  the  recog- 
nition that  many  feel  was  justly  his. 
But  to  those  acquainted  with  him 
his  name  stands  as  a  synonym  for 
precision,  rectitude  and  probity.  (C. 
L.  O.) 

OLSEN,  Christine  (born  Nielsen), 
wife  of  Christian  Olsen,  was  born 
June  19,  1823,  in  Christiania,  Nor- 
way. She  emigrated  to  Utah  from 
Norway,  in  1872,  arriving  in  Salt 
Lake  City  July  17th  of  the  same 
year,  and  proceeded  in  a  few  days 
by  team  to  Santaquin,  Utah  county, 
Utah,  where  she  died  Sept.  28,  1881, 
a  consistent  Latter-day  Saint.  She 
was  the  mother  of  ten  children,  and 
her  host  of  descendants  point  with 
pride  and  thankfulness  to  their 
worthy  progenitress.  As  an  apt 
scholar,  possessing  keen  wit,  and  be- 
ing a  deep  thinker  and  a  good  rea- 
soner,  she,  after  becoming  a  "Mor- 
mon," enthusiastically  defended  the 
truth  on  all  proper  occasions.  The 
specially  sanctified  colporteur  or  self- 
righeous  Pharisee  often  felt  rather 
uncomfortable  while  subjected  to  her 
clear-cut  arguments  when,  within, 
"the  spirit  of  God  like  a  fire  was 
burning."  In  the  winter — the  gen- 
uine Norwegian  winter — she  joyfully 
and  early  in  the  day  chopped  the  ice 
off  the  home-made  benches  and  stood 
them  on  end  by  the  five-story  "kak- 
kelovn"  (stove),  to  thaw  them  out, 
then  dry  them,  before  the  appointed 
time  for  evening  meeting  in  her 
home,  every  week;  or,  in  summer- 
time, in  that  "land  of  the  Midnight 
Sun,"  even  angels  sent  from  regions 
above  to  attend  these  spiritual  feasts 
must  have  enjoyed  the  cozy  dwelling, 
so  inviting,  the  floors  scrubbed  white 
with  sand,  and  the  atmosphere  made 
fragrant  by  scattering  about  on  the 
floor  fresh  "enebser"  (juniper) 
leaves,  a  custom  then  in  vogue,  and 


LATTER-DAY   SAINT 


by  vases  full  of  lovely  flowers, 
grown  in  her  own  garden  and  plant- 
ed by  her  own  hands.  Having  an 
excellent  ear  for  music  and  a  sweet 
melodious  voice,  she  sang  and,  o,  so 
feelingly,  so  hopefully,  so  sincerely, 
the  beautiful  songs  of  Zion.  Her 
heart  beating  for  the  cause  of  truth, 
and  her  soul  harmoniously  attuned 
for  receiving  the  needed  inspiration 
from  on  high,  the  living  of  her  re- 
ligion became  to  her  an  altogether 
natural  act.     (C.  L.  O.) 

OLSEN,  Joseph  Henry,  third 
Bishop  of  the  College  Ward  (Hyrum 
Stake),  Cache  county,  Utah,  was 
born  Oct.  13,  1867,  at  Brigham  City, 
Box  Elder  county,  Utah,  the  son  of 
James  Olsen  and  Maria  Petersen.  He 
was  baptized  in  August,  1876,  by 
J.  C.  Anderson;  ordained  a  Priest 
when  quite  young,  and  soon  after- 
wards ordained  an  Elder  by  Bishop 
Charles  O.  Dunn,  and  acted  as  a  Ward 
Teacher  for  several  years;  still  later 
he  was  ordained  a  High  Priest  by 
Peter  A.  Sorensen  and  set  apart  as 
second  counselor  to  Bishop  Charles 
O.  Dunn.  Prior  to  this  he  served  as 
the  first  secretary  in  the  Ward  Y.  M. 
M.  I.  A.  and  presided  over  that  asso- 
ciation from  1894  to  1896  and  from 
1905  to  ld07.  For  thirteen  years  he 
labored  as  a  Sunday  school  teacher 
in  the  theological  class.  In  1902-04 
he  filled  a  mission  to  Scandinavia, 
laboring  in  the  Aarhus  and  Aalborg 
conferences,  and  part  of  the  time  as 
president  of  the  Randers  branch. 
At  home  he  has  filled  a  number  of 
responsible  positions,  acted  as  deputy 
assessor  four  years,  registration 
clerk  four  years,  precinct  road  super- 
visor five  years  and  school  trustee 
four  years.  In  a  business  way  he  has 
acted  as  president  of  the  Logan  River 
and  Blacksmiths  Fork  Irrigation 
Company  four  years,  and  been  direc- 
tor in  the  Farmers'  Equity  Society 
in  Cache  county.  After  serving  faith- 
fully as  counselor  to  Bishop  Dunn, 
he  was  ordained  a  Bishop  July  20, 
lyl3,  by  George  F.  Richards,  and  set 


apart  to  preside  over  the  College 
Ward.  In  1896  (Nov.  4th)  he  mar- 
ried Elsie  Jensen  (daughter  of  Jens 
A.  Jensen  and  Else  Andreasen),  who 
was  born  Dec.  13,  1874,  at  Sorup, 
Aalborg  amt,  Denmark.  By  his  wife 
he  has  ten  children,  namely,  Joseph 
H.,  Jr.,  Lester  W.,  Elsie  W.,  Veda 
M.,  Lyman  R.  and  Lila  R.  (twins), 
Violet  B.,  Eva  M.,  Reuben  J.  and 
Daniel  J. 

OLSOX,  Erick  Lehi,  Bishop  of 
River  Heights  (Cache  Stake),  Cache 
county,  Utah,  was  born  May  25, 
1865,  at  Ving^ker,  Sweden,  the  son 
of  Lars  E.  Olson  and  Anna  Peterson. 
He  was  baptized  Dec.  2,  1881,  by  his 
father,  Lars  E.  Olson,  and  emigrated 
to  Utah  in  1883,  crossing  the  Atlantic 
ocean  in  the  steamship  "Nevada," 
which  arrived  in  New  York  July  1, 
1883.  On  his  arrival  in  Utah  he  be- 
came a  resident  of  Logan,  where  he 
was  called  to  labor  as  a  missionary 
in  the  Logan  Temple  in  1894.  He 
was  thus  engaged  two  years  and  six 
months.  In  1900  he  was  chosen  as 
a  trustee  of  the  public  schools  of 
district  No.  12,  and  served  in  a  simi- 
lar capacity  in  the  Providence  pre- 
cinct from  1905  to  1908.  When  the 
River  Heights  Ward  was  organized. 
May  4,  1908,  he  was  ordained  a  High 
Priest  and  Bishop  by  Apostle  George 
F.  Richards  and  set  apart  to  preside 
over  that  Ward,  which  position  he 
held  until  Feb.  25,  1917.  In  1893 
(April  2  7th)  Elder  Olson  married  In- 
grid  Larson,  who  has  borne  her  hus- 
band five  children,  namely,  Heber  L., 
born  Feb.  24,  1894;  Esther  I.,  born 
June  10,  1897;  Ella  F.,  born  Nov.  10, 
189d;  Anna  E.,  born  Aug.  25,  1905, 
and  Ingrid  lona,  born  Nov.  15,  1909. 
Bishop  Olson  is  by  occupation  a  con- 
tractor and  builder,  and  is  an  in- 
dustrious and  faithful  citizen  in  both 
temporal  and  spiritual  callings. 

ORME,  Charles  Alvin.  (Continued 
from  Vol.  1:546.)  Bro.  Orme  was 
baptized  and  confirmed  a  member  of 
the  Church  Oct.   16,   1878,  by  James 


BIOGRAPHICAL  ENCYCLOPEDIA. 


189 


Dunn;  he  was  ordained  a  Deacon 
Feb.  19,  1883,  by  James  Dunn;  or- 
dained a  Priest  Oct.  22,  1888,  by  Louis 
Bowen,  and  ordained  a  Seventy  Nov. 
20,  1892,  by  John  A.  Bevan.  After 
serving  as  Bishop  of  Batesville, 
Tooele  county,  Utah,  until  June,  1904, 
Bro.  Orme  was  chosen  as  second 
counselor  to  Hugh  S.  Gowans,  presi- 
dent of  the  Tooele  Stake.  This  posi- 
tion he  occupied  until  September, 
1908,  when  he  was  released  and 
called  to  preside  over  the  Australian 
Mission.  To  fill  said  mission  he  left 
home  Oct.  29,  1908,  and  returned 
Sept.  23,  1911.  At  a  special  meeting 
held  Dec.  31,  1911,  he  was  chosen 
and  set  apart  as  president  of  the 
Tooele  Stake  of  Zion  by  Apostle 
Francis  M.  Lyman,  which  position  he 
still  holds.  Bro.  Orme  is  the  father 
of  nine  children,  namely,  Charles  A., 
Golden  K.,  Sarah,  Melba,  Jean,  Elvon 
W.,  Mary,  James  F.  and  Gamnel  T. 
In  1914  Pres.  Orme  was  appointed 
chairman  of  the  extension  division 
of  the  Agricultural  College  for  Tooele 
county. 

OSGUTHORPE,    John,    a    veteran 
Elder  of  the  East  Mill  Creek  Ward, 


Osguthorpe  and  Ann  Kitson.  As  a 
boy  he  learned  the  trade  of  a  sawyer 
and  followed  that  business  in  his 
native  land.  He  married  Lydia 
Roper,  Oct.  13,  1846,  and  in  1849 
he  emigrated  to  America  and  lo- 
cated in  Philadelphia,  where  he  be- 
came a  convert  to  "Mormonism"  and 
was  baptized  in  1852.  True  to  the 
natural  instinct  of  a  Latter-day 
Saint,  he  prepared  to  migrate  to 
Utah,  which  he  did  the  following 
year,  arriving  in  Salt  Lake  City  Sept. 
2,  1853.  Locating  at  the  mouth  of 
Mill  Creek  canyon,  he  took  an  active 
part  in  the  saw-mill  business.  Dur- 
ing his  busy  career  as  a  Church 
worker  he  was  ordained  a  Seventy 
and  labored  as  a  Ward  chorister  a 
number  of  years  in  the  East  Mill 
Creek  Ward.  He  passed  to  his  final 
rest  April  13,  1884,  having  left  a 
record  which  made  him  universally 
respected  wherever  known  for  his 
strict  honesty  and  his  universal 
benevolence.  He  lived  and  died  a 
faithful  Latter-day  Saint. 

OSGrXHORPE,  Lydia  Roper,  wife 
of  John  Osguthorpe,  was  born  Feb. 
4,     1828,     at     Sheffield,     Yorkshire, 


Salt  Lake  county,  Utah,  was  born  England,  the  daughter  of  Abel  Roper 
March  10,  1823,  at  Sheffield,  York-  and  Sarah  Mosley.  She  became  the 
shire,   England,   the   son   of   Thomas    wife    of    John    Osguthorpe    Oct.    13, 


190 


LATTER-DAY   SAINT 


1846,  and  emigrated  with  her  hus- 
band to  America  in  1849  and  to 
Utah  in  1853.  She  remained  a  true 
and  faithful  helpmate  to  her  hus- 
band as  long  as  he  lived,  spent  the 
last  2  9  years  of  her  life  as  a  widow, 
and  died  March  2,  1915.  She  was 
the  mother  of  eleven  children,  name- 
ly, Sarah  A.,  Emma,  Priscilla,  Han- 
nah, John  H.,  Lydia,  Thomas,  Abel 
R.,  Joseph,  Selina  and  Irvin  R. 

OVIATT,  Henry  Herman,  a  faith- 
ful Church  worker  and  pioneer,  was 
born  June  17,  1832,  in  Pennsylvania. 
Becoming  a  convert  to  "Mormonism" 
he  was  baptized  in  1847;  was  or- 
dained a  Priest  by  James  Allred,  in 
1853;  ordained  a  Seventy  about  1857 
and  later  ordained  a  High  Priest. 
While  very  young  he  moved  with  his 
parents  to  Kirtland,  Ohio,  in  1838, 
and  thence  went  to  Nauvoo,  HI.,  in 
18  43,  where  he  first  met  the  Pro- 
phet Joseph  Smith.  During  the  exo- 
dus, in  1846,  he  came  West  with  the 
Church,  and  in  1848  drove  a  team  for 
Heber  C.  Kimball  as  far  west  as  the 
head  of  the  Sweetwater,  but  returned 
to  the  Missouri  river  the  same  year. 
In  1851,  together  with  his  parents, 
he  migrated  to  Utah,  arriving  in  Salt 
Lake  City  Oct.  5,  1851.  The  next 
year  he  located  at  Farmington,  Davis 
county,  and  went  out  to  Green  river 
where  he  helped  to  build  a  ferry  boat. 
In  the  fall  of  1852  he  settled  in  San- 
pete valley,  where  Spring  City  now 
stands,  and  here  he  married  Sally 
Ray  Whitlock  in  1853.  This  year  the 
Indians  drove  all  the  settlers  away 
from  their  location  and  compelled 
them  to  move  to  Manti,  and  during 
the  winter  of  1853-54  he  did  con- 
siderable guard  duty  at  Manti.  In 
1854  he  became  one  of  the  first 
settlers  of  Ephraim.  In  1864  he  was 
called  to  assist  in  the  settling  of 
Circle  valley,  and  while  residing  at 
that  place  he  acted  as  treasurer  of 
Piute  county.  In  18  6  6  the  people 
were  driven  out  of  Circle  valley  by 
the  Indians,  when  Bro.  Oviatt  re- 
turned to  Ephraim,  where  he  took  an 


active  part  in  the  Black  Hawk  war, 
and  resided  there  until  1883.  On 
one  occasion,  while  on  an  expedition 
against  the  Indians  to  recover  some 
horses  that  had  been  stolen  by  the 
savages,  four  horses  were  shot,  his 
being  one  of  the  four.  In  1883  Elder 
Oviatt  settled  on  the  San  Rafael 
river,  in  Emery  county,  where  he  re- 
sided about  one  year,  but  not  being 
able  to  control  the  water  of  the 
stream,  he  moved  to  Huntington  the 
next  year.  Being  one  of  the  men  who 
located  the  Cleveland  canal,  he 
changed  his  residence  in  1888  to 
Cleveland,  where  he  has  acted  as 
president  of  the  Cleveland  Canal 
Company,  served  ten  years  as  a 
member  of  the  canal  board,  acted 
as  school  trustee,  been  postmaster 
for  seven  years,  and  otherwise  helped 
to  build  up  the  place.  In  1913  he 
moved  to  Elmo,  Emery  county,  Utah, 
where  he  still  resides.  Bro.  Oviatt 
is  the  father  of  nine  children,  seven 
of  whom  are  still  alive.  His  wife 
died  in  1905. 

OVIATT,  George  Herman,  Bishop 
of  the  Elmo  Ward  (Emery  Stake), 
Emery  county,  Utah,  was  born  July 


14,  1874,  at  Ephraim,  Sanpete  coun- 
ty, Utah,  the  son  of  Henry  H.  Oviatt 
and  Annie  C.  Madsen.     He  was  bap- 


BIOGRAPHICAL   ENCYCLOPEDIA. 


lyi 


tized  in  1883  and  ordained  to  the 
lesser  Priesthood  when  a  boy.  About 
1898  he  was  ordained  an  Elder  by 
Bishop  Lars  P.  Overson;  ordained  a 
Seventy  April  17,  1905,  by  Joseph 
W.  McMurrin,  and  ordained  a  High 
Priest  by  James  E.  Talmage  May  11, 
1913.  In  the  early  days  of  Cleve- 
land he  acted  as  second  counselor  and 
treasurer  in  the  Ward  Y.  M.  M.  I.  A. 
From  February,  1906,  to  August, 
1907,  he  acted  as  second  assistant 
in  the  Cleveland  Sunday  school.  Af- 
ter the  latter  date  he  acted  as  super- 
intendent until  June,  1912,  when  he 
was  set  apart  as  presiding  Elder  of 
the  Elmo  branch,  acting  in  that  ca- 
pacity until  May  11,  1913,  when  he 
was  ordained  a  High  Priest  and 
Bishop  and  set  apart  to  preside  over 
the  Elmo  Ward  which  was  then  or- 
ganized. While  a  Seventy  he  acted 
as  one  of  the  presidents  of  the  81st 
quorum  of  Seventy.  He  has  followed 
different  occupations  with  sheep, 
cattle,  coal  mining  and  farming.  In 
1898  (May  25th)  he  married  Eliza 
M.  Johnson  in  the  Manti  Temple. 
This  marriage  has  been  blessed  with 
seven  children,  namely,  Farrell,  Le- 
roy,  Edna  Eliza,  Vivian  Elvina,  Elga 
Iva,  George  H.  and  Talmage  Omer. 

OWENS,  James  Clark,  Bishop  of 
the  Woodruff  Ward  (Snowflake 
Stake),  Navajo  county,  Arizona,  was 
born  July  7,  1832,  in  Jackson  county, 
Mo.,  the  son  of  James  Clark  Owens 
and  Abigail  Cordelia  Burr.  With  his 
parents  he  passed  through  the  trials 
and  drivings  of  the  Saints,  first  in 
Missouri  and  afterwards  in  Illinois. 
He  was  baptized  in  18  43  in  Hancock 
county.  111.,  attended  the  conference 
at  Nauvoo,  Aug.  8,  1844,  and  remem- 
bered how  Brigham  Young  was  trans- 
formed in  the  eyes  of  the  people. 
With  his  father's  family  he  located 
temporarily  at  Mt.  Pisgah,  Iowa,  at 
the  time  of  the  exodus  in  184  6. 
From  this  point  his  father  started 
out  in  search  of  work,  but  was  caught 
in  a  severe  storm  and  badly  frozen. 
He  died  from  the  effects  of  this  ex- 


posure, leaving  his  widowed  wife  and 
children  as  follows:  Horace  Burr 
Owens,  James  Clark  (the  subject  of 
this  sketch),  Amelia  and  Julia.  The 
family  crossed  the  plains  in  Captain 
Hodge's  ox  company,  in  1853.  Bro. 
Owens  wintered  at  Provo,  Utah  coun- 
ty, and  early  in  185  4  moved  to  Fill- 
more where  he  quarried  rock  for  the 
State  house.  In  January,  1856,  he 
married  Lucretia  P.  Robinson,  and 
the  following  year  cut  stone  for  the 
Salt  Lake  Temple;  he  did  the  same 
labor  also  in  1870-77.  He  also 
worked  as  a  stone  mason  on  the  St. 
George  Temple  in  1876;  was  or- 
dained an  Elder  April  4,  1866,  by 
Samuel  L.  Sprague;  ordained  a  High 
Priest  March  9,  1869,  by  Erastus 
Snow  and  served  as  a  High  Coun- 
cilor; served  as  sheriff  a  number  of 
years  in  Southern  Utah  and  was  cap- 
tain in  the  militia  during  the  Walker 
and  Black  Hawk  wars.  In  November, 
1878,  he  moved  to  Arizona  and  the 
following  year  was  ordained  a  Bishop 
and  set  apart  to  preside  over  the 
Woodruff  Ward  by  Wilford  Wood- 
ruff. Together  with  other  settlers 
who  suffered  the  loss  of  their  dams 
and  crops  for  a  number  of  years,  he 
had  to  find  employment  on  the  At- 
chison, Topeka  &  Santa  Fe  Railroad 
to  earn  bread  for  his  family.  After 
serving  as  Bishop  at  Woodruff  about 
twelve  years  he  removed  to  Fillmore, 
Utah,  where  he  remained  four  years 
and  then  returned  to  Woodruff,  Ari- 
zona, where  he  died  of  heart  failure 
Feb.  1,  1901.  Bishop  Owens  was  the 
father  of  twelve  children  and  was 
survived  by  his  wife,  Lucretia  P.  Rob- 
ison  Owens,  daughter  of  Joseph  Robi- 
son  and  Lucretia  Hancock.  The 
children  are  the  following:  James 
Clark  (now  Bishop  of  Showlow,  Ari- 
zona), Marion  Alfred,  Clarence  Ed- 
ward, Zina,  Franklin  Horace,  and 
Adelia. 

PARKER,  Gilbert,  a  High  Coun- 
cilor in  the  North  Davis  Stake,  Davis 
county,  Utah,  was  born  Nov.  17,  1857, 
at   Ogden,   Utah,   the  son  of  George 


192 


LATTER-DAY   SAINT 


Parker  and  Mary  Lewis.  He  was 
baptized  April  2  3,  18  67,  by  John  Jor- 
dan; ordained  an  Elder  in  March, 
1881,  by  Alma  Flinders;  ordained  a 
High  Priest  in  December,  1895,  by 
George  Q.  Cannon,  and  at  the  same 


time  set  apart  as  first  counselor  to 
Bishop  A.  C.  Christensen  of  the  South 
Hooper  Ward.  He  held  that  position 
until  June  12,  1898,  when  he  was 
ordained  a  Bishop  by  Francis  M.  Ly- 
man and  set  apart  to  preside  in  the 
South  Hooper  Ward.  He  held  this 
position  until  June  20,  1915,  when 
he  was  set  apart  as  a  High  Councilor 
by  Charles  W.  Penrose.  Among  the 
positions  Bro.  Parker  has  held  may 
be  mentioned  that  for  several  years 
he  acted  as  president  of  the  6th 
quorum  of  Elders  in  the  Davis  Stake; 
served  as  assistant  superintendent  of 
the  South  Hooper  Ward  Sunday 
school;  acted  as  Ward  teacher  about 
twenty  years,  and  was  constable  four 
years.  In  1880  (Dec.  6th)  he  mar- 
ried Louise  Roman  (daughter  of 
Davif/.  C.  Roman  and  Susannah  Rob- 
erts), born  March  2,  1859,  at  Provo, 
Utah.  This  marriage  has  been 
blessed  with  eleven  children,  four 
boys  and  seven  girls. 

PARKER,  Joseph  Faulkner,  Bishop 
of  Joseph  Ward,  Sevier  county,  Utah, 


was  born  April  7,  1841,  in  Palmyra, 
Mo.,  the  son  of  Thomas  Bryant  Par- 
ker and  Martha  Ann  Nelson.  He  emi- 
grated with  his  mother  to  Utah  in 
1852,  his  father  having  died  at  Bluff 
City,  Iowa,  prior  to  his  emigration. 
While  residing  temporarily  with  his 
mother  in  Spring  City,  Sanpete  coun- 
ty, Utah,  he  was  baptized  by  James 
Allred.  Subsequently  he  lived  in 
Provo,  Utah  county,  and  Heber  City, 
Wasatch  county.  In  1866  he  took 
part  in  the  Black  Hawk  war  as  a 
scout  and  cavalryman.  He  was  or- 
dained an  Elder  and  subsequently  a 
Seventy  at  Joseph,  Sevier  county,  by 
William  Palmer,  and  filled  a  mission 
to  the  Northwestern  States  in  1887- 
88.  He  married  Mary  E.  Ross,  June 
3  0,  1861;  she  was  born  March  4, 
1845,  in  Illinois,  the  daughter  of 
Thomas  Ross  and  Rachel  Smith.  She 
became  the  mother  of  eleven  chil- 
dren. In  1889  Bro.  Parker  married 
Adelia  Cooley,  who  was  born  March 
17,  18  67,  at  Kanosh,  Utah.  She  bore 
her  husband  six  childreii.  In  1896 
Bro.    Parker    was    ordained    a    High 


Priest  and  Bishop  by  Francis  M.  Ly- 
man and  set  apart  to  preside  over  the 
Joseph  Ward,  which  position  he  held 
for  ten  years.  His  second  wife  died 
in  1901  and  his  first  wife  in  1908, 
and  in  1912   (Aug.  12th)  he  married 


BIOGRAPHICAL  ENCYCLOPEDIA. 


193 


Ellen  Brown  (daughter  of  Richard 
Brown  and  Helen  Blemyre),  who  was 
born  in  St.  Louis,  Mo.  By  his  first 
and  second  wives  Bishop  Parker  be- 
came the  father  of  seventeen  chil- 
dren. At  the  present  time  he  has  130 
children  and  grandchildren  and  a 
number  of  great  grandchildren.  Bro. 
Parker's  occupation  throughout  most 
of  his  life  has  been  that  of  a  farmer 
and  stockraiser. 

PARKINSON,     Timothy     Henry, 

Bishop    of   Piano    (Fremont    Stake), 


Madison  county,  Idaho,  was  born 
March  3,  1858,  at  Grantsville,  Tooele 
county,  Utah,  the  son  of  Charles  Gra- 
ham Parkinson  and  Hannah  Clark. 
He  was  baptized  in  1866  by  Alma  H. 
Hale  and  ordained  to  offices  in  the 
Aaronic  Priesthood  when  a  boy.  He 
was  ordained  a  Seventy  Nov.  21, 
1911,  by  Joseph  W.  McMurrin;  or- 
dained a  High  Priest  and  Bishop 
April  2  6,  1914,  by  Apostle  Rudger 
Claw^son,  and  filled  a  mission  to  the 
Northwestern  States  in  1914.  Bishop 
Parkinson  married  Priscilla  Jane 
Williams  March  3,  1881;  she  was 
born  at  Coventry,  Warwickshire, 
England,  in  1861,  and  baptized  Oct. 
13,  1870.  This  marriage  has  been 
blessed  with  eleven  children,  seven 
boys    and    four    girls,    namely,    John 

Vol.  III.  No.  13. 


Henry,  Thomas  Franklin,  Esther 
Jane,  Hannah  Priscilla,  Charles  Les- 
lie, Sedlie  Williams,  James  Ezra, 
Clarence  Cleone,  Joseph  Earl,  Sarah 
Luana  and  Eva  Leone.  Bishop  Park- 
inson resided  in  Utah  until  18  83, 
when  he  moved  to  Idaho,  and  at 
present  resides  on  Egin  Bench,  Madi- 
son county. 

PATTEN,  William  Neuman,  Bishop 
of  the  Moore  Ward  (Blackfoot 
Stake),  Blaine  county,  Idaho,  was 
born  May  31,  1877,  at  Rockville, 
Washington  county,  Utah,  the  son  of 
David  Wyman  and  Sarah  Catherine 
Brown.  He  was  baptized  May  31, 
1885,  by  Hosea  Stout,  moved  from 
Rockville  in  1889  to  Mt.  Carmel, 
Kane  county.  In  the  spring  of  1890 
he  moved  to  Luna,  New  Mexico;  was 
ordained  a  Deacon  in  1901  and 
served  as  librarian  in  a  Deacons' 
quorum;  took  a  missionary  course  of 
eight  months  in  the  winter  of  1902- 
1903  at  St.  Johns  Academy,  Arizona; 
was  ordained  a  Priest  by  Manuel 
Thompson,  in  December,  1902,  and 
in  the  spring  of  1904  he  moved  by 
team  to  Moore,  arriving  there  in  the 


fall  of  that  year.  He  was  ordained 
an  Elder,  by  Elias  S.  Kimball,  April 
23,  1905,  and  set  apart  as  second 
counselor  to  Andrew  C.  Jenson,  pres- 
January,  1919 


194 


LATTER-DAY   SAINT 


ident  of  the  Moore  branch.  In  the 
fall  of  1905  he  was  called  on  a  mis- 
sion to  the  Southern  States;  after 
laboring  in  the  Middle  Tennessee 
conference  he  was  chosen  to  preside 
over  said  conference  Nov.  9,  1906, 
and  held  that  position  till  Nov.  9, 
1907,  when  he  was  released  to  return 
home.  His  mission  was  a  most  suc- 
cessful one.  In  1909  (Dec.  22nd)  he 
married  Maud  R.  Kidd,  of  Manches- 
ter, Tenn. ;  she  has  borne  her  hus- 
band four  children,  namely,  Sivilla 
M.,  Orall  Wanda,  William  N.,  and 
Phebe  Ann.  In  October,  1910,  Bro, 
Patten  was  chosen  as  Bishop  of  the 
Moore  Ward,  Blackfoot  Stake,  being 
ordained  a  High  Priest  and  Bishop 
Nov.  13,  1910,  by  Apostle  Hyrum  M. 
Smith.  Bishop  Patten's  main  occu- 
pation in  life  has  been  that  of  a 
farmer. 

PETERSEN,  Hans  Therkild,  Bishop 
of  the  Trenton  Ward  (Benson  Stake), 
Cache  county,  Utah,  was  born  Dec.  9, 
1867,  at  Ordrup,  Copenhagen  amt, 
Denmark,  the  son  of  Hans  J.  Peter- 
sen and  Christine  Bergesen.  His  par- 
ents having  embraced  "Mormonism," 
he  emigrated  to  Utah  with  them  in 
1870,  and  was  baptized  at  Smith- 
field  in  July,  18  7  6,  by  Alonzo  G.  Bar- 
ber. He  was  ordained  successively 
to  the  offices  of  Deacon,  Teacher, 
Priest,  Elder,  Seventy,  High  Priest 
and  Bishop.  After  receiving  a  com- 
mon school  education,  Bro.  Petersen 
attended  the  Agricultural  College  at 
Logan  and  acted  successively  as  sec- 
retary of  a  Deacons'  quorum,  a 
Teachers'  quorum  and  a  Y.  M.  M.  I. 
A.;  he  also  acted  as  second  assistant 
superintendent  and  secretary  of  the 
Smithfield  Sunday  school  and  as  a 
counselor  in  the  Ward  Y.  M.  M.  I.  A. 
In  1897-98  he  filled  a  mission  to 
Scandinavia,  laboring  in  the  Aarhus 
conference,  Denmark.  After  his  re- 
turn he  was  ordained  a  High  Priest 
by  Samuel  Roskelley  and  set  apart 
as  the  first  secretary  of  the  Benson 
Stake  High  Priests'  quorum.  He  was 
ordained  a  Bishop  by  George  Albert 


Smith  in  190  7  and  was  appointed  to 
preside  over  the  Trenton  Ward.  Bro. 
Petersen  is  at  present  the  manager 
of  the  Trenton-Clarkston  Flouring 
Mills.  While  a  resident  of  Smith- 
field  he  acted  as  city  recorder,  city 
councilman  and  mayor.  During  his 
term  as  mayor  a  fine  water  system 
was  introduced  in  Smithfield.  Bishop 
Petersen  married  Selma  Ronnekilde 
Sorensen,  Sept.  20,  1899,  which 
marriage  has  been  blessed  with  six 
children,  three  boys  and  three  girls. 

PETERSON,  La\vrence,  Bishop  of 
the  Barnwell  Ward,  Alberta,  Canada, 
was  born  April  12,  1873,  at  Provo, 
Utah  county,  Utah,  the  son  of  Anders 


Petersen  and  Eliza  Krogh.  He  was 
baptized  May  13,  1882.  by  John  G. 
Jones,  ordained  a  Teacher  Feb.  11, 
1891,  by  Charles  Conrade;  ordained 
a  Priest  March  14,  1891,  by  A.  M. 
Wild;  ordained  an  Elder  Nov.  5, 
18  93,  by  Charles  Conrade;  ordained 
a  Seventy  and  set  apart  for  a  mission 
to  the  Southern  States  by  Apostle 
Heber  J.  Grant  Sept.  11,  1896.  He 
labored  two  and  a  half  years  in  the 
South  Alabama  conference  and  bap- 
tized fifty  persons,  blessed  fifty  chil- 
dren, held  many  meetings,  and  dis- 
tributed a  great  number  of  books 
and  tracts.  During  his  mission  he 
walked   7,500   miles.      Bro.   Peterson 


BIOGRAPHICAL  ENCYCLOPEDIA. 


195 


married  Minnie  Bell  Golsan,  Dec.  20, 
1899,  in  the  Salt  Lake  Temple.  As 
a  result  of  this  marriage  the  follow- 
ing children  were  born:  Beulah, 
born  Sept.  29,  1900;  Erma  Bell,  born 
April  12,  1902;  Kenneth  L.,  born 
Oct.  31,  1903;  Myrtle,  born  March 
27,  1905;  Winnie  May,  born  April 
1,  1906,  and  Albert  Harold,  born 
July  9,  1908.  His  wife  died  Dec.  9, 
1908,  and  he  married  Lucy  Aspinwall 
Dec.  22,  1909,  in  the  Salt  Lake  Tem- 
ple. Bishop  Peterson  resided  at 
Provo  until  November,  1903,  when 
he  moved  to  Raymond,  Alberta,  Can- 
ada, and  in  1909  he  changed  his  res- 
idence to  Barnwell,  Alberta,  Canada. 
He  has  always  been  a  diligent  Church 
worker  and  has  labored  as  secretary 
and  president  of  a  Ward  Y.   M.   M. 

1.  A.,  Ward  Sunday  school  superin- 
tendent, and  secretary  and  first  as- 
sistant Stake  superintendent,  and  at 
present  acts  as  Bishop  of  the  Barn- 
well Ward. 

PETTY,  Lewis  James,  Bishop  of 
Swan  Lake  (Portneuf  Stake),  Ban- 
nock county,  Idaho,  was  born  Nov.  3, 
1879,  at  Richmond,  Cache  county, 
Utah,  the  son  of  Lewis  James  Petty 
and  Alvira  Lavona  Hendricks.  He 
was  baptized  May  3,  1888,  by  A.  N. 
Clements;  ordained  a  Deacon  when  a 
boy,  by  Lewis  J.  Petty;  ordained  a 
Teacher  Feb.  14,  18  97,  by  his  father; 
ordained  an  Elder  in  18  99,  by  his 
father;  ordained  a  Seventy  Sept.  6, 
1899,  by  Rulon  S.  Wells;  ordained 
a  High  Priest  and  Bishop  June  11, 
1911,  and  set  apart  to  preside  over 
the  Swan  Lake  Ward.  In  1899-1901 
he  filled  a  mission  to  the  Eastern 
States,  laboring  in  the  East  Penn- 
sylvania conference.  He  married 
Edith  Chella  Howell,  April  24,  1907, 
in  the  Logan  Temple. 

PHILLIPS,  Edward,  a  prominent 
Elder  in  the  Church,  was  born  April 

2,  1813,  in  Oxenhall,  Gloucestershire, 
England,  the  son  of  William  Phillips 
and  Mary  Ann  Presdee.  At  the  age 
of  twelve  years   he   was   left  to   the 


care  of  his  mother.  Edward  worked 
with  his  father  on  a  farm  at  Credley 
in  Hereforshire  and  also  learned  the 
blacksmithing  trade.  Like  his 
mother,  he  was  religiously  inclined 
and  associated  himself  with  the 
United  Brethren  under  Father  Thom- 
as Kingston.  They  remained  mem- 
bers of  that  congregation  until  the 
event  of  the  "Mormon"  Elders  into 
the  neighborhood.  Edward  was  the 
only  male  member  of  his  father's 
family  to  receive  the  gospel.  He 
first  heard  Wilford  Woodruff  preach 
at  Ridgeway  Cross,  in  March,  1840, 
and  was  baptized  by  that  Apostle  a 
few  days  later.     His  mother  and  his 


sister,  Susan,  followed  him  into  the 
Church.  Almost  immediately  he  was 
ordained  a  Priest  and  placed  in 
charge  of  two  branches  (Ashfield  and 
Crocrut)  in  Worcestershire.  In  the 
fall  of  the  same  year  he  was  ordained 
an  Elder  and,  in  company  with  Elder 
John  Gailey,  preached  in  the  forest  of 
Dean,  Gloucestershire,  England.  In 
1841  he  emigrated  to  America,  sail- 
ing from  Bristol  for  Quebec,  Aug.  8, 
1841,  with  a  company  of  about  one 
hundred  Saints,  under  Elder  Thomas 
Richardson.  By  way  of  Montreal, 
Niagara  Falls,  Buffalo  and  Chicago 
they  reached  Nauvoo,  111.,  in  Octo- 
ber,  1841.      Here  Elder  Phillips  be- 


196 


LATTER-DAY   SAINT 


came  well  acquainted  with  the  Pro- 
phet Joseph.  He  quarried  rock  for 
the  Nauvoo  Temple  and  became  ac- 
quainted with  Miss  Hannah  Simmons, 
who  became  his  wife  Aug.  2,  1842. 
Bro.  Phillips  was  a  member  of  the 
Nauvoo  Legion,  and  took  part  in  the 
movement  of  that  body  during  the 
perilous  times  at  Nauvoo.  During 
the  exodus,  in  1846,  the  Phillips 
family  came  West,  and  after  residing 
temporarily  at  Council  Point,  they 
came  to  the  Valley  in  1849.  In  the 
spring  of  1850  Bro.  Phillips  became 
the  first  settler  on  Kays  creek  (now 
Kaysville),  which  place  he  helped 
to  survey.  He  participated  in  the 
"general  move"  of  the  Saints  south 
in  1858,  but  soon  afterwards  re- 
turned to  Kaysville,  where  he  acted 
as  first  counselor  to  Bishop  William 
Kay  from  1850  to  1856.  It  was  at 
a  meeting  held  in  his  home  that  the 
Kaysville  Ward  was  organized.  He 
helped  to  build  the  first  meeting 
house  at  Kaysville  (which  still 
stands,  in  good  condition),  and  also 
the  wall  which  was  built  around  a 
quarter  section  of  land,  for  protection 
against  Indians.  Bro.  Phillips  was 
chosen  president  of  the  local  High 
Priests  Feb.  27,  1859.  This  office 
he  held  up  to  the  day  of  his  death, 
which  occurred  at  Kaysville,  Dec.  1, 
1896.  At. the  time  of  his  death  he 
was  the  oldest  resident  of  Kaysville. 
(See  History  of  Utah,  by  Orson  F. 
Whitney,  Vol.  IV.,  page  385). 

PIXTOX,  Joseph  Cooper,  Bishop 
of  Cove  Ward  (Union  Stake),  Union 
county,  Oregon,  was  born  Dec.  18, 
1858,  in  Salt  Lake  City,  Utah,  the 
son  of  Robert  Pixton  and  Elizabeth 
Cooper.  He  removed  with  his  par- 
ents to  Taylorsville,  Salt  Lake  coun- 
ty, when  three  months  old.  Here 
he  lived  until  he  was  fourteen  years 
of  age,  when  he  accompanied  his 
fathern  to  Southern  Utah,  where  he 
remained  about  ten  years.  In  1882 
(Oct.  19th)  he  married  Miss  Emma 
Esther  Ashby,  in  the  St.  George  Tem- 
ple.    Returning  to  Salt  Lake  county. 


he  resided  with  his  family  in  Tay- 
lorsville 21  years,  during  which  time 
six  children  (Emma  Alpha,  Katy 
Elena,  Joseph  Cooper,  Thelma,  Rich- 
ard Ashby  and  Erastus  Snow)  were 
born  to  him.  He  also  filled  two  mis- 
sions to  Great  Britain,  laboring  in  the 
Liverpool,  London,  Nottingham  and 
Scottish  conferences.  He  filled  his 
first  mission  in  1887-1889  and  the 
second  in  1899-1901.  Prior  to  this 
(in  the  spring  of  1876)  Bro.  Pixton 
was  ordained  an  Elder  in  the  St. 
George  Temple;  he  was  ordeined  a 
Seventy  in  18  89,  by  Brigham  H.  Rob- 
erts, removed  to  Cove,  Union  county, 
Oregon,   in  June,   1903,  and  was  or- 


dained a  High  Priest  in  July,  1903, 
by  Leonard  J.  Jordan,  and  served  as 
second  counselor  to  Bishop  John  A. 
Abbott  of  the  Cove  Ward.  He  was 
chosen  and  ordained  a  Bishop  March 
22,  1909,  by  Anthony  W.  Ivins. 
Bishop  Pixton  has  served  four  terms 
in  the  town  council  of  Cove.  He  is  a 
farmer  and  stockraiser  by  avocation, 

PLOWIVIAX,  John  Jacobsen,  a  pres- 
ident of  the  17th  quorum  of  Seventy, 
was  born  Dec.  25,  1867,  at  Mantau, 
Box  Elder  county,  Utah,  the  son  of 
John  J.  Plowman  and  Mette  Marie 
Lauritzen.  He  was  baptized  July  5, 
1877,  by  A.  G.  Barber,  and  married 


BIOGRAPHICAL   ENCYCLOPEDIA. 


197 


Mary  C.  Andersen,  Nov.  17,  1887; 
she  has  borne  her  husband  eight  chil- 
dren, namely,  Mary  Anita,  Sidonie, 
Bessie  Marie,  John  Dewey,  James 
Gerald,  Ronald  Oliver,  Eva  Laurinda 
and  Ruel  Andersen.     Bro.   Plowman 


was  ordained  a  Seventy  by  Seymour 
B.  Young,  Oct.  14,  1892,  and  filled 
a  mission  to  Scandinavia  in  1893-94, 
laboring  in  the  Aarhus  conference, 
chiefly  in  the  Randers  branch.  Later 
he  filled  a  second  mission  to  Scan- 
dinavia, during  which  he  presided 
over  the  Aalborg  conference.  After 
his  return  home  he  was  called  to 
labor  in  the  Smithfield  Sunday  school 
and  also  presided  over  the  Ward  Y. 
M.  M.  I.  A.  He  was  set  apart  as  a 
president  of  the  17th  quorum  of 
Seventy  Feb.  13,  1907.  Bro.  Plow- 
man is  also  taking  an  active  part  in 
secular  matters.  During  the  past 
four  years  he  has  acted  as  a  member 
of  the  Smithfield  city  council  and  is 
vice-president  of  the  Logan  &  North- 
ern Canal  Company. 

PRICE,  Brigham  Francis,  Bishop 
of  the  Mill  Creek  Ward,  Salt  Lake 
county,  Utah,  was  born  April  15, 
1866,  in  Mill  Creek,  Utah,  the  son 
of  John  W.  Price  and  Isabella  Pratt. 
He  was  baptized  Nov.  2i,  1876,  by 
John  Morgan;   ordained  successively 


to  the  offices  of  Teacher  and  Priest; 
ordained  an  Elder  Nov.  13,  1887,  by 
John  Jacklin  and  ordained  a  Seventy 
March  16,  1898,  by  J.  Golden  Kim- 
ball. He  acted  as  Stake  aid  in  the 
Y.  M.  M.  I.  A.  about  two  years  and 
also  as  president  of  the  Mill  Creek 
Ward  Y.  M.  M.  I.  A.  until  he  was 
called  on  his  first  mission  in  1S98. 
He  also  acted  as  a  counselor  in  the 
presidency  of  an  Elders  quorum  and 
as  superintendent  of  the  Mill  Creek 
Sunday  school,  and  in  1905  he  la- 
bored as  a  special  missionary  in  the 
Granite  Stake  six  months.  He  filled 
two  missions,  one  to  the  Southern 
States  in  1898-1900  (laboring  part 
of  the  time  as  president  of  the  Ken- 
tucky conference),  and  one  to  Great 
Britain  in  190  6-1907.  He  was  re- 
leased from  this  latter  mission  to 
come  home  (leading  a  company  of 
emigrating  Saints)  and  take  charge 
as  Bishop  of  the  Mill  Creek  Ward, 
to  which  position  he  was  ordained 
May  3,  1907,  by  John  R.  Winder; 
he  held  that  office  until  his  death. 
Bishop  Price  was  a  singularly  active 


man  in  Church  work.  All  affairs  of 
his  Ward  enlisted  his  interest  and 
aid,  and  the  auxiliary  organizations, 
as  well  as  the  Ward  organizations 
proper,  profited  greatly  through  his 
active  and  constant  support.     He  was 


198 


LATTER-DAY   SAINT 


a  successful  farmer,  dairyman  and 
sheep  raiser,  and  in  his  business  deal- 
ings, social  associations  and  Church 
activities  won  a  wide  circle  of  friends 
by  his  geniality,  sterling  manliness 
and  broad-minded  viewpoint,  coupled 
with  generosity  and  kindness  toward 
all  who  were  in  need  of  aid  and 
sympathy.  In  1887  (Dec.  14th)  he 
married  Annie  M.  Hansen  (daughter 
of  Jens  Hansen  and  Bertha  Jorgen- 
sen)  who  was  born  Feb.  26,  1865, 
in  Salt  Lake  City.  Having  no  chil- 
dren of  their  own  Bishop  Price  and 
wife  raised  two  adopted  children. 
Earl  F.  and  May.  Bishop  Price  died 
Jan.  30,  1914,  highly  respected  by  all 
who  knew  him. 

POND,  Joseph  LeRoy,  second  coun- 
selor in  the  presidency  of  the  Ban- 
nock Stake  of  Zion,  Bannock  county, 
Idaho,   was  born   Sept.    16,   1881,   at 


ent,  later  as  superintendent  and  was 
president  of  the  Ward  Y.  M.  M.  I.  A. 
two  years.  He  again  acted  as  super- 
intendent of  the  Sunday  school  from 
1907  to  1916.  He  was  chosen  as 
second  counselor  to  Pres.  Wm.  H. 
Mendenhall  of  the  Bannock  Stake 
May  21,  1916.  In  1905  (June  28th) 
Bro.  Pond  married  Jenetta  Bernhisel 
(daughter  of  John  M.  Bernhisel  and 
Henrietta  Harris)  who  was  born  Jan. 
9,  1882,  at  Lewiston,  Cache  county, 
Utah.  This  marriage  has  been 
blessed  with  one  child  (Grace)  who 
was  born  May  7,  1909.  Bro.  Pond 
received  a  good  education  and  gradu- 
ated from  the  B.  Y.  College  at  Logan 
in  1902.  Farming  and  stockraising 
have  been  his  principal  occupations 
in  life. 

POND,  Zera  Whittle,  third  Bishop 
of  the  Bench  "Ward  (Bannock  Stake), 


Richmond,  Cache  county,  Utah,  the 
son  of  Joseph  T.  Pond  and  Amanda 
Hendricks.  He  was  baptized  when 
nine  years  of  age  by  Moroni  Stocks; 
ordained  a  Deacon  when  quite  young 
and  afterwards  ordained  an  Elder; 
ordained  a  High  Priest  in  1905  by 
Jos.  T.  Pond  and  acted  as  second 
counselor  to  Bishop  Walter  Hogan 
from  1905  to  1^07;  he  also  acted  as 
assistant  Sunday  school  superintend- 


Bannock  county,  Idaho,  was  born 
Sept.  15,  1890,  at  Lewiston,  Cache 
county,  Utah,  the  son  of  Brigham 
Pond  and  Katherine  Whittle.  He 
was  baptized  Sept.  15,  1908,  by  Jos. 
Cole;  ordained  successively  to  the 
offices  of  Deacon,  Teacher,  Priest 
and  Elder;  ordained  a  Seventy  in 
1913  by  Archibald  Gunnell;  ordained 
a  High  Priest  and  Bishop  May  21, 
1916,    by    Heber    J.    Grant    and    set 


BIOGRAPHICAL   ENCYCLOPEDIA. 


199 


apart  to  preside  over  the  Bench  Ward. 
Prior  to  this  he  had  acted  as  a  coun- 
selor in  the  Ward  Y.  M.  M.  I.  A.  and 
filled  a  mission  to  California  in  1910- 
l:dl2,  laboring  principally  in  the  San 
Francisco  conference.  In  1913  (Mar. 
19th)  he  married  Eva  Stocks  (daugh- 
ter of  Moroni  Stocks  and  Sarah 
Heward)  who  was  born  Nov.  10, 
1891.  After  his  marriage  Bro.  Pond 
settled  at  Bench  where  he  still  re- 
sides. Bishop  Pond  received  a  good 
education  in  his  youth  and  studied 
two  and  a  half  years  in  a  high  school. 

PORTER,  Aaron  Benjamin,  Bishop 
of  the  Centerville  Ward,  Davis  coun- 
ty, Utah,  was  born  April  27,  1851, 
at  Centerville,  the  son  of  Nathan  T. 


served  as  selectman  of  Davis  county 
two  terms,  acted  as  school  trustee, 
road  supervisor,  etc.  Highly  re- 
spected and  beloved  by  all  who  knew 
him,  Bishop  Porter  died  Nov.  15, 
1910,  at  Rexburg,  Idaho,  remaining 
true  and  steadfast  in  the  faith  till  the 
last. 

PUGMIRE,  Henry  Nelson,  a  faith- 
ful young  Elder,  was  born  Feb.  11, 
1862,  in  Salt  Lake  City,  Utah,  the 
son  of  Jonathan  Pugmire  Jr.  and 
Caroline  Pugmire.  He  was  baptized 
June  20,  18  70,  by  John  Windley,  and 
married  Elizabeth  Ann  Matthews 
Nov.  18,  1886,  by  whom  he  became 
the  father  of  the  following  children 
(all    born    at    St.    Anthony,    Idaho) : 


Porter  and  Rebecca  Ann  Cherry.  He 
was  baptized  May  27,  1860,  by  Chas. 
C.  Rich  when  about  nine  years  old; 
was  ordained  an  Elder  at  the  age  of 
eighteen  years,  and  was  called  on  a 
mission  to  Arizona  in  1876,  where 
he  helped  to  locate  the  settlement 
of  Sunset  on  the  Little  Colorado 
river.  He  returned  to  Utah  the  same 
year.  After  his  return  he  was  or- 
dained a  High  Priest  and  set  apart 
to  preside  over  the  Centerville  Ward. 
Prior  to  that  date  he  had  acted  as 
president  of  the  Ward  Y.  M.  M.  I.  A. 
In  a  civil  capacity  Bishop  Porter  has 


Henry  Matthew,  Sidney  Samuel, 
Jonathan  Austin,  Jesse  Stanley,  Jen- 
evive  and  Harold  Nelson.  Bro.  Pug- 
mire was  ordained  an  Elder  in  1886 
and  later  a  Seventy,  in  which  capacity 
he  filled  a  mission  to  the  Eastern 
States  in  1900.  While  on  this  mis- 
sion he  contracted  typhoid  fever 
while  caring  for  his  brother  in  the 
mission  field,  who  suffered  with  the 
same  complaint.  He  was  honorably 
released  from  his  mission  on  account 
of  this  sickness  and  returned  home, 
where  he  died  two  weeks  later  (Aug- 
ust  15,   1900).      He  left  a  wife  and 


200 


LATTER-DAY   SAINT 


four    children,    the    youngest    three  from   the    effects   of   which    he    died 

months  old.    His  mother,  brother  and  Oct.    27,    1888;     his     remains    were 

sister  and  many  friends  mourned  his  shipped  to  his  home  at  St.   Charles, 

early    demise.      He    died    a    faithful  where    they    were    interred    Nov.    5, 

Latter-day  Saint.  1888. 


PUGMIRE,  Vincent  McKay,  an  Elder 
who  died  in  the  missionary  field,  was 


born  August  19,  1850,  in  Salt  Lake 
City,  Utah,  the  son  of  Jonathan  Pug- 
mire  and  Elizabeth  McKay.  He  was 
baptized  when  about  eight  years  old 
by  Elder  James  G.  Woolley.  In  1873 
(Oct.  7th)  he  married  Nancy  Emme- 
line  Rich  (a  daughter  of  Chas.  C. 
Rich  and  Emmeline  Grover)  who  was 
born  Feb.  19,  1854,  at  San  Bernar- 
dino, Cal.  This  marriage  was  blessed 
with  six  children,  namely,  Vincent  R., 
LeRoy  R.,  Chas.  C.  Rich,  Jonathan 
R.,  Landon  R.  and  James  R.  The 
last  named  child  was  born  after  his 
father  left  for  his  mission.  Prior  to 
his  going  on  a  mission  Bro.  Pugmire 
acted  as  first  assistant  superintend- 
ent in  the  Bear  Lake  Stake  Sunday 
School  Board.  Being  ordained  a 
Seventy  and  set  apart  for  a  mission 
to  the  Southern  States  Feb.  6,  1888, 
he  left  for  his  mission  the  following 
day,  and  after  his  arrival  in  the 
Southern  States  he  was  appointed  to 
labor  in  Coffee  county,  Alabama, 
where  he  contracted  malarial  fever, 


QUAYLE,  John,  a  High  Councilor 
in  the  Cache  Stake  of  Zion,  and  a 
resident  of  the  Logan  Third  Ward, 
was  born  Jan.  8,  1858,  at  Farming- 
ton,  Davis  county,  Utah,  the  second 
son  of  James  Quayle  and  Elizabeth 
Gillions.  He  was  six  months  old  at 
the  time  of  "the  move"  south, 
through  the  invasion  of  the  Johnston 
army.  In  the  spring  of  18  60  he  re- 
moved with  his  parents  to  Logan, 
where  he  helped  his  father  on  the 
farm  as  he  grew  up  to  manhood; 
later  he  engaged  in  stockraising. 
While  yet  a  boy  he  assumed  the  man- 
agement of  his  father's  (and  broth- 
ers') farm  and  is  still  engaged  in 
farming.  In  1893  (March  22nd)  he 
married  Emma  Hagar  Thorpe  in  the 
Logan  Temple.  One  son  (John  T.) 
and  two  daughters  (Cora  May  and 
Mary  Elizabeth)  are  the  issues  of 
this  marriage.  Bro.  Quayle  served 
three  years  on  the  Logan  City  school 


board  and  several  terms  as  member 
of  the  Logan  city  council.  He  was 
elected  city  commissioner  for  four 
years  Nov.  2,  1915.     He  was  ordained 


BIOGRAPHICAL  ENCYCLOPEDIA. 


201 


a  High  Priest  and  set  apart  as  first 
counselor  to  Bishop  Wm.  Evans  of 
the  Logan  Third  Ward  by  Apostle 
Geo.  Teasdale  April  28,  1907,  and 
since  November,  1913,  he  has  been 
a  member  of  the  Cache  Stake  High 
Council.  These  ecclesiastical  posi- 
tions, which  he  still  holds,  in  connec- 
tion with  many  other  similar  posi- 
tions, makes  him  a  very  busy  man. 
He  is  a  director  of  the  First  National 
Bank  and  president  of  the  Central 
Milling  Company. 

QUINNEY,  Joseph,  Jr.,  second  coun- 
selor in  the  Stake  Presidency  of  the 
Cache  Stake,  Cache  county,  Utah,  was 
born  Dec.  25,  1870,  in  Weber  canyon, 


Utah,  the  son  of  Joseph  Quinney  and 
Sarah  Bradshaw.  He  was  baptized 
at  Logan  in  1879  by  Christian  J. 
Larsen,  and  ordained  successively  to 
the  offices  of  Deacon,  Teacher  and 
Priest.  He  was  ordained  an  Elder 
in  1892  by  Henry  Ballard  and  or- 
dained a  Seventy  in  18'93  by  Chris- 
tian D.  Fjeldsted,  and  became  a  mem- 
ber of  the  32nd  quorum  of  Seventy. 
In  1895-99  he  filled  a  mission  to 
Samoa,  and  also  visited  the  Society 
Islands,  Fiji,  New  Zealand  and  Aus- 
tralia. After  his  return  home  he  was 
employed  by  David  Eccles  as  a  clerk 
in  the  Logan  Sugar  Factory,  and  also 


continued  active  in  Church  work. 
He  was  chosen  as  one  of  the  presi- 
dents of  the  119th  quorum  of  Seven- 
ty, acted  as  superintendent  of  Re- 
ligion Class,  Sunday  school  and  Mut- 
ual Improvement  Associations,  and 
afterwards  acted  as  Stake  superin- 
tendent of  Sunday  schools  in  the 
Cache  Stake.  In  1910  he  was  or- 
dained a  High  Priest  and  set  apart 
as  an  alternate  High  Councilor  in 
the  Cache  Stake,  and  in  1911  he  was 
chosen  as  second  counselor  to  Pres. 
Serge  F.  Bailiff  in  the  Cache  Stake 
presidency,  which  position  he  still 
holds.  In  his  connection  with  the 
sugar  business  he  has  acted  as  cash- 
ier of  the  Logan  Sugar  Factory,  man- 
ager of  both  the  Logan  and  Lewis- 
ton  factories,  and  district  manager 
of  what  is  known  as  the  Cache  valley 
district  of  the  Amalgamated  Com- 
pany's operations.  In  1917  he  was 
promoted  to  the  position  of  general 
agricultural  superintendent,  which 
position  he  still  occupies.  In  1916 
he  was  chosen  to  visit  Russia  to  ob- 
tain sugar  beet  seed.  Traveling  via 
Sweden  and  Finland,  he  reached  St. 
Petersburg,  Russia,  and  then  visited 
the  provinces  of  Keif,  Podolia,  Bo- 
lenia,,  Odessa,  Moscow,  Toula,  Kor- 
koff,  etc.  He  then  traveled  by  train 
through  Siberia  to  Vladivostock,  and 
thence  crossed  the  sea  to  Japan, 
where  he  visited  the  Elders  of  the 
Japanese  mission.  Continuing  the 
voyage  he  crossed  the  Pacific  Ocean 
via  Hawaii  to  America,  thus  circum- 
navigating the  Globe.  It  has  been 
his  privilege  to  visit  nearly  all  the 
missions  of  the  Church  in  the  whole 
world,  and  he  has  passed  through 
experiences  that  have  fallen  to  the 
lot  of  only  a  few.  He  has  witnessed 
many  wonderful  manifestations  of  the 
power  of  God  to  strengthen  his  faith 
in  the  divinity  of  the  Gospel  of  Jesus 
Christ.  Bro.  Quinney  has  a  family 
of  five  sons,  one  of  whom  is  now 
attending  school  at  the  Harvard  Uni- 
versity; another  is  laboring  as  a  mis- 
sionary in  Samoa,  and  one  is  serving 
his  country  in  the  U.  S.  Army.     His 


202 


LATTER-DAY  SAINT 


oldest   son   filled   a   mission   in   Ger- 
many before  the  outbreak  of  the  war. 

RANDALL,  Melvin  Harley,  Bishop 
of  the  Centerville  Ward,  Davis  coun- 
ty, Utah,   was  born  August  1,   1852, 


in  Salt  Lake  City,  Utah,  the  son  of 
Alfred  Randall  and  Margaret  Harley. 
He  was  baptized  in  November,  18  60, 
by  Thos.  Callister;  ordained  to  the 
lesser  Priesthood  when  a  mere  boy; 
ordained  an  Elder  in  the  Endowment 
House.  Salt  Lake  City;  ordained  a 
Seventy  Sept.  10,  1876,  by  Nathan 
T.  Porter;  ordained  a  High  Priest 
July  22,  1877,  by  Apostle  Franklin 
D.  Richards  and  set  apart  as  second 
counselor  to  Bishop  Nathan  Cheney 
of  Centerville.  After  serving  as  sec- 
ond counselor  to  Bishop  Cheney 
eleven  years  and  subsequently  as 
first  counselor  to  Bishop  A.  B.  Por- 
ter eleven  years,  he  was  ordained  a 
Bishop  June  19,  1899,  by  Joseph  F. 
Smith  and  set  apart  to  preside  over 
the  Centerville  Ward,  which  position 
he  held  until  February,  1911.  Prior 
to  that  he  acted  for  many  years  as  a 
Sunday  school  teacher,  president  of 
the  Ward  Y.  M.  M.  I.  A.  and  Ward 
teacher.  He  married  Frankie  B. 
Phelps  Feb.  15,  1875,  who  has  borne 
her  husband  eleven  children,  all  of 
whom  are  living.     Bishop  Randall  is 


a  farmer  and  stockraiser  by  avoca- 
tion and  has  been  a  resident  of  Cen- 
terville since  1862.  Prior  to  that 
date  he  lived  in  Salt  Lake  City  and 
Ogden. 

RASMUSSEN,  Xiels.  (See  sketch 
in  Vol.  1:596.)  Elder  Rasmussen 
continued  as  second  counselor  to 
Bishop  Warburton  of  the  First  Ward, 
Salt  Lake  City,  until  Oct.  10,  1909, 
when  the  bishopric  was  changed. 
Elder  Rasmussen  died  March  6,  1914, 
as  a  true  and  faithful  Latter-day 
Saint,  having  spent  the  last  five  years 
of  his  life  at  dry  farming.  He  had 
been  an  employee  of  the  Presiding 
Bishop's  office  for  nearly  forty  years. 
Bro.  Rasmussen  was  survived  by  his 
widow,  Christine  V.  T.  Rasmussen, 
and  eleven  children,  whose  names 
are  Alma  E.,  Laura  M.  R.,  Sarah  J., 
Annie  E.,  Rhoda  C,  May  C,  Esther 
O.,  David  L.,  Adeline,  Florence  G. 
and  Mrs.  Ellen  R.  Poulsen. 

RATCLIFFE,  James,  a  prominent 
Elder  in  the  Church,  was  born  May 
19,  1842,  at  Rowen,  France,  the  son 


of  James  Ratcliffe  and  Elizabeth 
Greenless.  He  moved  to  Middles- 
borough,  England,  with  his  parents 
when  a  child,  served  seven  years  as 
an  apprentice  boilermaker  and  later 


BIOGRAPHICAL  ENCYCLOPEDIA. 


203 


became  foreman  over  28  employees. 
During  this  time  he  commenced  his 
musical  career,  which  gave  him  the 
honor  of  playing  at  one  of  Queen  Vic- 
toria's receptions.  He  was  an  artist 
on  the  snare  drum  and  won  several 
medals  for  his  efficiency.  In  one  of 
his  band  excursions  he  met  his 
future  wife  Emma  Jane  Estham.  To- 
gether with  his  parents  he  adhered 
to  the  Methodists,  but  on  his  visits 
to  the  Estham  home  he  heard  of 
"Mormonism,"  to  which  he  became  a 
convert,  and  was  baptized  in  1861, 
at  Middlesborough.  In  18  61  (Dec. 
25th)  he  married  Emma  Jane  Est- 
ham. Joseph  F.  Smith,  who  at  that 
time  labored  as  a  missionary  in  Eng- 
land, performed  the  marriage  cere- 
mony, he  being  an  intimate  friend  of 
the  Esthams.  In  the  spring  of  1862 
Bro.  Ratcliffe  left  England  and  emi- 
grated to  America,  crossing  the  At- 
lantic in  a  sailing  vessel.  After  be- 
ing compelled  to  sell  most  of  their 
goods,  such  as  dress  patterns,  shawls, 
etc.,  they  left  Florence  July  28,  1862, 
to  cross  the  plains  with  ox  teams. 
After  enduring  the  usual  hardships 
of  such  an  overland  journey,  they 
arrived  at  Salt  Lake  City  Oct.  4, 
1862,  and  soon  afterwards  located  at 
Grantsville,  Tooele  county.  Later  he 
was  engaged  to  play  in  the  Salt  Lake 
Theatre  orchestra  and  was  also  furn- 
ished work  in  Pres.  Brigham  Young's 
blacksmith  shop.  Still  later  he  locat- 
ed permanently  at  Grantsville,  where 
he  became  one  of  the  leading  citizens 
in  ecclesiastical,  social  and  civic  af- 
fairs. Being  of  very  industrious 
habits,  he  soon  prepared  a  little  home, 
making  the  adobes  with  his  own 
hands,  after  which  he  began  tilling 
the  soil.  For  several  years  in  suc- 
cession he  lost  his  crops  by  grass- 
hoppers. In  1865  he  was  ordained 
an  Elder  and  was  a  member  of  the 
Grantsville  choir  for  fifty  years,  part 
of  the  time  being  its  leader.  He 
organized  a  string  and  martial  band 
in  Tooele  county  and  organized  a 
brass  band  Nov.  17,  1877,  of  which 
he  was  the  leader  for  21  years.    He 


acted  as  Stake  chorister  several 
years,  and  served  as  first  assistant 
superintendent  of  the  Grantsville 
Sunday  school  from  1888  to  1898. 
In  1885  he  was  ordained  a  Seventy 
by  Apostle  Francis  M.  Lyman.  In 
1892  he  labored  as  a  special  mis- 
sionary in  the  Weber  Stake,  and  in 
1898-1900  he  filled  a  mission  to 
Great  Britain.  On  his  return  he 
furnished  means  for  many  of  the 
Saints  to  emigrate  to  Zion.  In  1903 
he  was  ordained  a  High  Priest  by 
Hyrum  M.  Smith.  In  1907-1908  he 
filled  a  second  mission  to  Great 
Britain,  laboring  principally  in  the 
Leeds  branch;  he  returned  home  in 
the  fall  of  1908  on  account  of  sick- 
ness. Together  with  his  wife  he 
spent  his  last  days  working  in  the 
Salt  Lake  Temple  for  the  dead.  Elder 
Ratcliffe  died  at  Grantsville  July  30, 
1914,  and  his  wife,  Emma  Jane  Est- 
ham, died  Jan.  19,  1915.  When  the 
call  came  to  go  to  the  great  beyond  it 
was  remarked  by  his  physician  that 
such  love  as  existed  between  him  and 
his  wife  could  not  be  separated  long. 
This  proved  to  be  the  case,  for  six 
months  after  his  own  death  his  be- 
loved wife  joined  him  on  the  other 
side.  Following  are  the  n9,mes  of 
the  children  of  James  and  Emma  Jane 
Ratcliffe:  Lenora  Jane,  Emma  R., 
Louisa  R.,  James  E.,  Merlin  R.,  Wil- 
liam H.,  Robert  A.,  Matilda  R.,  Eliza- 
beth R.  and  Marintha  R. 

RATCLIFFE,  Emma  Jane  Estham, 

wife  of  James  Ratcliffe,  was  born 
July  21,  1841,  at  Preston,  England, 
the  daughter  of  John  Estham  and 
Jane  Huntington.  At  the  age  of  nine 
years  (in  1850)  she  was  baptized  a 
member  of  the  Church  of  Jesus  Christ 
of  Latter-Day  Saints.  Her  mother 
had  joined  the  Church  as  early  as 
1839,  but  her  father  was  not  bap- 
tized until  1868.  Having  taught  the 
truths  of  "Mormonism"  unto  James 
Ratcliffe,  who  was  a  visitor  at  her 
home,  she  married  him  in  1861,  giv- 
ing up  a  comfortable  home  (as  her 
parents    kept    a    furniture    shop)    to 


204 


LATTER-DAY   SAINT 


start  a  home  of  her  own.  In  1862  she 
and  her  husband  set  sail  for  America 
to  cast  their  lot  with  the  Saints  in 
the  Rocky  Mountains.  Sister  Rat- 
cliffe  was  most  tender  with  the  sick 
and  suffering,  and  particularly  with 


little  children,  and  was  always  a 
friend  to  those  who  had  made  a  mis- 
take in  life,  ever  ready  to  take  the 
side  of  the  weak  and  down-trodden. 
She  died  at  Grantsville  Jan.  19,  1915, 
mourned  and  missed  by  all  who  knew 
her.  Three  sisters,  six  children,  39 
grandchildren  and  two  great  grand- 
children survived   her. 

RAVSTEN,  John,  Bishop  of  the 
Clarkston  Ward  (Benson  Stake), 
Cache  county,  Utah,  was  born  Feb. 
17,  1871,  at  Logan,  Cache  county. 
Cache  county,  Utah,  was  born  Feb- 
ruary 17,  1871,  at  Logan  Cache 
county,  Utah,  the  son  of  Bengt  M. 
Ravsten.  He  was  baptized  and  con- 
firmed February  18,  1879,  by  his 
father;  ordained  a  Deacon  December 
27,  1884,  by  Robt.  Henderson;  or- 
dained a  Priest  Nov.  29,  1886,  by 
Bengt  M.  Ravsten;  ordained  an  Elder 
June  15,  1890,  by  Bengt  M.  Ravsten, 
was  set  apart  as  second  counselor  to 
James  A.  Hansen  (president  of  the 
10th  quorum  of  Elders)  Sept.  21, 
1890,  and  served  in  that  capacity  un- 


til 1893.  He  filled  a  mission  to  the 
Northern  States  in  1897-99,  laboring 
principally  in  Illinois;  was  ordained 
a  Seventy  Dec.  2,  1897,  by  Brigham  H. 
Roberts;  served  as  one  of  the  presi- 
dents of  the  7th  quorum  of  Seventy 
several  years,  and  acted  as  second 
assistant  superintendent  of  the  Clark- 
ston Sunday  school  from  1891  to 
1892;  was  ordained  a  High  Priest 
June  22,  1902.  by  Wm.  H.  Lewis  and 
ordained  a  Bishop  August  24,  1902, 
by  Apostle  Marriner  W.  Merrill  and 
set  apart  to  preside  over  the  Clark- 
ston Ward.  Bishop  Ravsten  married 
Eliza  Christensen  March  18,  1896,  in 
the  Logan  Temple.  She  bore  her 
husband  six  children  and  died  in 
childbed  April  2  3,  1913.  Bishop  Rav- 
sten's  second  wife,  whom  he  married 
Oct.  1,  1913,  is  Bertha  Eveline  Nish, 


who  has  borne  her  husband  two  chil- 
dren. Bishop  Ravsten  is  a  farmer 
and  stockraiser  by  avocation,  a  man 
of  strong  physique  and  an  enterpris- 
ing citizen. 

REDD,  Lemuel  Hardison  Jr.,  presi- 
dent of  the  San  Juan  Stake  of  Zion, 
was  born  at  Spanish  Fork,  Utah  coun- 
ty, Utah,  Oct.  .25,  1856,  the  son  of 
Lemuel  Hardison  Redd  and  Keziah 
Jane  Butler.  While  yet  a  small  child 
his    parents    moved    to    Washington 


BIOGRAPHICAL  ENCYCLOPEDIA. 


205 


county.  He  was  baptized  at  the  age  of 
eight  years;  ordained  a  Teacher 
when  fourteen  and  an  Elder  when 
22  years  old.     He  attended  the  Uni- 


versity of  Deseret  in  1875-7  6,  after 
which  he  taught  school  one  year. 
In  1878  he  married  Eliza  A.  West- 
over,  and  in  188  4  he  married  Lucy 
Lyman.  In  1879,  responding  to  a 
call  from  Pres.  John  Taylor,  he  went 


He  took  an  active  part  in  the  labor 
and  hardships  of  that  wonderful 
journey.  He  started  in  October,  1879, 
and  was  five  months  on  the  road, 
reaching  the  present  site  of  Bluff, 
April  6,  1880.  The  next  year  (1881) 
he  was  ordained  a  High  Priest  and 
set  apart  as  second  counselor  to 
Bishop  Jens  Nielsen,  in  which  capac- 
ity he  labored  for  twenty  years,  and 
at  Bishop  Nielsen's  death  he  became 
Bishop  of  Bluff.  In  1910  he  was  set 
apart  by  Pres.  Joseph  F.  Smith  as 
president  of  the  San  Juan  Stake. 
Many  years  in  the  early  days  of  Bluff 
he  acted  as  superintendent  of  the 
Ward  Sunday  school,  was  secretary 
of    the    Y.    M.    M.     I.    A.    and    also 


lucy.lyman:redd 

Wife  of  Lemuel  Harrison,  Redd,  Jr 

acted  as  Ward  clerk.  For  fifteen 
years  he  served  as  superintendent 
of  the  San  Juan  Co-op  and  is 
still  president  of  a  number  of  cor- 
porations. He  served  San  Juan  coun- 
ty as  representative  to  the  Utah 
legislature  two  terms.  In  the  try- 
ing and  perilous  time  of  redeeming 
San  Juan  county  from  isolation  and 
anarchy  he  took  a  leading  part,  serv- 
ing five  years  as  the  county's  first 
with  a  company  of  Saints  under  assessor,  during  which  time  he  often 
President  Silas  S.  Smith  to  make  a  faced  grave  danger  for  the  sake  of 
settlement    on    the    San    Juan    river,     law  and  order.     At  present  he  is  ex- 


ELIZA  A.  WESTOVER  REDD 
Wife  of  Lemuel  Harrison  Redd,  Jr. 


206 


LATTER-DAY  SAINT 


tensively  engaged  in  farming  and 
stockraising  and  connected  more  or 
less  with  all  the  principal  industries 
of  the  county  where  he  has  wielded 
a  telling  influence  in  placing  them 
on  a  paying  basis.  He  is  a  man  of 
unwavering  integrity  and  has  never 
faltered  in  his  support  of  his  breth- 
ren in  the  Priesthood.  His  children 
from  his  first  marriage  are  Lula, 
Lemuel  H.,  Hattie  Ellen,  Herbert  H., 
Edith,  Charles,  Marian  and  Amy.  The 
children  by  his  second  marriage  are 
Corlie,  Frank,  Annie  and  Amasa  J. 
One  of  the  friends  of  President  Redd 
says  of  him:  "As  a  man  he  is  quiet 
and  unpretentious,  firm  as  a  rock  and 
humble  as  a  child." 

RICH,   Benjamin   Erastus,    one   of 

the  most  successful  missionaries  of 
the  Church  and  for  many  years  presi- 


dent of  missions,  was  born  Nov.  7, 
1855,  in  Salt  Lake  City,  Utah,  the 
son  of  Charles  C.  Rich  and  Sarah  D. 
Pea.  His  father  was  one  of  the 
earliest  settlers  in  Salt  Lake  Valley, 
arriving  there  in  October,  1847.  Ben 
E.  Rich,  who  is  one  of  his  father's 
fifty-two  children,  received  his  edu- 
cation in  the  schools  of  Salt  Lake 
City,  and  was  employed  as  a  sales- 
man in  the  Z.  C.  M.  I.  In  1885,  at  the 
age  of  twenty,  he  removed  to  Ogden 


and  became  manager  of  the  Ogden 
Equitable  Co-operative  Store.  In 
1881-83  he  filled  a  mission  to  Great 
Britain  and  returned  in  charge  of 
nearly  700  emigrating  Saints.  He 
married  Diana  Farr,  Dec.  27,  1877, 
and  entered  business  for  himself  in 
Ogden.  He  also  began  activity  in 
the  effort  being  made  at  the  time  for 
statehood  for  Utah.  During  the  next 
few  years  he  mingled  religion,  poli- 
tics and  business  in  his  career,  be- 
coming prominent  in  each.  In  1893 
he  removed  to  Rexburg,  Idaho,  with 
his  family.  Here  he  purchased  the 
"Rexburg  Press,"  the  name  of  which 
he  changed  to  the  "Silver  Hammer." 
He  had  already  contributed  material- 
ly to  various  Church  publications  and 
had  achieved  success  in  his  literary 
efforts.  He  wrote  a  book  "Mr.  Dur- 
rant  of  Salt  Lake  City"  which  gained 
great  popularity,  and  later  wrote 
numerous  pamphlets  and  booklets 
which  were  distributed  quite  widely 
throughout  the  Church  and  the  world. 
Later  he  removed  the  "Silver  Ham- 
mer" office  to  St.  Anthony,  Idaho. 
Both  in  Idaho  and  Utah  he  was  active 
in  local  and  national  politics.  In 
June,  1898,  he  was  called  to  take 
charge  of  the  Southern  States  Mis- 
sion, which  position  he  filled  until 
July,  1908,  when  he  was  called  to 
the  presidency  of  the  Eastern  States 
Mission,  a  position  which  he  filled 
until  the  time  of  his  demise.  For 
nearly  twenty  years  he  was  contin- 
uously engaged  in  missionary  work, 
hardly  sparing  time  from  his  labors 
to  make  more  than  business  visits 
to  Utah  or  elsewhere.  Throughout 
the  Church  and  throughout  the 
United  States  he  became  known  as 
one  of  the  strong  advocates  of 
"Mormonism,"  and  the  thousands  of 
Elders  who  were  associated  with  him 
in  the  missionary  work  esteemed 
him  highly.  For  eleven  years  he 
made  his  home  at  Chattanoogo,  Ten- 
nessee. Qualities  of  courage,  loyalty 
and  independence  won  for  him 
friends  everywhere.  He  was  con- 
sidered    one     of     the     most     ardent 


BIOGRAPHICAL  ENCYCLOPEDIA. 


207 


workers  in  the  Church  and  one  of  the 
most  fearless  expounders  of  the  gos- 
pel of  Christ.  In  his  career  as  a  mis- 
sionary he  met  and  debated  with 
many  anti-Mormons  of  prominence 
and  always  left  a  strong  impression 
upon  his  hearers.  He  also  under- 
went various  forms  of  persecution 
peculiar  to  the  South  and  always 
bore  it  with  manliness  and  patience. 
During  the  first  fifteen  years  of  his 
missionary  life  he  enjoyed  excellent 
health.  During  the  last  two  years  or 
his  life  he  suffered  considerably  with 
sickness  and  finally  passed  to  the 
great  beyond  Sept.  13,  1913,  in  New 
York.  He  was  survived  by  his  widow, 
Mrs.  Diana  R.  Rich  (who  for  several 
years  has  made  her  home  at  Center- 
ville,  Utah),  and  eight  children, 
namely,  Ben  L.  Rich,  of  Salt  Lake 
City,  Dr.  Lorin  F.  Rich  of  Ogden, 
Fred  Rich  of  Salt  Lake  City,  Dr. 
Homer  E.  Rich  of  Vernal,  Utah,  Mrs. 
Alvin  C.  Strong  of  Salt  Lake  City, 
Don  O'Neil  Rich,  Mrs.  Vivian  Watkins 
of  Vernal,  and  Frank  C.  Rich  of 
Centerville.  His  remains  were  ship- 
ped to  Salt  Lake  City  where  they 
were  interred  Sept.  21,  1913.  Pres. 
Joseph  F.  Smith,  in  speaking  at  his 
funeral  said:  "In  Pres.  Ben  E.  Rich 
no  confidence  was  ever  misplaced.  He 
failed  to  fulfill  no  trust,  his  char- 
acter stood  out  bright  and  clear  in 
the  defense  of  truth,  he  was  fearless 
of  the  world  and  of  opposition,  he 
was  established  in  the  knowledge  of 
the  eternal  truth  of  the  gospel,  his 
faith  was  built  on  the  foundation  of 
assurance  and  he  knew  the  cause  he 
represented  was  just  and  right  in  the 
sight  of  God  and  before  all  men.  He 
was  a  stalwart  defender  of  the  faith, 
a  friend  of  mankind,  faithful  to  duty 
and  capable  to  perform  it." 

RICH,  Edward  Charles,  Bishop  of 
the  Montpelier  First  Ward  (Bear 
Lake  Stake),  Idaho,  was  born  June 
16,  1871,  at  Paris,  Idaho,  the  son  of 
Joseph  C.  Rich  (who  was  a  son  of 
Apostle  Chas.  C.  Rich)  and  Ann 
Eliza    Hunter    (daughter    of    Bishop 


Edward  Hunter).  He  was  baptized 
when  about  eight  years  old;  ordained 
a  Seventy  by  Francis  M.  Lyman  in 
October,  1896,  and  filled  a  mission 
to  Great  Britain  in  1896-98,  laboring 
in  the  Cheltenham  and  Nottingham 
conferences.  He  filled  a  second  mis- 
sion to  Great  Britain  in  1909-1911, 
laboring  in  the  Leeds  conference.  At 
home  he  has  served  on  school  boards 
and  as  a  member  of  the  city  council 
of  Montpelier.  He  represented  Bear 
Lake  county  in  the  Idaho  legislature 
one  session.  Ecclesiastically  he  acted 
for  several  years  as  a  president 
of  the  79th  quorum  of  Seventy;  was 
first  counselor  to  David  J.  Suffers  of 
the  Montpelier  First  Ward,  and  when 


Bishop  Sutlers  moved  to  Pocatello  in 
1914  Elder  Rich  was  ordained  a 
Bishop  by  Apostle  Rudger  Clawson 
Dec.  20,  1914,  and  set  apart  to  pre- 
side over  the  Montpelier  First  Ward. 
In  1902  (June  4th)  he  married  De- 
borah Dalrymple  who  has  borne  him 
six  children,  namely,  Helen,  Edna, 
Joseph  C,  Edward  H.,  Lewis  Bays, 
and  Emerson  R.  Since  his  return 
from  his  mission  in  1911  he  has  con- 
ducted a  grocery  store  in  Montpelier, 
where  he  has  resided  during  the  past 
twenty-six  years. 

RICH,  Sarah  De  Arman  Pea,  wife 
of  Apostle  Chas.  C.  Rich,  and  a  Utah 


208 


LATTER-DAY  SAINT 


pioneer  of  1847,  was  born  Sept.  23, 
1814,  in  what  was  called  the  Look- 
ing Glass  Prairie,  St.  Clair  county, 
111.,  the  daughter  of  John  Pea  (of 
South  Carolina)  and  Elizabeth 
Knighton  (of  Old  Virginia).  Her 
father  served  as  a  soldier  in  the  war 
of  1812,  and  her  mother  was  a  daugh- 
ter of  Thomas  Knighton,  who  was  a 
soldier  of  the  American  Revolution. 
Her  father  was  a  well-to-do  farmer 
and  blacksmith,  and  Sarah  D.,  who 
was  taught  to  be  thrifty,  could  take 
the  flax  and  cotton  from  the  field 
and  spin  and  weave  it  into  cloth.  For 
many  years  she  was  the  weaver  for 
the  family,  as  the  main  part  of  their 
clothing,  as  well  as  their  food,  were 


:^>f0^. 


the  products  of  the  farm.  She  was 
of  a  very  religious  nature,  a  great 
reader  of  the  Bible,  the  family  be- 
longing to  the  so-called  Reformed 
Methodists,  and  her  eldest  brother 
was  a  Methodist  minister.  In  the 
summer  of  183  5  Harvey  Green  and 
Wm.  O.  Clark,  two  "Mormon"  mis- 
sionaries, were  invited  into  her 
father's  house,  where  they  held  a 
meeting  and  told  about  Joseph  Smith 
and  the  angel  appearing  to  him. 
Sarah  D.  was  deeply  impressed  and 
the  Elders  left  the  Book  of  Mormon 
with  her  to  read;  she  became  a  con- 
vert to  "Mormonism,"  and  when  the 


Elders  returned  she  was  baptized 
Dec.  15,  1835,  she  being  the  first 
of  her  father's  family  to  receive  the 
fulness  of  the  gospel.  Her  father, 
mother  and  sister  followed  her  ex- 
ample. After  joining  the  Church, 
her  father  began  making  arrange- 
ments for  migrating  to  Missouri.  The 
Elders  frequently  visited  the  family 
and  left  Church  publications  in  the 
house  to  be  read  by  members  of  the 
household.  In  one  of  these  she  saw 
the  name  of  Chas.  C.  Rich  and  laugh- 
ingly said:  "This  is  a  very  rich 
name,  I  think  I  will  marry  him."  On 
one  of  his  visits  Bro.  Greene  said: 
"Sister  Sarah  I  have  recommended 
you  to  a  very  worthy  young  Elder  as 
a  companion  (Chas.  C.  Rich).  After 
this  another  Elder  told  her  the  same 
thing.  Soon  afterwards  she  received 
a  letter  from  Bro.  Rich  himself  in 
which  he  asked  for  her  hand  in  mar- 
riage. They  had  never  seen  each 
other  and  before  giving  her  answer 
to  Bro.  Rich  she  looked  into  her 
Bible,  when  her  eyes  suddenly  fell 
upon  the  words  of  Ruth  to  Boaz,  upon 
which  she  answered  his  letter.  The 
correspondence  continued  until  the 
family  moved  to  Missouri  in  the  fall 
of  1837,  and  Sarah  D.  was  married  to 
Chas.  C.  Rich  Feb.  11,  1838,  Geo. 
M.  Hinkle  performing  the  ceremony 
at  Far  West.  Here  Sister  Sarah  D. 
became  acquainted  with  the  Prophet 
Joseph  Smith,  and  from  this  time  on 
her  life  with  that  of  her  husband  be- 
came closely  associated  with  the  his- 
tory of  the  Latter-day  Saints.  About 
this  time  the  persecutions  of  the 
Saints  began  in  Missouri,  and  owing 
to  the  prominent  part  her  husband 
had  taken  in  the  Crooked  River  battle 
he  was  forced  to  flee  into  the  wilder- 
ness for  his  life.  He  and  Hosea 
Stout  parted  with  their  wives  at  mid- 
night on  the  public  square  at  Far 
West  and  covenanted  to  the  effect 
that  the  men  would  remain  together 
and  the  women  also.  Sisters  Rich 
and  Stout  went  to  the  house  of  Jane 
Greene.  In  the  morning  she  was 
obliged  to  get  a  pass  from  the  com- 


BIOGRAPHICAL  ENCYCLOPEDIA. 


209 


mander  of  the  mob  before  she  could 
go  home.  When  the  people  of  the 
farming  districts  were  driven  from 
their  homes  into  Far  West  Sister 
Rich  took  seven  families  into  her 
house,  among  them  being  John  E. 
Page  and  wife.  Sister  Page  was  ill 
and  died  in  a  few  days  and  while  her 
body  was  being  prepared  for  burial, 
some  of  the  mobbers  came  into  the 
house  to  search  for  arms.  One  of 
the  mobocrats  pointed  a  gun  at  Sister 
Rich,  threatening  to  shoot  her  if  she 
did  not  tell  where  her  husband  was. 
She  replied,  "You  will  have  to  shoot, 
for  I  do  not  know."  She  heard  noth- 
ing from  her  husband  for  three 
months,  until  one  day  an  Indian  came 
to  her  house  and  gave  her  a  small 
silver  broach,  telling  her  that  a  man 
sent  it  to  her  from  his  camp;  he  then 
described  Bro.  Rich.  After  leaving 
the  Indian  camp  Bro.  Rich  traveled 
to  Quincy,  111.,  where  he  met  his 
father-in-law  and  heard  of  the  mob- 
bing at  Far  West.  Bro.  Rich  re- 
quested him  to  go  and  bring  Sisters 
Rich  and  Stout  to  Quincy,  111.,  the 
father  arrived  at  Far  West  in  Jan- 
uary, 1839.  In  a  remarkable  short 
time  they  got  ready  and  traveled  to 
the  Mississippi  river,  to  a  point  op- 
posite Quincy,  where  they  were  seen 
by  Bros.  Rich  and  Stout,  who  came 
over  to  assist  their  wives  across.  In 
the  midst  of  great  dangers  they 
crossed  the  river  in  a  canoe,  pad- 
dling through  the  ice,  the  women 
holding  onto  the  side  while  the  float- 
ing ice  cut  their  fingers.  A  few 
days  after  their  arrival  at  Quincy 
Sister  Rich  gave  birth  to  a  daughter 
(her  first  child)  March  4,  1839;  they 
named  the  child  Sarah  Jane  and  she 
was  blessed  by  Patriarch  Joseph 
Smith,  sen.,  who  also  blessed  Sister 
Rich,  promising  that  she  should  live 
to  a  good  old  age.  In  November, 
1839,  the  family  moved  to  Nauvoo, 
where  they  lived  a  happy  life.  Here 
Sister  Rich  formed  a  lasting  friend- 
ship with  Sister  Vilate  Kimball. 
When  the  Prophet  Joseph  organized 
the   Female   Relief  Society   in   1842, 

Vol.  Ill,  No.  14. 


Sister  Rich  became  a  member  of  that 
organization;  she  became  intimately 
acquainted  with  Emma  Smith,  the 
Prophet's  wife,  and  Lucy  Smith,  the 
Prophet's  mother,  and  frequently 
visited  these  ladies  in  their  homes. 
Soon  persecution  again  commenced 
against  the  Saints  and  Bro.  Rich  was 
frequently  called  away  from  home, 
leaving  Sister  Rich  alone  with  the 
family;  a  son  and  a  daughter  were 
born  to  her  after  settling  at  Nauvoo. 
About  this  time  one  of  the  greatest 
trials  that  ever  befell  Sister  Rich 
came  to  her  from  the  fact  that  celes- 
tial marriage  was  revealed,  but  after 
engaging  in  earnest  prayer  she  made 
up  her  mind  to  trust  in  the  word  of 
the  Prophet,  and  in  May,  1844,  Pa- 
triarch Hyrum  Smith  came  to  the 
Fullmer  House,  where  the  family 
lived,  and  there  she  was  sealed  to 
her  husband  by  Hyrum  Smith  for 
time  and  eternity.  Bro.  Rich  was 
away  on  a  mission  when  the  martyr- 
dom of  the  Prophet  occurred.  Sister 
Rich  set  out  in  a  rainstorm  to  listen 
to  the  last  address  given  by  the  Pro- 
phet Joseph  before  he  went  to  Carth- 
age, and  she  was  with  the  funeral 
procession  which  went  out  to  meet 
the  bodies  of  the  martyrs  June  28, 
1844.  Soon  afterwards  Bro.  Rich, 
being  released  from  his  mission,  re- 
turned to  Nauvoo  and  moved  into  his 
own  home  near  the  Temple.  Here 
on  Sept.  2,  1844,  Sister  Rich  gave 
birth  to  a  son,  Chas.  C.  Rich  Jr.,  her 
fourth  child.  When  the  revelation  on 
plural  marriage  was  revealed  to  her, 
she  decided  to  accept  this  order  and 
gave  her  consent  for  her  husband 
to  enter  into  this  covenant.  After  the 
Temple  was  finished,  she,  together 
with  her  husband,  was  called  to  do 
ordinance  work  in  the  same.  This 
necessitated  her  leaving  home  a  great 
deal;  hence  two  of  her  husband's 
plural  wives  came  to  live  in  her 
house  and  take  care  of  the  children 
and  home.  The  Temple  work  was 
continued  until  the  exodus  took  place, 
and  Sister  Rich  left  home  with  her 
household  goods  unsold,  Feb,  13, 
February,  1919 


210 


LATTER-DAY   SAINT 


1846,  taking  only  the  most  necessary 
supplies  with  her.  With  her  husband 
she  commenced  the  long  journey  to 
find  a  new  home  in  the  unknown  land 
beyond  the  Rocky  Mountains.  After 
crossing  the  Mississippi  river  into 
Iowa,  the  family  traveled  through 
sleet  and  snow,  the  child'ren  being 
sick  from  sleeping  on  the  damp 
ground.  After  leaving  Sugar  creek 
the  journey  was  continued  to  Garden 
Grove,  Mt.  Pisgah  and  the  Missouri 
river.  Bro.  Rich  was  appointed  to 
preside  at  Mt.  Pisgah,  at  which  place 
Sister  Rich  passed  through  many  try- 
ing experiences,  owing  to  the  many 
hardships  the  people  had  endured; 
their  health  was  broken,  chills  and 
fever  became  prevalent  and  there 
were  only  a  few  to  care  for  the  sick 
or  bury  the  dead.  Bro.  Rich  him- 
self through  overwork  became  a  vic- 
tim to  the  disease  and  Sister  Rich 
watched  over  him  many  weeks  while 
he  lingered  between  life  and  death; 
he  slowly  recovered.  During  this 
time  food  was  very  scarce  and  many 
of  the  Saints  were  on  the  verge  of 
starvation.  Sister  Rich  had  only 
twenty  pounds  of  flour  in  the  house 
when  her  husband  was  still  sick.  Bro. 
Wm.  Huntington's  death  left  Bro. 
Rich  in  charge  at  Mt.  Pisgah.  A  poor 
woman,  whose  husband  had  gone 
with  the  Mormon  Battalion,  came  to 
the  house  weeping  and  stated  that 
her  little  children  were  starving.  Bro. 
Rich  said  "Sarah  give  this  woman 
some  flour."  She  replied,  "We  have 
only  twenty  pounds  and  one  loaf  of 
bread  in  the  house,"  but  the  flour 
was  given  and  towards  evening  a 
Bro.  Sldwell  drove  up  and  asked  if  he 
could  stay  over  night.  Upon  being 
answered  in  the  affirmative,  Bro. 
Sidwell,  who  had  been  a  Quaker, 
turned  to  Bro.  Rich  and  said:  "The 
spirit  tells  me  that  thou  art  out  of 
money  and  tells  me  to  help  thee." 
He  then  gave  him  $50.00.  Bro.  Rich 
gave  the  money  to  his  wife,  saying: 
"Now  you  see  the  Lord  has  opened 
the  way  for  us  to  get  flour."  She 
had   just   bread   enough    for   supper, 


but  the  flour  arrived  that  night.  Bro. 
Rich  bought  a  supply  of  flour  for  his 
family  and  some  for  the  poor.  Early 
in  1847  Bro.  Rich  was  sent  to  Nau- 
voo.  Before  going  he  moved  his 
family  to  Winter  Quarters,  leaving 
Sister  Rich  to  provide  for  the  family. 
After  returning  from  a  successful 
trip  to  Nauvoo,  two  orphan  children 
named  Judson  (whose  parents  had 
died  at  Mt.  Pisgah)  were  added  to 
the  Rich  family  circle.  Charles  C. 
Rich  and  family  left  Winter  Quarters 
June  14,  1847,  for  the  west,  Bro. 
Rich  taking  charge  of  a  company 
crossing  the  plains.  There  being 
more  women  and  children  in  this 
company  than  men  the  task  of  team- 
sters and  the  driving  of  stock  fell 
greatly  to  the  lot  of  the  women  and 
older  children.  After  many  hard- 
ships the  company  came  in  sight  of 
Salt  Lake  Valley  Oct.  3,  1847.  On 
the  5th  of  October,  Nancy  Rich,  the 
mother  of  Chas.  C.  Rich,  died;  she 
was  the  first  adult  of  the  Saints  who 
died  in  the  Valley.  The  family  soon 
commenced  to  get  logs  from  the  can- 
jons  to  build  houses,  and  while  this 
was  being  done  they  lived  in  their 
tents  and  wagons.  Sister  Rich  of 
course  passed  through  all  the  trials 
incident  to  pioneer  life.  In  February, 
1849,  the  Rich  family  moved  out  of 
the  fort  onto  their  city  lots.  Being 
called  on  a  mission  to  California,  Bro. 
Rich  (who  had  been  ordained  an 
Apostle  Feb.  12,  1849),  left  Oct.  9, 
184  9,  leaving  Sister  Rich  with  a 
daughter  three  days  old;  he  returned 
to  his  home  in  November,  1850,  and 
was  soon  afterwards  called  to  assist 
in  establishing  a  "Mormon"  settle- 
ment in  Southern  California.  Sister 
Rich  preferred  to  remain  in  the  Val- 
ley and  her  husband  purchased  her  a 
home  in  the  Seventeenth  Ward.  Here 
she  lived  for  forty  years  and  owned 
one  of  the  first  fruit  orchards  in  Utah 
Territory;  she  also  owned  one  of  the 
first  cultivated  roses  which  bloomed 
in  Utah,  for  which  she  received 
a  diploma  at  a  fair.  Sister  Rich  par- 
ticipated   at    the    renowned    celebra- 


BIOGRAPHICAL  ENCYCLOPEDIA. 


211 


tion  July  4,  1851,  at  Black  Rock; 
and  she  also  attended  the  memorable 
celebration  in  Cottonwood  Canyon  in 
July,  1857.  In  the  "general  move" 
south  in  1858  she  located  at  Provo, 
but  soon  returned  to  her  Salt  Lake 
City  home.  In  1860  her  husband 
and  their  son  Joseph  C.  left  on  a  mis- 
sion to  England,  from  which  they 
returned  in  1862,  Bro.  Rich  being 
called  to  colonize  Bear  Lake  Valley, 
Sister  Rich  moved  there  in  November, 
1864,  and  resided  there  three  years. 
The  climate  being  too  severe  for  her 
constitution,  she  came  back  to  her 
Seventeenth  Ward  home.  When  her 
husband  was  stricken  with  paralysis 
in  1880  she  with  others  of  her  family 
went  to  Bear  Lake  Valley  to  be  with 
him  and  nurse  him.  Sister  Rich  was 
a  teacher  in  the  Relief  Society  in  the 
Seventeenth  Ward  from  the  time  of 
its  first  organization  until  her  death 
which  occurred  Sept.  12,  1893,  while 
visiting  her  son  Fred  C.  Rich  in  Salt 
Lake  City.  She  survived  her  hus- 
band ten  years,  was  the  mother  of 
nine  children,  six  sons  and  three 
daughters.  The  last  tw^o  years  of  her 
life  she  lived  with  her  son  Ben.  E. 
Rich  and  wife  at  Ogden.  Following 
are  the  names  of  the  children  of 
Chas  C.  and  Sarah  D.  Rich:  Sarah 
Jane,  born  March  4,  1839  at  Quincy, 
111.;  Jos.  Coulson,  born  Jan.  16,  1841, 
at  Nauvoo,  111.;  Artemesia,  born  Jan. 
15.  184  3,  and  died  when  nine  months 
r  Chas.  C.  Jr.,  born  Sept.  2,  1844, 
at  Nauvoo,  111.;  John  T.,  born  Dec. 
15,  1846,  at  Pisgah,  Iowa;  Elizabeth, 
born  Oct.  6,  1849,  in  Salt  Lake  City; 
David  Patten,  born  April  8,  1853,  in 
Salt  Lake  City;  Benjamin  E.,  born 
Nov.  7,  1855,  in  Salt  Lake  City,  and 
Frederick  Carmel,  born  July  19, 
1859,  in  Salt  Lake  City.  (Sketch 
written  by  Sarah  Rich  Miller,  eldest 
child  of  Charles  C.  Rich  and  Sarah 
DeArman  Pea.) 

RICH,  Harriet  Sargent,  wife  of 
Apostle  Charles  C.  Rich,  was  born 
Oct.  23,  1832,  in  Fountain  County, 
Indiana,   the  daughter  of  Abel   Mor- 


gan Sargent  and  Sarah  Edwards.  Her 
father,  who  was  born  in  Kentucky  in 
1801,  taught  school  in  Floyd  county, 
Indiana,  where  he  married  Sarah  Ed- 
wards, daughter  of  a  wealthy  family. 
Harriet's  parents  became  members 
of  the  Church,  and  during  the  perse- 
cution (being  driven  from  their 
homes  by  mobs)  her  mother  died, 
leaving  seven  children,  the  eldest 
(Martha  J.)  being  twelve  years  old. 
Harriet  was  seven  years  old.  The 
loss  of  his  wife  caused  Bro.  Sargent 
to  leave  his  smaller  children  with 
their  grandparents,  who  later  refused 


to  give  them  up,  but  he  subsequently 
secured  them  and  took  them  away. 
After  many  trials  and  the  loss  of  two 
children,  preparations  were  made  to 
start  for  the  Rocky  Mountains,  but 
in  the  meantime  Bro.  Sargent, 
responding  to  a  call  of  the  United 
States  Government,  became  a  member 
of  the  Mormon  Battalion.  Before 
starting  on  his  journey  he  placed  his 
children  with  different  families.  His 
health  failing  on  the  march,  he  was 
sent  with  the  sick  detachment  from 
Santa  Fe  to  Pueblo,  to  spend  the 
winter.  The  following  year  (1847) 
he  went  to  the  Valley,  but  returned 
to  his  children  on  the  Missouri  river 
later  the  same  year.  While  standing 
guard  over  some  cattle  he  was  sud- 


212 


LATTER-DAY  SAINT 


denly  stricken  with  cholera  and  died 
in  a  few  hours.  His  only  son  (Thomas 
Sargent)  died  the  same  night;  they 
were  both  buried  in  one  grave.  Sis- 
ter Harriet  lived  three  months  on  the 
Missouri  river  and  was  married  to 
Charles  C.  Rich,  as  a  sixth  wife  in 
March,  1847.  Her  life  was  proof  of 
her  belief  that  all  these  wives  were 
all  sacred  helpmates.  The  following 
June  (1847)  the  companies  of  Saints 
started  toward  the  West  from  the 
Missouri  river.  Harriet  drove  a  team 
most  of  the  way  across  the  plains  and 
arrived  in  the  Valley  Oct.  5,  1847, 
having  made  the  journey  in  three 
months  and  eighteen  days.  Her  hus- 
band's mother  Nancy  O'Neil  Rich, 
died  on  the  day  of  their  arrival,  her 
death  being  the  first  in  the  Valley. 
When  Chas.  C.  Rich,  together  with 
Amasa  M.  Lyman,  was  called  to  Cali- 
fornia in  18  51  to  establish  a  settle- 
ment, Harriet  accompanied  her  hus- 
band on  that  mission  and  thus  be- 
came one  of  the  founders  of  San 
Bernardino,  Cal.  She  returned  to  Utah 
with  her  husband  in  1857.  While  on 
the  journey  Harriet's  only  daughter 
died  at  the  Mountain  Meadows. 
The  body  was  placed  in  a  zinc  casket 
which  was  sealed  and  brought  home 
In  her  wagon  for  burial.  When 
Apostle  Rich  was  called  to  colonize 
Bear  Lake  Valley  in  1863,  Harriet 
again  accompanied  him  and  thus  be- 
came one  of  the  first  settlers  of  Paris, 
Bear  Lake  county,  Idaho,  which  place 
became  her  permanent  home.  Thus 
Harriet's  life  was  one  of  pioneering, 
fraught  with  constant  hardship  and 
toil.  She  was  the  mother  of  ten 
children,  namely  Franklin  D.,  Mor- 
gan J.,  Adelbert  C,  Alvin  O.,  Abel 
G.,  Martha  Caroline,  Druscilla  Stre- 
ger,  Harriet  Tunis,  Harley  T.,  and 
Luna.  In  the  early  pioneer  days  of 
Utah  and  Idaho  it  was  necessary  to 
understand  the  art  of  making  cloth, 
both  flannel  and  linsey,  carding  and 
spinning,  knitting  and  coloring,  all  of 
which  branches  of  industry  were  mas- 
tered by  Sister  Harriet.  Native  In- 
dians taught  her  how  to  tan  and  dress 


the  skins  of  animals  which  she  used 
in  making  gloves.  Her  first  dress 
after  reaching  Salt  Lake  Valley  was 
made  from  flour  sacks,  and  colored 
with  willow  leaves.  She  was  an  ex- 
cellent housekeeper  and  though  her 
life  was  crowded  with  work,  she  was 
ever  ready  to  make  any  sacrifice  for 
the  benefit  of  her  children.  For 
many  years  she  as  an  officer  in  the 
Ward  Relief  Society  assisted  the 
sick  and  cared  for  the  dead.  She  was 
particularly  interested  in  orphans. 
She  helped  to  fight  crickets  and  dig 
sego  roots  for  food  and  she  shared 
in  all  the  hardships  of  pioneer  life. 
After  the  death  of  her  husband  in 
1883,  she  spent  thirty  years  of  her 
life  as  a  widow,  but  lived  long  enough 
to  enjoy  thirty-five  grandchildren 
and  twenty-three  great  grandchild- 
ren. She  died  at  Centerville,  July  18, 
1915,  nearly  84  years  old.  Her  life 
was  a  living  testimony  of  God's  good- 
ness to  all  who  put  their  trust  In  him. 
She  often  declared  that  the  sweet  in- 
fluence of  prayer  guided  her  whole 
career  in  life. 

RICH,  Thomas,  a  High  Councilor 
in  the  Morgan  Stake  of  Zion,  Morgan 
county,  Utah,  was  born  Nov.  29,  1817, 
in  Floyd  county,  Indiana,  the  son  of 
Landon  Rich  and  Elizabeth  Rickets. 
His  father  was  in  the  war  of  1812, 
and  moved  with  his  family  to  Ken- 
tucky where  Thomas  was  raised.  He 
married  Henrietta  Peck,  to  whom  he 
was  subsequently  sealed  in  the  Nau- 
voo  Temple,  passed  through  the  per- 
secutions of  the  Saints  in  Missouri 
and  Illinois  and  was  a  participant  in 
the  Crooked  River  battle,  acted  as  a 
body  guard  to  the  Prophet  Joseph 
Smith,  and  came  to  Utah  in  1850, 
crossing  the  plains  in  Joseph  Young's 
company,  he  himself  being  a  captain 
of  ten.  After  locating  temporarily 
at  Centerville,  he  took  an  active  part 
in  Ward  affairs  and  also  participated 
in  the  expedition  into  the  mountains 
in  1857-58  during  the  Johnston  Army 
trouble.  In  1861  he  moved  to  Rlch- 
ville,    Morgan    county,    which   settle- 


BIOGRAPHICAL  ENCYCLOPEDIA. 


213 


ment  was  named  in  his  honor,  and  in 
1871  he  became  a  resident  of  Porter- 
ville.  Bro.  Rich  was  the  first  pre- 
siding Elder  at  Richville,  and  died 
Jan.  26,  1884,  at  Porterville.  He  was 
ordained  a  High  Priest  July  1,  1877. 
His  wife  Henrietta  died  March  8, 
1896;  she  was  the  daughter  of  Ben- 
jamin Peck  and  Phoebe  Crosby,  and 
was  born  August  3,  1823,  in  Che- 
nango county,  N.  Y. 

RICH,  Thomas  Jr.,  a  counselor  in 
the  Porterville  bishopric,  Morgan 
county,  Utah,  was  born  Oct.  11,  1847, 


at  Winter  Quarters,  Nebraska,  the 
son  of  Thomas  Rich  and  Henrietta 
Peck.  He  came  with  his  parents  to 
Utah  in  1850,  was  baptized  by  Jede- 
diah  M.  Grant  in  1857,  was  ordained 
an  Elder  in  1864  by  John  D.  T.  Mc- 
Allister, was  ordained  a  Seventy  Feb. 
jl7,  1884,  by  Dan  Bertech  and  was 
ordained  a  High  Priest  Nov.  15,  1884, 
by  Geo.  Teasdale  and  set  apart  as 
second  counselor  to  Bishop  Joseph  R. 
.Porter.  In  1897  he  was  chosen  as 
second  counselor  to  Bishop  Joseph 
Durrant,  w^hich  position  he  held  until 
1904,  when  he  was  chosen  as  first 
counselor  in  the  presidency  of  the 
High  Priests  quorum.  In  1876  (Dec. 
4th)  Bro.  Rich  married  Adria  Eliza- 
beth Brough  (a  daughter  of  Thomas 
Brough    and    Jane   Patterson),    who 


was  born  Oct.  13,  18  59,  In  Madison 
county,  111.;  and  emigrated  to  Utah 
in  1864.  This  marriage  was  blessed 
with  ten  children,  four  boys  and  six 
girls.  Sister  Rich  presided  over  the 
Porterville  Relief  Society  a  number 
of  years  and  prior  to  that  presided 
over  the  "Ward  Primary  Association. 
She  now  serves  on  the  Stake  Board  of 
Relief  Societies. 

RICHARDS,  Jesse  Snyder,  Bishop 
of  the  Virginia  Ward  (Portneuf 
Stake),  Bannock  county,  Idaho,  was 
born  April  11,  1887,  at  Ogden,  Utah, 
the  son  of  Charles  C.  Richards  and 
Louisa  L.  Peery.  He  was  baptized 
April  11,  1895,  by  his  father;  or- 
dained a  Deacon  when  quite  young  by 
George  Shorten;  ordained  a  Teacher 
a  little  later  by  Edwin  T.  Woolley; 
ordained  a  Priest  still  later;  ordained 
an  Elder  by  his  father,  and  ordained 
a  High  Priest  and  Bishop  August  15, 
1915,  by  Apostle  Francis  M.  Lyman. 
While  filling  the  office  of  a  Deacon 
in  the  Second  Ward,  Ogden,  Utah,  he 
presided     over     a    Deacons  quorum 


about  two  years.  He  has  also  acted 
as  Ward  teacher  and  Sunday  school 
teacher.  He  was  vice  president  of 
the  Portneuf-Marsh  Valley  Canal 
Company,  and  was  secretary  and 
treasurer    of    the    Bannock    County 


214 


LATTER-DAY   SAINT 


Fair  Association  for  two  years. 
June  20,  1912,  he  married  Kathryn 
May  Coughnet  (a  daughter  of  Wil- 
liam H.  Coughnet  and  Julia  Emma 
Gulick),  who  was  born  Sept.  2,  1887, 
at  Albany  New  York.  Nov.  7,  1916, 
he  was  elected  a  member  of  the  house 
of  representatives  of  the  Fourteenth 
Idaho  legislature.  He  was  also  ap- 
pointed Carey  Act  commissioner  for 
the  Portneuf-Marsh  Valley  Irrigation 
Project.  Bishop  Richards  is  a  farm- 
er and  stockraiser  by  occupation,  and 
specializes  in  pure-bred  live  stock. 
He  is  manager  of  the  Richards  Live 
Stock  Company  of  Virginia,  Idaho, 
which  is  owned  by  himself  and  father. 

RICHARDS,     Mary     Ann     Parker, 

wife  of  Samuel  W.  Richards,  was 
born  Nov.  4,  18  3  9,  at  Chaidgley,  Lan- 


cashire, England,  the  daughter  of 
John  Parker  and  Alice  Woodacre. 
After  the  death  of  her  mother  she 
came  to  America  with  her  father,  a 
brother  and  a  sister  in  the  year  1845 
with  a  company  of  Latter-day  Saints, 
which  went  directly  to  Nauvoo,  111. 
There  the  family  resided  for  nine 
months  and  then  removed  to  St. 
Louis,  Mo.,  leaving  Nauvoo  during 
the  exodus  of  the  Saints  from  that 
city.  The  family  resided  at  St.  Louis 
six  years,  during  which  time  Sister 
Mary's    father    engaged    in    business 


through  which  he  was  enabled  to  ob- 
tain a  good  outfit  with  which  to 
travel  to  the  mountains,  as  well  as  to 
assist  others  to  acquire  similar  out- 
fits. Sister  Mary  Ann  was  baptized 
at  the  age  of  nine  years  at  St.  Louis. 
In  the  spring  of  1852  the  family  mi- 
grated to  Salt  Lake  Valley  and  lo- 
cated in  Salt  Lake  City,  where  Mary 
Ann  became  the  wife  of  the  late  Sam- 
uel Whitney  Richards  Feb.  14,  1855; 
she  bore  her  husband  seven  daugh- 
ters and  three  sons,  and  at  the  time 
of  her  death,  which  occurred  Dec. 
14,  1914,  in  Salt  Lake  City,  she  was 
survived  by  six  children,  forty-six 
grandchildren  and  twenty-six  great 
grandchildren.  Sister  Richards  was 
a  faithful  Latter-day  Saint  and  per- 
formed many  useful  services  for  the 
Church.  She  accompanied  and 
labored  with  her  husband  in  the 
Eastern  States  Mission  while  he  pre- 
sided there  during  the  years  1895- 
1897. 

RICHARDSON,    Joseph    Joliii,    an 

active  Elder  of  the  Smithfield  Sec- 
ond Ward,  Cache  county,  Utah,  was 
born  Sept.  25,  1870,  at  Smithfield, 
Utah,  the  son  of  Joseph  B.ichardson 
and  Eliza  Lavina  Harper.  He  was 
baptized  when  eight  years  of  age  by 
Wm.  A.  Noble;  ordained  successively 
to  the  offices  of  Deacon,  Teacher 
and  Priest;  ordained  an  Elder  in 
February,  1896,  by  Robert  A.  Bain; 
ordained  a  Seventy  Feb.  28,  1896, 
by  Seymour  B.  Young,  and  ordained 
a  High  Priest  April  30,  1900,  by 
Apostle  Marriner  W.  Merrill  and  set 
apart  as  second  counselor  to  Bishop 
Newton  Woodruff  of  the  Smithfield 
Ward,  which  office  he  held  for  six 
years.  In  1896-98  he  filled  a  mis- 
sion in  the  Central  States,  presiding 
over  the  Cherokee  conference  eigh- 
teen months;  he  afterwards  presided 
over  the  East  Kansas  conference.  In 
1899  he  filled  a  short  mission  to 
Sevier  Stake  in  the  interest  of  the 
Y.  M.  M.  1.  A.  In  1910-12  he  filled 
a  mission  to  the  Eastern  States,  pre- 
siding  over    the    Rhode    Island    con- 


BIOGRAPHICAL   ENCYCLOPEDIA. 


215 


ference  and  afterwards  over  the  East 
Pennsylvania  conference.  From  18  98 
to  1899  he  labored  as  a  home  mis- 
sionary in  the  Cache  Stake.  In  his 
home  town  he  has  labored  as  Ward 
Teacher,      Sunday      school      teacher, 


parents,  who  were  born  in  the  east- 
ern part  of  New  York  State,  joined 
the  Church  during  the  early  perse- 
cutions of  the  Saints,  his  father  be- 
ing baptized  by  the  Prophet  Joseph 
Smith  in  the  Mississippi  river.  They 
emigrated  to  Utah  in  1850  in  Capt. 
Brown's  company,  and  located  at 
Browns  Fort  (now  Ogden),  Utah. 
Bishop  Richardson  writes,  "I  was 
baptized  when  nine  years  of  age  by 
John  Carver.  At  fourteen  years  of 
age  I  received  the  Aaronic  Priest- 
hood and  was  ordained  a  Deacon  by 
Bishop  Pleasant  Green  Taylor.  When 
seventeen  years  old  I  was  ordained 
a  Teacher.  In  April,  1884,  I  was 
ordained  an  Elder  by  John  England 
at  Plain  City,  and  on  April  10,  1884, 
I  married  Louisa  C.  Shurtliff,  daugh- 
ter of  Pres.  Lewis  W.  Shurtliff  of 
the  Weber  Stake.  I  was  ordained  a 
Seventy  Oct.  1,  1901,  and  set  apart 
for  a  mission  to  the  Northwestern 
States  by  Jonathan  G.  Kimball.  Ar- 
riving in  the  Mission  Oct.  5,  1901,  I 
was    assigned    to    the    Portland    con- 


president  and  counselor  in  the  Y.  M. 
M.  I.  A.,  superintendent  of  Religion 
Class,  and  teacher  in  the  Seventy's 
quorum  class.  Stake  Aid  in  the  Y.  M. 
M.  I.  A.  cause,  etc.  Of  secular  offices 
it  may  be  said  that  he  was  assessor 
of  Cache  county  for  four  years.  He 
was  elected  to  the  office  of  mayor  of 
Smithfield,  Utah,  in  1913.  took  office 
in  January,  1914,  and  was  reelected 
to  the  same  office  in  1915.  The  per- 
manent improvements  inaugurated 
during  his  term  of  office  indicate 
the  thrift,  industry,  integrity  and 
tenacity  of  his  executive  ability  and 
forethought.  Brother  Richardson 
spent  the  early  part  of  his  life  on  the 
farm,  but  later  engaged  in  stock- 
raising.  In  1899  (Jan.  21st)  he  mar- 
ried Laurina  May  Low,  by  whom  he 
has  had  eight  children. 


RICHARDSON,      Myron      Barber,  ference,  where  I  labored  until  Decem- 

Bishop    of     the     Ogden    Third    Ward  ber,  1902,  when  I  was  called  to  pre- 

(North    Weber     Stake),     Utah,    was  side    over    the    Boise    conference.      I 

born  Feb.  21,  1865,  at  Ogden,  Utah,  labored    in   this    capacity    until    Nov. 

the  son  of  Ebenezer   Clawson   Rich-  10,    1903,    when    I    was    released    to 

ardson  and   Phoebe  W.   Childs.      His  return    home.       I    enjoyed    my    mis- 


216 


LATTER-DAY   SAINT 


sionary  labors  very  much  and  was 
blessed  by  the  Lord.  Upon  my  re- 
turn home  I  moved  from  Plain  City 
to  Ogden,  where  I  made  my  residence 
in  the  Third  Ward.  Here  I  was 
called  to  act  as  supervisor  of  the 
parents  department  of  the  Sunday 
school,  and  also  labored  as  a  presid- 
ing Ward  teacher.  I  have  also  acted 
as  one  of  the  presidents  of  the  53rd 
quorum  of  Seventy.  In  1908  I  was 
chosen  first  vice  president  of  the 
Utah  State  Federation  of  Labor,  and 
acted  in  this  position  for  the  next 
three  years.  During  this  time  I  was 
chosen  to  represent  the  laboring  class 
in  a  labor  convention  held  at  Chi- 
cago. I  served  as  a  member  of  the 
Utah  State  legislature  during  the 
ninth  session,  which  met  in  1911. 
In  1911  (Jan.  1st)  I  was  ordained 
a  High  Priest  and  set  apart  by  John 
V.  Bluth  as  second  counselor  to  Bish- 
op Wm.  D.  Van  Dyke  of  the  Ogden 
Third  Ward,  North  Weber  Stake.  I 
held  this  position  until  Oct.  12,  1913, 
when  I  was  called  to  succeed  Elias 
S.  King  as  first  counselor  to  Bishop 
Wm.  D.  Van  Dyke  Jr.  Bishop  Wm. 
D.  Van  Dyke  died  May  22,  1914, 
and  on  June  28th  I  was  ordained  a 
Bishop  and  set  apart  to  preside  over 
the  Ogden  Third  Ward  by  Apostle 
Orson  F.  Whitney,  which  position 
I  am  holding  at  the  present  time. 
The  names  of  my  children  are:  Lewis 
E.,  Emily  S.,  Edith  A.,  Irene  L.  and 
Myron  B.  Richardson,  Jr.  The  last 
named  has  served  as  a  missionary  in 
the  Eastern  States  Mission.  I  also 
have  ten  grandchildren." 

RIRIE,  David,  Bishop  of  the  Perry 
Ward  (Rigby  Stake),  Jefferson  coun- 
ty, Idaho,  was  born  Nov.  21,  1860, 
at  West  Weber,  Weber  county,  Utah, 
the  son  of  James  Ririe  and  Ann 
Boyack.  He  was  baptized  April  2  6, 
1869,  by  James  Ririe;  ordained  a 
Teacher ,in  1878;  presided  over  the 
Teachers  quorum  for  several  years; 
ordained  an  Elder  in  1886  by  Sam- 
uel Farrow;  married  Leah  Ann  Lov- 
ell,    Sept.    14,    1893,    in    the    Logan 


Temple;  acted  as  first  counselor  to 
the  president  of  the  second  quorum 
of  Elders  in  the  Bingham  Stake 
four  years;  was  ordained  a  Seventy 
Oct.  25,  1900,  by  Anthon  H.  Lund; 
filled  a  mission  to  Great  Britain  in 
1900-1903,  laboring  in  the  New  Cas- 
tle conference;  ordained  a  High 
Priest  March  4,  1904,  by  Robt.  L. 
Bybee  and  set  apart  to  preside  over 
the  High  Priests  quorum  in  the  Bing- 
ham Stake  when  that  Stake  was  di- 
vided, and  was  set  apart  as  second 
counselor  to  Bishop  Streeper  of  the 
Peery  Ward,  Rigby  Stake,  Sept.  10, 
1910;  finally  he  was  ordained  a  Bish- 


op April  7,  1911,  by  Francis  M.  Ly- 
man and  set  apart  to  preside  over 
the  Perry  Ward.  Bishop  Ririe  has 
been  a  farmer  all  his  life  and  has 
served  as  justice  of  the  peace  for  the 
Perry  precinct  for  four  years.  The 
names  of  his  children  are  Joseph 
Hyrum,  Elizabeth  Ann,  James  Ed- 
mond,  George  Franklin,  Parley  Alex- 
ander, Elden  Clide  and  Silvia  Ellen. 

RITCHIE,  John  McAffee  (Contin- 
ued from  Vol.  2,  page  11).  John  M. 
Ritchie  acted  as  counselor  to  Bishop 
N.  C.  Murdock  of  the  Charleston 
Ward  from  1898  to  liOl,  and  from 
1901  to  1904  he  acted  as  a  coun- 
selor to  Bishop  Wm.  Daybell.  He 
was  elected  county  commissioner  in 


BIOGRAPHICAL  ENCYCLOPEDIA. 


217 


November,  1914.  In  connection  with 
his  farming  Bro.  Ritchie  is  a  special- 
ist in  raising  pure-bred  horses  and 
Hereford  cattle,  and  is  meeting  with 
great  success  in  improving  the  stand- 
ard of  his  animals.  Bishop  Ritchie 
is  the  father  of  nine  children,  name- 
ly, Mabel,  Joseph  W.,  Lacey,  Vera 
J.,  Elden  L.,  P.  Clyde,  Horace  J., 
Nerdell  W.  and  Relva. 

ROBBINS,  Hulbert  Bross,  Bishop 
of  the  Stone  Ward  (Curlew  Stake), 
Box  Elder  county,  Utah,  was  born 
June  29,  1874,  at  Curlew,  Box  Elder 
county,  Utah,  the  son  of  Wm.  Rob- 
bins  and  Jane  Carter.  When  born 
he  was  rather  deformed,  being  club- 
footed,  twisted  in  the  hip  joints  and 


in  various  ways  far  from  being  nor- 
mal, but  through  the  faith  and 
prayers  of  his  mother,  coupled  with 
her  continuous  nursing,  he  at  eigh- 
teen months  old  was  perfectly 
straight  and  able  to  walk.  He  was 
baptized  July  9,  1882,  by  Wm.  Rob- 
bins;  ordained  a  Deacon  in  1886; 
acted  in  the  presidency  of  the 
Deacons  qourum  at  Snowville  four 
years,  and  labored  as  a  special  mis- 
sionary in  the  interest  of  Y.  M.  M. 
I.  A.  during  the  winter  of  1893-94. 
He  was  ordained  a  Priest  March  24, 
1895,  by  Wm.  Hurd  and  acted  as  one 


of  the  presidency  of  the  Ward  Y.  M. 
M.  I.  A.  in  1896-98.  In  1897  (Nov. 
24th)  he  married  Mary  Ellen  C. 
Jackson  in  the  Salt  Lake  Temple; 
was  ordained  an  Elder  Nov.  24, 1897; 
acted  as  president  of  the  Ward  Y. 
M.  M.  I.  A.  from  1900  to  1902  In 
the  Stone  branch,  Snowville  Ward; 
was  ordained  a  High  Priest  August 
25,  l'd02,  and  set  apart  to  act  as 
Bishop's  counselor  by  Pres.  Lucius 
A.  Snow;  acted  as  superintendent  of 
the  Stone  Ward  Sunday  school  from 
June  4,  1904,  to  July  30,  1911;  was 
ordained  a  Bishop  by  Apostle  Rudger 
Clawson  May  17,  1915,  and  set  apart 
to  preside  over  the  Stone  Ward; 
called  and  set  apart  Feb.  4,  1917, 
by  Pres.  John  C.  Cutler,  as  presi- 
dent of  High  Priests  quorum  of  the 
Curlew  Stake  and  called  into  the 
High  Council  of  the  Curlew  Stake 
Nov.  4,  1917.  Bishop  Robbins  has 
filled  many  other  offices,  both  eccle- 
siastical and  civil,  and  is  throughout 
a  leading  man  in  the  community. 
The  names  of  his  children  are  Jennie 
Ellen,  Hulbert  Merlin,  Alberta,  Doris, 
Chas.  William,  Elliot  Kenneth,  Ken- 
dall Jackson,  Mildred  Nellie  and 
Amy  Catherine.  Bishop  Robbins  is 
a  farmer  and  stockraiser  by  avoca- 
tion. 

ROBISON,  Daniel,  first  counselor 
to  Bishop  Oluff  B.  Andersen  of  the 
North  Morgan  Ward  (Morgan  Stake), 
Morgan  county,  Utah,  was  born 
March  21,  1831,  at  Quincy,  Franklin 
county,  Pennsylvania,  the  son  of 
Alexander  Robison  and  Nancy  Wald- 
erman.  He  was  baptized  in  March, 
1854,  by  Joseph  Mantser,  and  while 
yet  young  ordained  to  different  po- 
sitions in  the  Priesthood.  About 
1852  he  married  Rachel  Smith  who 
bore  him  twelve  children,  namely, 
Agnes  Ellen,  Annie  Catherin-e,  John 
S.,  George  Q.,  Daniel  Philander, 
Rachel  Berdie,  Brigham,  Margaret 
Helen,  David  Alexander,  Samuel 
Alonzo,  Lucy  Malinda,  and  Arta.  He 
emigrated  to  America  in  1860,  cross- 
ing the  plains  as  captain  of  a  hand- 


218 


LATTER-DAY   SAINT 


cart  company,  which  arrived  in  Salt 
Lake    City,    August    27,    1860.       He 


died    in    Morgan,    Utah,    March     2  5, 
1907,  as  a  faithful  Latter-day  Saint. 

ROBINSON,  George  Henry,  second 
Bishop  of  Laketown  ( Hear  Lake 
Stake),  Rich  county,  Utah,  was  born 
June  21,  1868,  at  Clayton,  near  Brad- 
ford, Yorkshire,  England,  the  son  of 
Geo.  Robinson  and  Sarah  Craven.  He 
emigrated  with  his  parents  to  Utah  in 
1873;    was  ordained   a  Deacon   when 


a   boy;    ordained   an   Elder   Aug.    25, 
1888,  by  George  Osmond;  ordained  a 


Seventy  Sept.  17,  1890,  by  Nathaniel 
M.  Hodges,  and  ordained  a  High 
Priest  and  Bishop  April  11,  1905,  by 
President  Joseph  F.  Smith,  and  set 
apart  to  preside  over  the  Laketown 
Ward.  When  quite  young  he  acted  as 
a  counselor  in  a  Deacons'  quroum; 
acted  as  senior  president  of  a  quorum 
of  Seventy;  was  secretary  of  the 
Ward  Sunday  school,  teacher  in  a 
theological  class,  counselor  in  the 
Ward  Y.  M.  M.  L  A.,  and  superintend- 
ent of  Religion  Class.  In  1895-97  he 
tilled  a  mission  to  Great  Britain, 
laboring  in  the  Leeds  conference,  part 
of  the  time  as  president  of  the  same. 
After  his  return  home  he  spent  three 
months  as  a  M.  1.  A.  missionary  in 
the  Bear  Lake  Stake.  In  1903-1905 
he  filled  a  mission  to  the  Eastern 
States,  laboring  first  in  Boston,  and 
then  as  president  of  the  Southwest 
Virginia  conference.  At  home  he  has 
acted  as  justice  of  the  peace,  school 
trustee,  county  attorney,  county 
superintendent  of  schools  and  served 
as  a  member  of  the  Utah  State  leg- 
islature in  1913.  In  1895  (June  20th) 
he  married  Lucy  Barker  (daughter  of 
John  H.  Barker  and  Susan  Dermott), 
who  was  born  March  25,  187  6,  at 
Newton,  Cache  county,  Utah.  Seven 
children.  Fuchsia,  Vernon  G.,  Wilford 
H.,  Amos  B.,  Ella,  Hazel  and  Grace, 
have  blessed  this  marriage.  Bishop 
Robinson  followed  farming  as  a  boy 
and  after  graduating  from  the  B.  Y. 
College  of  Logan  he  taught  school  a 
number  of  years  and  entered  into 
the  mercantile  business  in  1855, 
which  business  he  is  conducting  at 
the  present  time. 

ROBINSON,  James  Henry,  presi- 
dent of  the  South  Davis  Stake  of 
Zion,  was  born  Nov.  8,  1865,  at 
Farmington,  Davis  county,  Utah,  the 
son  of  Oliver  Lee  Robinson  and  Lucy 
Miller.  He  was  baptized  Aug.  1, 
1875,  by  John  W.  Hess;  was  ordained 
a  Deacon  when  a  boy  and  presided 
over  a  Deacons'  quorum  for  several 
years,  until  he  was  ordained  a  Teach- 
er  and   subsequently   an   Elder.      He 


BIOGRAPHICAL   ENCYCLOPEDIA. 


219 


was    ordained    a    Seventy    Feb.     17, 

1905,  by  Joseph  H.  Grant,  and  acted 
as  one  of  the  presidents  of  the  5  6th 
quorum  of  Seventy,  and  ordained  a 
High    Priest    and    Bishop    Nov.     2  7, 

1906,  by    Francis    M.     Lyman.       In 


1902  he  was  chosen  as  superintend- 
ent of  the  Farmington  Sunday  school, 
having  previously  acted  as  first  as- 
sistant superintendent  for  two  years 
in  the  same  organization.  For  two 
years  he  labored  as  a  home  mis- 
sionary in  the  Davis  Stake.  He  was 
the  first  marshal  of  Farmington, 
where  he  also  has  acted  as  city  coun- 
cilman several  terms  and  as  mayor 
from  Jan.  1,  1904,  to  Jan.  1,  1908. 
Farmingand  merchandizing  have  been 
his  principal  avocations,  and  in  1894 
he  was  made  superintendent  of  the 
Farmington  Commercial  &  Manufac- 
turing Company.  In  18  8  9  (Dec. 
18th)  he  married  Romania  Chaff  in 
(daughter  of  Darwin  E.  Chaff  in  and 
Victoria  Wilson),  who  was  born  Nov. 
3,  1866,  at  Farmington.  This  mar- 
riage has  been  blessed  with  nine 
children,  six  boys  and  three  girls. 
When  the  Davis  Stake  was  divided 
into  two  Stakes,  in  June,  1915,  he 
was  chosen  and  set  apart  as  president 
of  the  South  Davis  Stake,  by  Fran- 
cis M.  Lyman. 


ROBINSON,  Joseph  Eldridge,  pres- 
ident of  the  California  Mission,  was 
born  Nov.  26,  1867,  at  Pinto.  Wash- 
ington county,  Utah,  the  son  of  Rich- 
ard S.  Robinson  and  Mary  Kate 
Eldridge.  He  was  baptized  Aug.  12, 
1876,  by  Joseph  Eldridge;  ordained 
a  Deacon  April  18,  1880,  by  John  H. 
Harrison;  ordained  a  Teacher  in  Feb- 
ruary, 18  84,  and  ordained  an  Elder 
late  in  the  fall  of  the  same  year.  He 
was  ordained  a  High  Priest  Dec.  20, 
1896,  by  Thomas  Chamberlain;  acted 
as  second  assistant  in  the  Stake 
superintendency  of  the  St.  George 
Stake  Sunday  schools  from  1888  to 
1889;  acted  as  Stake  superintendent 
of  Sunday  schools  in  the  Kanab 
Stake  from  1892  to  1900;  labored 
as  an  alternate  member  of  the  High 
Council  of  the  Kanab  Stake  from 
September.  1895,  to  May,  1900;  was 
called  on  a  mission  to  California  in 
1900,  where  he  first  labored  as  a 
traveling  Elder  and  afterwards  pre- 
sided over  the  Sacramento  confer- 
ence. Since  June,  1901,  he  has  pre- 
sided   over    the    California    Mission, 


with  headquarters  at  San  Francisco 
until  the  earthquake,  in  1906,  and 
after  that  he  has  resided  at  Los  An- 
geles. From  his  earliest  youth  Elder 
Robinson  has  taken  an  active  part  in 
Church    affairs;    thus    he    filled    im- 


220 


LATTER-DAY   SAINT 


portant  positions  in  the  auxiliary 
organizations  while  residing  at  Pinto. 
He  followed  farming  as  an  occupa- 
tion early  in  life,  but  followed  mer- 
chandizing in  Kane  county  from  1890 
to  1900;  there  he  also  acted  as  coun- 
ty clerk  and  recorder  and  county 
assessor  and  collector.  He  served  as 
a  member  of  the  Utah  State  consti- 
tutional convention  and  also  as  a 
member  of  the  first  three  State  leg- 
islatures of  Utah.  In  1891  (Dec. 
21st)  he  married  Minnie  Ann  Knell, 
of  Pinto,  in  the  St.  George  Temple, 
by  whom  he  has  had  four  children, 
namely,  Joseph  Knell,  Minnie  Kate, 
Inez  and  Walter  Knell.  During  El- 
der Robinson's  presidency  of  the 
California  Mission  a  beautiful  L.  D. 
S.  chapel,  mission  office  and  mission 
house  has  been  built  at  Los  Angeles, 
and  splendid  church  edifices  have 
also  been  built  in  Gridley  and  San 
Diego,  California,  and  other  church 
buildings  in  the  Arizona  branches  of 
the  mission. 

ROBINSON,  Joseph  Lee,  the  first 
Bishop  of  the  Farmington  Ward, 
Davis  county,  Utah,  was  born  Feb. 
18,  1811,  at  Shaftsbury,  Bennington 
county,  Vermont,  the  son  of  Nathan 
Robinson  and  Mary  Brown.  When 
yet  a  boy  he  moved  with  his  parents 
to  Boonville,  Oneida  county.  New 
York,  where  he  became  acquainted 
with  Mariah  Wood  and  married  her 
July  23,  1832.  While  living  at  Boon- 
ville his  younger  brother,  Ebenezer, 
brought  him  the  gospel  and  bap- 
tized him  Aug.  13,  1836.  He  came 
to  Nauvoo  in  August,  1841;  was  or- 
dained a  High  Priest  in  1843,  by 
Jonathan  H.  Hale,  and  set  apart  as 
first  counselor  in  the  bishopric  of 
the  Ninth  Ward  (Nauvoo).  Before 
his  ordination  as  a  High  Priest,  he 
had  been  ordained  an  Elder  in  New 
York,  by  James  Blakesley,  and  pre- 
sided over  a  branch  of  the  Church 
near  Rome,  New  York,  where  he  al- 
so built  a  school  house.  He  mar- 
ried Susan  McCord  Jan.  31,  1846, 
and  helped  to  erect  the  Nauvoo  Tem- 


ple, in  which  he  received  his  bless- 
ings. He  also  became  intimately  ac- 
quainted with  the  Prophet  Joseph, 
and  said  later  in  life  that  he  loved 
the  Prophet  more  than  any  other 
man  he  had  ever  known.  He  partici- 
pated in  the  exodus  from  Nauvoo, 
and  became  a  temporary  resident  of 
Winter  Quarters,  where  he  was  made 
Bishop  of  the  Seventh  Ward.  While 
at  Winter  Quarters  he  married  Lau- 
rinda  Maria  Atwood,  March  20,  1847. 
In  1848  he  crossed  the  plains  to  the 
Valley,  arriving  in  Salt  Lake  City 
Oct.  19,  1848.  In  the  spring  of  1849 
he  moved  to  North  Cottonwood 
(Farmington)  and  was  set  apart  as 
Bishop  of  that  place  March  25,  1849. 


About  the  same  time  he  was  elected 
justice  of  the  peace  for  Davis  county. 
In  1853  (Feb.  16th)  he  married 
Lydia  Foster,  and  in  1867  (Feb. 
2nd)  he  married  Mary  Taylor  Sim- 
mons. By  his  five  wives  he  became 
the  father  of  27  children.  When  the 
Davis  Stake  of  Zion  was  organized, 
June  17,  1877,  Bro.  Robinson  was 
chosen  as  a  member  of  the  High 
Council,  and  he  was  ordained  a  Patri- 
arch by  Franklin  D.  Richards  Oct. 
24,  1880.  Faithful  and  true  to  his 
covenants,  he  died  at  Uintah,  Weber 
county,  Utah,  Jan.  1,  1893. 


BIOGRAPHICAL  ENCYCLOPEDIA. 


221 


ROBINSON,  Richard  Smith,  Bishop 
and  Indian  missionary,  was  born  Nov. 
25,  1830,  in  Upton,  Cheshire,  Eng- 
land, the  son  of  Edward  Robinson 
and  Mary  Smith.  He  emigrated  to 
America  in  1842,  crossing  the  Atlan- 
tic in  the  ship  "Henry."  The  com- 
pany spent  six  week  on  the  ocean. 
During  the  first  two  weeks  the  voy- 
age was  prosperous,  but  during  the 
last  four  weeks  the  ship  was  be- 
calmed. The  captain  (who  was  a 
bachelor),  and  the  leader  of  the  com- 
pany. Elder  John  Snyder,  did  not 
agree  very  well.  From  New  Orleans 
the  journey  was  continued  up  the 
Mississippi  in  a  large  steamer  to  St. 


Louis,  Mo.,  where  the  comfiany  had 
to  remain  all  winter  because  of  the 
severity  of  the  weather,  and  in  the 
spring  of  1843  the  company  pro- 
ceeded up  the  river  to  Nauvoo  in  the 
"Maid  of  Iowa"  together  with  an- 
other company  of  Saints  which  had 
crossed  the  Atlantic  in  the  ship 
"Sydney."  The  little  steamer,  "Maid 
of  Iowa,"  made  three  unsuccessful 
efforts  to  stem  the  rapids  and  at 
length  the  passengers  were  landed, 
walked  up  the  river  past  the  rapids 
and  then  boarded  the  vessel  again. 
Bro.  Robinson  remained  at  Nauvoo, 
111.,  until  the  exodus  in  184  6.  His 
father   built   a   fine    brick   house   im- 


mediately east  of  Nauvoo,  and  his 
mother  died  in  that  city.  After  the 
exodus,  in  184  6,  Bro.  Robinson  tar- 
ried in  Iowa  till  18  49,  when  he 
crossed  the  plains  to  the  Valley,  but 
continued  the  journey  to  California 
the  same  year,  after  spending  only 
one  week  in  the  Valley.  He  worked 
in  the  mines  near  Sacramento  till 
1852,  when  he  returned  to  the  Valley 
by  the  Northern  route  and  settled  at 
American  Fork,  Utah  county,  where 
he  married,  and  in  1854  was  sent 
with  Jacob  Hamblin  and  about  40 
others  to  Harmony,  where  he  was 
one  of  the  early  settlers.  Together 
with  Samuel  F.  Atwood  and  Lorenzo 
W.  Roundy  he  laid  most  of  the  rock 
and  adobes  of  the  old  fort  at  Har- 
mony, which  was  built  200  feet 
square  and  two  stories  high.  This 
fort  was  subsequently  washed  away. 
From  Harmony  Bro.  Robinson  re- 
moved to  Pinto  in  the  fall  of  1856. 
He  and  the  family  of  Rufus  Allen 
and  Amos  G.  Thornton  were  the  first 
settlers  at  Pinto.  They  built  two 
cellars  covered  with  willows  and  clay 
and  spent  the  winter  of  1856-57  at 
the  infant  settlement,  they  being  the 
only  two  families  there.  The  next 
season  other  settlers  arrived  at  Pinto 
and  a  regular  townsite  was  surveyed. 
When  a  branch  was  organized,  Bro. 
Robinson  was  chosen  as  Presiding 
Elder  of  the  same.  Subsequently  he 
was  ordained  a  Bishop.  Pinto  was 
originally  an  Indian  missionary  re- 
sort, and  Bro.  Robinson  also  helped 
to  build  the  stone  fort  at  Santa 
Clara.  Pinto  consisted  the  first  win- 
ter of  its  existence  of  two  cellars. 
When  the  first  California  emigrants 
passed  through,  having  heard  of  the 
place  and  approaching  the  little  set- 
tlement in  the  evening,  they  saw 
lights  through  an  opening.  They 
rode  up  on  what  they  thought  was 
an  elevation  to  look  for  the  light. 
The  elevation  proved  to  be  a  cellar, 
and  when  the  horsemen  forced  their 
animals  up  what  they  thought  a  hill, 
a  man  came  running  out  from  the 
cellar  below  and  begged  the  intrud- 


222 


LATTER-DAY   SAINT 


ers  not  to  ride  over  his  house.  Bro. 
Robinson  presided  at  Pinto  about 
twenty  years,  after  which  he  moved 
to  Upper  Kanab,  Kane  county,  Utah, 
in  the  spring  of  1876  to  take  charge 
of  the  Canaan  dairy.  He  was  also 
placed  in  charge  of  the  branch  of  the 
Church  at  Upper  Kanab  and  held 
that  position  about  ten  years,  until 
he  was  called  to  Lower  Kanab  to 
preside  as  Bishop.  Prior  to  this  he 
was  a  member  of  the  first  High 
Council  of  the  Kanab  Stake.  He 
acted  as  Bishop  of  Kanab  from  18  84 
to  1889,  and  was  finally  released  on 
account  of  sickness.  He  made  several 
missionary  trips  among  the  Indians. 

ROBINSON,  George  Huber,  Bishop 
of  the  Kanab  Ward  (Kanab  Stake), 
Kane   county,   Utah,    was    born    April 


over  the  Kanab  Ward.  He  filled  that 
position  until  Sept.  13,  1913,  when 
the  bishopric  of  the  Ward  was  re- 
organized. From  1876  to  1885  he 
resided  with  his  parents  at  Upper 
Kanab.  He  married  Susan  Elizabeth 
Little,  Feb.  5,  1890.  She  was  the 
daughter  of  James  A.  Little  and 
Anna  M.  Baldwin  and  was  born  Jan. 
6,  1871,  in  Eagle  Valley,  Lincoln 
county,  Nevada.  This  marriage  has 
been  blessed  with  nine  children, 
namely,  George  H.,  Teressa,  Malcolm 
L.,  Delmar  G.,  Leda,  Marriner,  Ethel, 
James  G.  and  Anna  Laura. 

ROSE,  Erastus  Francisco,  a  vet- 
eran Elder  of  Farmington,  Davis 
county,  Utah,  was  born  Aug.  25, 
1847,  at  Council  Bluffs,  Iowa,  the 
son  of  Abraham  Rose  and  Catherine 


15,  1867,  on  Pinto  creek,  Washington 
county,  Utah,  the  son  of  Richard  S. 
Robinson  and  Elizabeth  Brindley. 
He  was  baptized  April  15,  18  75,  by 
his  father;  ordained  an  Elder  in  Jan- 
uary, 1890,  by  Bishop  Lawrence  C. 
Mariger;  ordained  a  High  Priest 
Sept.  2,  1900,  by  Francis  M.  Lyman, 
and  set  apart  as  a  Higli  Councilor  in 
the  Kanab  Stake.  He  served  in  that 
capacity  until  Dec.  5,  1910,  when  he 
was  ordained  a  Bishop  by  George  F. 
Richards,    and    set    apart    to    preside 


Nicholson.  He  emigrated  with  his 
parents  to  Utah  in  1853  and  settled 
at  Farmington,  which  became  his 
permanent  home.  Here  he  was  bap- 
tized April  27,  1856,  by  Daniel  A. 
Miller.  In  18  66  he  went  back  as  a 
Church  teamster  to  the  Missouri 
river  after  emigrants.  He  was  or- 
dained an  Elder  and  subsequently 
a  Seventy,  and  acted  as  secretary 
of  an  Elders'  quorum  a  number  of 
years.  In  1902-1903  he  filled  a  mis- 
sion to  the   Eastern  States,   laboring 


BIOGRAPHICAL   ENCYCLOPEDIA. 


223 


in  the  State  of  New  York,  during 
which  time  he  reopened  the  Syracuse 
branch.  In  1868  (Jan.  4th))  he 
married  Josephine  E.  Robinson,  who 
bore  her  husband  ten  children,  six 
boys  and  four  girls;  eight  of  these 
children  are  still  living.  Bro.  Rose 
is  a  farmer  and  carpenter  by  avoca- 
tion. For  twenty  years  (being  a 
musician)  he  played  for  dances  and 
was  a  member  of  a  band,  playing  the 
organ,  accordion  and  concertina. 
Bro.   Rose  died   Jan.    4,    1910. 

ROSE,  Josephine  Elnora  Robinson, 

wife  of  Erastus  F.  Rose,  was  born 
Nov.    9,    1852,   at  Farmington,   Davis 


county,  Utah,  the  daughter  of  Joseph 
Lee  Robinson  and  Lorinda  Maria  At- 
wood.  At  the  age  of  seven  years  she 
moved  with  her  parents  to  Mountain 
Green,  where  she  was  baptized,  but 
returned  to  Farmington  in  1864.  In 
1868  (Jan.  4th)  she  married  Erastus 
F.  Rose  and  by  him  became  the 
mother  of  ten  children.  Sister  Rose 
has  been  an  active  Relief  Society 
worker  for  many  years,  and  also 
acted  as  a  counselor  in  the  Ward 
Y.  L.  M.  L  A.  for  a  long  time.  In 
1900-1901  she  made  a  visit  to  Cards- 
ton,  Alberta,  Canada,  visiting  her 
children  who  resided  there.  While 
there   she   rendered   efficient   service 


in  behalf  of  the  sick  and  received 
three  blessings  in  tongues.  Though 
passing  through  many  hardships  and 
trials,  she  never  faltered  in  her  faith 
in  the  Lord  nor  the  gospel.  For  ten 
years  she  was  engaged  in  raising  silk 
worms,  and  one  season  she  raised 
six  and  a  half  pounds  of  eggs,  which 
were  sold  at  the  rate  of  $4  per  ounce. 

ROGERS,  Thomas,  a  faithful  Elder 
in  the  Church,  was  born  in  October, 
1827,  in  Falkirk,  Scotland,  the  son 
of  Archibald  Rogers  and  Isabella 
Wilson.  When  about  a  year  old  his 
parents  emigrated  to  Canada,  where 
his  father  died  about  1835.  Subse- 
quently his  mother  married  Andrew 
L.  Lamereaux,  who  was  a  good  father 
to  her  children.  All  becoming  converts 
to  "Mormonism,"  Thomas  was  bap- 
tized by  his  stepfather  in  June,  18  40, 
after  which  the  family  passed 
through  many  of  the  persecutions 
and  trials  of  those  early  days.  They 
moved  from  Canada  to  Kirtland, 
Ohio,  and  thence  to  Nauvoo,  111., 
prior  to  the  time  of  the  martyrdom 
of  Joseph  and  Hyrum  Smith.  They 
became  intimately  acquainted  with 
the  Prophet,  and  it  afforded  Thomas 


a  great  deal  of  pleasure  in  after 
years  to  tell  of  his  close  associations 
with  Joseph  Smith.     During  the  exo- 


224 


LATTER-DAY   SAINT 


dus  of  184  6  the  Lamereaux  family 
crossed  the  Mississippi  river,  trav- 
eled through  Iowa  and  stopped  one 
winter  at  Winter  Quarters.  In  1848 
Thomas  crossed  the  plains  as  a  team- 
ster in  President  Brigham  Young's 
company,  Andrew  Cahoon  being  the 
captain  of  ten.  In  1851  (March 
27th)  Thomas  Rogers  married  Au- 
relia  Spencer,  daughter  of  Orson 
Spencer  and  Catherine  Curtis,  and 
the  newly  married  couple  located 
permanently  at  Farmington,  Davis 
county.  During  the  Johnston  army 
troubles, Thomas  Rogers  served  under 
Lot  Smith  as  a  minute  man  as  long 
as  the  war  lasted.  He  also  exhibited 
great  activity  during  the  time  of  In- 
dian troubles.  In  185  8  he  partici- 
pated in  the  expedition  which  was 
sent  north  to  rescue  the  settlers  who 
had  located  on  Salmon  river,  the  In- 
dians having  attached  the  little  col- 
ony there.  He  helped  to  move  the 
families  back  to  Utah.  In  1869-1870 
Bro.  Rogers  filled  a  mission  to  Great 
Britain,  where  he  was  very  successful 
as  a  missionary,  but  his  health  fail- 
ing, he  returned  home  sooner  than 
he  expected.  Bro.  Rogers  died  Sept. 
16,  1896,  from  the  effects  of  a  stroke 
of  paralysis  and  was  buried  in  the 
Salt  Lake  City  cemetery. 

ROGERS,  Aurelia  Spencer,  wife  of 
Thomas  Rogers  and  the  "mother" 
of  the  Primary  Associations  in  the 
Church,  was  born  Oct.  4,  1834,  in  the 
town  of  Deep  River,  Connecticut,  the 
daughter  of  Orson  Spencer  and  Cath- 
erine Curtis.  Her  father  moved  from 
Connecticut  to  Middlefield,  Mass., 
where  he  labored  as  a  Baptist  minis- 
ter for  many  years,  but  becoming  a 
convert  to  "Mormonism,"  he  was 
baptized  in  18  41  and  moved  with  his 
family  to  Nauvoo,  111.,  in  the  summer 
of  1842.  In  February,  184  6,  the 
family  crossed  the  Mississippi  river, 
starting  for  the  Rocky  Mountains,  but 
when  30  miles  from  Nauvoo,  Sister 
Spencer,  mother  of  Aurelia,  died 
from  exposure.  Her  remains  were 
taken    back    to    Nauvoo    for    burial. 


Previous  to  leaving  Nauvoo,  Orson 
Spencer  had  been  called  on  a  mission 
to  Great  Britain  to  edit  the  "Mil- 
lennial Star."  To  fill  said  mission  he 
left  Winter  Quarters  and  six  mother- 
less children,  all  less  than  thirteen 
years  of  age,  in  a  log  cabin  and  in 
care  of  James  Bullock.  The  children 
crossed  the  plains  in  Brigham 
Young's  company  in  1848.  On  this 
journey,  in  Andrew  Gaboon's  ten. 
Sister  Aurelia  first  met  her  husband, 
and  three  years  later  (March  27, 
1851)  they  were  married  and  soon 
afterwards  located  at  Farmington. 
Sister  Rogers,  as  one  of  the  early 
settlers  of  Farmington,  passed 
through    quite    an    experience    while 


battling  with  poverty  and  famine, 
owing  to  the  grasshoppers  destroy- 
ing the  crops  and  for  other  reasons. 
Stores  were  few  and  far  between  in 
those  early  days,  and  the  women  had 
to  spin  and  weave  their  own  cloth, 
make  their  own  soap  and  manufac- 
ture their  own  candles  and  candies. 
Sister  Rogers  took  part  in  such  pub- 
lic duties  as  fell  to  the  lot  of  women. 
Thus  she  acted  as  secretary  in  the 
Ward  Relief  Society  for  twenty-two 
years  and  was  the  first  president 
of  the  first  Primary  Association  or- 
ganized in  the  Church,  the  organiza- 
tion   being    effected    at    Farmington 


BIOGRAPHICAL   ENCYCLOPEDIA. 


225 


Aug.  11,  1878.  Sister  Rogers  is  the 
mother  of  twelve  children,  eight 
boys  and  four  girls.  At  the  advanced 
age  of  80  years  she  made  a  silk  dress 
for  herself,  without  using  glasses. 
In  1894  she  made  a  trip  to  the  Wo- 
man's Suffrage  Association  conven- 
tion, held  at  Atlanta,  Georgia,  and 
also  visited  the  Pacific  coast.  Sister 
Rogers  has  had  the  privilege  of  en- 
tering every  Temple  the  Church  has 
erected  up  to  the  present  time  with 
the  exception  of  the  Kirtland  Temple. 
She  is  a  most  remarkable  and  intelli- 
gent woman  and  is  idolized  by 
thousands  as  one  of  the  genuine 
mothers  in  Israel.  (See  Life  Sketch- 
es of  Orson  Spencer  and  Others,  by 
Aurelia   Rogers). 

ROSKELLEY,  James,  senior  presi- 
dent of  the  17th  quorum  of  Seventy 
and  a  resident  of  Smithfield,  Cache 
county,  Utah,  was  born  Jan.  10,  1865, 


at  Smithfield,  the  son  of  Samuel  Ros- 
kelley  and  Rebecca  Hendricks.  In 
his  young  days  he  passed  through 
several  experiences  with  hostile  In- 
dians, and  on  one  occasion  an  old 
Indian  buck  drew  a  large  knife 
around  his  throat  sufficient  to  draw 
blood.  In  order  to  help  his  father 
to  make  a  living  he  worked  on  the 
farm  and  drove  teams  in  the  canyons, 
where  he  had  several  narrow  escapes 

Vol.  Ill,  No.  IB. 


from  sudden  death.  After  receiving 
a  common  school  education  he  or- 
ganized and  conducted  a  high  school 
for  one  winter,  having  great  success. 
At  the  age  of  fifteen  his  father  left 
home  on  a  mission  to  Europe,  and 
one  month  later  his  mother  died, 
after  which  the  responsibility  fell 
upon  James  to  take  care  of  his 
father's  large  family.  Bro.  Ros- 
kelley  was  baptized  July  12,  1874; 
ordained  a  Teacher  Feb.  22,  1875, 
by  "William  A.  Noble;  ordained  a 
Priest  June  6,  1883,  by  John  J.  Plow- 
man; ordained  an  Elder  May  20, 
1884,  by  George  L.  Farrell,  and  or- 
dained a  Seventy  May  26,  188  4,  by 
Wilford  Woodruff.  Subsequently 
(June  10,  1888)  he  was  set  apart  as 
a  president  of  the  17th  quorum  of 
Seventy  and  became  senior  president 
of  that  quorum  Jan.  30,  1909.  In 
1884-86  he  filled  a  mission  to  the 
Southern  States,  laboring  principally 
in  East  Tennessee,  where  he  had 
many  thrilling  experiences,  being 
mobbed  many  times  and  shot  at  on 
several  occasions.  In  one  of  these 
persecutions,  while  sitting  on  a  porch 
of  Col.  William  Green,  Lee  Valley, 
Tenn.,  Aug.  8,  1884,  he  was  shot  by 
a  mobber  in  the  left  arm.  In  1913- 
1914  he  filled  a  six  months'  mission 
to  the  Northwestern  States,  laboring 
principally  in  Portland,  Oregon. 
Twice  he  has  labored  as  a  home  mis- 
sionary in  the  Benson  Stake  and  also 
acted  as  first  assistant  in  the  Y.  M. 
M.  I.  A.  of  the  Cache  Stake.  He  has 
been  the  genealogical  society  repre- 
sentative of  the  Benson  Stake  since 
August,  1912,  was  first  counselor  in 
the  Ward  Y.  M.  M.  I.  A.  in  Smith- 
field,  and  twice  assistant  superin- 
tendent of  the  Smithfield  Ward  Sun- 
day school.  He  also  served  two 
terms  as  field  assessor  in  Cache 
county,  and  as  a  city  councilman  of 
Smithfield.  Though  principally  en- 
gaged in  farming,  he  has  also  been 
engaged  in  the  lumber  business,  life 
insurance  business  and  other  voca- 
tions. He  married  Frances  Annie 
Emery    (daughter    of   Henry    Emery 

March.  1919 


226 


LATTER-DAY   SAINT 


and  Elizabeth  Brewerton),  born  in 
Salt  Lake  City,  June  13,  1867.  This 
marriage  has  been  blessed  with 
twelve  children,  namely,  Aurelia, 
James  E.,  Druzilla,  Frances  Annie, 
Henry  Brewerton,  Edith,  Elizabeth, 
Vida,  Tabitha,  Mary  Edna,  Katie  and 
Dorris   Rhodes. 

RUSSELL,  Allen,  a  Patriarch  in 
the  South  Sanpete  Stake,  Sanpete 
county,  Utah,  was  born  Nov.  1,  182  4, 


he  has  worked  in  the  Temple  for  a 
number  of  years  in  the  interest  of  his 
dead  relatives  and  friends.  Elder 
Russell's  first  wife  was  Harriet  Mas- 
sina  Hutchins,  who  bore  her  husband 
seven  children,  namely,  Allen,  John, 
William,  Elizabeth,  Nancy,  Harriet 
Narcissus  and  Jonathan.  His  second 
wife,  Margaret  Ashley,  whom  he 
married  Dec.  23,  1857,  bore  him 
eight  children,  namely,  Emily,  Julia, 
Susan  Melissa,  Mary,  Jane,  Richard 
Ashley,  Margaret  Ashley  and  Gen- 
nette. 


at  China,  Genessee  county,  New  York, 
the  son  of  Jonathan  Russell  and 
Nancy  Wilson.  He  was  baptized 
Aug.  2  2,  1842,  by  Hyrum  Brown,  in 
Michigan;  ordained  a  Priest  in  1844, 
by  Elder  Perry,  at  Ramus,  Hancock 
county,  111.;  ordained  an  Elder  in 
April,  1849,  at  Kanesville,  Iowa; 
came  to  Utah  with  his  father  in  1852, 
and  was  ordained  a  Seventy  June  14, 
1857,  by  Hyrum  Mace,  at  Fillmore, 
where  the  family  had  settled  in  1852. 
He  was  ordained  a  High  Priest  March 
9,  1869,  by  Joseph  F.  Smith,  and  or- 
dained a  Patriarch  April  14,  1900,  by 
Francis  M.  Lyman.  At  Fillmore  he 
acted  as  a  member  of  the  city  council, 
acted  as  city  marshal  and  road  super- 
visor many  years,  and  from  18  6*9  to 
1901  labored  as  a  home  missionary 
in  the  Millard  Stake.  In  1906  he 
moved  from  Fillmore  to  Manti,  where 


RUSSELL,  Jonathan,  a  veteran  El- 
der of  the  Church,  was  born  May  11, 
1783,  at  New  Canaan,  Columbia 
county.  New  York,  the  son  of  Daniel 
Russell.  Jonathan  was  the  youngest 
of  his  father's  eleven  children,  the 
names  of  his  brothers  and  sisters  be- 
ing the  following:  Anna,  Hannah, 
Chloe,  Martha,  Silva,  Metutabel, 
Sally,  Daniel  (born  in  1775  and  died 
as  an  infant),  Daniel  (born  in  1877) 
and  Abigail.  Jonathan,  who  became 
a  convert  to  "Mormonism,"  gathered 
with  the  Saints  to  Illinois,  where  he 
became  a  member  of  the  Ramus 
branch  in  Hancock  county.  He  was 
ordained  a  Priest  May  31,  1841,  at 
Attica,  Michigan,  by  Hyrum  Brown, 
and  ordained  a  High  Priest  by  Patri- 
arch John  Smith  at  Ramus  in  1844. 
He  married  Nancy  Wilson,  by  whom 
he  became  the  father  of  twelve  chil- 
dren, namely,  Gennette,  George, 
Anna,  Daniel,  Martin,  Leman,  Lyman, 
Mary,  Nancy,  Sally  and  Horace.  Bro. 
Russell  came  to  Utah  at  an  early  day, 
and  died  July  27,  1855,  at  Fillmore, 
Millard  county,  Utah,  as  a  faithful 
Latter-day  Saint. 

SAGERS,  Adam  S.,  Bishop  of  the 
Basin  Ward  (Cassia  Stake),  Cassia 
county,  Idaho,  was  born  Sept.  11, 
1863,  at  Tooele,  Tooele  county,  Utah, 
the  son  of  William  Harrison  Sagers 
and  Marian  Smith.  He  was  baptized 
in  1871,  by  Andrew  Gallaway,  and 
ordained  an  Elder  by  Charles  Hyde 
in    1894.      In    1886     (Nov.    3rd)     he 


BIOGRAPHICAL  ENCYCLOPEDIA. 


227 


married  Martha  T.  Smith,  in  the 
Salt  Lake  Temple,  by  whom  he  be- 
came the  father  of  seven  children, 
namely,  Margaret,  John,  Howard, 
Harry,  Wilford,  Marian  and  Niel. 
All  but  the  last  one  were  born  in 
Utah.  Bro.  Sagers  was  ordained  a 
High  Priest  in  September,  1900,  by 
John  L.  Smith,  and  soon  afterwards 


ordained  a  Bishop  by  Apostle  Rudger 
Clawson.  He  has  served  as  Bishop 
of  the  Basin  Ward  during  the  last 
seventeen  years. 

SALTER,  William,  counselor  in 
the  presidency  of  the  High  Priests' 
quorum  in  the  Davis  Stake  of  Zion, 
was  born  Oct.  16,  1836,  at  Charlcutt, 
Wiltshire,  England,  the  son  of  Wil- 
liam Salter  and  Elizabeth  Hobbs.  He 
became  a  member  of  the  Church 
March  6,  1868,  being  baptized  by 
John  Hatt.  Having  married  Ellen 
Cleverly,  June  5,  18  68,  he  emigrated 
to  Utah  together  with  his  wife  that 
same  year,  crossing  the  Atlantic  in 
the  steamship  "Colorado,"  which 
sailed  from  Liverpool,  England,  July 
14,  1868,  and  arrived  at  New  York 
July  28,  18  68.  The  company  traveled 
by  rail  as  far  as  Fort  Benton  and 
thence  came  to  the  Valley  in  Simp- 
son M.  Molen's  company,  which  ar- 
rived in  Salt  Lake  City  Sept.  2.  1868. 


The  Salter  family  settled  at  Woods 
Cross,  Davis  county,  Utah,  and  has 
followed  farming  principally  since 
their  arrival  in  Utah.  Bro.  Salter 
was  ordained  a  Teacher  March  8, 
1868,  by  William  G.  Burridge,  while 
in  England,  and  ordained  an  Elder 
March  7,  1870,  by  Elias  Smith;  was 
ordained  a  Seventy  March  23,  1884, 


by  John  G.  Leviett,  and  became  a 
member  of  the  3  4th  quorum  of 
Seventy;  he  was  ordained  a  High 
Priest  May  25,  1902,  by  Thomas 
Steed.  In  1890-92  he  filled  a  mission 
to  England,  laboring  in  Southampton 
six  months  and  subsequently  in  Lon- 
don. At  home  he  labored  as  an  act- 
ing Ward  teacher  for  many  years  and 
served  as  superintendent  of  the  South 
Bountiful  Sunday  school  about  twelve 
years.  Elder  Salter  died  as  a  faith- 
ful Latter-day  Saint  May  31,  1915. 

SALTER,  Ellen  Cleverly,  wife  of 
William  Salter,  was  born  March  18, 
1850,  at  Calne,  Wiltshire,  England, 
the  daughter  of  James  Cleverly  and 
Mary  Alexander.  Becoming  a  con- 
vert to  "Mormonism,"  she  was  bap- 
tized March  8,  1868,  by  John  Hatt; 
she  was  married  to  William  Salter 
June  5,  1868,  and  emigrated  to  Utah 
with  her  husband  the  same  year. 
Sister  Salter  is  the  mother  of  twelve 


228 


LATTER-DAY   SAINT 


children,  seven  boys  and  five  girls. 
She  has  always  been  an  active  Church 
worker  and  has  labored  as  a  teacher 
in  Ward  Relief  Societies  for  a  num- 


ber of  years,  though  most  of  her  time 
has  been  employed  in  the  rearing  of 
her  children.  At  one  time  she  acted 
as  a  counselor  in  a  Ward  Y.  L.  M.  I. 
A.  Following  are  the  names  of  her 
children:  James  W.,  Mary  E.,  John 
H.,  Joseph,  David,  Harry  S.,  William 
E.,  Sarah  E.,  George  A.,  Emily  A., 
Amelia  and  Rachel  J. 

SARGENT,  Abel  Morgan,  a  mem- 
ber of  the  Mormon  Battalion,  was 
born  in  the  State  of  Maryland,  Feb. 
27,  1798,  the  son  of  Abel  M.  and 
Sarah  Sargent.  Having  received  a 
good  education,  he  taught  school  in 
Floyd  county,  Indiana,  where  he 
married  Sarah  Edwards,  daughter  of 
wealthy  parents,  who  bore  her  hus- 
band seven  children,  namely,  Dru- 
cella,  Sarah,  Martha  J.,  Thomas, 
David,  Phoebe,  Harriet  and  Caroline. 
Abel  M.  and  his  wife  both  joined  the 
Church  and  suffered  much  persecu- 
tion, being  driven  from  their  home, 
which  caused  the  death  of  his  wife. 
The  loss  of  his  companion  caused 
Bro.  Sargent  to  leave  the  smaller 
children  with  their  grandparents, 
who  later  refused  to   give  them   up. 


For  fear  of  being  followed  on  a 
steamboat,  he  made  a  skiff  and  se- 
cretly took  the  children  down  the 
Mississippi  river  to  a  place  of  safety. 
After  many  -disappointments  and  the 
loss  of  two  children,  preparations 
were  made  to  start  for  the  Rocky 
Mountains.  A  short  time  after  that 
he  responded  to  a  call  of  the  United 
States  government,  in  July,  1846, 
and  became  a  member  of  the  Mormon 
Battalion  (Company  D).  He  was 
then  obliged  to  place  his  children 
with  different  families.  His  health 
failing  on  the  journey,  he  was  sent 
with  the  sick  detachment  from  Santa 
Fe  to  Pueblo,  on  the  Arkansas  river, 
to  spend  the  winter.  The  following 
year  (1847)  he  went  to  the  Valley, 
but  returned  to  his  children  on  the 
Missouri  river  late  in  1847.  While 
standing  guard  over  some  cattle  he 
was  suddenly  stricken  with  cholera 
and  died  in  a  few  hours.  His  son, 
Thomas,  died  the  same  night.  They 
were  both  buried  in  one  grave. 

SCHAUB,  Karl  Conrad,  Bishop  of 
the  Tenth  Ward,  Logan,  Cache  coun- 
ty,   Utah,    was    born    Dec.    12,    1869, 


in  Canton  Grauouiiaen,  Switzerland, 
the  son  of  Conrad  Schaub  and  Maria 
A.  Alker.  Becoming  a  convert  to 
"Mormonism,"  he  was  baptized  Aug. 


BIOGRAPHICAL   ENCYCLOPEDIA. 


229 


8,  1887,  by  Adolph  Bair.  He  emi- 
grated with  his  father  to  Utah  in 
1888,  arriving  in  Salt  Lake  City  in 
November  of  that  year,  having 
crossed  the  ocean  on  the  steamer 
"Wisconsin."  After  his  arrival  in 
Utah  he  worked  as  draftsman  in  Salt 
Lake  City,  studied  at  the  B.  Y.  Col- 
lege in  1891  and  at  the  Utah  Agri- 
cultural College  in  1893,  1894  and 
1896.  He  was  employed  in  govern- 
ment service  as  draftsman  in  Wash- 
ington, D.  C,  in  1901,  and  since  that 
year  he  has  figured  in  private  prac- 
tice as  architect  at  Logan.  He  was 
ordained  to  the  different  grades  in 
the  Priesthood  and  in  1897  he  was 
called  to  act  as  second  counselor  to 
Bishop  John  Q.  Adams  of  the  Logan 
Fifth  Ward,  which  position  he  held 
until  the  division  of  the  Ward,  July 
1,  1917,  when  he  was  chosen  as 
Bishop  of  the  Logan  Tenth  Ward. 
In  18  93  Bro.  Schaub  married  Jessie 
Ann  Adams,  in  the  Logan  Temple; 
she  was  the  daughter  of  James 
Adams  and  Margaret  J.  Moffat,  and 
bore  her  husband  ten  children,  name- 
ly, Margaret  Ann,  Karl  Conrad,  Jr., 
James  Milton,  George  Wesley,  Jo- 
seph Elmer,  Leah  Isabelle,  Geneva 
Elisa,  Jessie  Marie,  Howard  Adam 
and  Mildred  Agnes. 

SCHOLES,  Francis,  counselor  in 
the  presidency  of  the  High  Priests' 
quorum  of  the  Liberty  Stake,  Salt 
Lake  City,  Utah,  was  born  July  2, 
1835,  at  Leeds,  Yorkshire,  England, 
the  son  of  Thomas  Scholes  and  Ann 
Newton.  When  about  five  years  old 
his  father  died.  Notwithstanding  the 
limited  educational  facilities  at  that 
time,  Francis  was  taught  to  read  and 
write.  At  an  early  day  he  learned 
the  trade  of  clay  pipe  manufactur- 
ing, which  business  he  followed  while 
iu  England.  In  1856  (Sept.  6th)  he 
married  Sarah  Jane  Fishburn,  daugh- 
ter of  Francis  Fishburn  and  Eliza 
Jeffs.  Becoming  a  convert  to  "Mor- 
monism,"  he  was  baptized  May  2  9, 
1880,  by  Elder  Robert  L.  Fishburn. 
In   1881   he  was   ordained   an   Elder 


by  James  Rydalch  and  called  to  as- 
sist in  the  presidency  of  the  Leeds 
branch.  In  1882  he  emigrated  to 
Utah,  together  with  his  wife  and 
seven  children,  crossing  the  Atlantic 
in  the  steamship  "Nevada,"  and  ar- 
rived in  Utah  May  1,  1882.  After 
residing  temporarily  at  Brigham 
City,  Box  Elder  county,  he  removed 
to  Salt  Lake  City  in  1883,  and  here 
followed  the  occupation  of  teamster 
and  building  contractor.  Later  he  be- 
came interested  in  the  sheep  busi- 
ness, in  which  he  was  successful. 
Retiring  from  his  commercial  activ- 
ities at  the  age  of  60,  he  devoted 
practically     the     remaining     fifteen 


years  of  his  life  to  Temple  work.  In 
1897  (Nov.  16th)  he  was  set  apart  as 
a  Temple  worker  in  the  Salt  Lake 
Temple,  and  later  was  called  to  labor 
in  the  Logan  Temple  in  like  capacity. 
At  the  organization  of  the  Liberty 
Stake  of  Zion  he  was  chosen  and 
set  apart  as  second  counselor  to  Pres- 
ident Joseph  Keddington  of  the 
High  Priests'  quorum  March  2  4, 
1904,  which  position  he  held  until 
his  death,  which  occurred  July  30, 
1910.  Elder  Scholes  was  the  father 
of  nine  children,  all  born  in  Leeds, 
Yorkshire,  England,  namely,  Thomas, 


230 


LATTER-DAY  SAINT 


Joseph,  Ann,  Arthur,  Walter,  Freder- 
ick, Francis,  Sarah  Jane  and  Caro- 
line. Bro.  Scholes  was  a  good  man, 
and  a  devout  and  consistent  Latter- 
day  Saint. 

SCHOLES,  Frederick,  recorder  of 
the  Logan  Temple,  was  born  July  2  9, 
1870,  at  Leeds,  Yorkshire,  England, 
the  son  of  Francis  Scholes  and  Sarah 
Jane  Fishburn.  On  account  of  deli- 
cate health  he  did  not  attend  school 
until  he  was  seven  years  old.  Be- 
coming a  convert  to  "Mormonism," 
he    was    baptized    Feb.    5,    1881,    by 


John  Cooper,  and,  in  company  with 
his    parents,    emigrated    to    Utah    in 

1882,  crossing  the  Atlantic  in  the 
steamship  "Nevada,"  which  sailed 
from  Liverpool  April  12,  1882.  Af- 
ter residing  temporarily  at  Brigham 
City,  Box  Elder  county,  the  family 
moved  to  Salt  Lake  City  in  February, 

1883,  where  Frederick  found  employ- 
ment at  various  places  as  a  sales- 
man. He  was  ordained  a  Deacon 
June  7,  1886,  by  John  Siddoway  and 
later  presided  over  the  Deacons'  quo- 
rum in  the  First  Ward,  Salt  Lake 
City,  three  years.  He  was  ordained  a 
Priest  March  14,  1889,  by  John  T. 
Thorup  and  acted  as  secretary  of  that 
quorum.  He  was  ordained  an  Elder 
Feb.    6,    1893,    by   James   Malin.      In 


1893  (June  28th)  he  married  Lydia 
Abbie  Burnham,  daughter  of  Wal- 
lace K.  Burnham  and  Lydia  Stanley. 
This  marriage  has  been  blessed  with 
eleven  children,  namely,  Frederick 
Burnham,  Lucille,  Elinor,  Stanley 
Fishburn,  Sarah  Jane,  Wallace  Burn- 
ham, Abbie,  Francis  Newton,  Joseph 
Frederick,  Edward  Burnham  and 
Harold  Burnham.  Bro.  Scholes  was 
ordained  a  Seventy  by  Brigham  H. 
Roberts,  April  20,  1894,  and  filled  a 
mission  to  Great  Britain  in  1894-96, 
laboring  in  the  Leeds  conference. 
Both  going  and  coming  on  this  mis- 
sion he  had  charge  of  a  company  of 
Elders  and  Saints.  At  home  Elder 
Scholes  has  always  been  diligent  as 
a  Sunday  school  teacher  and  officer, 
Ward  clerk,  president  of  Ward  Y.  M. 
M.  I.  A.  and  officer  in  the  Cache 
Stake  Y.  M.  M.  I.  A.  In  1900  he 
became  a  president  of  the  109th  quo- 
rum of  Seventy.  In  1910  (Jan. 
2  3rd)  he  was  ordained  a  High  Priest 
by  Apostle  David  O.  McKay  and  set 
apart  as  a  member  of  the  Cache 
Stake  High  Council,  having  previously 
occupied  the  position  of  Stake  clerk. 
He  had  charge  of  the  Stake  tithing 
office  for  six  years,  and  was  called  to 
his  present  position  as  recorder  of 
the  Logan  Temple  March  14,  1910. 
Notwithstanding  these  activities  and 
his  great  devotion  to  his  Church 
duties.  Elder  Scholes  has  had  much 
experience  in  secular  matters,  hav- 
ing occupied  a  number  of  positions  of 
honor  and  responsibiliity  in  the  in- 
terest of  his  fellow-citizens. 

SCOWCROFT,    John,    one    of    the 

leading  business  men  of  Ogden,  was 
born  Dec.  9,  1844,  at  Tottington, 
Lancashire,  England,  the  son  of 
James  Scowcroft  and  Hannah  Fair- 
brother.  His  parents  were  hand- 
loom  weavers,  in  comfortable  circum- 
stances, and  at  the  age  of  eight  years, 
having  left  school,  John  began  work- 
ing at  the  same  vocation,  which  he 
continued  until  he  was  fourteen.  His 
boyhood  and  early  manhood  were 
spent  in  his  native  village,  near  the 


BIOGRAPHICAL   ENCYCLOPEDIA. 


231 


city  of  Manchester,  where  he  learned 
the  business  of  confectioner.  Always 
religious,    he    became    a    convert    to 


"Mormonism"  in  1861,  and  after  his 
baptism,  was  a  devout  and  zealous 
laborer  in  the  ministry.  He  presided 
over  the  Tottington  branch  of  the 
Church  and  was  the  superintendent 
of  its  Sunday  school.  At  Hastling- 
den,  in  Lancashire,  he  became  a  suc- 
cessful wholesale  and  retail  confec- 
tioner. Emigrating  to  America  he 
crossed  the  Atlantic  in  the  steam- 
ship "Wisconsin,"  which  sailed  from 
Liverpool,  England,  June  5,  1880, 
bringing  with  him  his  wife,  Mary 
Fletcher  Scowcroft,  his  four  sons 
(Joseph,  Willard,  Heber  and  Albert), 
and  his  daughter  (Sarah  A.).  These, 
with  one  oth6r  daughter,  Florence 
M.,  born  since  their  arrival  in  Utah, 
made  up  the  sum  total  of  their  chil- 
dren. They  arrived  in  Salt  Lake  City 
June  2  3,  1880;  the  same  year  they 
settled  in  Ogden,  where  Bro.  Scow- 
croft, after  being  in  the  employ  of 
R.  P.  Harris,  commenced  business 
for  himself  in  1881,  establishing  a 
confectionery  and  bakery  and  gradu- 
ally working  into  general  merchan- 
dise. Eventually  he  branched  out 
into  the  wholesale  trade,  founding 
the  splendid  institution  which  now 
bears   his   name.      For   a   number  of 


years  Elder  Scowcroft  was  one  of  the 
presidents  of  the  75th  quorum  of 
Seventy  and  also  superintendent  of 
the  Ogden  Second  Ward  Sunday 
school,  the  Ward  in  which  he  lived. 
Eventually  he  was  ordained  a  High 
Priest  and  set  apart  as  counselor  to 
Bishop  Robert  McQuarrie,  a  position 
which  he  held  the  remainder  of  his 
life.  In  1890,  and  again  in  1901, 
he  visited  England,  and  while  on 
the  latter  tour  he  was  stricken  with 
paralysis,  which  finally  proved  fatal. 
He  recovered  sufficiently  to  return 
to  Utah,  but  gradually  declined  until 
death  relieved  him  of  his  sufferings 
on  April  7,  1902,  in  his  beautiful 
dwelling  Lancaster,  so  named  in  hon- 
or of  the  county  seat  of  his  old»  Eng- 
lish home.  The  domestic  life  of 
Elder  Scowroft  was  as  good  and 
happy  as  his  career  was  prosperous; 
he  charmed  every  one  he  met  by  his 
cheerful  and  amiable  courtesy;  he 
was  a  free  and  generous  giver  to 
charity  and  a  willing  and  a  ready 
promoter  of  every  worthy  cause.  At 
his  demise  he  left  a  widow,  four  sons 
and  two  daughters. 

SCOWCROFT,  Mary  Fletcher,  wife 
of   John    Scowcroft,    was   born    June 


4,    1842,    at   Tottington,    Lancashire, 
England,  the  daughter  of  John  Flet- 


232 


LATTER-DAY   SAINT 


Cher  and  Mary  Greenhalgh.  She  be- 
came the  wife  of  John  Scowcroft  in 
1863.  In  1880,  with  her  husband, 
four  sons  and  one  daughter,  she  emi- 
grated from  her  native  land  to  Utah 
and  took  up  her  residence  at  Ogden. 
The  biographical  story  of  John  Scow- 
croft is  practically  the  life  story  of 
his  devoted  wife,  whose  loyalty  and 
unwavering  constancy  is  interwoven 
with  his,  in  laying  the  foundation 
of  the  big  business  house  at  Ogden 
which  now  bears  his  name.  She  has 
also  taken  an  active  part  in  Church 
affairs,  and  is  now  (1918)  residing 
with  her  daughter,  Florence  M.,  the 
wife  of  President  Alva  L.  Scoville  of 
the  Stake  presidency  of  the  Weber 
Stake.  Sister  Scowcroft  is  still  heav- 
ily interested  in  the  great  wholesale 
house  of  John  Scowcroft  &  Sons  Co., 
Ogden,  tftah,  an  institution  she  has 
watched  during  years  of  growth 
from  a  small  retail  store  of  but  a  few 
hundred  dollars  investment  to  the 
present  immense  concern  of  over 
$1,000,000   capital. 

SEAMAN,  George  Ale.vaiuler,  second 
counselor  to  President  Alonzo  A. 
Hinckley,  in  the  Millard  Stake  of 
Zion,  Millard  county,  Utah,  was  born 
Feb.  28,  1870,  at  Richville,  Morgan 
county,  Utah,  the  son  of  John  Sea- 
man and  Susannah  Stephens  Brown. 
He  was  baptized  July  5,  1881,  by 
Joel  Parrish;  was  ordained  a  Deacon 
and  Teacher  successively;  was  or- 
dained an  Elder  in  1893,  by  Ed- 
ward W.  Wade,  and  a  month  later 
ordained  a  Seventy  by  Francis  M. 
Lyman.  He  was  ordained  a  High 
Priest  and  Bishop  Feb.  17,  1900,  by 
Francis  M.  Lyman  and  set  apart  to 
preside  over  the  Abraham  Ward,  Mil- 
lard county,  Utah,  which  position  he 
held  till  1902.  In.  1893-95  he  filled 
a  mission  to  Great  Britain,  labor- 
ing in  the  Leeds  conference,  most  of 
the  time  as  conference  clerk.  Prior 
to  this  he  acted  as  president  of  the 
Pleasant  View  Ward  Y.  M.  M.  I.  A. 
and  taught  school  for  five  years.  In 
1898  he  enlisted  in  the  U.  S.  Army 


and  served  in  the  Philippine  Islands. 
While  in  that  service  he  was  wound- 
ed and  promoted  to  the  position  of 
second  lieutenant.  After  his  return 
from  the  Philippine  Islands,  early  in 
1900,  he  again  became  an  active 
home  worker,  and  in  November,  1902, 
he  was  chosen  as  second  counselor  to 
President  Alonzo  A.  Hinckley  in  the 
Millard  Stake  of  Zion,  which  position 
he  held  till  1907.  In  1896  (Feb. 
20th)  Bro.  Seaman  married  Charlotte 
Jeannette  Fox  (daughter  of  Jesse  W. 
Fox  and  Sarah  E.  Fox),  who  was 
born  June  22,  1873,  in  Salt  Lake 
City,  Utah;  she  became  the  mother 
of  nine  children,  five  boys  and  four 
girls.      Bro.   Seaman  graduated  from 


the  normal  department  of  the  Univer- 
sity of  Deseret  in  1891,  and  was  a 
resident  of  Ogden  from  1905  to  1914; 
while  there  he  served  on  the  Stake 
board  of  Y.  M.  M.  I.  A.,  and  the 
latter  four  years  as  superintendent  of 
the  Weber  Stake  Y.  M.  M.  I.  A.  He 
moved  to  Milton,  Morgan  county,  in 
1914,  and  was  appointed  superin- 
tendent of  public  schools  in  Morgan 
county  in  1915. 

SECRIST,  Charles  Albert,  second 
counselor  to  Bishop  Joseph  H.  Rob- 
inson, of  Farmington,  Davis  county, 
Utah,  was  born  August  19,  1875,  at 


BIOGRAPHICAL   ENCYCLOPEDIA. 


233 


Farmington,  the  son  of  Jacob  Moroni 
Secrist  and  Polly  Estella  Smith.  He 
was  baptized  July  27,  1884,  by  Jon- 
athan D.  Woods;  ordained  succes- 
sively to  the  offices  of  Elder,  Seventy 
and    High    Priest,   the   latter    ordina- 


tion taking  place  Nov.  27,  1906,  un- 
der the  hands  of  Francis  M.  Lyman, 
ffho  also  set  him  apart  to  act  as 
second  counselor  to  Bishop  Joseph 
H.  Robinson.  This  position  he  held 
until  his  death,  which  occurred 
March  23,  1915.  In  1900-1902  Bro. 
Secrist  filled  a  mission  to  California, 
laboring  in  the  San  Francisco  and 
Los  Angeles  conferences.  In  1902 
(Nov.  19th)  he  married  Harriet  Hess 
(daughter  of  John  W.  Hess  and 
Francis  Ann  Bigley),  who  was  born 
May  2  6,  1881,  at  Farmington.  The 
issue  of  this  marriage  was  four  chil- 
dren, namely,  Charles  Allen,  Fran- 
cis N.,  Keith  and  Amy. 

SECRIST,  Jacob  Moroni,  Bishop  of 
Farmington,  Davis  county,  Utah,  was 
born  Aug.  15,  1850,  in  Salt  Lake 
City,  Utah,  the  son  of  Jacob  Foutz 
Secrist  and  Eliza  Logan.  His  par- 
ents were  natives  of  Pennsylvania, 
but  later  they  settled  in  Illinois, 
where  they  resided  about  two  years, 
until  the  exodus  of  the  Saints  from 
Nauvoo    in    18  48.      With    the    main 


body  of  the  Church  they  then  moved 
to  Winter  Quarters  on  the  Missouri 
river  and  came  to  Utah  in  1847.  The 
first  few  years  they  spent  in  Salt 
Lake  City,  where  Jacob  Moroni  Se- 
crist was  born.  Later  the  family 
settled  in  Davis  county.  In  1852  the 
father  was  called  on  a  mission  to 
Great  Britain  and  on  his  return  from 
said  mission  he  died  while  crossing 
the  plains.  Jacob  Moroni  married 
Miss  Polly  Estella  Smith,  Sept.  13, 
18  69;  she  was  the  daughter  of 
Thomas  Smith  and  Polly  Clark,  and 
was  born  Dec.  12,  1852.  She  became 
the  mother  of  six  children.  Bro. 
Secrist  was  baptized  May  3,  1861,  by 
Thomas  Grover;  ordained  a  Seventy 
March  31,  1868,  by  Elias  Van  Fleet, 
and  ordained  a  High  Priest  and 
Bishop  July  2,  1882  and  set  apart 
to  preside  over  the  Farmington 
Ward.  He  occupied  the  position  of 
Bishop  until  his  death,  which  oc- 
curred at  Garland,  Nov.  5,  1906. 
Bishop  Secrist's  first  wife  died  Dec. 
12,  1882,  and  later  he  married  Mon- 
ica A.   Potter    (daughter  of  Gardner 


Potter  and  Eveline  Himan),  who 
was  born  Sept.  2,  1856,  at  Spring- 
ville,  Utah;  she  bore  her  husband 
two  children  and  died  in  October, 
1902.  In  1903  (April  29th)  Bishop 
Secrist  married   H.    Priscilla   Bourne 


234 


LATTER-DAY  SAINT 


(daughter  of  Charles  Bourne  and 
Jane  Alder),  who  was  born  Sept.  21, 
1854,  in  Salt  Lake  City,  Utah.  Be- 
sides taking  an  active  part  in  Church 
affairs.  Bishop  Secrist  held  many 
positions  of  a  secular  nature  in  the 
interest  of  his  fellow-citizens.  Thus 
he  was  president  of  the  Farmington 
Commercial  &  Manufacturing  Com- 
pany and  a  director  in  the  Davis 
County  Bank  of  Farmington. 

SHAWCROFT,  David  Earl,  Bishop 
of  Richfield  Ward  (San  Luis  Stake), 
Conejos  county,  Colorado,  was  born 
June  17,  1887,  at  Richfield,  Colo., 
the  son  of  John  Shawcroft  and  Annie 


in  1907;  was  appointed  Ward  clerk 
at  Richfield  in  1908;  filled  a  mission 
to  the  Northern  States  in  1909-12, 
laboring  25  months  in  Wisconsin  and 
afterwards  eight  months  as  president 
of  the  Southern  Indiana  conference. 
In  1909  he  married  Martha  Eliza 
Smith  and  is  the  father  of  two  chil- 
dren, namely,  Zina  and  Alice  Shaw- 
croft. 

SHEFFIELD,  Heber  John,  presi- 
dent of  the  High  Priests  quorum  of 
the  North  Davis  Stake  of  Zion,  was 
born  May  29,  1854,  at  Wellingbor- 
ough, Northhamptonshire  England, 
the  son  of  James  Sheffield  and  Sarah 


Maria  Jensen.  He  was  baptized 
Aug.  1,  1895,  by  W.  F.  O.  Behrmann; 
ordained  a  Deacon  in  1900,  by  Henry 
Behrmann;  ordained  a  Teacher  in 
1903,  by  Henry  W.  Valentine;  or- 
dained an  Elder  March  6,  190'9,  by 
William  W.  Huffaker;  ordained  a 
Seventy  April  26,  1909,  by  Hyrum 
M.  Smith;  ordained  a  High  Priest 
and  Bishop  Nov.  16,  1912,  by  James 
E.  Talmage,  and  set  apart  to  preside 
over  the  Richfield  Ward.  He  was 
the  first  man  born  in  the  San  Luis 
Stake  to  be  ordained  a  High  Priest. 
Bishop  Shawcroft  acted  as  secretary 
of  Religion  Classes  in  1906;  was 
Stake   secretary    of   Religion    Classes 


Adelaide  Willmer.  He  was  baptized 
by  his  father  in  May,  18  64.  As  a 
boy  he  worked  in  a  grocery  store  in 
London,  and  there  received  his  first 
inclination  to  become  a  business  man, 
which  qualities  he  developed  to  such 
an  extent  that  after  his  arrival  in 
Utah  in  1872  he  soon  engaged  in  a 
successful  enterprise  at  Kaysville, 
Davis  county,  where  he  located,  after 
living  three  years  in  Salt  Lake  City. 
Since  1889  he  has  been  engaged  in 
commercial  business  for  himself  at 
Kaysville.  Bro.  Sheffield  was  or- 
dained a  Priest  when  quite  young;  or- 
dained an  Elder  Jan.  4,  1875,  by 
Samuel  H.  Smith;  ordained  a  Seventy 


BIOGRAPHICAL  ENCYCLOPEDIA. 


235 


Jan.  20,  1884,  by  Wm.  W.  Taylor; 
ordained  a  High  Priest  Nov.  1,  1903, 
by  Joseph  S.  Clark  and  set  apart  as 
second  counselor  to  Bishop  Peter 
Barton  of  Kaysville.  He  has  also 
acted  as  a  Ward  teacher,  as  assist- 
ant superintendent  of  the  Kaysville 
Sunday  school  (20  years),  and  as  an 
officer  in  the  Ward  Y.  M.  M.  I.  A.,  as 
president  of  the  Ward  Religion  Class, 
as  assistant  in  the  Stake  presidency 
of  Religion  Classes  and  as  a  coun- 
selor in  the  presidency  of  the  High 
Priests  quorum  of  the  Davis  Stake. 
Since  June  20,  1915,  he  has  acted  as 
president  of  the  High  Priests  quorum 
of  the  Davis  Stake.  In  1875  (Dec. 
25th)  he  married  Sarah  Harriet 
Blamires  (daughter  of  Richard 
Blamires  and  Mary  Kershaw),  who 
was  born  August  27,  1853,  in  Brad- 
ford, Yorkshire,  England,  and  came 
to  Utah  in  18  69.  The  children  of 
this  marriage  are  Heber  James, 
George  Blamires  and  Fred  Albert. 
These  three  sons  have  all  filled  for- 
eign missions.  Elder  Sheffield  has 
served  six  terms  in  the  Kaysville  city 
council  and  was  elected  mayor  of 
Kaysville  Jan.  1,  1914. 

SHEPARD,  Justin,  an  active  Elder 
in  the  Church,  was  born  January 
4,  1831,  at  Denmark,  Lewis  county, 
N.  Y.,  the  son  of  Isaac  Shepard  and 
Sarah  Lackore.  His  parents  having 
been  converted  to  "Mormonism,"  he 
was  baptized  in  1843  by  Wheeler 
Baldwin.  Together  with  his  parents 
he  gathered  to  Nauvoo,  Illinois, 
and  subsequently  lived  at  Zarahemla, 
Lee  county,  Iowa.  Later  the  family 
participated  in  the  exodus  from  Nau- 
voo, and  Justin  crossed  the  plains  in 
1848  and  settled  at  Farmington, 
Davis  county,  Utah,  after  a  short 
residence  in  Salt  Lake  City.  In  1850 
he  went  to  California  with  a  cousin, 
but  only  remained  there  one  year. 
He  married  Eliza  Maria  Allred, 
daughter  of  Isaac  Allred  and  Julia 
Ann  Taylor,  at  Farmington,  May  1, 
1855,  the  ceremony  being  performed 
by  John  S.  Gleason.     The  following 


year  (1856)  they  were  sealed  In  the 
Endowment  House,  Salt  Lake  City. 
In  1854  he  and  Milton  D.  Hammond 
were  called  to  Sanpete  county  to  as- 
sist in  defending  the  settlers  against 
the  Indians  and  remained  there  all 
winter.     At  the  time  of  the  move  in 

1858  he  made  his  temporary  home  at 
Mona,  Juab  county,  but  returned  to 
Farmington  in  the  fall  of  1858.     In 

1859  he  went  to  Cache  valley  to  put 
up  hay;  he  built  a  good  log  house 
in  the  old  fort  at  Richmond  on  ground 
later  occupied  by  A.  C.  Brower.  He 
and  his  family  were  among  seventeen 
families  who  stayed  at  Richmond 
during  the  winter  of  1859-60;  they 
lived  in  a  fort,  in  order  to  be  safe 
against  attacks  by  Indians.  Bro. 
Shepard  died  of  old  age  May  10, 
1910,  at  Richmond.  He  was  a  farmer 
by  avocation,  was  a  quiet  reserved 
man  and  labored  for  many  years  as 
a  Ward  teacher.  He  was  the  father 
of  ten  children,  namely,  Sarah  Luna, 
born  Oct.  1,  185  6;  Julia  Valona,  born 
May  14,  18  58;  Eliza  Lusina,  born 
Oct.  4,  18  60;  Justin  Villinswell,  born 
Jan.  28,  1863;  James  Isaac,  born 
April  5,  1865;  Evy  Cleanthy,  born 
June  1,  1867;  Julian  Riley,  born 
Sept.  19,  1869;  Ella  Jane,  born  Dec. 
6,  1871;  Hannah  Lovina,  born  June 
2,  1874  and  Millie  Janet,  born  Dec. 
26,  1875. 

SHEPHERD,  Joseph  BusseU,  pres- 
ident of  the  Bear  Lake  Stake  of  Zion, 
and  a  resident  of  Paris,  Bear  Lake 
county,  Idaho,  was  born  March  18, 
1865,  at  Brockenhurst,  Hampshire, 
England,  the  son  of  Wm.  Shepherd 
and  Mary  Ann  Tracey.  He  was  bap- 
tized Nov.  8,  1877,  by  Robt.  Price; 
ordained  a  Deacon  April  30,  1883,  by 
Robt.  Price;  ordained  a  Priest  April 
13,  1884,  by  James  Oakey;  ordained 
an  Elder  later;  ordained  a  Seventy 
May  12,  1890,  by  Seymour  B.  Young; 
ordained  a  High  Priest  June  10, 
1906,  by  Francis  M.  Lyman  and  set 
apart  as  president  of  the  Bear  Lake 
Stake  of  Zion.  While  yet  a  boy  he 
acted  as  president  of  a  Deacons  quor- 


236 


LATTER-DAY   SAINT 


um  at  Paris,  later  as  a  counselor  in 
an  Elders  quorum  and  still  later  as 
a  president  of  the  11th  quorum  of 
Seventy.  He  also  acted  as  superin- 
tendent of  a  Ward  Sunday  school, 
was  president  of   a   Y.    M.    M.   I.   A., 


Ward  choir  leader,  Stake  chorister 
and  Stake  superintendent  of  Sunday 
schools.  He  also  served  as  mayor  of 
Paris  two  terms,  as  county  commis- 
sioner two  terms  and  as  senator  in 
the  Idaho  legislature  in  1913  and 
1917.  Bro.  Shepherd,  as  one  of  the 
leading  business  men  of  Bear  Lake 
county,  Idaho,  was  manager  of  the 
Paris  Co-op  for  many  years;  he  or- 
ganized the  Shepherd  Mercantile 
Company,  assisted  in  organizing  the 
Bear  Lake  State  Bank  and  has  acted 
as  its  president  since  1907.  At  pres- 
ent he  is  president  of  the  Shepherd 
Hardware  and  Implement  Company. 
Bro.  Shepherd  filled  a  mission  to  Cal- 
ifornia In  1895-9  6,  laboring  prin- 
cipally in  San  Francisco,  Oakland, 
Sacramento,  Stockton  and  San  Jose, 
a  part  of  the  time  as  president  of  the 
Sacramento  conference.  He  again 
filled  a  six  months'  mission  to  Cali- 
fornia in  1914,  when  he  acted  as 
president  of  the  Los  Angeles  con- 
ference. In  1884  (Sept.  25th)  Bro. 
Shepherd  married  Rose  Budge, 
daughter   of   Pres.   Wm.    Budge   and 


Eliza  Prichard),  who  was  born  June 
22,  1866,  at  Providence,  Cache 
county,  Utah.  This  marriage  has 
been  blessed  with  ten  children, 
namely,  Joseph  Russell,  Alfred  Wil- 
liam, Clarence,  David,  Eva,  Roselle, 
Harold,  Earl,  Louise,  Celia,  and 
Ruth,  President  Shepherd  has  been 
a  resident  of  Paris  since  1877. 

SHIELDS,  John  Gillespie,  second 
Bishop  of  Lakeview  Ward  (Tooele 
Stake),  Tooele  county,  Utah,  was 
born  Sept.  24,  1857,  at  Tooele,  the 
son  of  Archibald  C.  Shields  and  Helen 
Gillespie.  He  was  baptized  when 
eight  years  of  age  by  John  B.  Smith; 
ordained  a  Deacon  and  afterwards 
ordained  a  Teacher;  ordained  an 
Elder  April  21,  1883;  ordained  a 
High  Priest  and  Bishop  Dec.  23, 
1888,  by  Francis  M.  Lyman  and  set 
apart  to  preside  over  the  Lakeview 
Ward.  Prior  to  this  he  acted  as  presi- 
dent of  the  Ward  Y.  M.  M.  I.  A.  and 
has  from  his  early  youth  been  a  most 
faithful  Church  worker.  In  1881 
(April  2  2nd)  he  married  Louise  Han- 


sen who  has  borne  her  husband  ten 
children,  namely,  John  G.  Jr.,  Elsie 
Claribel,  Florence  Helen,  Charles 
Lester,  Eleroy,  Douglas,  Hazel,  Hoyt, 
Louise  and  Josephine. 


BIOGRAPHICAL  ENCYCLOPEDIA. 


237 


SHIELDS,  Louise  Hansen,  wife  of 
John  G.  Shields,  was  born  March  16, 
1858,  near  Aalborg,  Denmark,  the 
daughter  of  James  P.  Hansen  and 
Elsie  Nielsen.  She  was  baptized  in 
18  68    and   emigrated   to   America   in 


i.«i?/<--.,^ 


company  with  her  older  sister  Line  in 
18  68,  crossing  the  Atlantic  in  the 
ship  "Emerald  Isle"  and  the  plains  in 
John  G.  Hoiman's  company,  which  ar- 
rived in  Salt  Lake  City  Sept.  25, 
1868.  She  taught  school  for  two 
years  before  her  marriage  to  Bro. 
Shields,  which  marriage  took  place 
April  22,  1881.  She  has  borne  her 
husband  ten  children.  After  serving 
as  counselor  and  secretary  in  the 
Lakeview  Ward  Relief  Society  a  num- 
ber of  years  she  was  chosen  as  presi- 
dent of  said  society,  which  position 
she  held  for  ten  years.  She  is  still 
a  faithful  and  active  worker  in  the 
Church. 

SKIDMORE,  Charles  Henry,  Bish- 
op of  the  Miller  Ward,  Granite  Stake, 
Salt  Lake  county,  Utah,  was  born 
July  23,  1875,  in  a  log  cabin  built 
by  his  father  at  Richmond,  Cache 
county,  Utah.  He  was  the  fifth  of 
twelve  children  of  Bishop  Wm.  L. 
Skidmore  (see  Vol.  I,  p.  403)  and 
Sarah  Armina  Knapp.  He  was  bap- 
tized  in   the   "Big  Ditch"   at  Cherry 


creek,  August  2,  1883.  Later  he  was 
ordained  a  Deacon,  Teacher,  Seventy 
and  High  Priest.  From  the  time  he 
joined  the  Primary  Association  as  a 
child  he  has  been  an  active  worker  in 
the  Church.  In  1895-97  he  labored 
as  a  traveling  Elder,  clerk  and  presi- 
dent of  the  Sheffield  conference  in 
England.  At  home  he  has  served  as 
a  member  of  the  Cache  Stake  boards 
of  Religion  Classes,  Mutual  Im- 
provement associations  and  Sunday 
schools;  as  teacher  in  the  119th  and 
40th  quorums  of  Seventy,  and  as  head 
teacher  of  the  thelogical  department 
of  the  B.  Y.  College.  He  was  or- 
dained a  High  Priest  in  January, 
1910,  at  which  time  he  became  the 
youngest  member  of  the  High  Coun- 
cil of  Cache  Stake,  which  position  he 
held  until  October,  1912,  when  he 
moved  to  Salt  Lake  City.  During  the 
years  1911  and  1912  he  also  acted 
as  president  of  the  Cache  Stake  mis- 
sionary conference,  which  was  or- 
ganized for  the  special  purpose  of 
preaching  the  gospel  to  its  resident 


non-members.  In  1912  he  was 
chosen  a  member  of  the  Granite 
Stake  Sunday  School  Board,  on  which 
he  served  until  Nov.  18,  1914,  when 
he  was  ordained  a  Bishop  and  set 
apart    to    preside    over    the    Miller 


238 


LATTER-DAY   SAINT 


Ward,  by  Francis  M.  Lyman.  He  has 
filled  several  positions  which  have 
called  into  play  unusual  ability  in 
organizing  and  managing  business  af- 
fairs; he  was  especially  noted  for  his 
work  in  pioneering  dry  farming  in 
Tooele  county.  He  was  director, 
secretary,  manager,  and  finally  presi- 
dent of  the  Rush  Valley  Farming 
Company,  a  corporation.  During  this 
time,  besides  putting  farming  into 
operation  on  a  large  scale,  he  sur- 
veyed and  mapped  some  10,000  acres 
of  land.  As  a  student  he  made  his 
own  way  through  four  years  of  high 
school,  four  years  of  college  and  two 
years  of  post  graduate  work,  the  lat- 
ter being  accomplished  in  the  Uni- 
versity of  Chicago.  He  was  once 
president  of  the  Alumni  Association 
of  the  B.  Y.  College  and  was  for  four 
years  a  member  of  the  Board  of  Edu- 
cation of  Logan  City.  As  an  educator 
he  has  spent  several  years  in  teach- 
ing grades  from  two  to  eight,  and  ten 
more  years  in  teaching  students  from 
the  first  year  high  school  to  the 
senior  year  of  college  work.  For 
nine  years  he  was  head  professor  of 
mathematics  in  the  B.  Y.  College.  He 
became  superintendent  of  the  Gran- 
ite School  District  Oct.  1,  1912, which, 
omitting  Ogden  and  Salt  Lake  City, 
is  the  largest  school  system  in  Utah. 
He  is  now  a  trustee  of  the  Utah  Edu- 
cational Association.  He  was  a  Utah 
delegate  to  the  first  dry  farmers 
congress  of  the  United  States,  which 
was  held  at  Denver,  Colo.,  and  has 
traveled  extensively  in  the  United 
States  and  in  Europe.  For  the  pur- 
pose of  getting  the  best  school  meth- 
ods he  has  visited  schools  in  Massa- 
chusetts, New  York,  Pennsylvania, 
Ohio,  Indiana,  Illinois,  Missouri, 
Kansas,  Colorado  and  California.  On 
June  3,  1903,  he  married  Louise 
Wangsgaard  (daughter  of  Christian 
C.  Wangsgaard  and  Arma  Anderson 
of  Huntsville,  Utah),  born  Feb.  29, 
1879,  at  Huntsville,  Utah.  She  was  a 
teacher  of  the  B.  Y.  College  Train- 
ing School.  As  a  result  of  this  mar- 
riage  their   home   has   been   blessed 


with  the  following  children:  Leone, 
Demoivre  Ray,  Irl  Stanley,  Loraine, 
Zella  and  Rex  Austin. 

SKINNER,  George,  Bishop  of  the 
Graham  Ward  (St.  Joseph  Stake), 
Graham  county,  Arizona,  was  born 
July  25,  1852,  at  Bristol,  Glocester- 
shire,  England,  the  son  of  John  Skin- 
ner and  Jane  Smith.  He  emigrated 
to  America  with  his  parents  in  1856, 
crossing  the  Atlantic  in  the  ship 
"Columbus,"  and  arriving  at  Castle 
Gardens  Jan.  1,  1857.  He  resided  in 
New  York  state  until  June,  1868, 
with  his  father,  working  on  a  farm. 
In   (1868)   he  traveled  on  water  and 


by  railroad  and  teams  to  Laramie, 
Wyoming,  whence  he  traveled  in 
Capt.  Seeley's  ox  train  as  far  as 
Weber  canyon,  where  he  worked  for 
some  time  on  the  Union  Pacific  Rail- 
road. In  February,  18  69,  he  went  to 
Cache  valley,  where  he  found  employ- 
ment with  Charles  O.  Card,  who  bap- 
tized him  May  15,  1869.  In  Decem- 
ber, following,  he  was  ordained  a 
Priest  by  Christian  J.  Larsen,  and  on 
March  7,  1870,  he  was  ordained  an 
Elder  by  Geo.  L.  Farrell.  He  received 
his  blessings  in  the  Endowment 
House,  Salt  Lake  City,  May  2,  1870, 
married  Miss  Mary  Elizabeth  Strat- 
ton  Feb.   17,   1873,  and  located  with 


BIOGRAPHICAL  ENCYCLOPEDIA. 


239 


his  young  wife  at  Logan.  In  Octo- 
ber, 1874,  he  moved  to  Price,  near 
St;  George,  Southern  Utah,  where  he 
worked  in  the  United  Order  until  late 
in  March,  1875,  when  he  located 
temporarily  at  Mt.  Trumbull,  working 
at  the  sawmill  in  getting  out  lumber 
for  the  St.  George  Temple.  After  re- 
siding a  short  time  in  St.  George  he 
moved  back  to  Logan  in  September, 
1875.  In  February,  1876,  he  l«ft 
Logan,  together  with  others,  for  Ari- 
zona, arriving  on  the  Little  Colorado 
river  in  April  of  that  year.  He  com- 
menced labor  at  what  was  known  as 
Obed  Camp.  In  the  summer  he  re- 
turned to  Logan,  where  he  engaged 
in  hauling  logs  from  the  river  to  help 
build  the  Logan  tabernacle,  in  order 
to  earn  means  with  which  to  return  to 
Arizona.  He  left  Logan  with  his 
family  in  November,  1876,  and  after 
stopping  a  short  time  at  St.  George, 
he  continued  the  journey  southward, 
building  roads  en  route,  and  arrived 
at  Obed,  Arizona,  May  1,  1877.  Here 
he  worked  in  the  United  Order  until 
the  fall  of  1877,  when  the  camp  was 
broken  up  on  account  of  chills  and 
fever,  all  the  families  going  to  other 
settlements.  Bro.  Skinner  then  lo- 
cated at  Brigham  City,  Arizona, 
where  he  lived  in  the  United  Order 
until  December,  1880,  when  he  left 
for  the  Gila  valley,  locating  at  Gra- 
ham in  the  latter  part  of  January, 
1881.  Here  he  worked  to  build  up 
a  new  home  and  soon  (May  27,  1883) 
became  superintendent  of  the  Ward 
Sabbath  school.  He  was  ordained  a 
Seventy  March  21,  1886,  by  John  M. 
Moody,  and  filled  a  mission  to  the 
Northern  States  and  Canada  in  1890- 
1891.  In  July,  1892,  he  was  ap- 
pointed presiding  Elder  of  the  Gra- 
ham branch,  and  in  November,  1892, 
he  was  elected  a  representative  to  the 
Territorial  legislature  of  Arizona.  In 
1894  he  was  elected  for  another  term. 
He  has  also  served  two  sessions  on  the 
Territorial  Board  of  Equalization.  In 
1896-97  he  again  served  in  the  Ari- 
zona legislature.  He  was  ordained  a 
High  Priest  and  Bishop  Feb.  8,  1898, 


by  Apostle  John  Henry  Smith.  His 
wife,  Mary  Elizabeth  Stratton,  died 
March  1,  1908,  after  bearing  her  hus- 
band ten  children,  namely,  George 
William,  born  Jan.  20,  1874  (died 
Oct.  31,  1875);  Moroni,  born  Feb. 
22,  1876;  Mary  Jane,  born  Oct.  28, 
1878;  Rose  Elizabeth,  born  April  9, 
1881;  Alice,  born  August  15,  1883; 
Francis  Marion,  born  Feb.  16,  1886; 
Joseph  Frederick,  born  Sept.  26, 
1889;  Eliza  Emily  born  Feb.  16, 
1893;  Esther  born  March  2,  1896; 
and  Wilmerth,  born  Feb,  28,  1899. 
In  1913  (June  17th)  Bishop  Skihner 
married  Miss  Martha  Matlock.  Bishop 
Skinner  is  a  farmer  and  stockraiser 
by  avocation  and  has  taken  an  active 
part  in  many  public  enterprises  In 
Arizona  and  elsewhere. 

S]VnTH,  George  Michael,  a  High 
Councilor  in  the  Bannock  Stake 
Bannock    county,    Idaho,    was    born 


April  11,  1855,  at  Draper,  Salt  Lake 
county,  Utah,  the  son  of  John  Sivel 
Smith  and  Jane  Wadley.  He  was 
baptized  when  eight  years  of  age  by 
James  Ware;  ordained  an  Elder  in 
January,  1881;  ordained  a  Seventy 
Dec.  9,  1892,  by  Brigham  H.  Rob- 
erts, and  ordained  a  High  Priest 
July  2  5,  1897,  by  Marriner  W.  Mer- 
rill and  at  the  same  time  set  apart 


240 


LATTER-DAY   SAINT 


as  a  High  Councilor  in  the  Bannock 
Stake  of  Zion.  He  served  a  short 
time  as  assistant  superintendent  of 
the  Ward  Sunday  school  and  filled 
a  mission  to  the  Southern  States  in 
18'd2-94,  laboring  principally  in 
North  Carolina.  He  served  as  a  High 
Councilor  until  1908,  when  he  re- 
signed, but  was  chosen  again  as  a 
High  Councilor  in  1913  and  still 
holds  that  position.  Bro.  Smith  has 
been  a  resident  of  the  Thatcher 
Ward,  Bannock  county,  Idaho,  since 
June,  1881.  In  1881  (Jan.  13th)  he 
married  Mary  Ellen  Woolley,  who  has 
borne  him  nine  children,  namely, 
Edna  May,  Geo.  Sivel,  Ernest  Heber, 
Elmer  Wilding,  Hyrum  Wendell, 
Michael  Paul,  Edwin  Parley,  Luella 
and   Joseph   Harold. 

SMITH,  Mary  Ellen  Woolley,  wife 
of  George  M.  Smith,  was  born  Dec.  1, 
1858,  in  Salt  Lake  City,  Utah,  the 
daughter  of  Bishop  Edwin  D.  Woolley 
and  Ellen  Wilding.  She  was  bap- 
tized when  eight  years  old  and  be- 
came an  active  and  successful  Church 
worker  in  the  different  auxiliary  or- 
ganizations   of    the     Church.      After 


fied  with  the  Thatcher  Ward  Primary 
Association,  over  which  she  presided 
from  18  97  till  190  7.  She  was  also 
a  Sunday  school  teacher  from  1893 
until  her  death,  and  an  active  Relief 
Society  worker,  serving  as  secretary 
of  the  latter  society  for  a  number  of 
years;  she  bore  her  husband  nine 
children,  and  died  a  kind  and  loving 
mother  and  a  faithful  Latter-day 
Saint  Jan.  10,  1908,  at  Thatcher, 
Idaho. 

SMITH,  HjTuni,  a  Patriarch  in  the 
Taylor  Stake  of  Zion,  Alberta,  Can- 
ada, and  a  resident  of  the  Lethbridge 


marrying  Bro.  Smith  Jan.  13,  1881, 
she  settled  with  him  at  Thatcher, 
Idaho,  where  she  soon  resumed  her 
Church  activities  and  became  identi- 


Ward,  was  born  Dec.  15,  1882,  at 
Snowflake,  Arizona,  a  son  of  the  late 
Pres.  Jesse  Nathaniel  Smith  and  Em- 
ma Larson.  Being  born  and  reared 
in  an  undeveloped  country,  Bro. 
Smith  became  acquainted  with  many 
of  the  privations  incident  to  pioneer 
life;  he  grew  up  on  the  farm  and 
at  the  age  of  fifteen  was  doing  a 
man's  work  and  taking  a  man's  re- 
sponsibility. Being  reared  by  goodly 
parents,  in  the  fear  of  the  Lord,  he 
received  a  testimony  in  regard  to  the 
truth  of  "Mormonism"  in  his  early 
youth  and  was  baptized  by  his  father 
Dec.  15,  1890.  At  the  age  of  thir- 
teen he  was  ordained  a  Deacon  by 
Wm.   J.   Flake  and  served   as  secre- 


BIOGRAPHICAL  ENCYCLOPEDIA. 


241 


tary  of  a  Deacons  quorum  two  years, 
and  since  that  time  he  has  been  an 
earnest  and  active  worker  in  the  var- 
ious quorums  of  the  Priesthood  and 
also  in  the  auxiliary  organizations  of 
the  Church.  He  acted  as  Stake  sec- 
retary of  Y.  M.  M.  I.  A.  for  about 
two  years  and  at  the  age  of  nineteen 
was  called  to  act  as  Sunday  school 
superintendent  in  the  Snowflake 
Ward,  which  position  he  held  for 
two  and  a  half  years,  when  he  en- 
rolled in  the  State  Normal  school  of 
Arizona  at  Flagstaff.  He  graduated 
from  that  school  in  1908.  In  1908 
(June  10th)  he  married  June  Augus- 
ta Bushman,  daughter  of  Bishop 
John  Bushman  and  Lois  A.  Smith  in 
the  Salt  Lake  Temple.  At  the  pres- 
ent writing  Bro.  Smith  has  three 
children,  whose  names  are  Marvin 
Eugene,  Dorothy  and  Oliver  Rollin. 
He  has  alw^ays  taken  a  lively  interest 
in  educational  matters;  has  served 
as  public  school  trustee  and  has 
taught  five  years  in  the  Church 
schools,  four  years  in  the  Snowflake 
Stake  Academy  at  Snowflake,  Ari- 
zona, and  one  year  in  the  Knight 
Academy  at  Raymond,  Alberta.  Since 
early  manhood  he  has  been  an  advo- 
cate of  drugless  therapy;  in  1913  he 
graduated  from  the  Palmer  School 
of  Chiropractic  at  Davenport,  Iowa, 
and  at  the  present  time  is  following 
the  profession  of  chiropractor.  Bro. 
Smith  was  ordained  an  Elder  in  the 
fall  of  190  2  by  Joseph  H.  Richards; 
ordained  a  Seventy  May  31,  1908, 
by  John  R.  Hulet;  became  a  presi- 
dent of  the  83rd  quorum  of  Seventy 
May  16,  1909,  and  was  ordained  a 
High  Priest  and  Patriarch  May  24, 
1910,  by  Apostle  Francis  M.  Lyman. 
At  that  time  he  was  the  youngest  or- 
dained Patriarch  in  the  Church,  be- 
ing only  27  years  old.  In  1914  he 
moved  from  Snowflake,  Arizona,  to 
Southern  Alberta,  living  first  at  Ray- 
mond, and  later  moving  to  the  city 
of  Lethbridge,  where  he  now  resides. 

SMITH,   John    Sivel,    a    Patriarch, 
was  born  March  10,  1809,  in  Worces- 

Vol.  Ill,  No.  16. 


tershire,  England.  In  his  youth  he 
learned  the  trade  of  a  wheelwright, 
and  in  1838  (Feb.  13th)  he  married 
Jane  Wadley.  Be'coming  converted 
to  "Mormonism,"  he,  together  with 
his  wife,  were  baptized  May  17, 
1840,  by  Wilford  Woodruff  in  Here- 
fordshire, England.  He  was  ordained 
a  Priest  about  the  same  time.  Two 
daughters  were  born  to  him  in  Eng- 
land, of  whom  one  died  in  that 
country.  He  left  England  with  his 
family  May  12,  1841,  crossing  the 
Atlantic  in  the  ship  "Harmony." 
After  spending  six  weeks  on  the 
water  they  landed  at  Quebec,  Can- 
ada, whence  they  went  by  team  to 
Montreal,  and  crossed  the  lake  to 
Kirtland,  Ohio,  which  they  reached  in 
July.  Bro.  Smith,  obtaining  employ- 
ment, earned  a  team  and  traveled 
with  his  family  to  La  Harpe,  111., 
after  staying  at  Kirtland  about  six- 
teen months.  One  daughter  was 
born  to  him  at  Kirtland  Feb.  17, 
1842,  and  two  daughters  at  Camp 
Creek,  111.,  where  Bro.  Smith  rented 
a  farm.  In  the  spring  of  1846  they 
started  west  with  the  rest  of  the 
exiled  Saints.  Before  the  exodus 
Bro.  Smith  participated  in  guarding 
Nauvoo  and  doing  the  duties  of  a 
Saint  and  citizen  to  the  best  of  his 
ability.  He  was  present  when  the 
Prophet  Joseph  delivered  his  last  ad- 
dress to  the  Nauvoo  Legion,  and  he 
also  attended  the  memorably  meet- 
ing held  at  Nauvoo  August  8,  1844, 
when  the  mantle  of  Joseph  fell  upon 
Brigham  Young.  After  leaving  Nau- 
voo with  their  five  daughters.  Bro- 
ther and  Sister  Smith  traveled  to 
Mt.  Pisgah,  Iowa,  and  thence  to 
Council  Point,  where  one  of  their  little 
daughters  died  at  Cod  Fish  Lake.  A 
son  and  a  daughter  were  born  at  the 
Bluffs.  Bro.  Smith  left  Council 
Bluffs  with  his  family  in  the  spring 
of  1850,  and,  crossing  the  plains  in 
William  Snow's  company,  arrived  in 
the  Valley  Oct.  3,  1850.  They  set- 
tled on  Willow  creek  (now  Draper). 
Bro.  Smith  was  ordained  a  Seventy 
in  1852  and  was  chosen  as  a  presi- 

April,  193  9 


242 


LATTER-DAY   SAINT 


dent  in  the  55th  quorum  of  Seventy 
in   1855.     Three  sons  were  born  to 
him  at  Draper.      In   185  6   he  moved 
to     Kays     Ward     (now     Kaysvllle), 
where  he  bought  out  the  holdings  of 
Bishop  Kay.     Here  another  daughter 
was  born  to  him.     During  the  winter 
of    1857-58    he    participated    in    the 
Johnston  army  troubles,  and  during 
"the  move"  of  1858  he  went  as  far 
south  as  Alpine,  Utah  county,  where 
he    remained    with   his    family    until 
peace   was   restored,    when    they    re- 
turned to  Kaysville.   Here  Bro.  Smith 
was   chosen   as   second    counselor   to 
Bishop  Allen  Taylor,  which  position 
he  held  until  the  organization  of  the 
Davis    Stake    in    1877.      In    1896    he 
was  ordained  a  Patriarch  by  Joseph 
F.    Smith.      His    wife    died    in    May. 
1888.     Bro.  Smith  was  the  father  of 
eleven    children    and    at    his    death 
Feb.    13,    1905,    he    left    seven    chil- 
dren, 36  grandchildren  and  41  great 
grandchildren.     He  was  faithful  and 
true  to  the  last  and  bore  a  faithful 
testimony   to   the   divine   mission   of 
the   Prophet   Joseph    Smith   and    his 
successors. 

S>nTH,  John  Jex,  Stake  clerk  of 
the  South  Davis  Stake  of  Zion,  was 
born  April  16,  1840,  at  Lound,  Suf- 
folk, England,  the  son  of  Henry 
Smith  and  Susannah  Jex.  Becoming 
a  convert  to  "Mormonism"  he  was 
baptized  Dec.  4,  1852,  by  Wm.  Ash- 
man. He  emigrated  to  America  in 
1855,  crossing  the  Atlantic  in  the 
ship  "Emerald  Isle,"  which  sailed 
from  Liverpool  Nov.  30,  1855,  and 
arrived  at  New  York  Dec.  29,  1855. 
He  remained  in  Brooklyn,  N.  Y.,  till 
1862,  when  he  migrated  to  Utah, 
crossing  the  plains  in  Henry  W.  Mil- 
ler's company,  and  settled  at  Center- 
ville,  Davis  county,  Utah,  which  has 
been  his  home  ever  since.  He  was 
ordained  a  Deacon  in  1856  by  Apos- 
tle John  Taylor;  ordained  a  Seventy 
July  1,  1856,  by  Joseph  Young;  or- 
dained a  High  Priest  Sept.  28,  1888, 
by  Franklin  D.  Richards  and  set 
apart  as  second  counselor  to  Bishop 


Aaron  D.  Porter  of  Centerville.  Later 
(June  19,  1899)  he  was  set  apart 
as  first  counselor  to  Bishop  Melvin 
H.  Randall  and  held  that  position 
till  Dec.  21,  1902.  Since  1879  he 
has  acted  as  Ward  clerk  at  Center- 
ville and  since  1892  as  Stake  clerk  of 
the  Davis  Stake.  In  1868  he  went 
to  Fort  Benton  as  a  Church  team- 
ster after  immigrants.  In  1863  (Oct. 
28th)  Bro.  Smith  married  Ruth  Dew- 
hurst  (daughter  of  Roger  Dewhurst 
and  Susannah  Blazard),  who  was 
born  Oct.  11,  1845,  in  Lancashire, 
England,  and  emigrated  to  Utah  in 
1852.  She  became  the  mother  of 
two  children  and  died  March  3,  1868. 
In  1870   (Oct.  11th)  Bro.  Smith  mar- 


ried Jane  Theckston  (daughter  of 
James  Theckston,  and  Martha  Ma- 
thar)  who  was  born  August  27,  18  43, 
in  Lancashire,  England,  and  emi- 
grated to  Utah  in  186d;  she  became 
the  mother  of  seven  children  and 
died  Oct.  1,  1908.  While  residing 
at  Brooklyn,  N.  Y.,  Elder  Smith 
served  an  apprenticeship  as  a  gold- 
smith, but  since  his  arrival  in  Utah 
he  has  been  engaged  in  farming  and 
gardening  at  Centerville. 

SMITH,    Samuel   Harrison    Bailey, 

a  nephew  of  the  Prophet  Joseph 
Smith,  was  born  August  1,   1838,  in 


BIOGRAPHICAL  ENCYCLOPEDIA. 


243 


Daviess  county,  Mo.,  being  the  only 
son  of  Samuel  Harrison  Smith  and 
Mary  Bailey.  His  father  was  a  bro- 
ther of  the  Prophet  Joseph  Smith 
and  a  prominent  figure  in  the  early 
history  of  the  Church.  At  the  time 
of  the  younger  Samuel's  birth  the 
persecutions  were  raging  against  the 
Saints  in  Missouri,  and  when  the 
child  was  only  four  days  old,  his 
mother  with  her  infant  and  two 
small  children  were  driven  from  their 
homes  by  a  ruthless  mob  and  forced 
to  travel  3  0  miles  through  a  blinding 
storm  to  a  place  of  safety.  From  this 
awful  ordeal  she  never  recovered, 
but  after  a  lingering  illness  died 
from  the  effects  of  exposure,  leaving 
young  Samuel  motherless  at  two 
years   of   age.      After    the    expulsion 


from  Missouri  the  boy  was  taken 
with  his  father's  family  to  Illinois, 
where  they  remained  in  and  around 
Nauvoo  until  after  the  martyrdom 
of  the  Prophet  Joseph  and  his  brother 
Hyrum.  At  that  time  Samuel  H. 
Smith  in  attempting  to  reach  Carth- 
age to  aid  his  imprisoned  brethren 
was  shot  at  and  pursued  several 
miles  by  the  mob,  from  which  he 
received  internal  injuries  which  re- 
sulted in  his  death  a  month  later, 
leaving  young  Samuel  an  orphan  at 
six  years  of  age.     From  this  time  on 


the  boy  lived  with  different  rela- 
tives, and  in  184  8  he  crossed  the 
plains  to  the  Valley  in  Pres.  Brigham 
Young's  -company.  Here  he  shared 
in  all  the  hardships  and  privations 
of  early  pioneer  life.  At  the  age  of 
seventeen  Samuel  went  on  a  mission 
to  the  States  and  from  there  was 
transferred  the  following  year  to  the 
British  Mission,  where  he  labored  un- 
til called  home  in  1858,  together  with 
all  the  other  missionaries  at  the 
time  of  the  Johnston  Army  troubles. 
In  185  9  he  assisted  in  opening  the 
lead  mines  at  Minersville,  Utah.  In 
1860  (April  17th)  he  married  Mary 
Catherine  Smith  (daughter  of  Con- 
rad Smith  and  Ann  Elizabeth  Gees- 
man)  born  March  22,  1842,  at  Quincy, 
Franklyn  county,  Pennsylvania.  A  few 
days  later  he  started  on  his  second 
mission  to  England,  going  in  com- 
pany with  his  cousin  Joseph  F. 
Smith.  They  remained  in  Europe 
three  and  a  half  years,  meeting  with 
very  gratifying  success.  While  there 
Samuel  organized  the  Leeds  confer- 
ence. After  his  return  to  Utah  in 
18  63  he  moved  to  Bear  Lake  Val- 
ley, Idaho,  in  the  spring  of  1864, 
where  he  assisted  in  founding  the 
town  of  St.  Charles.  He  remained 
there  two  years  and  held  many  re- 
sponsible positions  in  that  new  and 
growing  community.  In  1866  Bro. 
Smith  returned  to  Salt  Lake  City 
where  he  continued  his  activity  in 
Church  work,  being  engaged  in  the 
Endowment  House  and  at  the  Histor- 
ian's office  for  a  number  of  years. 
In  1870  (May  2nd)  he  married  Julia 
A.  R.  Winter,  daughter  of  Bishop 
Thomas  W^inter  of  the  Fifth  Ward 
(Salt  Lake  City),  and  Julia  Restell; 
she  was  born  Feb.  8,  1854,  in  Salt 
Lake  City.  In  1877  Bro.  Smith  filled 
a  short  mission  to  California.  After 
his  return  from  that  mission  he  spent 
the  remainder  of  his  life  in  or  near 
Salt  Lake  City,  where  he  conducted 
a  large  dairy  business  for  many 
years.  He  died  June  12,  1914,  at 
the  age  of  75  years,  leaving  two 
widows,  Mary  C.  and  Julia  W.,  and 


244 


LATTER-DAY   SAINT 


ten  sons:  Samuel  B.,  Joseph  B.,  Al- 
vin  B.,  Junius  B.,  Albert  W.,  J.  Win- 
ter, David  W.,  Newton  T.,  Heman  T., 
and  Clarence  T.;  and  six  daughters, 
namely,  Florence  S.,  Jenta  S.,  Cum- 
orah  S.,  Ruby  K.,  Sue  Blanche,  and 
Grace  L.  Elder  Smith  was  a  great 
reader  and  a  deep  thinker;  he  took 
an  active  part  in  politics  and  public 
affairs  and  was  a  staunch  defender 
of  the  faith.  He  was  a  man  of  large 
stature  and  strong  athletic  appear- 
ance, clean  in  speech  and  habits  and 
generous  to  a  fault. 

SMITH,    WilUam    B.,    one    of    the 

early  settlers  of  Kaysville,  Davis 
county,  Utah,  was  born  in  February, 
1814,  at  Dunton,  Bedfordshire,  Eng- 
land, the  son  of  John  Smith  and  Lucy 


Brown.  He  was  baptized  in  1841  in 
England  by  John  Sheffield.  His 
father  and  mother  lived  and  died  in 
England.  William  came  to  America 
in  1843  and  settled  in  Nauvoo,  Han- 
cock county,  111.,  where  he  resided 
until  the  Saints  were  expelled  from 
that  place  in  1846.  He  crossed  the 
plains  to  Utah  in  1850  with  Capt. 
Evans  and  settled  at  Kaysville,  Davis 
county,  where  he  took  up  land  near 
the  Great  Salt  Lake.  This  farm  he 
improved  and  stocked  with  cattle 
and    sheep.      In    October,    1838,    he 


married  Ann  Barnes,  who  was  born 
at  Sandy,  Bedfordshire,  England, 
March  6,  1817,  and  died  at  Kaysville 
in  1871.  In  1857  (Jan.  10th)  Bro. 
Smith  married  Isabell  Burton,  who 
was  born  Sept.  17,  182  7,  at  Winds- 
dale,  Yorkshire,  England.  Her  father, 
James  Burton,  died  in  England,  and 
the  mother  with  her  nine  children 
emigrated  to  America  and  crossed 
the  plains  in  Capt.  Milo  Andrus's 
company  in  1855.  She  died  in  the 
sixties.  Of  her  nine  children,  four 
are  still  living.  By  this  second  mar- 
riage Brother  Smith  had  six  children, 
four  of  whom  are  still  living;  this 
second  wife  died  April  11,  1907,  at 
Kaysville.  In  his  early  youth  Bro. 
Smith  was  ordained  to  the  Priest- 
hood, and  being  a  staunch  believer 
in  the  principles  and  doctrines  of  the 
Latter-day  Saints,  he  labored  faith- 
fully his  entire  life  for  the  better- 
ment of  mankind.  He  was  ordained 
a  High  Priest  December  9,  1883,  by 
Thomas  Steed.  During  his  residence 
in  Kaysville  he  assisted  with  team 
and  means  several  times  in  making 
trips  to  the  Missouri  river  after  emi- 
grants, and  was  also  a  member  of 
one  of  the  expeditions  sent  out  to 
meet  the  hand-cart  companies  in 
1856.  During  the  Johnston  Army 
troubles  he  served  as  a  military  man 
in  Echo  canyon  and  elsewhere,  most- 
ly under  the  command  of  Lot  Smith. 
He  was  one  of  the  most  active  and 
enterprising  citizens  of  Davis  county, 
generous  to  a  fault  and  is  still  widely 
remembered  for  his  many  charitable 
deeds.  He  died  Oct.  11,  18d7,  at 
Kaysville,  leaving  a  large  estate  for 
his  wife  and  children.  He  settled 
his  sons  on  farms  of  their  own  when 
they  grew  to  manhood,  and  they  are 
today  among  the  most  substantial 
citizens  of  Davis  county. 

SNOW,  Orrin  Henry,  second  coun- 
selor in  the  Stake  presidency  of  the 
Taylor  Stake,  Alberta,  Canada,  was 
born  April  17,  18  69,  at  Pine  Valley, 
Washington  county,  Utah,  the  son  of 
William  Snow  and  Ann  Rogers.     He 


BIOGRAPHICAL  ENCYCLOPEDIA. 


245 


was  baptized  Sept.  23.  1877,  by 
Joseph  I.  Earl,  ordained  a  Deacon  at 
the  age  of  twelve  years  by  Bishop 
Frederick  W.  Jones  of  Pine  valley, 
Utah,  and  subsequently  held  all  the 
offices  in  the  Aaronic  Priesthood 
He  attended  the  district  schools  in 
Pine  valley  during  the  winter  sea- 
sons, working  on  the  farm  in  the 
summer,  until  he  was  twenty  years 
of  age.  Then  he  attended  the  B.  Y. 
Academy  at  Provo,  the  last  winter 
studying  under  Dr.  Karl  G.  Maeser. 
His  father  died  when  he  was  ten 
years  of  age,  and  thus  early  in  life 
Bro.  Snow  was  left  principally  to  his 
own  resources.  Having  been  ordained 
an  Elder  by  Bishop  Wm.  Gardner, 
he   filled  a  mission   to   the  Southern 


States  in  1891-93,  laboring  first  in 
the  North  Alabama  conference  and 
afterwards  presided  over  that  con- 
ference. He  also  spent  some  time 
assisting  in  the  presidency  of  the 
mission  at  Chattanooga,  Tennessee. 
After  visiting  the  World's  Fair  in  Chi- 
cago he  returned  home  in  1893.  At 
home  he  has  filled  many  positions  in 
the  Church  and  also  held  several 
secular  offices.  From  1894  to  1896 
he  acted  as  county  commissioner  for 
Washington  county,  and  he  acted  as 
secretary  of  the  2  5th  quorum  of  Sev- 
enty   four    years.        In     1896     (Sept. 


23rd)  he  married  Ella  May  Burgess 
in  the  St.  George  Temple.  This  mar- 
riage has  been  blessed  with  six 
children,  namely,  Afton,  May,  J. 
Golden,  Norma,  Orrin  Porter  and 
Ann.  His  wife  died  May  19,  1908, 
at  Lund,  Nevada.  In  1900  he  re- 
moved to  Cedar  City,  Utah,  having 
sold  his  property  in  Pine  valley,  and 
after  spending  the  winter  at  school 
he  moved  to  Lund,  Nevada,  where  he, 
on  August  7,  1902,  was  chosen  as 
Bishop  of  the  Lund  Ward.  Subse- 
quently he  was  ordained  a  High 
Priest  and  Bishop  by  Pres.  Joseph  F. 
Smith.  Elder  Snow  taught  school  at 
Lund  two  years  and  engaged  in  a 
profitable  mercantile  and  farming 
business.  In  1909  (August  2nd)  he 
married  Charity  Alvira  Redd  in  the 
Salt  Lake  Temple  and  soon  after- 
wards visited  Canada.  Being  favor- 
ably impressed  with  the  country  he 
sold  his  holdings  in  Nevada  and 
moved  to  Raymond,  Alberta,  in  the 
spring  of  1910.  Soon  afterwards  he 
was  chosen  as  a  High  Councilor  in 
the  Taylor  Stake,  and  in  May,  1911, 
chosen  to  fill  the  vacancy  in  the 
Stake  presidency  caused  by  the  death 
of  Wm.  A.  Redd.  At  Raymond,  El- 
der Snow  has  been  engaged  in  farm- 
ing and  in  the  real  estate  business. 

SPILSBURY,  George,  a  Patriarch 
in  the  St.  George  Stake  of  Zion,  was 
born  April  21,  1823,  at  Leigh,  Wor- 
cestershire, England,  the  son  of  Jos- 
eph Spilsbury  and  Hannah  Haden. 
He  was  baptized  Oct.  11,  1840,  and 
labored  as  a  missionary  in  Wales  in 
1841-42,  baptizing  seventeen  souls. 
In  1842  (Sept.  5th)  he  married  Fan- 
ny Smith  and,  together  with  this  wife, 
emigrated  to  Nauvoo,  111.,  arriving 
there  in  May,  1843.  He  attended  the 
famous  meeting  called  by  Sidney  Rig- 
don  after  the  martyrdom  of  the 
Prophet  and  Patriarch  and  voted  for 
Brigham  Young  and  the  Twelve  at 
the  conference  held  August  8,  1844. 
He  was  a  member  of  the  Nauvoo 
Legion  and  Capt.  Wm.  Pitts'  brass 
band.       After    participating    In    the 


246 


LATTER-DAY   SAINT 


trials  and  troubles  attending  the  ex- 
odus of  the  Saints  from  Nauvoo,  he 
finally  crossed  the  plains  to  the  Val- 
ley in  1850  and  lived  in  Salt  Lake  City 
for  nine  years;  he  then  moved  to 
Draper,  Salt  Lake  county,  where  he 
served  as  postmaster.  In  1862  he 
was  called  on  a  colonization  mission 
to  Southern  Utah  (or  Dixie)  and  lo- 
cated the  same  fall  at  Grafton  on 
the  Rio  Virgen.  In  1866  he  moved 
to  Rockville  for  protection  against 
the  Indians.  Here  he  became  a  dili- 
gent Sunday  school  worker.  In  1868 
he  changed  his  residence  to  Toquer- 
ville  where  he  has  resided  ever  since. 
The  Sunday  school  at  Toquerville  im- 


mediately claimed  his  services  and  he 
became  superintendent  of  the  same 
in  1871.  He  was  also  appointed  sup- 
erintendent of  Sunday  schools  for 
Kane  county,  which  position  he  filled 
for  six  and  a  half  years  until  the 
western  part  of  Kane  county  was  an- 
nexed to  Washington  county;  he  then 
labored  as  second  assistant  to  Miles 
P.  Romney  in  the  Sunday  schools  of 
the  St.  George  Stake.  Subsequently 
he  became  first  assistant  to  A.  R. 
Whitehead.  He  also  labored  under 
Sunday  School  superintendents  Rich- 
ard Morris  and  George  Q.  Miles.  He 
continued  as  a  member  of  the  St. 
George    Sunday    School    Board    until 


March  16,  1913,  laboring  in  the  Sun- 
day school  cause  over  fifty  years. 
For  seventeen  years  he  rode  on 
horseback,  and  after  that  he  wore 
out  three  buggies  and  buckboards, 
three  sets  of  harness  and  four  horses 
in  the  Sunday  school  cause  at  his 
own  expense.  Altogether  he  traveled 
more  than  thirty  thousand  miles  in 
the  interest  of  Sunday  schools.  On 
the  90th  anniversary  of  his  birthday 
he  attended  a  Sunday  school  gather- 
ing at  Hurricane  (ten  schools  being 
represented),  on  which  occasion  he 
was  presented  with  a  costly  lap  robe, 
a  rocking  chair  and  a  memorial.  At 
the  age  of  93  years,  Patriarch  Spils- 
bury  is  still  hale  and  hearty  and  en- 
joys perfect  health.  He  has  kept  the 
Word  of  Wisdom  3  6  years,  and  been 
a  member  of  the  Church  76  years. 
When  his  son  David  filled  a  mission 
to  Great  Britain  in  1880-82  he  ob- 
tained upwards  of  two  thousand 
names  of  ancestors,  for  nearly  half 
of  whom  Patriarch  Spilsoury  and  his 
daughter  Katy  have  done  ordinance 
work  in  the  St.  George  Temple. 

SPILSBURY,  Fanny  Smith,  wife 
of  Geo.  Spilsbury,  was  boin  Dec.  25, 
1823,  at  Creadly,  Herefordshire,  Eng- 
land, the  daughter  of  Richard  Smith 
and  Tabitha  Bridges.  As  a  convert 
to  "Mormonism"  she  was  baptized 
Jan.  23,  1842;  married  Geo.  Spils- 
bury Sept.  5,  1842,  and  became  the 
mother  of  thirteen  children.  Emigrat- 
ing to  America  together  with  her  hus- 
band, she  arrived  at  Nauvoo,  111.,  May 
31,  1843,  and  resided  at  that  place 
when  the  Prophet  and  Patriarch  were 
martyred.  She  passed  through  all 
the  trials  and  persecutions  which  be- 
fell the  Saints  during  their  exodus 
from  Nauvoo  and  finally  came  to 
Salt  Lake  Valley  July  3,  1850.  Her 
son,  Alma  Platte  Spilsbury,  was  born 
on  the  Platte  river  August  5,  1850. 
A  week  later,  during  a  stampede,  the 
wagon  in  which  she  and  her  baby 
were  riding,  was  overturned  into  the 
river,  almost  drowning  the  occupants. 
The   accident    was   due   to   the   oxen. 


BIOGRAPHICAL  ENCYCLOPEDIA. 


247 


which  were  thirsty,  jumping  down 
the  bank,  capsizing  the  wagon.  In 
the  excitement  Sister  Spilsbury  lost 
the  child  and  Bishop   Hunter   found 


the  baby  in  the  river  and  named  him 
Alma  Platte.  The  family  resided  in 
Salt  Lake  City  for  nine  years,  until 
1850,  when  George  Spilsbury  was 
called  to  the  Southern  Utah  or  Dixie 
Mission.  Here  Sister  Spilsbury  bravely 
passed  through  all  the  hardships  as- 
sociated with  the  settling  of  that  bar- 
ren, sterile  country,  and  she  did  it 
without  a  murmur.  Beloved  and  re- 
spected by  all  who  knew  her,  she 
died  at  her  home  at  Toquerville, 
Washington  county,  Utah,  June  5, 
1903.  Sister  Spilsbury  was  noted 
for  her  deeds  of  charity,  and  as  an 
active  and  leading  spirit  in  Relief 
Society  work. 

STEED,  Thomas.  (Continued  from 
Vol.  2:88.)  Patriarch  Thomas  Steed 
married  Matilda  Cecilia  Giauque  Feb. 
2,  1905.  She  was  the  daughter  of 
Louis  Emil  Giauque  and  Sophia  A. 
Gauchat  and  was  born  Feb.  2,  18  67, 
at  Preles,  Canton  Bern,  Switzerland. 
After  a  long  and  useful  career,  Bro. 
Steed  died  at  the  L.  D.  S.  Hospital 
in  Salt  Lake  City  (after  undergoing 
an  operation)  June  26,  1910.  Up  to 
the   time   of   his   death    he   acted    as 


president  of  the  High  Priests  quor- 
um of  the  Davis  Stake  of  Zion.  Bro. 
Steed  was  a  hard-working  man,  jov- 
ial in  his  disposittion  and  exemplary 


in  his  life.     He  was  most  successful 
as  a  peace-maker  among  his  brethren. 

STEED,  Laura  Lucinda  Reed,  wife 
of  Patriarch  Thomas  Steed,  was  born 
May  22,  1828,  near  Rome,  Ashtabula 
county,   Ohio,   the  daughter  of  John 


Reed  and  Rebecca  Bearce.  She  was 
the  fourteenth  child  of  a  family  of 
sixteen  children.  The  Reeds  and 
Bearces  were  of  New  England  stock, 


248 


LATTER-DAY  SAINT 


the  Reeds  descending  from  the  emi- 
grant   Wm.    Reed    who     landed     in 
America   in    1636;    many   of   his   de- 
scendants were  prominent  as  officers 
in  the  French  and  Indian  wars  and 
also  in  the  American  Revolution  for 
Independence.     Sister  Steed's  parents 
received   the   gospel    and   were    bap- 
tized   In    1830;    they     remained     as 
staunch  supporters  of  the  truth  dur- 
ing their  lives  and  assisted  in  build- 
ing   both    the    Kirtland    and    Nauvoo 
Temples.     Her  mother  in  her  old  age 
traveled  to  Salt  Lake  Valley,  a  lone 
widow,   with  her  two  youngest  chil- 
dren, and  was  with  the  company  of 
Saints  whose  lives  were  saved  by  the 
Lord    sending    quails    to    their    tent 
doors  after  their  expulsion  from  Nau- 
voo.    John  Reed  was,  when  he  joined 
the  Church,  a  comparatively  wealthy 
man,  owning  farms,  grist  mills,  and 
as  much  coin   as  the  strongest   man 
was  able  to  lift;  yet,  because  of  the 
mobbings  and  movings  of  the  Saints, 
he  lost  all,  and  the  younger  children, 
including  Laura  L.,  had  little  or  no 
chance   for  schooling.      While  resid- 
ing on  Shoal  creek  in  Caldwell  coun- 
ty. Mo.,  where  Bro.   Reed  was  build- 
ing a  grist  mill  and  blacksmith  shop 
for    Jacob    Haun,    he    had    a    dream 
three  nights  before  the  Hauns  mill 
massacre  took  place,  in  which  he  saw 
the   creek    running    red    with    blood. 
He  took  the  dream  as  a  warning  and 
at  once  moved  his  family  away, which 
saved    them    from    that    awful    mas- 
sacre.    Sister  Laura  L.  was  baptized 
in    183  6    and    was   with    her   parents 
during    all    their    persecutions.      She 
often  played  at  the  feet  of  the  Proph- 
et Joseph  Smith  and  was  held  on  his 
lap  on  many  occasions  when  he  was  a 
guest  of  the  Reed  home  while  hiding 
from    his    enemies.       She    has    often 
told  her  children  of  the  eventful  days 
of  the  martyrdom  of  the  Prophet  and 
Patriarch,    and    how    sad    the    Saints 
felt  on  hearing  of  the  occurrence.    In 
1846    (Dec.    13th)    she   was   married 
to  Thomas  Steed,  and  at  the  time  of 
their   marriage   they   had    less    than 
$30    between    them.      At    once    they 


began  to  struggle  for  means  to  bring 
themselves  to  the  Valley,  and  on  May 
1,     1850,    with    their     few     earthly 
effects  loaded  in  wagons.  Sister  Steed 
with   a   baby   only   six   weeks   old   in 
her  arms,  they  started  on  their  way 
(together    with    friends)    from    their 
home   at    Keokuk,    Iowa.      They    fin- 
ally crossed  the  plains  in  Capt.  Milo 
Andrus'  train,  which  arrived  in  Salt 
Lake    City    August    29,    1850.       The 
trials,  hardships  and  sufferings  which 
the  family   underwent  on  that  jour- 
ney   none    can    tell,    only    those    who 
under  like  conditions  made  the  trip. 
The   first   winter    was   spent   in    and 
around  Salt  Lake  City,  and  in  Febru- 
ary, 1851,  the  family  became  perma- 
nent settlers  on  a  farm  at  Farming- 
ton.       Sister     Steed's     marriage     to 
Thomas  Steed  was  blessed   with  fif- 
teen   children,    namely,    John,    Char- 
lotte, George  Henry,  Thomas  Joseph, 
Laura  Lucinda,  Arthur  Albert,  Wal- 
ter  William,    Laura   Lovina,    Fannie 
Louisa,    Ira    Edwin,    Charles    Marco, 
Alice  Charlotte,  Franklin  David,  Rose- 
Rebecca    and    Lee    Elonzo.      At    her 
marriage   Sister   Steed   was   tall   and 
slender,    with   black   hair,   dark   eyes 
and   rosy   cheecks,    but   later   in   life 
she    became    a    large    woman,    had    a 
commanding  appearance,  was  a  great 
worker   and   had    ability   and   expert- 
ness  in  cooking,  sewing  and  all  kinds 
of  domestic  work.     Her  pride  was  her 
family,  and  "Aunt  Laura,'  as  she  was 
affectionately    called,    was    a    "wise 
councilor,    a    true    and    dutiful    wife, 
a  loving  and  kind  mother,  a  sincere 
friend,  a  good  neighbor,  a  peace-lov- 
ing   citizen    and   a     true     Latter-day 
Saint."     Sister  Steed  died   at  Farm- 
ington  Nov.  22,  1903. 

STEED,  Thomas  Joseph,  a  prom- 
nent  and  active  Elder  in  the 
Church,  was  born  April  3,  1852,  at 
Farmington,  Davis  county,  Utah,  the 
son  of  Thomas  Steed  and  Laura  Lu- 
cinda Reed.  He  was  baptized  at 
Farmington  by  Henry  W.  Miller  June 
24,  18  60;  ordained  an  Elder  March 
3,    1873,   by   John   D.   T.    McAllister; 


BIOGRAPHICAL  ENCYCLOPEDIA. 


249 


ordained  a  Seventy  by  Truman  Leon- 
ard Feb.  3,  18  7  4,  and  became  a  mem- 
ber of  the  65th  quorum  of  Seventy; 
ordained  a  High  Priest  and  set  apart 
as  a  High  Councilor  June  6,  188  6, 
by   John  Henry   Smith   in  the   Davis 


Stake.  During  the  winter  of  1880- 
81  he  visited  the  Davis,  Morgan, 
Summit  and  Wasatch  Stakes  as  a 
special  home  missionary;  acted  as 
president  of  the  Y.  M.  M.  I.  A.  of 
Farmington  five  years;  served  as 
first  assistant  superintendent  of  the 
Stake  superintendency  of  Y.  M.  M. 
I.  A.  in  the  Davis  Stake;  filled  a 
preaching  mission  to  the  States  of 
Wisconsin,  Minnesota  and  Iowa  in 
1881;  served  as  a  Sunday  school 
teacher  and  a  Ward  teacher  in  the 
Farmington  and  Clinton  Wards  for 
many  years;  acted  as  justice  of  the 
peace  a  number  of  terms;  furnished 
means  to  advertise  the  mass  meeting 
which  resulted  in  the  incorporation 
of  the  Davis  and  Weber  Counties 
Canal  Company,  which  has  built  one 
of  the  most  extensive  canal  and  res- 
ervoir systems  in  Utah.  For  his 
services  in  that  connection  he  is 
called  the  father  of  the  enterprise, 
and  he  has  served  the  company  as 
superintendent,  vice  president,  presi- 
dent and  director.  From  188  6  to 
1913,  or  until  his  transfer  to  the 
Weber    Stake    in    1913.     Bro.    Steed 


served  as  a  High  Councilor  in  the 
Davis  Stake.  He  has  spent  several 
years  as  a  home  missionary.  Elder 
Steed  is  a  man  of  "big  things;"  he 
has  opened  up  and  improved  as  many 
new  farms  as  any  other  man  in  Utah, 
and  is  still  actively  engaged  in  farm- 
ing, stock-raising,  fruit  growing  and 
dealing  in  real  estate.  He  has  been 
an  active  Church  worker  all  his  days. 
In  1873  (March  3rd)  he  married 
Susannah  Davis  (daughter  of  Abra- 
ham T.  Davis  and  Matilda  Haynes). 
The  issue  of  this  marriage  is  eleven 
children,  namely,  Anna  Amy,  Wm. 
Rufus,  Walter  Ralph,  Laura  Grace, 
Ethel  P.,  Fannie  Rose,  Charles  El- 
mer, Horace,  George,  Jay  and  Anson. 
Bro.  Steed  is  now  acting  as  first 
counselor  in  the  presidency  of  the 
High  Priests  quorum. 

STEED,  Susannah  Davis,  wife  of 
Thomas  Joseph  Steed,  was  born  June 
7,  1852,  in  Henry  county,  Indiana, 
the  daughter  of  Abraham  T.  Davis 
and  Matilda  Haynes.  When  she  was 
about  two  years  old  her  father  moved 


to  Polk  county,  Iowa,  and  made  the 
family  home  about  eight  miles  north 
of  Des  Moines.  Several  years  later 
he  moved  further  north  and  settled 
near  Polk  City,  where  his  wife  died 
Sept.  11,  1857,  leaving  him  a  widower 


250 


LATTER-DAY   SAINT 


with  five  small  children.  He  married 
Miss  Elmina  P.  Beals  May  2,  1858. 
Becoming  converts  to  "Mormonism," 
Bro.  Davis  and  wife  were  both  bap- 
tized May  1,  1858,  by  Elder  James 
Andrus.  Sister  Susannah  lived  with 
her  father's  family  until  April  1, 
1872,  when,  in  company  with  her 
brother  Benjamin,  she  started  for 
Salt  Lake  City  where  they  arrived 
April  10,  1872.  Sister  Susannah  was 
baptized  May  4,  1872,  by  Edward 
Stevenson  and  was  married  to  Thom- 
as Joseph  Steed  March  3,  1873.  The 
family  home  now  became  Farming- 
ton,  Davis  county,  for  the  following 
26  years.  Then  they  moved  onto 
their  ranch  in  Clinton,  Davis  county. 
While  at  Farmington,  eleven  children 
were  born  to  Bro.  and  Sister  Steed, 
namely,  Anna  Amy,  Wm.  R.  and 
Walter  R.  (twins),  Thomas  Joseph 
F.,  Laura  Grace,  Ethel  Prudence, 
Fannie  Rose,  Ezra  Victor,  Chas.  El- 
mer, Horace  Jay  and  Geo.  Anson. 
Ten  of  these  children  lived  long 
enough  to  marry.  In  1881  Sister 
Steed  was  chosen  as  first  counselor 
to  Mrs.  Elizabeth  Coombs  of  the 
Ward  Y.  L.  M.  I.  A.  at  Farmington. 
She  has  also  served  as  an  aid  to 
Pres.  Miriam  Mitchell  and  as  first 
counselor  to  her  successor,  Pres. 
Janet  Parker  of  the  Clinton  Ward 
Relief  Society.  After  moving  to 
Clearfield  Ward,  she  served  as  the 
first  president  of  the  Ward  Relief 
Society  at  that  place.  She  is  now 
a  member  of  the  Ogden  Second  Ward 
Relief  Society,  the  family  having  re- 
moved to  Ogden  in  November,  1917. 

STEED,  Walter  William,  a  High 
Councilor  in  the  North  Davis  Stake 
of  Zion  and  a  resident  of  Syracuse, 
Davis  county,  Utah,  was  born  May 
29,  1858,  at  Clover  creek  (now 
Mona),  Juab  county,  Utah,  the  son 
of  Thomas  Steed  and  Laura  Lucinda 
Reed.  Bro.  Steed  was  born  during 
the  general  move  of  the  Church 
south,  his  parents,  who  at  that  time 
resided  at  Farmington,  having  gone 
as  far  south   as   Clover  creek.      The 


family  returned  the  same  year  to 
Farmington,  where  Walter  William 
was  educated  and  began  to  labor  as 
an  active  Church  member.  For  a 
number  of  years  he  acted  as  a  Sun- 
day school  teacher  and  later  as  as- 
sistant superintendent  of  the  Farm- 
ington Sunday  school;  he  also  acted 
as  an  officer  in  the  Ward  Y.  M.  M.  I. 
A.  for  several  years.  In  December, 
1874,  he  was  ordained  an  Elder  by 
Mads  Christensen;  ordained  a  Seven- 
ty May  22,  1886,  by  James  D.  Wil- 
cox; ordained  a  High  Priest  May  28, 
1888,  by  Joel  Parrish  and  set  apart 
as  an  alternate  member  of  the  Davis 
Stake  High   Council.      He   became   a 


regular  member  of  said  council  Sept. 
11,  1897.  Besides  his  activity  in 
Church  matters,  Bro.  Steed  has 
served  as  county  commissioner, 
school  trustee,  and  filled  many  im- 
portant positions  of  a  secular  nature. 
Otherwise  he  is  a  farmer  and  stock- 
raiser  by  avocation,  but  has  also  fol- 
lowed the  mercantile  business  for 
some  time.  He  is  one  of  the  organ- 
izers of  the  Davis  County  Bank  and 
helped  in  the  construction  of  the 
Davis  and  Weber  Counties  Canal, 
Company's  canal,  of  which  extensive 
canal  system  he  is  now  a  director. 
He  is  also  one  of  the  founders  of  the 
Clearfield  State  Bank,  of  which  he  is 


BIOGRAPHICAL   ENCYCLOPEDIA. 


261 


now  the  president  .  In  1880  (Sept. 
16th)  Bro.  Steed  married  Julia 
Maria  Wilcox,  daughter  of  James  D. 
Wilcox  and  Anna  Robinson.  She  has 
borne  her  husband  thirteen  children. 
Afterwards  Bro.  Steed  married  Alice 
Clark  who  is  the  mother  of  seven 
children. 

STEVENS,  David  Riley,  a  Patri- 
arch in  the  Millard  Stake  of  Zion 
and  a  resident  of  Holden,  Millard 
county,  Utah,  was  born  Nov.  21,  183  9, 


near  La  Harpe,  Hancock  county, 
Illinois,  the  son  of  Wm.  Stevens  and 
Marinda  Thomas.  He  removed  with 
his  parents  to  Nauvoo  while  a  child 
and  participated  with  them  in  the 
general  exodus  of  the  Saints.  After 
spending  some  time  at  Council  Bluffs 
on  the  Missouri  river,  the  family 
crossed  the  plains  in  1850  and  lo- 
cated temporarily  at  Pleasant  Grove, 
Utah  county,  Utah,  whence  they,  re- 
sponding to  call  from  the  Church 
authorities,  moved  to  Fillmore,  Mil- 
lard county,  in  1853;  later  they  were 
among  the  first  settlers  of  Holden, 
where  they  have  lived  ever  since. 
Bro.  Stevens  was  baptized  about  June, 
1852,  by  Noah  T.  Guyman  at  Ameri- 
can Fork,  Utah  county;  was  ordained 
a  Seventy  in  1859,  and  married  Caro- 
line   Felshaw    Dec.     24,    18  62;     she 


bore  her  husband  fourteen  children, 
namely,  Mary  Olive,  Wm.  Riley,  Car- 
oline, Marinda  Ellen,  Daniel,  David 
Felshaw,  Lorenzo  Milton.  Clara 
Vilate  and  Clarence  Edward  (twins), 
Alma,  Marion  Roscoe,  John  Elmer, 
Hazen  F.,  and  Laura.  In  1861,  re- 
sponding to  call,  Bro.  Stevens  went 
back  to  the  Missouri  river  as  a 
Church  teamster  in  Capt.  John  R. 
Murdock's  train  after  emigrants.  He 
was  ordained  a  High  Priest  and  Bish- 
op July  22,  1877,  by  Apostle  Erastus 
Snow  and  set  apart  to  preside  as  the 
first  Bishop  of  Holden,  which  posi- 
tion he  held  for  thirteen  years.  In 
May,  1890,  he  was  set  apart  as  sec- 
ond counselor  to  Pres.  Ira  N.  Hinck- 
ley of  the  Millard  Stake.  He  labored 
with  Pres.  Hinckley  until  a  change 
in  the  Stake  Presidency  took  place 
in  May,  1890,  when  Elder  Stevens 
was  ordained  a  Patriarch  (Nov.  2  4, 
1902),  by  Pres.  Joseph  F.  Smith. 
Since  August  11,  1912,  he  has  been 
a  member  of  the  Millard  Stake  High 
Council.  Besides  being  an  active 
Church  worker  Elder  Stevens  has 
taken  a  most  active  part  in  secular 
matters  and  has  held  many  positions 
of  honor  and  responsibility  in  the  in- 
terests of  his  fellow-citizens.  From 
1882  to  1893  he  acted  as  a  commis- 
sioner of  Millard  county.  His  occu- 
pation is  that  of  a  farmer  and  stock- 
raiser. 

STEVEXSON,  George  Vickers,  first 
counselor  to  Bishop  David  E.  Layton 
of  the  West  Layton  Ward,  Davis 
county,  Utah,  was  born  March  18, 
1847,  at  Breaston,  Derbyshire,  Eng- 
land, the  son  of  John  Stevenson  and 
Mary  Vickers.  Becoming  a  convert 
to  "Mormonism"  he  was  baptized 
Jan.  1,  1855,  by  John  Newbold,  and 
emigrated  with  his  praents  to  Utah 
in  1862,  crossing  the  Atlantic  in  the 
ship  "John  J.  Boyd"  and  the  plains 
in  Capt.  Joseph  Home's  company, 
which  arrived  in  Salt  Lake  City 
Oct.  1,  1862.  Nine  days  after  their 
arrival  in  the  Valley  his  father  died, 
and  George  V.,  after  working  in  the 


252 


LATTER-DAY  SAINT 


shoe  business  for  Wm.  Jennings, 
moved  to  Kaysville  in  the  fall  of 
1863  and  commenced  farming.  In 
1889-1891  he  filled  a  mission  to 
Great  Britain,  having  previously  been 
ordained  an  Elder  and  subsequently 


ried  to  Bro.  Stevenson  March  21, 
18  67;  she  became  the  mother  of  ten 
children,  six  of  whom  are  still  liv- 
ing. In  18  93  she  was  chosen  as 
president  of  the  branch  Primary  As- 
sociation and  held  that  position  for 


a  Seventy.  He  was  ordained  a  High 
Priest  in  March,  1895,  and  set  apart 
as  first  counselor  to  Bishop  Layton. 
This  position  he  held  until  his  death, 
which  occurred  Nov.  14,  1907.  In 
1867  (March  21st)  he  married  Eliza 
M.  Smith  (who  bore  her  husband  ten 
children),  and  moved  to  Layton  (now 
West  Layton)  in  1878.  He  was  or- 
dained an  Elder  in  18  65. 

STEVENSON,   Eliza   Maria   Smith, 

wife  of  George  V.  Stevenson,  was 
born  Feb.  5,  1850,  at  Council  Bluffs, 
Iowa,  the  daughter  of  John  Sivol 
Smith  and  Jane  Wadley.  She  was 
born  while  her  parents  were  en 
route  from  England  to  Salt  Lake 
City  in  Wm.  Snow's  company.  The 
company  arrived  in  Salt  Lake  City 
Oct.  3,  1850,  and  the  family,  after 
wintering  in  the  city,  moved  to  Dra- 
per, Salt  Lake  county,  In  the  spring 
of  1851.  In  1856  they  moved  to 
Kaysville,  where  Sister  Eliza's  father 
purchased  a  farm  of  Bishop  Kay. 
Sister  Eliza  was  baptized  Oct.  13, 
1861,  by  Joseph  Sharp  and  was  mar- 


twelve  years;  since  1^05  she  has 
been  a  member  of  the  Stake  Primary 
Board. 

STOKER,  John,  Bishop  of  East 
Bountiful,  Davis  county,  Utah,  was 
born  March  8,  1817,  at  Bloomfield, 
Jackson  county,  Ohio,  the  son  of  Dav- 
id Stoker  and  Barbara.  Graybill.  Be- 
coming a  convert  to  "Mormonism" 
he  was  baptized  Nov.  13,  1836,  by 
Seymour  Brunson,  and  cast  his  lot 
with  the  Sanits  in  their  gathering 
places  in  the  States.  He  emigrated 
to  Utah  in  1848  and  settled  in  what 
was  then  called  the  Sessions  settle- 
ment (now  Bountiful).  He  was  or- 
dained a  Bishop  Jan.  20,  1851,  by 
Brigham  Young  and  set  apart  to  pre- 
side over  the  North  Mill  Creek  Ward, 
afterwards  named  Bountiful.  Bishop 
Stoker  married  three  wives,  namely, 
Jane  McDaniel,  who  became  the 
mother  of  six  children;  Jane  Allen, 
who  gave  birth  to  nine  children,  and 
Harriet  (a  widow),  who  bore  her 
husband  two  children.  In  1869-70 
Bishop  Stoker  filled  a  short  mission 


BIOGRAPHICAL  ENCYCLOPEDIA. 


253 


to  Virginia.  He  was  ordained  a  Pat- 
riarch in  1877  and  died  June  11, 
1881,  at  Bountiful. 

STOKER,  David,  Bishop  of  East 
Bountiful,  Davis  county,  Utah,  was 
born    Sept.    28,    1844,     in     Hancock 


county.  111.,  the  son  of  John  Stoker 
and  Jane  McDaniel.  The  parents 
spent  their  early  life  in  Ohio  where 
they  were  married,  and  in  183  6  they 
emigrated  to  Adams  county,  111.,  and 
later  settled  in  Hancock  county,  in 
the  same  State.  At  the  time  of  the 
exodus  (184  6)  the  family  came  west 
as  far  as  Mt.  Pisgah,  Iowa,  where 
they  remained  until  1848,  when  they 
fitted  out  ox  teams  preparatory  to 
crossing  the  plains  to  Utah,  which 
they  did  that  year  in  Pres.  Brigham 
Young's  train,  arriving  in  Salt  Lake 
City  Sept.  23,  1848.  The  first  winter 
was  spent  in  the  Old  Fort,  and  in  the 
spring  of  1849  they  located  at  Boun- 
tiful, which  at  that  time  was  sparsely 
settled  and  in  a  wild  state.  Here  David 
received  his  education  and  became 
earlier  in  life  a  faithful  worker  in  the 
Church.  In  1866  (March  3rd)  he  mar- 
ried Miss  Regena  Hogan,  daughter  of 
Erick  G.  M.  Hogan  and  Harriet 
Nesteby.  Bishop  Stoker's  whole  life 
was  spent  in  Bountiful,  where  he 
assisted  in  transforming  the  country 


from  a  wild  and  barren  waste  to  its 
present  prosperous  condition.  His 
home  was  considered  one  of  the  fin- 
est of  its  size  in  the  locality.  In 
1892-1894  he  filled  a  mission  to  the 
Northern  States.  During  the  Indian 
troubles  in  Utah  he  served  in  the 
militia  organized  to  protect  the  set- 
tlers and  was  in  the  Black  Hawk 
war  for  81  days.  After  presiding  a 
number  of  years  over  the  Elders  quo- 
rum at  Bountiful,  he  was  ordained  a 
Seventy  and  still  later  a  High  Priest 
and  chosen  as  first  counselor  to  Bishop 
Chester  Call.  This  position  he  held 
till  Jan.  19,  189  6,  when  he  was  or- 
dained a  Bishop  by  Lorenzo  Snow 
and  set  apart  to  preside  over  the 
East  Bountiful  Ward.  He  also  served 
as  county  commissioner  and  probate 
judge  of  Davis  county,  and  served 
two  terms  in  the  Utah  Territorial 
legislature.  Respected  and  beloved 
by  his  people  he  died  April  1,  1911, 
at  his  home  at  Bountiful. 

STOKER,  Regena  Hogan,  wife  of 
David  Stoker,  was  born  July  10,  184  4, 
in  Lee  county,  Iowa,  the  daughter  of 


Erick  G.  M.  Hogan  and  Holga  Neste- 
by. She  came  to  Utah  with  her  par- 
ents in  18  48,  crossing  the  plains  in 
Pres.  Brigham  Young's  company.  As 
a  girl  she  passed  through  all  the  ex- 


254 


LATTER-DAY   SAINT 


periences  connected  with  crickets, 
grasshoppers  and  Indians,  and  she 
became  the  wife  of  David  Stoker 
March  3,  1866.  She  bore  her  hus- 
band eight  children,  of  whom  seven 
are  still  living.  For  a  number  of 
years  Sister  Stoker  acted  as  a  coun- 
selor in  the  Ward  Y.  L.  M.  I.  A.  and 
has  also  been  a  most  diligent  and 
successful  Relief  Society  worker.  She 
was  also  a  teacher  in  the  Sabbath 
school  for  about  25  years. 

STOKER,  David  Jr.,  the  third 
Bishop  of  the  Clearfield  Ward  (North 
Davis  Stake),  Davis  county,  Utah, 
was  born  April  6,  186i),  at  Bountiful, 


Davis  county,  Utah,  the  son  of  David 
Stoker  and  Regena  Hogan.  He  was 
baptized  June  24,  1877,  by  W.  W. 
Willey;  ordained  a  Teacher  Jan.  30, 
1884,  and  a  Priest  March  5,  1886; 
ordained  an  Elder  Jan.  25,  1888;  or- 
dained a  Seventy  Jan.  9,  1891,  by 
lanthus  H.  Barlow;  filled  a  mission 
to  Great  Britain  in  1899-1901,  labor- 
ing in  the  Sheffield  and  Grimsby 
conferences,  part  of  the  time  as  sec- 
retary. After  his  return  home  he 
was  set  apart  as  one  of  the  presi- 
dents of  the  100th  quorum  of  Sev- 
enty. He  moved  to  Syracuse  in  May, 
1901,  became  a  president  of  the 
I36th    quorum    of    Seventy    in    1902 


and  served  as  a  home  missionary  in 
Davis  Stake  one  year.  He  was  or- 
dained a  High  Priest  Nov.  3,  1907, 
by  Orson  F.  Whitney  and  set  apart 
as  first  counselor  to  Bishop  James 
G.  Wood  of  the  Clearfield  Ward, 
which  at  that  time  was  organized. 
Bro.  Stoker  has  filled  many  positions 
of  a  secular  nature  in  the  interest  of 
his  fellow-citizens;  he  labored  as 
school  trustee  at  Bountiful  six  years 
and  at  Syracuse  four  years.  In  1891 
(Dec.  2  3rd)  he  married  Emma  L. 
Stable  (daughter  of  John  Stable  and 
Susan  Baumaum),  born  June  9,  1870, 
at  Bountiful.  This  marriage  has  been 
blessed  with  ten  children,  namely, 
Sylvia  May,  Alvin  D.,  Iva  L.,  Delila, 
Vera  S.,  Bertha  S.,  Clarence  J.,  Gol- 
den L.,  Lola  L.  and  Mary.  In  1913 
(Dec.  27th)  Bro.  Stoker  was  chosen 
as  an  alternate  member  of  the  Davis 
Stake  High  Council  and  was  set  apart 
as  a  member  of  the  North  Davis 
Stake  High  Council  June  20,  1915. 
He  acted  as  a  High  Councilor  until 
Jan.  14,  1917,  when  h^  was  ordained 
a  Bishop  by  Geo.  Albert  Smith  and 
set  apart  to  preside  over  the  Clear- 
field Ward,  this  position  he  still  oc- 
cupies. In  December,  1917,  he  was 
elected  a  member  of  the  Davis  coun- 
ty school  board. 

SUTTON,  Harry  Edward,  fifth 
Bishop  of  the  Paris  Ward  (Bear 
Lake  Stake),  Bear  Lake  county, 
Idaho,  was  born  July  30,  1869,  in 
Salt  Lake  City,  Utah,  the  son  of 
John  Allen  Sutton  and  Margaret 
Hannah  Shepherd.  He  was  baptized 
in  1878  by  Robt.  Price  and  confirmed 
by  Apostle  Chas.  C.  Rich;  ordained 
a  Deacon  v.'hen  a  boy;  ordained  an 
Elder  Oct.  6,  1889,  by  James  H. 
Hart;  ordained  a  Seventy  Oct.  15, 
18  97,  by  Geo.  Reynolds;  ordained  a 
High  Priest  by  Wm.  Budge  and  set 
apart  as  Stake  superintendent  of 
Y.  M.  M.  I.  A.,  and  ordained  a  Bishop 
Dec.  15,  1912,  by  Anthony  W.  Ivins 
and  set  apart  to  preside  over  the 
Paris  First  Ward.  Prior  to  this  he 
acted  as  superintendent  of  the  Ward 


BIOGRAPHICAL  ENCYCLOPEDIA. 


255 


Sunday  school,  stake  aid  in  Y.  M.  M. 
I.  A.  work,  first  counselor  in  Y.  M. 
M.  I.  A.  and  Stake  superintendent 
of  Y.  M.  M.  I.  A.  In  1897  he  filled 
a  mission  to  Great  Britain,  laboring 
in  the  Newcastle  conference,  a  part 
of  the  time  as  conference  clerk.  At 
home  he  acted  as  constable  of  the 
Paris  precinct  four  years,  was  deputy 
sheriff  two  years,  city  councilman  of 
Paris  eight  years  and  school  trustee 
eight  years.     In  1889   (Oct.  16th)   he 


married  Alice  Smith  (daughter  of 
William  John  Smith  and  Jane  Lori- 
mer)  who  was  born  July  23,  1870, 
in  Salt  Lake  City,  Utah.  Seven  chil- 
dren have  blessed  this  marriage, 
namely,  Alice  J.,  Edward  Smith,  Wm. 
Hugh,  Cyril  Shepherd,  Gilbert  Rex, 
Milford  Lorimer  and  Oral.  Bro. 
Sutton  learned  the  trade  of  a  black- 
smith from  his  father  and  has 
worked  at  this  business  with  suc- 
cess. Since  1869  he  has  been  a  resi- 
dent of  Paris. 

SWAPP,  Joseph  Henry,  Bishop  of 
Glendale  Ward  (Kanab  Stake),  Kane 
county,  Utah,  was  born  July  20,  1884, 
near  Luna,  New  Mexico,  the  son  of 
Archibald  Swapp  and  Sarepta  Leu- 
ticia  Jolley.  He  was  baptized  Sept. 
5,  1895,  by  Edwin  Cutler;  ordained 
an  Elder  Sept.   29,  1908,  by  John  S. 


Carpenter,  and  filled  a  mission  to 
the  Eastern  States  in  1908-09,  labor- 
ing in  the  Southwest  Virginia  confer- 
ence. He  married  Edith  Farnsworth 
Oct..  9,  1908,  just  before  starting  on 
his  mission,  which  marriage  has  been 
blessed  with  three  children,  namely, 
Farris,  Maurice  and  Frank  Farns- 
worth. Bishop  Swapp  has  followed 
farming  and  sheep-raising  principal- 
ly for  a  living;  he  has  held  several 
political    positions,     been    connected 


with  various  committees  in  connec- 
tion with  secular  affairs  and  is  tak- 
ing an  active  part  in  building  up  the 
country  in  Southern  Utah.  He  was 
ordained  a  High  Priest  in  December, 
1-^12,  by  Wm.  W.  Seegmiller,  and 
ordained  a  Bishop  and  set  apart  to 
preside  over  the  Glendale  Ward, 
Kanab  Stake,  Sept.  8,  1913,  by  Apos- 
tle Rudger  Clawson. 

STRONG,    Alice    F.    Bury    Walsh, 

wife  of  Jacob  Strong,  was  born  April 
16,  1829,  at  Over  Darwen,  Lanca- 
shire, England,  the  daughter  of  Ed- 
mund Bury  and  Jane  Fish.  She 
joined  the  Church  at  Over  Darwen 
at  the  age  of  sixteen  (being  the  only 
member  of  her  father's  family  who 
became  thus  converted),  and  emi- 
grated to  Utah  in  1856,  crossing  the 
Atlantic   in  the   ship    "Horizon,"    to- 


256 


LATTER-DAY   SAINT 


gether  with  her  husand  Wm.  Walsh 
and  three  children  (Robert,  John 
and  Sarah),  the  latter  a  babe  six 
months  old.  From  Boston,  Mass., 
the  company  traveled  to  Iowa,  where 
they  waited  six  weeks  for  hand-carts, 
but  finally  started  out  for  the  Valley 
in  Capt.  Edward  Martin's  hand-cart 
company.  Her  son  Robert  died  on 
the  journey  across  the  plains,  and 
Sister  Walsh  and  her  family  suffered 
in  common  with  the  other  emigrants 
who  crossed  the  plains  and  moun- 
tains with  hand-carts  that  memor- 
able year.  On  the  journey  Sister 
Walsh  was  one  of  three  couples  to 
occupy  one  tent,  and  nine  children 
under    eight    years    of    age    occupied 


the  same  tent.  Her  husband  (Wm. 
Walsh)  died  at  Devils  Gate.  The 
ground  was  frozen  so  hard  the  morn- 
ing he  died  that  the  brethren  could 
not  dig  a  grave,  so  they  buried  him 
under  the  snow.  Nine  others  died 
the  same  night.  Thus  Sister  Walsh 
was  left  a  widow  to  care  for  her 
two  remaining  children,  the  boy  so 
weak  that  he  could  not  stand  alone. 
Sister  Walsh  writes:  "My  shoes 
froze  to  my  feet,  and  later,  when  I 
was  able  to  remove  them,  the  skin 
and  flesh  came  off  too,  leaving  only 
the  bones.  My  hands  were  also 
severely   frozen.      At  last  help   came 


from  the  Valley,  and  when  all  were 
ready  to  start  I  was  sitting  in  the 
snow  with  both  my  children  on  my 
lap.  There  seemed  to  be  no  place 
for  me,  but  just  before  the  company 
started,  it  was  decided  that  I  should 
ride  in  the  commissary  wagon,  which 
I  did  during  the  whole  journey. 
Joseph  B.  Alvord,  the  young  man 
with  whom  I  rode,  understood  fron- 
tier life  and  helped  me  with  my 
children  the  best  he  could.  We  ar- 
rived in  Salt  Lake  City  Nov.  30, 
1856.  Here  I  found  myself  in  a 
strange  land,  not  knowing  anyone 
and  possessing  nothing  but  the 
clothes  I  stood  in,  my  spare  clothes 
being  cached  at  Devils  Gate.  I  have 
not  seen  them  since.  A  number  of  em- 
igrants being  allotted  to  each  Ward, 
I  was  taken  to  the  Tenth  Ward  in 
Salt  Lake  City  to  live  in  the  home 
of  Jacob  Strong,  whom  1  afterwards 
married."  During  the  "general  move" 
south  in  1858,  Sister  Strong  and 
family  went  as  far  as  Springville, 
Utah  county,  but  returned  to  Salt 
Lake  City  the  same  year.  She  be- 
came the  mother  of  three  children 
by  her  second  husband,  namely,  Lu- 
cinda,  Wm.  J.  and  Alma  E.)  When 
one  of  these  children  were  born.  Sis- 
ter Strong  was  living  in  a  log  cabin 
with  dirt  roof,  through  which  the 
water  poured  into  the  cabin,  making 
the  room  extremely  wet  and  cold. 
Sister  Strong  learned  to  spin  and 
weave  cloth  for  her  family  and  be- 
came very  useful  in  that  avocation. 
She  passed  through  the  famine 
caused  by  the  ravages  of  the  grass- 
hoppers and  otherwise  participated 
with  her  husband  and  the  other 
pioneers  in  all  the  hardships  incident 
to  pioneer  life.  Sister  Strong  is  still 
(1916)  alive,  87  years  of  age,  and 
rejoices  in  the  gospel  of  Jesus  Christ. 

SWTFT,  Sarah  Walsh,  president  of 
the  Daughters  of  the  Hand-cart  Pio- 
neers, was  born  Nov.  19,  1855,  at 
Over  Darwen,  Lancashire,  England, 
the  daughter  of  Wm.  Walsh  and 
Alice  F.   B.  Walsh    (Strong).     When 


BIOGRAPHICAL  ENCYCLOPEDIA. 


257 


six  months  old  she  sailed  for  Amer- 
ica with  her  parents,  crossing  the 
Atlantic  in  the  ship  "Horizon,"  and 
the  plains  in  Capt.  Edward  Martin's 
hand-cart  company,  which  arrived  in 
Salt  Lake  City  Nov.  30,  1856.  On 
the  journey  her  father  and  her  old- 
est brother  (Robert)  died.  Sister 
Sarah  found  a  home  in  the  house  of 
Jacob  Strong,  who  afterwards  became 
her  step-father.  The  family  moved 
to  Springville  at  the  time  of  the  move 
in  1858.  After  their  return  to  Salt 
Lake  City,  Sister  Sarah  learned  to 
knit  stockings  for  the  family,  and 
had     but     small     opportunities     for 


schooling  or  play.  She  writes:  "We 
all  had  to  work  hard  to  earn  a  liv- 
ing in  those  early  days;  my  mother 
often  worked  all  day  to  earn  one 
yard  of  factory,  as  it  was  then  called, 
costing  one  dollar  per  yard.  We  went 
to  live  on  a  farm  in  Emigration 
canyon  for  a  short  time.  There  we 
kept  some  sheep,  and  as  they  ran 
through  the  oak  brush  they  often 
left  pieces  of  their  wool  which  I, 
as  a  little  girl,  gathered  up  with 
great  care  to  make  bats  for  quilts 
for  which  my  mother  did  the  card- 
ing. We  used  to  strip  sugar  cane 
and  glean  wheat,  which  my  step- 
father threshed  out  with  a  flail.  We 
also  gathered  the  milk  weed  pods  to 

Vol.  Ill,  No.  17. 


make  pillows.  When  twelve  years 
old  I  learned  to  spin  yarn  and  soon 
became  so  much  of  an  expert  at  that 
work  that  I  could  spin  my  three 
skeins  of  yarn  a  day.  At  the  age  of 
fifteen  years  I  was  called  to  labor 
in  the  Relief  Society,  and  frequently 
visited  the  families  on  my  block  to- 
gether with  an  older  lady,  helping  to 
carry  what  was  given  to  us.  We  re- 
ceived flour  or  anything  the  people 
would  contribute  for  the  poor.  When 
the  Female  Retrenchment  Society 
was  organized  in  the  Tenth  Ward, 
Salt  Lake  City,  I  was  chosen  one 
of  the  counselors,  and  in  1874  I  also 
commenced  to  labor  in  the  Sunday 
school.  In  1877  (June  6th)  I  was 
married  to  William  Swift,  who  died 
Sept.  16,  1884,  and  I  was  left  a 
widow  with  three  children,  including 
a  pair  of  twins,  five  weeks  old.  In 
18  98  I  was  chosen  as  second  coun- 
selor in  the  Ward  Relief  Society, 
occupying  that  position  until  Novem- 
ber, 1906."  From  April  23,  1907, 
to  Oct.  23,  1915,  Sister  Swift  labored 
as  a  Stake  Relief  Society  missionary 
in  the  Liberty  Stake.  Since  1910 
she  has  been  an  active  member  of  the 
Utah  Hand-cart  Pioneers'  Association 
and  is  now  president  of  the  Daugh- 
ters of  the  Hand-cart  Pioneers. 

SWEXSON,  Swen  L.,  Bishop  of  the 
Pleasant  Grove  First  Ward  (Alpine 
Stake),  Utah  county,  Utah,  was  born 
Feb.  17,  1865,  at  Pleasant  Grove, 
the  son  of  Canute  Swenson  (Knud 
Svendsen)  and  Hannah  Maria  Han- 
son. He  was  baptized  August  31, 
1873,  by  Wm.  West;  ordained  a  Dea- 
con when  thirteen  years  of  age  and 
ordained  a  Priest  later.  From  his 
early  childhood  he  worked  on  a  farm 
during  the  summers  and  attended 
the  district  school  and  the  B.  Y. 
Academy  at  Provo  in  the  winters. 
When  21  years  of  age,  he  began 
work  in  the  Pleasant  Grove  Co-op 
store  as  a  clerk.  After  obtaining 
more  schooling  at  the  Brigham 
Young  Academy  at  Provo,  he  entered 
into    the    mercantile    business    with 

May,  1919 


258 


LATTER-DAY   SAINT 


Thorne  Brothers  and  Company  and 
was  elected  treasurer  of  Pleasant 
Grove  City  and  subsequently  collec- 
tor. He  was  ordained  a  Seventy  July 
10,  1890,  by  John  J  .Hayes  and  mar- 
ried Susan  E.   Brown  May   22,   1895, 


in  the  Salt  Lake  Temple.  In  Septem- 
ber, 1895,  he  left  on  a  mission  to 
the  Southern  States,  where  he  la- 
bored principally  in  Mississippi  and 
Louisiana,  part  of  the  time  as  presi- 
dent of  the  Louisiana  conference. 
He  returned  home  in  July,  1897;  was 
ordained  a  High  Priest  and  set  apart 
as  second  counselor  to  Bishop  Joseph 
E.  Thorne  August  19,  1897,  by  Ed- 
ward Partridge;  was  elected  mayor  of 
Pleasant  Grove  City  Nov.  3,  1897,  and 
subsequently  served  as  councilman. 
He  was  ordained  a  Bishop  by  Apostle 
Mathias  F.  Cowley  Jan.  25,  1903, 
and  set  apart  to  preside  over  the 
Pleasant  Grove  Ward.  Two  weeks 
later  the  splendid  Ward  meeting 
house  was  burned  to  the  ground,  and 
under  his  direction  the  erection  of 
the  Pleasant  Grove  Tabernacle  was 
commenced  the  following  spring. 
When  Pleasant  Grove  was  divided 
into  three  Wards  May  16,  1909,  he 
was  chosen  as  Bishop  of  the  Pleasant 
Grove  Second  Ward.  Bishop  Swen- 
son  has  been  connected  with  the 
bank    of    Pleasant    Grove    for    many 


years  as  assistant  cashier,  and  was 
elected  mayor  of  Pleasant  Grove  a 
second  time  Nov.  3,  1915.  He  is  the 
father  of  four  children,  namely,  Dor- 
othy, Russell  B.,  Helen  and  Elizabeth. 

TAYLOR,  John  Possels,  an  active 

Elder  in  the  Church,  was  born  Sep- 
tember 7,  1823,  at  Knutsford,  county 
of  Cheshire,  England,  the  son  of  Wil- 
liam Taylor  and  Nancy  Possels,  of 
Cheshire,  England.  He  was  baptized 
late  in  1848,  or  early  in  1849,  by 
Wm.  Bramwell,  and  learned  the 
trade  of  a  merchant  tailor  with  his 
father,  who  died  when  the  son  was 
twenty  years  of  age.  Being  the  old- 
est son,  he  continued  his  father's 
business,  living  with  his  mother  and 
keeping  home  for  the  younger  chil- 
dren. In  1848  (May  24th)  he  mar- 
ried Ann  Sanders  in  St.  Mary's 
Church,  Manchester,  Lancashire,  Eng- 
land. His  wife  bore  him  three  chil- 
dren, namely,  Jessie  Rosela,  John  F., 
eleven  days  old),  Mary  and  Annie. 
The  wife  died  July  6,  1854,  and  in 
1855  (Sept.  18th)  he  married  Ann 
Faulkner,  who  bore  him  six  chil- 
dren, namely,  Jessie  Rosela,  John  F., 
Elizabeth  Agnes,  James  P.,  Florence 
Emily  and  Charles.  In  1853  he  was 
appointed  president  of  the  branch  by 
Elder  Orson  Spencer  (president  of 
the  European  Mission).  In  1857,  to- 
gether with  his  family,  he  emigrated 
to  America  with  a  company  of  Saints, 
crossing  the  Atlantic  in  the  ship 
"Geo.  Washington,"  which  sailed 
from  Liverpool  March  26,  1857,  and 
arrived  at  Boston  April  22,  1857. 
From  Boston  the  emigrants  went  by 
rail  to  Iowa  City,  Iowa,  arriving 
there  April  29,  1857.  Together  with 
his  two  brothers,  William  and  Joseph, 
Bro.  Taylor  started  in  business  at 
their  trade  as  merchant  tailors,  and 
during  his  temporary  residence  at 
Iowa  City,  he  acted  as  president  of 
the  branch  of  the  Church  at  that 
place  two  and  a  half  years,  being  ap- 
pointed to  that  position  by  Pres. 
Horace   S.    Eldredge.      In   December, 


BIOGRAPHICAL  ENCYCLOPEDIA. 


259 


1860,  he  married  Sarah  Faulkner, 
a  sister  of  Ann  Faulkner,  in  Salt 
Lake  City,  Utah.  They  had  one 
child,  Wm.  Alfred.  Migrating  to 
Utah,  Bro.  Taylor  left  Iowa  City,  May 
24,  1860,  and  arrived  in  Omaha, 
Nebraska,  June  16,  18  60.  Continu- 
ing the  journey  across  the  plains  July 
3,  1860,  they  arrived  in  Salt  Lake 
City,  Sept.  18,  18  60.  The  company 
in  which  he  crossed  the  plains  and 
of  which  he  was  the  captain,  con- 
sisted of  2  8  wagons  and  one  hand- 
cart; ten  families  were  Swedish  and 
the  others  English.  Bro.  Taylor  lo- 
cated with  his  family  in  the  Second 
Ward,  Salt  Lake  City.  Subsequently 
he  resided  in  the  Ninth  Ward,  where 
he  acted  as  leader  of  the  Ward  choir 
and  superintendent  of  the  Sunday 
school  for  many  years.  He  was  a 
resident  of  the  Ninth  Ward  when  he 
died  Dec.   4,  1884. 


Lake,  a  daughter  of  Bailey  Lake  and 
Sarah  Jane  Marlor,  both  American 
born  and  pioneers.  She  was  born 
August  9,  1853,  and  bore  her  hus- 
band eleven  children,  namely,  Wm. 
Andrew  Jr.,  Bailey,  Millie  Almeda, 
George  Lorin,  Mary  Ellen,  Ida,  Eliza 
Ann,  Aner,  Riley  Edmond,  Iriminda 
and  Icivinda.  The  family  home  has 
been  Farr-West  for  many  years. 
Elder  Taylor,  after  being  ordained  to 
the  several  grades  of  the  Priesthood, 
acted  as  a  president  of  the  60th 
quorum  of  Seventy.  He  filled  a  mis- 
sion to  the  Central  States  in  1887- 
89;  and  when  the  Farr-West  Ward 
was  first  organized,  Nov.  3  0,  1890, 
he  was  chosen  as  the  first  Bishop 
of  the  same.  During  his  useful  life 
he  filled  many  positions  of  honor 
and  responsibility,  was  a  farmer  by 
occupation  and  died  at  his  home  at 
Farr-West  March  6.   1892. 


TAYLOR,  William  Andrew,  first 
Bishop  of  the  Farr-West  Ward, 
Weber   county,   Utah,   was   born   May 


15,  1850,  at  Kanesville,  Pottawat- 
tamie county,  Iowa,  the  son  of  Joseph 
Taylor  and  Mary  Moore.  He  came 
to  Utah  as  an  infant  with  his  par- 
ents in  1850,  crossing  the  plains  in 
Capt.  Hawkin's  company.  In  1869 
(April    26th)    he   married   Philomela 


TEEPLES,    William    Randolph,    a 

counselor    in    the    bishopric    of    the 
Pima  Ward,  Graham  county,  Arizona, 


was  born  June  V,  183  4,  at  Huron, 
Huron  county,  Michigan,  the  son  of 
Geo.  Bentley  Teeples  and  Hulda  Col- 
by. His  parents  joined  the  Church 
and  he  went  with  them,  about  1843, 
to  Nauvoo,  111.,  where  William  was 
baptized   by   Elder  Zenos   H.   Gurley. 


260 


LATTER-DAY   SAINT 


He  remembered  Joseph  and  Hyrum 
Smith,  though  only  ten  years  old 
when  they  were  killed.  He  emi- 
grated to  Utah  in  1848  with  his 
parents,  crossing  the  plains  in  Heber 
C.  Kimball's  company,  and  drove  an 
ox  team  across  the  plains  for  Mary 
Smith,  mother  of  Pres.  Jos.  F.  Smith. 
Together  with  his  parents  he  became 
one  of  the  first  settlers  of  Provo, 
Utah  county.  He  married  Catherine 
Chamberlain  in  18  66  and  the  only 
child  by  this  marriage  was  Sarah 
Elizabeth.  In  1859  (August  21st) 
he  married  Harriet  B.  Cook,  daugh- 
ter of  Bishop  Phineas  W.  Cook  and 
Ann  E.  Howland  (also  pioneers  of 
1848).  She  was  born  at  Richland, 
Kalamazoo  county,  Michigan,  Oct.  28, 
1844.  The  children  by  this  marriage 
were  Harriet  Rita,  Beatrice,  Ann 
Eliza,  Wm.  George,  Alonzo  R.,  Phebe 
Henrietta,  David  Wolcott,  Alice  Au- 
lelia  and  Eunice  Rosalia.  Bro. 
Teeples  married  Caroline  Ann  Sco- 
field  in  October,  1868;  she  was  the 
daughter  of  John  and  Margaret  Sco- 
field  of  Sunderland,  England,  was 
born  Nov.  3,  1851,  at  Sunderland, 
and  came  to  Utah  about  1859.  This 
marriage  was  blessed  with  seven  chil- 
dren, namely,  Phineas  Henry,  John 
Albert,  Chas.  Welcome,  James,  Sid- 
ney Lee,  Caroline  Hulda  and  Mar- 
garet Ellen.  Bro.  Teeples  learned 
the  blacksmith  trade  when  a  young 
man,  participated  in  the  early  Indian 
wars  in  Utah,  served  in  the  Echo 
canyon  campaign  during  the  John- 
ston Army  troubles,  assisted  in  start- 
ing the  cotton  industry  in  Southern 
Utah,  made  a  trip  to  California  in 
1858-5  9,  moved  to  Salem,  Utah 
county,  and  afterwards  to  Provo,  con- 
tinually working  at  his  trade.  He 
was  one  of  the  first  pioneers  of  Bear 
Lake  valley,  Idaho,  in  1863,  built  a 
small  log  house  at  Paris  and  went  to 
Montpelier  as  a  pioneer  settler  of 
that  place  in  May,  1864.  In  1865  he 
moved  to  Holden,  Millard  county, 
Utah,  where  he  followed  blacksmith- 
ing  and  farming  until  1879,  when 
he  was  called  to  Arizona,  where  he 


became  the  first  Mormon  pioneer  in 
the  Gila  valley.  He  had  been  in- 
structed to  go  there  and  find  a  place 
that  suited  him.  Raising  a  company 
of  ten  men  (only  four  families),  he 
settled  with  them  at  a  place  now 
known  as  Pima,  Graham  county,  on 
the  south  side  of  the  Gila  river,  near 
the  foot  of  Mt.  Graham.  At  a  confer- 
ence held  Sept.  25,  1892,  he  was  or- 
dained a  High  Priest  by  Lot  Smith 
and  set  apart  as  a  Bishop's  counse- 
lor. He  put  forth  all  his  energy  in 
building  up  that  part  of  the  country 
and  died  June  5,  1883,  at  Pima,  49 
years  of  age.  Bro.  Teeples  was  gen- 
erous to  a  fault  and  would  give  his 
last  dollar  for  the  benefit  of  the 
community  in  which  he  lived. 

TERRY,  James  Parshall,  a  Patri- 
arch in  the  Church  and  a  resident  of 
Hinckley,  Millard  county,  Utah,  was 
born  Jan.  1,  1830,  at  Albion,  Home 
District,    Upper    Canada,    the    son    of 


Parshall  Terry  and  Hannah  Terry. 
In  183  8  he  removed  with  his  father's 
family  to  Missouri,  whence  the  family 
with  the  rest  of  the  Saints  were 
driven  out  under  the  exterminating 
order  of  Gov.  Lilburn  W.  Boggs.  The 
Terry  family  settled  temporarily  in 
Pike  county,  111.,  where  young  James 
P.  was  baptized  in  June,  1840,  by 
Wm.  Allred.     In  the  summer  of  1843 


BIOGRAPHICAL  ENCYCLOPEDIA. 


261 


the  family  moved  to  Nauvoo,  111., 
where  they  resided  until  18  46,  when 
they  became  participants  in  the 
general  exodus  of  the  Saints.  His 
father  lost  nearly  everything  he 
owned  during  the  drivings  and 
stopped  for  a  time  at  Carterville  on 
Mosquito  creek,  Iowa.  While  stopping 
temporarily  at  Winter  Quarters, 
James  P.  was  ordained  an  Elder.  The 
family  migrated  to  Great  Salt  Lake 
Valley  in  1849,  arriving  there  Oct. 
15th.  Bro.  Terry  was  ordained  a 
Seventy  by  John  Pack  March  4,  1855, 
and  became  a  member  of  the  8th 
quorum  of  Seventy.  In  1856  (Nov. 
2nd)  he  married  Mary  Richards 
(daughter  of  John  and  Agnes  Hill 
Richards)  who  subsequently  bore  her 
husband  eleven  children.  Subse- 
quently he  married  Sarah  K.  Lemons, 
a  widow,  by  whom  he  had  one  child 
(a  boy).  After  living  with  him  about 
three  years  she  asked  for  and  ob- 
tained a  bill  of  divorce.  In  18  62 
Bro.  Terry  moved  to  Southern  Utah 
with  his  family,  arriving  at  Rock- 
ville  Jan.  13,  1863.  The  following 
year  he  was  commissioned  as  a  cap- 
tain of  militia  in  the  Iron  Military 
District  .  In  18  77  (May  6th)  he  was 
ordained  a  High  Priest  and  set  apart 
as  first  counselor  to  Bishop  Chas.  N. 
Smith  in  the  Rockville  Ward,  which 
position  he  held  until  March  22, 
1891.  He  acted  as  school  trustee 
about  fourteen  years  in  the  Rockville 
school  district,  and  was  also  road 
supervisor  about  the  same  length  of 
time.  For  two  or  three  years  he 
held  the  office  of  selectman  in  Wash- 
ington county.  In  1887-88  he  filled 
a  mission  to  Canada  and  the  United 
States.  On  his  way  home,  April  20, 
1888,  as  he  was  traveling  between 
Toquerville  and  Virgen  City  on  foot, 
he  was  overtaken  by  deputy  U.  S. 
marshals  and  arrested  on  a  charge 
of  unlawful  cohabitation.  After  ex- 
amination at  Silver  Reef  he  was 
placed  under  $1500  bonds  to  appear 
at  Beaver  May  11,  1888.  On  his 
appearance  in  court  on  that  day  the 
prosecution    failed    to    make    out    a 


case  against  him  and  he  was  conse- 
quently discharged.  In  1902  (Feb. 
24th)  Elder  Terry  was  ordained  a 
Patriarch  by  Apostle  Mathias  F.  Cow- 
ley, and  since  1899  he  has  been  a 
resident  of  Hinckley,  Millard  county, 
Utah.  Bro.  Terry  has  ever  been  a 
faithful  and  consistent  Latter-day 
Saint,  ever  on  hand  to  defend  the 
principles  of  the  gospel  and  to  labor 
in  any  capacity  in  which  the  author- 
ities of  the  Church  have  asked  him 
to  labor.  As  an  aged  man  he  still 
enjoys  good  health  and  is  generally 
beloved  and  respected  by  all  who 
know  him.  He  is  the  father  of 
twelve  children  and  has  at  the  pres- 
ent time  a  numerous  posterity.  His 
wife,  Mary,  died  May  17,  1902,  at 
Hinckley,  Millard  county,  after  doing 
a  great  deal  of  ordinance  work  for 
the  dead  in  the  St.  George  Temple; 
in  this  vicarious  labor  her  daughter 
and   others   assisted   her. 

TERRY,  Thomas  Searles,  a  Patri- 
arch in  the  St.  George  Stake  of  Zion, 
and  a  resident  of  Enterprise,  Utah, 
was   born    Oct.    3,    1825,    at    Bristol, 


Pennsylvania,  the  son  of  Thos.  Terry 
and  Mary  Ann  Merkins.  He  was  bap- 
tized March  13,  1842,  by  Joseph 
Newton,  joined  a  company  of  Saints 
emigrating  to  the  West,  with  which 


262 


LATTER-DAY   SAINT 


he  arrived  at  Winter  Quarters  in 
June,  184  7.  In  the  latter  part  of 
that  month  he  started  for  the  Valley 
in  Daniel  Spencer's  hundred,  Perri- 
grine  Session's  fifty  and  Elijah  F. 
Sheet's  ten;  he  arrived  in  the  Valley 
Sept.  23,  1847.  During  the  winter  of 
1847-48  he  was  engaged  in  whip- 
sawing  lumber;  from  some  of  the 
lumber  made  by  his  industry  the  first 
thresher  and  fanning  mill  was  built 
in  the  Valley.  Early  in  the  spring  of 
1848  he  was  ordained  a  Deacon  by 
Bishop  Edward  Hunter.  His  main 
employment  in  the  Valley  was  farm- 
ing. He  married  Mary  Ann  Pulsi- 
pher Dec.  25,  1849,  and.  settled  on 
Little  Cottonwood.  He  was  ordained 
a  Seventy  May  6,  1855,  became  iden- 
tified with  the  29th  quorum  of  Sev- 
enty, and  married  Eliza  Jane  Pulsi- 
pher May  6,  1855.  In  the  fall  of 
1856  he  was  called  on  a  mission  to 
the  United  States.  Reporting  to 
Pres.  Erastus  Snow  at  St.  Louis,  Mo., 
he  was  sent  to  Philadelphia  to  labor. 
In  the  spring  of  1857  he  met  Apostle 
Parley  P.  Pratt  at  Philadelphia,  who 
was  preparing  to  return  home.  He 
asked  Bro.  Terry  to  accompany  him 
to  the  Valley  as  his  body  guard.  Bro. 
Terry  was  released  for  the  purpose, 
but  soon  afterwards  learned  of  the 
death  of  Bro.  Pratt.  On  his  arrival  at 
Florence,  Bro.  Terry  was  made  cap- 
tain of  a  company  to  cross  the  plains. 
This  company  left  Winter  Quarters 
July  1,  1857,  and  arrived  in  Salt  Lake 
City  in  September,  1857.  While  on  this 
journey  he  witnessed  several  mani- 
festations of  the  power  of  God.  At 
a  crossing  of  a  branch  of  the  Platte 
river  a  young  sister  died.  Together 
with  John  Dutson,  Elder  Terry  was 
called  to  administer  to  her;  they  did 
so  twice,  with  no  apparent  effect, 
whereupon  Elder  Terry  retired  to  a 
secluded  place  where  he  engaged  in 
secret  prayer,  and  on  his  return  they 
again  administered  to  the  young  sis- 
ter who  was  then  restored  to  life. 
During  "the  move"  in  1858,  Elder 
Terry  located  temporarily  with  his 
family   at    Springville,    Utah    county, 


but  soon  afterwards  moved  back  to 
Union,  Salt  Lake  county,  where  he 
was  chosen  as  a  counselor  to  Bishop 
Silas  Richards.  In  the  fall  of  1862 
he  was  called  to  the  Dixie  Mission 
with  his  family.  He  then  sold  his 
farm,  moved  south  and  settled  at  St. 
George.  In  the  spring  of  1863  he 
was  sent  by  Pres.  Erastus  Snow  to 
Shoal  creek  to  help  build  up  that 
locality.  The  place  was  subsequently 
organized  as  the  Hebron  Ward  by 
Erastus  Snow.  Bro.  Terry  built  a 
ranch  at  the  so-called  Moroni  Springs, 
five  miles  above  Hebron,  where  in 
1874  he  was  taken  very  ill  and  went 
to  Hebron  to  be  taken  care  of.  "While 
lying  in  my  room,"  writes  Elder 
Terry,  "I  was  visited  by  the  devil. 
Standing  before  me  with  his  hand 
upon  the  bed  post  he  said:  'You  are 
sick  and  had  better  give  up  and  die 
and  not  go  through  the  sickness 
in  store  for  you.  You  will  never 
have  another  passage  through  your 
bowels.'  I  did  not  answer  and  the 
evil  one  left  the  room.  Immediately 
I  called  to  my  wife  and  said:  'I  am 
going  to  be  very  sick,  I  want  you  to 
see  that  I  have  a  passage  of  the 
bowels  every  day.'  For  six  weeks  I 
was  at  death's  door,  but  through  the 
administration  of  the  Elders  I  re- 
covered." In  1876  Bro.  Terry  was 
ordained  a  High  Priest  and  Bishop 
and  set  apart  to  preside  over  the 
Hebron  Ward,  occupying  that  posi- 
tion until  Sept.  9,  1894.  In  1878  he 
married  Hannah  Louisa  Leavitt.  In 
the  year  1885  Bro.  Terry  moved  from 
Hebron  to  the  Beaver  Dams  Wash  in 
Washington  county.  During  the  anti- 
polygamy  raids  he  had  several  narrow 
escapes  from  being  arrested  by  U.  S. 
deputy  marshals,  but  after  the  danger 
on  that  score  had  cleared  away  he 
moved  back  to  Hebron,  where  he  re- 
mained until  the  Ward  there  was 
discontinued.  He  was  ordained  a 
Patriarch  by  Pres.  Francis  M.  Ly- 
man June  14,  1908.  His  wife,  Mary 
Anp  died  Sept.  18,  1913,  and  was 
buried  at  Enterprise.  By  his  three 
wives  Bishop  Terry  became  the  father 


BIOGRAPHICAL   ENCYCLOPEDIA. 


263 


of  30  children.  By  his  wife  Mary 
Ann  he  had  Mary  Ann,  Adelia,  Ce- 
lestia,  Lydia,  Mina,  Almira,  Nora, 
Thomas  S.  Jr.,  Susan,  Elizabeth, 
Luther  and  Joseph.  By  his  wife  Eli- 
za Jane  he  had  Zerah  Pulsipher, 
Thomas  Nelson,  Eliza  Jane,  Aluna, 
Sarah  Mariah,  John  William,  Charles 
Henry,  Josephine,  Olive,  Frank  D., 
Tacy  and  Eva.  By  his  wife  Louisa 
he  had  Maud  Edna,  Mary  Elsie,  Dav- 
id Dudley,  Jeddiah  Merkins,  Edward 
Searles  and  Exie.  Patriarch  Terry 
adds  the  following  in  his  own  words: 
"In  the  fall  of  1913,  while  at  my 
house  in  Enterprise,  I  knelt  in  prayer 
and  there  appeared  before  me  a 
heavenly  light  in  the  form  of  a  circle. 
While  looking  at  it  I  was  impressed 
to  go  to  Panaca,  Nevada,  where  one 
of  my  families  lived.  On  reaching 
that  place  the  next  evening,  I  was 
enjoying  myself  with  the  family  when 
I  was  called  out  to  see  a  lady  who 
had  been  ill  for  nearly  four  months 
and  had  not  spoken  a  word  for  three 
months.  I  seated  myself  by  her  bed- 
side and  kept  close  watch  for  a  few 
moments.  She  made  two  moves  which 
showed  me  that  she  was  possessed  of 
an  evil  spirit.  Several  doctors  had 
waited  on  her,  but  could  not  tell  what 
was  the  matter.  Assisted  by  the 
brethren  present  I  administered  to 
her,  rebuking  the  devil  and  command- 
ing him  to  leave  her  and  go  to  his  own 
place.  Immediately  she  arose  and 
then  talked  as  though  nothing  had 
ever  been  wrong  with  her.  From 
that  day  until  this  the  lady  has  not 
been  troubled.  If  space  would  permit 
I  could  relate  many  such  manifesta- 
tions of  the  power  of  the  Lord." 

THACKERAY,       George       Robert, 

third  Bishop  of  the  Croyden  Ward, 
Morgan  county,  Utah,  was  born  June 
29,  18  60,  in  Salt  Lake  City,  Utah, 
the  son  of  George  Thackeray  and 
Helen  Condie.  He  was  baptized  Sept. 
12,  1870,  by  Chas.  Hill;  ordained  a 
Teacher  Sept.  12,  1877,  by  John 
Hopkins  and  ordained  a  Priest  June 
7,  1879,  by  Geo.  K.  Bowering.    Later 


he  was  ordained  an  Elder,  still  later 
a  Seventy,  and  in  1896  he  was  or- 
dained a  High  Priest  by  Francis  M. 
Lyman.  Bro.  Thackeray  moved  to 
Croyden  with  his  parents  in  185  6 
and  acted  as  president  of  the  Ward 
Y.  M.  M.  I.  A.  for  a  number  of  years 
and  was  also  assistant  superintend- 
ent of  the  Ward  Sunday  school.  In 
1896  he  was  ordained  a  Bishop  and 
appointed  to  preside  over  the  Croy- 
den Ward,  which  position  he  held 
until  1904.  Bro.  Thackeray  served 
as  county  commissioner  two  years 
and  as  director  in  the  Croyden  Irriga- 
tion Company  for  a  long  time.  In 
1894  he  filled  a  short  mission  to 
the  Southern  States,  laboring  in  Mis- 
sissippi,  but  returned  home  sick.  In 


1882  (April  4th)  he  married  Annie 
London,  daughter  of  John  London 
and  Hannah  Smith.  This  marriage 
has  been  blessed  with  nine  children, 
namely,  Laura  Annie,  born  Dec.  1. 
1884;  Ada  Blanch,  born  Sept.  5. 
1886;  Thomas  Royal  George  (born 
April  1,  1888;  Zina,  born  March  23, 
1890;  Mark,  born  August  3,  1892; 
Parley  Allen,  born  Feb.  20,  1895; 
Elsie,  born  July  12,  1899;  Horace 
Emanuel,  born  April  28,  1904,  and 
John,  born  Jan.  27,  1910. 

THATCHER,  John  Bethewell,  Bish- 
op of  Mormon  Ward  (now  Thatcher), 


264 


LATTER-DAY   SAINT 


Bannock  county,  Idaho,  was  born  Oct. 
22,  183  4,  at  Springfield,  Ohio,  the 
son  of  Hezekiah  Thatcher  and  Alley 
Kitchen.  He  was  baptized  when 
about  eight  years  of  age  and  ordained 
to  several  offices  in  the  Priesthood. 


gan;  ordained  an  Elder  July  19, 
1902,  by  Denmark  Jensen,  and  or- 
dained a  High  Priest  August  16, 
1914,  by  Rudger  Clawson.  He  acted 
as  assistant  superintendent  of  the 
Thatcher  Ward  Sunday  school  from 
1900  to  1903,  having  moved  to 
Thatcher  with  his  father  in  1881. 
In  1903  he  moved  to  Thayne,  Wyom- 
ing, where  he  engaged  in  the  mercan- 
tile business  and  acted  as  superin- 
tendent of  Religion  Classes  one  and 
a  half  years.  He  then  returned  to 
Thatcher  where  he  served  as  secre- 
tary of  the  Ward  Y.  M.  M.  I.  A.  He 
was  ordained  a  Bishop  by  Rudger 
Clawson  August  16,  1914,  and  set 
apart  to  preside  over  the  Thatcher 
Second  Ward.  Bro.  Thatcher  also 
served  as  school  trustee  six  years, 
was  secretary  and  president  of  the 
Thatcher  Irrigation  Canal  Company, 
clerk  of  the  school  board  six  years, 
etc.  He  also  served  as  a  member  of 
the  14th  session  of  the  Idaho  legis- 
lature, having  been  elected  from  Ban- 
nock county  in  November,   1916.    In 


He  married  Rachel  Hannah  Davis 
March  9,  1858,  in  Salt  Lake  City;  she 
was  the  daughter  of  Nathan  Davis 
and  Sarah  Woolley,  and  was  born 
March  5,  183  6;  she  became  the 
mother  of  eleven  children,  namely, 
John  Bethewell  Jr.,  Hezekiah,  Katie, 
Eva,  Milton  Herbert,  Nathan  Davis, 
Lula,  Lettie,  Howard,  Gilbert  and 
Henry.  Bro.  Thatcher  married  Sarah 
Maria  Davis  (another  daughter  of 
Nathan  Davis  and  Sarah  Woolley) 
who  bore  her  husband  the  following 
children:  Frank  Davis,  Roy,  Sarah, 
Raymond,  Martha,  Ethel,  Kingsley, 
Alice  and  Wallace.  Bro.  Thatcher 
is  still  living  at  Thatcher,  Idaho. 


THATCHER,  Henry  Kitchen,  Bish- 
op of  the  Thatcher  Second  Ward 
(Bannock  Stake),  Bannock  county, 
Idaho,  was  born  August  23,  1878,  at 
Logan,  Utah,  the  son  of  John  B.  1905  (May  31st)  he  married  Cora 
Thatcher  and  Rachel  Davis.  He  was  Larkin  (daughter  of  Wm.  H.  Larkin 
baptized  in  188  8  by  Jeppe  G.  Folk-  and  Dora  Woodhead),  who  was  born 
man;  ordained  a  Deacon  in  August,  Nov.  3,  1883,  at  Thatcher;  five  chil- 
1888,  by  Aroet  Hale;  ordained  a  dren  have  blessed  this  marriage. 
Teacher  March  10,  1900,  by  Ira  Ho-    namely,     Henry    K.    Jr.,     Constance, 


BIOGRAPHICAL   ENCYCLOPEDIA. 


265 


Milton  L.,  Roma  and  Leora.  Farm- 
ing and  stockraising  are  Bishop 
Thatcher's  chief  occupations. 

THOMAS,  William  Henry,  first 
Bishop  of  the  Malad  Second  Ward 
( Malad  Stake ) ,  Oneida  county,  Idaho, 


was  born  Feb.  12,  1866,  at  Brigham 
City,  Box  Elder  county,  Utah,  the  son 
of  Thos.  W.  Thomas  and  Ruth  Mor- 
gan. He  was  baptized  when  eight 
years  of  age  by  Jenkins  Davis,  or- 
dained successively  to  the  offices  of 
Deacon,  Elder  and  Seventy,  the  lat- 
ter ordination  taking  place  March  13, 
1898,  under  the  hands  of  Brigham 
H.  Roberts.  He  acted  as  counselor 
in  the  presidency  of  a  Deacons  quor- 
um, as  secretary  and  president  of 
the  Y.  M.  M.  I.  A.  and  as  secretary 
of  the  5  6th  quorum  of  Seventy.  He 
was  ordained  a  High  Priest  in  Novem- 
ber, 1892,  by  Rudger  Clawson  and 
set  apart  as  first  counselor  to  Bishop 
Wm.  H.  Richards  of  the  Malad  Ward; 
was  chosen  as  a  member  of  the  Malad 
Stake  High  Council  Sept.  25,  1908, 
and  was  ordained  a  Bishop  July  13, 
1912,  by  Geo.  F.  Richards  and  set 
apart  to  preside  over  the  Malad  Sec- 
ond Ward  which  was  then  organized. 
In  1898-1900  he  filled  a  mission  to 
Great  Britain,  laboring  principally 
in  Wales.    At  home  he  served  as  a 


member  of  the  Malad  city  council  six 
years  and  as  secretary  of  the  school 
board  si.x  years.  His  principal  avo- 
cation in  life  is  that  of  a  farmer 
and  stockraiser.  He  took  a  leading 
part  in  the  collecting  of  means  and 
letting  the  contract  for  the  erection  of 
the  new  Malad  Stake  House,  which 
was  erected  at  a  cost  of  about  $35,- 
000  and  was  dedicated  August  29, 
1'915,  by  Pres.  Jos.  F.  Smith.  In 
1886  Bishop  Thomas  married  Annie 
E.  Reynolds  (daughter  of  John  Rey- 
nolds and  Catherine  Williams),  who 
was  born  July  15,  1867,  at  Merthyr 
Tydfil,  Wales.  This  marriage  has 
been  blessed  with  seven  children, 
namely,  Wm.  H.  Jr.,  John  R.,  Ruth 
R.,  Catherine,  Paul,  Reynold  and 
Mary. 

THOMSON,  George,  an  active  Elder 
in  the  Church,  was  born  March  1, 
1830,  at  Thornhill,  Perthshire,  Scot- 
land, the  son  of  Moses  Thomson  and 
Janet  Steele.  When  George  was 
seventeen  years  old  he  became  a 
convert  to   "Mormonism,  "   being  the 


first  of  his  father's  family  to  em- 
brace the  gospel.  An  older  brother 
became  so  enraged  because  of  his 
baptism  that  he  held  him  by  force 
while  his  mother  whipped  him.  John 
Sharp,  afterwards  Bishop  of  the  20th 


266 


LATTER-DAY   SAINT 


Ward,  Salt  Lake  City,  was  baptized 
at  the  same  time.  George  commenced 
working  in  the  coal  pits  when  eigh- 
teen years  of  age.  At  the  age  of 
21  he  took  a  year's  savings  and  sent 
it  to  Liverpool  to  secure  his  passage 
to  America.  He  crossed  the  Atlantic 
in  the  ship  "Ellen,"  which  arrived 
at  New  Orleans  March  14,  1851.  A 
friend  paid  his  passage  to  St.  Louis, 
Mo.,  and  a  sister  gave  him  five  dol- 
lars more  to  pay  his  passage  up  the 
Missouri  river  to  Council  Bluffs. 
Here  he  engaged  with  Joshua  Grant 
to  drive  a  freight  team  across  the 
plains.  He  traveled  with  eleven  other 
men  and  a  young  woman  (Joan  Bee) 
who  did  the  cooking  for  the  com- 
pany. After  his  arrival  in  Utah  he 
located  in  the  Sessions  settlement 
(now  Bountiful)  and  married  Joan 
Bee  (his  traveling  companion  across 
the  plains)  in  1853.  He  then  re- 
turned to  Kanesville,  Iowa,  some- 
what disappointed  with  the  treat- 
ment he  had  received  from  some  of 
his  brethren  in  Utah.  After  remain- 
ing one  year  in  Iowa,  he  concluded 
that  Zion  was  after  all  the  best  place 
for  him,  and  consequently  returned 
to  the  body  of  the  Church,  and  has 
been  steadfast  as  a  faithful  Church 
member  till  the  present  day  (now 
in  1916  being  8  6  years  old).  In 
1865  he  participated  in  the  Echo 
canyon  expedition  and  at  the  time  of 
"the  move"  took  his  family  to  Pay- 
son.  In  1860  he  removed  from 
Bountiful  to  Richmond,  Cache  coun- 
ty, being  one  of  the  founders  of  that 
place.  Here  he  passed  through  all 
the  experiences  and  hardships  con- 
nected with  the  founding  of  a  new 
settlement.  In  1861  he  married  Alice 
Tomlinson  and  enjoyed  his  honey- 
moon trip  traveling  with  an  ox  team 
from  Salt  Lake  City  to  Cache  valley. 
His  first  wife  had  no  children,  but 
his  second  wife  bore  him  eight  chil- 
dren, namely,  Margaret,  George  M., 
Alice  J.,  Richard,  Agnes  L.,  Joseph 
R.,  Isabelle  and  Mary.  In  18  66  Bro. 
Thomson  married  a  plural  wife, 
Maria    Crosley,    who    bore    him    two 


children,  John  and  Thomas.  He  was 
ordained  an  Elder  in  1860  by  John 
Bair  and  later  ordained  a  High  Priest. 
In  1860  he  assisted  Apostle  Ezra  T. 
Benson  to  build  a  house.  As  a  mili- 
tary man  he  took  a  prominent  part 
in  guarding  the  settlers  against  Indi- 
ans. For  many  years  he  served  the 
public  as  a  water  master  and  road 
supervisor.  Apostle  Marriner  W. 
Merrill  gave  him  credit  for  organiz- 
ing the  best  system  of  water  distri- 
bution in  Cache  county.  His  wife 
Alice  died  in  1897,  and  in  1898  he 
established  a  home  on  River  Heights 
and  worked  in  the  Logan  Temple, 
doing  ordinance  work  for  about  one 
thousand  of  his  dead  kindred.  In 
1915  he  moved  back  to  Richmond, 
where  he  still  resides  and  is  a  man 
of  robust  health  and  strong  physique. 

THOMPSON,  Joseph,  an  active 
Elder  in  the  South  Cottonwood  Ward, 
Salt  Lake  county,  Utah,  was  born  in 


Doncaster,  England,  August  16,  1826, 
the  son  of  Joseph  Thompson  and 
Agnes  Hirst.  He  was  baptized  into 
the  Church  of  Jesus  Christ  of 
Latter-day  Saints  by  Joseph  West- 
wood,  in  November,  1848,  at  Croule, 
Yorkshire,  England,  and  was  or- 
dained a  Priest  there.  In  February, 
1852,     he     married     Ann     Grayson 


BIOGRAPHICAL   ENCYCLOPEDIA. 


267 


(daughter  of  John  and  Hannah  Gray- 
son), who  was  born  June  27,  1827, 
in  Sheffield,  England.  With  his 
young  wife  he  emigrated  to  America 
in  the  same  year,  arriving  in  Salt 
Lake  City  Sept.  5,  1852.  He  lived 
in  Salt  Lake  City  five  years,  work- 
ing on  the  Temple  Block  at  his  trade 
as  a  stone  cutter.  In  185  7  he  moved 
to  South  Cottonwood  on  a  farm,  and, 
with  his  family,  endured  many  hard- 
ships of  pioneer  days.  The  issue  of 
his  marriage  was  nine  children, 
namely,  John  G.,  Joseph  Jr.,  Agnes, 
Hannah,  Ann  E.,  Lucy  E.,  Martha, 
and  Mary.  His  wife  died  July  2  0, 
1867,  and  on  August  8,  1868,  he 
married  Annie  M.  Kershaw  (daugh- 
ter of  George  F.  Kershaw  and  Eliza 
Byard),  who  was  born  June  16,  1853, 
in  Port  Elizabeth,  South  Africa.  Her 
father  was  one  of  the  first  converts 
to  the  Church  in  South  Africa  in 
1854,  where  he  filled  an  honorable 
mission  and  died  on  the  sea,  while 
emigrating  to  Utah,  June  6,  1865. 
His  wife  Annie  bore  Bro.  Thompson 
fourteen  children,  namely,  Annie  E., 
Joseph  F.,  Alvin,  Henry,  Lydia,  Wil- 
liam A.,  Sarah  L.,  James  H.,  Ada  P., 
Orson  D.,  Wilford  W.,  Cleo  C,  Mar- 
vin C.  and  Louis  B.  Bro.  Thompson 
was  ordained  a  Seventy  in  1858  by 
Charles  Lambert  in  Salt  Lake  City, 
and  ordained  a  High  Priest  Nov.  23, 
1891,  by  John  Cook  in  the  Granite 
Stake.  He  acted  as  Ward  teacher  for 
many  years,  belonged  to  the  South 
Cottonwood  choir  for  fifty-four  years, 
and  was  a  faithful  member  in  the 
discharge  of  his  Church  duties.  Be- 
sides farming,  he  followed  his  trade 
of  mason  and  bricklayer  until  nearly 
80  years  old,  and  died  Sept.  10,  1911. 

THORNLEY,  John,  a  Patriarch  in 
the  Davis  Stake  of  Zion,  Davis  coun- 
ty, Utah,  was  born  June  25,  1822,  at 
Leyland,  Lancashire,  England,  the 
son  of  Thos.  Thornley  and  Ann  Bol- 
ton. When  about  five  years  of  age 
he  moved  with  his  parents  to  Pres- 
ton, and  was  a  lad  of  fifteen  when 
Heber   C.    Kimball    and    Orson    Hyde 


with  their  party  arrived  at  that  place, 
which  witnessed  the  first  preaching 
of  "Mormonism"  in  the  British  Isles. 
He  was  baptized  Feb.  2,  1839,  as  a 
convert  to  "Mormonism."  In  1843 
(Nov.  25th)  he  married  Martha  Seed, 
who  had  been  a  Latter-day  Saint 
since  October,  1837,  she  being  one 
of  the  first  women  baptized  by  the 
Elders  in  England.  She  was  a  noble 
character  and  proved  a  congenial 
companion  to  the  man  whom  she  mar- 
ried. Brother  and  Sister  Thornley, 
with  their  two  children,  emigrated 
to  America  in  1854,  sailing  from 
Liverpool  in  the  ship  "Golconda," 
Feb.    4,    1854,    and    landed    at    New 


Orleans  March  18,  1854.  They 
ascended  the  Mississippi  river  to  St. 
Louis,  Mo.,  and  from  there  proceeded 
to  Atchison,  Kansas,  where  they 
were  detained  a  month  waiting  for 
wagons  and  supplies.  They  started 
across  the  plains  in  Capt.  James 
Brown's  ox  train,  which  arrived  in 
Salt  Lake  City  Sept.  29,  1854.  After 
wintering  in  the  city,  they  became 
permanent  settlers  of  Kaysville,  Davis 
county,  Utah,  where  they  took  up 
land  and  established  a  home.  The 
usual  experiences  of  the  early  set- 
tlers in  Utah  were  had  by  this 
worthy  couple  in  their  new  environ- 
ments.    Bro.  Thornley  claims  to  have 


268 


LATTER-DAY   SAINT 


raised  the  first  alfalfa  in  Utah.  He 
participated  in  the  Echo  canyon  cam- 
paign and  for  35  years  was  one  of 
the  presidency  of  the  55th  quorum  of 
Seventy,  having  been  ordained  a 
Seventy  July  19,  1857,  by  Samuel 
Henderson.  He  was  ordained  a  High 
Priest  Dec.  29,  1892.  His  wife  died 
Dec.  17,  1894,  leaving  him  with 
three  children.  In  1896  (Dec.  12th) 
Bro.  Thornley  was  ordained  a  Patri- 
arch by  George  Teasdale,  and  died  as 
a  faithful  Latter-day  Saint  Dec.  1, 
1907,  at  Kaysville,  Utah.  (See  Whit- 
ney's History  of  Utah,  Vol.  4:402). 

THORNLEY,  Martha  Seed,  wife  of 
John  Thornley,  was  born  in  1819  in 
England.  She  was  one  of  the  first 
converts  to  "Mormonism"  in  Preston, 
being  baptized  there  in  1837.  She 
became  the  wife  of  John  Thornley 
November  25,  1843,  and  bore 
her  husband  seven  children,  two 
boys  and  five  girls.  Three  of  the 
children  were  born  in  England  and 
four  in  Utah;  their  names  follow: 
William  Thomas,  Elizabeth  Ann, 
Mary  Ellen,  Martha  Seed,  John  Watt, 
Alice    and     Jane.       Sister    Thornley 


proved  a  faithful  companion  to  her 
husband  all  through  life  and  was  one 
of  the  "sweet  singers  of  Israel."  She 
died  as  a  true  and  faithful  Latter-day 
Saint  Dec.  17, 1904,  at  Kaysville, Utah. 


THURMAN,  Ray  Stewart,  Bishop 
of  Grover  Ward,  and  Patriarch  of 
the  Star  Valley  Stake,  Lincoln  coun- 
ty, Wyoming,  was  born  Oct.  30,  1881, 
at  Hyde  Park,  Cache  county,  Utah, 
the  son  of  Edward  M.  Thurman  and 


Femina  B.  Sb  i  He  was  bap- 
tized Oct.  30,  1889,  by  Edward  M. 
Thurman,  his  father;  ordained  a  Dea- 
con Oct.  23,  1896,  by  Andrew  P. 
Anderson;  ordained  an  Elder  Feb. 
24,  1906,  by  Morris  J.  Hale;  or- 
dained a  High  Priest  and  Bishop 
June  2,  1912,  by  Orson  F.  Whitney, 
and  ordained  a  Patriarch  June  1, 
1913,  by  Hyrum  M.  Smith  His 
occupation  is  that  of  a  farmer  and 
stockraiser.  Most  of  his  official 
Church  labors  have  been  performed 
in  the  Star  Valley  Stake  and  in  the 
Grover  Ward.  He  acted  as  presiding 
Elder  of  the  first  quorum  of  Elders 
in  the  Star  Valley  Stake  from  June 
1,  1910,  to  June  2,  1912.  At  the 
same  time  he  acted  as  second  assist- 
ant superintendent  of  the  Grover 
Sunday  school.  Since  his  ordination 
to  the  office  of  a  Patriarch  he  has 
been  busy  giving  patriarchal  bless- 
ings. In  1909  (April  8th)  he  mar- 
ried Lucy  Luvilla  McCombs,  who  has 
borne  her  husband  five  children, name- 
lyReita  Luvilla,  born  Jan.  19,  1910; 
Nellie  Maurine,  born  July  17,   1911; 


BIOGRAPHICAL   ENCYCLOPEDIA. 


269 


Stewart  M.,  born  July  27,  1913;  Ruth 
Mina,  born  June  10,  1915,  and  Hellen 
H.,  born  Feb.  12,  1918. 

THURSTON,     Thomas     Jefferson, 

first  Bishop  in  Morgan  county,  Utah, 
was  born  Feb.  12,  1805,  in  Fletcher, 
Vermont,  the  son  of  Peter  Thurston 
and  Hanna  Butler.  He  came  to  Salt 
Lake  Valley  in  1847,  having  crossed 
the  plains  in  Jedediah  M.  Grant's 
company.  He  acted  as  a  counselor 
to  Bishop  Wm.  H.  Hickenlooper  of 
the  Sixth  Ward,  Salt  Lake  City,  for 
a  number  of  years,  and  afterwards 
officiated  as  acting  Bishop  of  Mor- 
gan county.  Subsequently  he  served 
as  a  member  of  the  High  Council  of 
the  Morgan  Stake.  He  was  sent  by 
Pres.  Brigham  Young  on  the  first 
exploring  expedition  to  Cache  valley 
in  1848,  and  later  settled  at  Center- 
ville,  Davis  county,  Utah,  where  he 
took  up  80  acres  of  land  and  engaged 
in  farming.  Together  with  Chas.  S. 
Peterson  and  their  sons  he  helped 
to  build  the  first  road  through  Weber 
valley.  With  William  W.  Potter  and 
others  he  built  the  first  boat  and 
made  the  first  known  trip  on  the 
Great  Salt  Lake,  exploring  all  the 
islands.  The  boat  was  named  "Mud 
Hen,"  and  while  navigating  the  lake 
the  party  were  overtaken  by  a  storm 
in  which  the  members  of  the  expedi- 
tion came  near  loosing  their  lives. 
Bro.  Thurston  also  established  the 
first  ferry  on  Bear  river.  Later  in 
life  he  became  a  resident  of  St. 
George,  Washington  county,  Utah, 
where  he  died  May  4,  1885.  Bishop 
Thurston  married  three  wives,  name- 
ly, Rozette  Bull,  Elizabeth  Smith  and 
Helen  Maria  Davis.  By  these  wives 
he  became  the  father  of  26  children. 

TIPPETS,  John  Harvey,  a  member 
of  the  Mormon  Battalion,  was  born 
Sept.  5,  1810,  at  Wittingham,  Rock- 
ingham county,  New  Hampshire,  the 
son  of  John  Tippets  and  Abigail 
Pierce.  In  March,  183  2,  he  heard  of 
the  Book  of  Mormon  and  walked 
fifteen    miles    to    see    it.      Becoming 


converted  to  "Mormonism"  he  was 
baptized  in  the  fall  of  the  same  year. 
In  the  fall  of  1834  he  first  met  the 
Prophet  Joseph  Smith,  and  from  that 
time  till  the  Saints  were  driven  frora 
Missouri  he  was  with  them  and  be- 
came subject  to  all  the  trials  and 
tribulations  of  his  people.  He  wit- 
nessed the  betrayal  of  Joseph  Smith 
and  others  by  Geo.  M.  Hinkle  at  Far 
West,  Mo.,  in  1838,  went  to  Nauvoo 
in  1844,  and  shared  in  the  persecu- 
tions there  until  driven  out  by  the 
mob.  He  was  in  Pres.  Brigham 
Young's  company  when  the  call  for 
the  Mormon  Battalion  was  made,  and 
enlisted  in  Company  D  (Capt.  Nelson 


Higgins)  and  marched  with  a  part 
of  the  battalion  to  Pueblo.  On  the 
2  3rd  of  December,  1846,  in  company 
with  Thos.  Woolsey,  he  started  from 
Pueblo  to  carry  money,  mail  and  dis- 
patches to  the  Saints  at  Winter  Quar- 
ters, taking  with  them  their  guns, 
four  days'  provisions  and  two  mules. 
After  enduring  untold  hardships  of 
hunger  and  cold,  they  reached  Win- 
ter Quarters  in  5  2  days.  On  the  trip 
they  were  taken  prisoners  by  Pawnee 
Indians  and  came  very  near  being 
burned  at  the  stake.  Soon  after- 
wards they  were  met  by  some  friendly 
Omaha  Indians,  who  directed  them 
to  their  journey's  end.     In  the  spring 


270 


LATTER-DAY   SAINT 


of  1847  Elder  Tippets  joined  the 
pioneers  and  traveled  with  them  as 
far  as  Laramie;  thence  he  went 
toward  Pueblo  and  joined  his  com- 
pany, with  which  he  then  made  his 
way  to  Salt  Lake  Valley,  where  he 
arrived  in  July,  1847.  He  returned 
to  Winter  Quarters  the  same  year  for 
his  family,  and  arrived  in  the  Valley 
with  his  family  Sept.  24,  1848.  He 
located  in  Salt  Lake  City.  In  1856 
he  was  called  on  a  mission  to  Eng- 
land and  when  he  returned  to  Utah 
in  1858  on  account  of  the  Johnston 
Army  troubles  he  found  the  Saints 
had  moved  south.  In  1863  he  moved 
to  Farmington,  Davis  county,  where 
he  resided  until  his  death.  In  1878 
he  was  ordained  a  Patriarch.  For 
several  years  he  suffered  much 
through  sickness,  but  bore  his  afflic- 
tion with  the  utmost  patience.  Some- 
time before  his  death  he  became 
aware  that  he  could  not  live  much 
longer  and  so  expressed  himself,  but 
his  mind  was  clear  to  the  last,  and 
he  died  in  full  faith  in  the  gospel 
at  his  residence  in  Farmington,  Feb. 
14,  1890,  of  dropsy.  During  his  life 
Patriarch  Tippets  married  three 
wives,  by  whom  he  became  the  father 
of  ten  children.  His  first  wife,  Jane 
Abigail  Smith,  bore  him  two  chil- 
dren; his  second  wife,  Caroline  Haw- 
kins, bore  him  two,  and  his  third 
wife,  Eleanor  Wise,  six  children. 

TOYN,  David  Harry,  a  Patriarch 
in  the  Raft  River  Stake  and  Bishop 
of  Grouse  Creek  Ward,  Box  Elder 
county,  Utah,  from  1896  to  1916,  was 
born  May  1,  1849,  at  Cambridge, 
Cambridgeshire,  England,  the  son  of 
Charles  Toyn  and  Francis  Harriet 
Portcher.  He  emigrated  with  his  par- 
ents to  the  Bermuda  Islands  (West 
Indies)  in  1854,  and  while  there 
his  father  took  sick  and  died.  The 
mother  and  her  children  migrated  to 
New  York  and  came  to  Utah  in  18  62, 
crossing  the  plains  in  Henry  W.  Mil- 
ler's company,  which  arrived  in  the 
Valley  Oct.  17,  1862.  Bro.  Toyn 
was  baptized  June  11,  1862,  by  Wm. 


Horsepool,  and  resided  in  Salt  Lake 
City  until  1875,  when  he  moved  to 
Wallsburg,  Wasatch  county,  Utah, 
and  after  living  there  one  summer 
moved  to  Tooele  county,  but  settled 
more  permanently  in  Grouse  Creek 
in  1877.  In  1874  (Jan.  19th)  he 
married  Martha  Jane  Davis  (daugh- 
ter of  John  M.  Davis  and  Elizabeth 
Abshire),  who  was  born  June  26, 
1847,  at  Council  Bluffs,  Iowa.  This 
marriage  has  been  blessed  with 
twelve  children,  namely,  Mary  E., 
David  A.,  Francis  H.,  Chas.  C,  Anna 
E.,  Thos.  S.,  May  and  Mamy  (twins), 
Nora  and  Cora  (twins),  and  Joseph 
E.  Bro.  Toyn  was  ordained  a  Dea- 
con July  27,  1879,  by  Benjamin  F. 
Cook;     ordained    a    Priest    Oct.    2  8, 


1883,  by  Chas.  Kimber;  ordained  a 
Seventy  Dec.  28,  1884,  by  Lorenzo 
Hunsaker;  ordained  a  High  Priest 
July  3,  1892,  by  Rudger  Clawson,  and 
ordained  a  Bishop  April  20,  1896, 
by  John  Henry  Smith.  Bro.  Toyn 
was  released  from  his  position  as 
Bishop  April  2  4,  1916,  and  ordained 
a  Patriarch  of  the  Raft  River  Stake 
by  Apostle  George  F.  Richards. 

TRANSTR^M,  Ola,  first  counselor 
in  the  presidency  of  the  Bear  Lake 
Stake,  Bear  Lake  county,  Idaho,  was 
born  March  17,  1864,  at  Hyrum,  Cache 


BIOGRAPHICAL  ENCYCLOPEDIA. 


271 


county,  Utah,  the  son  of  Ola  Trans- 
trom  and  Hannah  Nelson.  He  was 
baptized  when  eight  years  old  and 
ordained  successively  a  Priest,  Elder 


and  Seventy.  He  was  ordained  a 
High  Priest  in  1895  by  Wm.  Budge 
and  set  apart  as  second  counselor  to 
Bishop  Elijah  C.  Keetch,  and  at  the 
death  of  Josiah  Booth  he  became 
first  counselor  to  Bishop  Keetch.  In 
1907  he  was  chosen  as  first  counse- 
lor to  Bishop  Edward  M.  Pugmire. 
He  was  called  to  act  as  Bishop  of 
St.  Charles  Jan.  10,  1914,  and  or- 
dained a  Bishop  by  Pres.  Joseph  F. 
Smith  March  15,  1914.  He  presided 
in  that  capacity  at  St.  Charles  until 
Dec.  23,  1917,  when  he  was  chosen 
as  first  counselor  to  Pres.  Wm.  T. 
Rich  of  the  Bear  Lake  Stake,  being 
set  apart  to  that  position  by  Apostle 
Heber  J.  Grant.  Earlier  in  life  Bro. 
Transtrom  also  acted  as  president  of 
the  Ward  Y.  M.  M.  I.  A.  at  St. 
Charles,  in  the  Bear  Lake  Stake,  was 
counselor  in  the  presidency  of  the 
4th  quorum  of  Elders,  served  as 
county  commissioner,  served  in  the 
fourteenth  session  of  the  Idaho  legis- 
lature and  filled  a  six  months'  mis- 
sion to  Missouri  in  1895.  In  1864 
he  moved  with  his  parents  to  St. 
Charles,  where  he  has  since  resided. 
In  1889   (Oct.  31st)  he  married  Emi- 


ly Sorensen  (daughter  of  James  Sor- 
ensen  and  Bendicta  Osterlin)  who 
was  born  Dec.  Id,  1868,  at  St. 
Charles,  Idaho.  This  marriage  has 
been  blessed  with  seven  children, 
namely,  Chester  O.,  Olive  B.,  Whit- 
ney J.,  James  N.,  Lillian  H.,  Myrtle 
E.,  and  Orville  Horton.  Bro.  Tran- 
strom is  a  farmer  and  stockraiser 
and  specializes  in  sheep  and  horses. 

TURNER,  Charles,  a  Patriarch  and 
Bishop  of  South  Morgan  Ward  (Mor- 
gan Stake),  Morgan  county,  Utah,  was 
born  in  the  year  1827,  at  Leamington 
Spa,  Warwickshire,  England.  He 
received  his  early  education  in  Eng- 
land. When  five  years  of  age  his 
parents  moved  to  Ryton,  in  the  same 
shire.  At  the  age  of  23  he  became 
a  member  of  the  Church  of  Jesus 
Christ  of  Latter-day  Saints,  and 
shortly  after  his  baptism  was  or- 
dained a  Priest.  He  labored  in  the 
Coventry  branch  of  the  Church  for 
seven  years,  and  was  ordained  an 
Elder  in  185  4.  He  traveled  for  three 
years  as  a  missionary  in  England  and 
Scotland,  and  was  for  seventeen 
months  president  of  the  Dundee  con- 
ference. In  1861  he  became  imbued 
with  a  desire  to  come  to  America, 
and  in  April  of  that  year  took  pas- 
sage on  the  ship  "Underwriter,"  a 
sailing  vessel,  landing  in  New  York. 
He  went  to  Florence,  whence  he 
made  the  trip  across  the  plains  by 
ox  teams,  arriving  in  Salt  Lakt  City 
Sept.  15,  1861.  After  remaining  in 
the  city  seven  weeks  he  went  to  the 
Weber  valley,  locating  on  what  is 
now  the  site  of  Morgan  City.  During 
the  two  years  following  he  worked 
at  whatever  he  could  obtain  to  make 
a  livelihood.  At  the  end  of  this 
time  he  engaged  in  brick  making, 
manufacturing  the  brick  from  the 
native  clay,  and  furnished  the  first 
brick  in  Morgan  City;  many  of  the 
houses  now  in  use  were  built  from 
these  brick.  He  also  burnt  the 
native  lime  stone  and  engaged  in 
this  business  for  over  thirty  years, 
still    retaining    his    farm,    which    he 


272 


LATTER-DAY   SAINT 


operated  in  a  small  way.  From  1896 
he  gave  his  time  more  particularly 
to  farming  and  ranching.  He  built 
a  fine  home  in  Morgan  City  in  1888, 
and  also  built  a  house  for  his  oldest 
son.  He  also  purchased  a  house  in 
Morgan  which  he  gave  to  his  second 
son.  In  1861  (Dec.  8th)  he  married 
Miss  Elizabeth  Wilkens,  who  died 
Feb.  26,  1865,  leaving  one  child 
which  died  later.  Bro.  Turner  mar- 
ried Miss  Annie  Bosch  Oct.  14,  1865; 
she  is  still  living  and  is  the  mother 
of  thirteen  children,  of  whom  eleven 
are  living.  In  1872  Bro.  Turner 
married  Hannah  Jones,  who  died 
May  26,  1914,  after  bearing  him  six 
children.  In  1918  he  had  14  living 
children  and  44  grand-children.  He 
was  identified  with  most  of  the 
public  enterprises  of  Morgan  City. 
Before  the  admission  of  Utah  into  the 
Union  he  served  for  two  terms  as 
selectman  of  Morgan  county,  and  was 
largely  instrumental  in  building  up 
the  community  in  which  he  lived. 
Some  time  after  his  arrival  in  Utah 
he  was  ordained  a  High  Priest  and 
presided  over  the  North  Morgan  dis- 
trict before  the  Morgan  Stake  was 
organized,  and  at  the  time  of  the 
organization  of  said  Stake  in  1877 
he  was  ordained  a  Bishop  by  Apostle 
Loienzo  Snow  and  set  apart  to  pre- 
side over  the  South  Morgan  Ward. 
After  acting  as  Bishop  thirty  years  he 
was  ordained  a  Patriarch  July  10, 
1906,  by  Charles  W.  Penrose.  He 
died  Oct.  23,  1910,  at  Morgan,  Utah, 
beloved  and  respected. 

UDY,  Chaxles  Albert,  fourth  Bish- 
op of  the  Fielding  Ward  (Bear  River 
Stake),  Box  Elder  county,  Utah,  was 
born  April  29,  1866,  at  Farmington, 
Davis  county,  Utah,  the  son  of  James 
Udy  and  Mary  Hansen.  He  was  bap- 
tized by  Jonathan  D.  Wood  when 
about  eight  years  of  age;  ordained 
an  Elder  in  1893;  ordained  a  Seven- 
ty in  1897  by  J.  Golden  Kimball, 
and  filled  a  mission  to  the  Southern 
States   in    1897-99,    laboring    princi- 


pally in  Kentucky.  He  was  ordained 
a  High  Priest  Oct.  14,  1906,  by  Geo. 
F.  Richards  and  set  apart  as  second 
counselor  to  Bishop  Jos.  S.  Clark 
Jr.  In  1908  he  was  chosen  as  first 
counselor  to  Bishop  Clark  and  he  was 
ordained  a  Bishop  May  4,  1913,  by 
Pres.  M.  H.  Welling,  and  set  apart 
to  preside  over  the  Fielding  Ward. 
From  the  time  he  was  fourteen  years 
of  age  until  he  reached  the  age  of 
21  he  spent  the  time  mostly  freight- 
ing and  railroading;  since  then  he 
has  been  occupied  with  farming  and 
stockraising.  In  1888  (Aug.  16th) 
he  married  Adeline  Hess  (daughter 
of  John  W.  Hess  and  Caroline  Work- 


man), who  was  born  Dec.  11,  1869, 
at  Farmington,  Davis  county,  Utah. 
His  children  by  this  marriage  are 
Charles  A.  Jr.,  Arvil  R.,  Thelma  A. 
and  Mark  J.  Soon  after  his  mar- 
riage, he  settled  in  that  part  of  Bear 
River  valley  which  is  now  within  the 
limits  of  the  Fielding  Ward.  Here 
he  has  remained  a  permanent  rosi- 
dent  ever  since  and  has  taken  an 
active  part  in  building  up  that  part 
of  the  country.  At  present  he  is 
interested  in  the  Tremonton  Furni- 
ture Company,  is  vice  president  of 
the  same  and  the  Farmers  Cash 
Union.  He  has  acted  as  road  super- 
visor about  three  years. 


BIOGRAPHICAL  ENCYCLOPEDIA. 


273 


VANCE,  James  Wesley,  Bishop  of 
Alpine  (Alpine  Stake),  Utah  county, 
Utah,  was  born  Dec.  1,  1861,  at  Al- 
pine, the  son  of  John  Wesley  Vance 
and  Rhoda  Freestone.  He  was  bap- 
titzed  July  9,  1870,  by  Richard  T. 
Booth  at  Alpine;  ordained  a  Deacon 
by  Bishop  Thos.  J.  McCullough;  or- 
dained an  Elder  Dec.  16,  1883,  by 
David  Adams;  ordained  a  Seventy 
Dec.  6,  1884,  by  Abraham  H.  Cannon 
and  became  a  member  of  the  67th 
quorum  of  Seventy.  When  five  years 
old  his  father.  Major  John  W.  Vance, 
was  shot  and  killed  by  Indians  (June 
2,  1867),  at  Twelve  Mile  Creek,  San- 
pete county,  Utah,  while  in  defense  of 
the  Saints  in  that  part  of  the  country. 
His  father,  though  only  36  years  of 
age,  left  a  family  of  two  wives  and 
nine    small    children,    six    of    whom 


were  under  six  years  of  age.  Under 
these  conditions  the  family  suffered 
considerable  poverty  and  hardships. 
The  Bishop's  mother  had  two  boys 
and  a  girl,  but  lost  her  youngest 
boy  (George  Frank)  four  months 
after  the  death  of  the  father.  James 
W.  therefore  found  it  necessary  to 
herd  cows  and  work  to  the  best  of  his 
ability  to  assist  his  mother.  When 
about  fourteen  years  of  age  he  drove 
a  herd  of  cattle  for  his  uncle  James 
Freestone  to  Southern  Idaho,  in  or- 

Vol.  Ill,  No.  18. 


der  to  earn  means  to  assist  building 
a  house  for  the  family  at  Alpine. 
His  schooling  consisted  of  three  or 
four  months  during  the  winter  sea- 
son. He  was  chosen  president  of  the 
Alpine  Y.  M.  M.  I.  A.  Sept.  9,  1885, 
and  re-elected  to  the  same  position 
Nov.  14,  1888.  For  several  years 
he  labored  as  a  block  teacher  and  a 
Sunday  school  teacher.  In  1890-92 
he  filled  a  mission  to  the  Southern 
States,  laboring  principally  in  Ken- 
tucky. After  his  return  from  that 
mission  he  again  presided  over  the 
Y.  M.  M.  I.  A.  In  1893  (Feb.  22nd) 
he  married  Miss  Lilly  Darnall,  who 
bore  her  husband  seven  children  and 
died  April  29,  1916,  leaving  a  babe 
ten  months  old.  When  Albert  Marsh 
was  chosen  as  Bishop  of  Alpine  in 
April,  1893,  James  W.  was  ordained 
a  High  Priest  and  set  apart  as  first 
counselor  to  Bishop  Marsh  by  Apos- 
tle Abraham  H.  Cannon.  In  18  95  he 
filled  a  special  mission  in  the  Utah 
Stake  of  Zion.  After  acting  as  coun- 
selor to  Bishop  March  fourteen  years 
he  was  chosen  as  first  counselor  to 
Bishop  Benjamin  Fullmer  Jan.  20, 
1907,  which  position  he  held  until 
Dec.  21,  1913,  when  he  was  ordained 
a  Bishop  by  Apostle  Geo.  F.  Rich- 
ards and  set  apart  to  preside  over 
the  Alpine  Ward.  He  commenced 
his  activity  as  Bishop  Jan.  1,  1914. 
Besides  the  many  ecclesiastical  posi- 
tions filled  by  Bishop  Vance  he  has 
acted  as  city  recorder  of  Alpine  sev- 
eral terms,  and  also  as  city  council- 
man. He  was  elected  president  of 
the  Alpine  Irrigation  Company  Feb. 
2  8,  1885,  elected  director  and  secre- 
tary of  said  company  Feb.  25,  1895, 
and  a  member  of  the  board  in  1899. 
He  has  also  acted  as  secretary  of 
the  Alpine  Mercantile  Company  since 
April,  1904,  secretary  of  the  Alpine 
Cattle  Range  Company  since  Jan.  16, 
1907,  and  secretary  of  the  Alpine 
Dairy  and  Exchange  Company  since 
June  15,  ld05.  He  was  elected  pre- 
cinct justice  of  the  peace  in  Novem- 
ber, 1904,  and  justice  of  the  peace  of 
Alpine  City  in  November,  1905.     He 

June,  1919 


274 


LATTER-DAY  SAINT 


was  also  elected  mayor  of  Alpine  City 
Nov.  6,  1911,  and  served  in  1912-1913. 

WADDOUPS,  William,  second  coun- 
selor to  Pres.  Alma  Merrill  of  the 
Benson  Stake,  Cache  county,  Utah, 
was  born  August  19,  1840,  at  Sowe, 


Warwickshire,  England,  the  son  of 
Thomas  Waddoups  and  Elizabeth 
Porter.  Becoming  a  convert  to 
"Mormonism,"  he  was  baptized  April 
20,  185  6.  by  Charles  Turner  and 
emigrated  to  America  in  18  63,  cross- 
ing the  Atlantic  in  the  ship  "Ama- 
zon" and  the  plains  in  Capt.  Rosel 
Hyde's  company.  He  drove  three 
yoke  of  oxen  from  the  Missouri  river 
to  the  Valley,  where  he  arrived  Oct. 
13,  1863.  He  settled  at  once  at  Boun- 
tiful, Davis  county,  but  moved  to 
Lewiston,  Cache  county,  in  1874; 
where  he  has  resided  ever  since.  He 
was  ordained  a  Deacon  while  in 
England;  ordained  a  Seventy  July  1, 
1865,  by  Joseph  Young,  and  was  for 
a  number  of  years  a  president  of  the 
36th  quorum  of  Seventy;  was  or- 
dained a  High  Priest  July  5,  1884, 
by  Moses  Thatcher  and  set  apart  as 
first  counselor  to  Bishop  Wm.  H. 
Lewis  of  Lewiston;  was  ordained  a 
Bishop  June  30,  1901,  by  Apostle 
Marriner  W.  Merrill  and  set  apart 
to  preside  over  the  Lewiston  Ward. 
Since  Nov.  5,   1905,  he  has  acted  as 


second  counselor  to  President  Mer- 
rill of  the  Benson  Stake  of  Zion.  Bro. 
Waddoups  was  the  first  of  his  fam- 
ily to  emigrate  to  Utah  from  Eng- 
land, and  he  subsequently  was  the 
means  of  emigrating  his  father's 
family  to  the  Valley.  In  18  64  (Nov. 
2  7th)  Bro.  Waddoups  married  Mar- 
tha Page,  who  bore  him  six  children. 
In  1883  (Nov.  29th)  he  married 
Eliza  Jane  Stephenson,  who  bore  him 
fourteen  children.  Bro.  Waddoups 
has  performed  three  home  missions, 
is  by  occupation  a  farmer,  and  for 
the  past  nine  years  has  acted  as  field 
superintendent  of  the  Lewiston  Sugar 
Company.  In  early  days  in  Utah  he 
was  a  member  of  the  Utah  militia, 
and  served  as  captain  of  a  company 
for  many  years.  His  first  wife  died 
Nov.  17,  1912,  and  his  second  wife 
July  4,  1912. 

WADDOUPS,  Martha  Page,  wife  of 
Wm.  Waddoups,  was  born  June  28, 
1840,  at  Birmingham,  Warwickshire, 
England,  the  daughter  of  James  Page 
and  Louisa  Graves.  She  was  bap- 
tized   when    eight    years    of    age    by 


Jeter  Clinton,  emigrated  to  America 
in  1860,  together  with  her  parents, 
crossing  the  Atlantic  in  the  ship 
"William  Tapscott.  "  She  remained 
in  New  York  two  years  and  crossed 
the   plains   in    Joseph    Home's    com- 


BIOGRAPHICAL  ENCYCLOPEDIA. 


275 


pany  which  arrived  in  Salt  Lake  City 
Oct.  1,  1862.  She  settled  at  Bounti- 
ful, was  married  to  Wm.  Waddoups 
Nov.  27,  18  64,  and  became  the 
mother  of  six  children,  three  boys 
and  three  girls.  Sister  Waddoups 
was  an  active  Relief  Society  worker 
for  many  years  and  died  as  a  faithful 
and  beloved  member  of  the  Church 
at  Lewiston,  Utah,  Nov.  17,  1912. 

WADDOUPS,  Eliza  Jane  Stephen- 
son,  wife     of     Wm.    Waddoups,    was 


born  July  13.  1863,  at  Richmond, 
Cache  county,  Utah,  the  daughter  of 
Harris  H.  Stephenson  and  Isabella 
Sprowle.  She  was  baptized  August 
1,  375,  by  Wallace  K.  Burnham, 
ai.u  liiarried  Wm.  Waddoups  Nov.  29, 
1883,  by  whom  she  became  the 
mother  of  fourteen  children,  eight 
boys  and  six  girls.  She  was  a  most  act- 
ive Relief  Society  worker  and  was  for 
some  time  president  of  the  Lewiston 
Ward  Relief  Society,  filling  that  posi- 
tion from  June,  1902,  until  April  17, 
190^,  when  the  Lewiston  Ward  was 
divided.  She  then  became  a  mem- 
ber of  the  Lewiston  Third  Ward  and 
was  chosen  as  first  counselor  in  the 
Relief  Society  in  that  Ward.  She 
also  held  the  position  of  treasurer 
and  counselor  in  the  Y.  L.  M.  I.  A., 
besides    acting    as    a    Sunday    school 


teacher,  etc.  Sister  Waddoups  died 
July  4,  1912,  at  Lewiston,  as  a  faith- 
ful and  devoted  Latter-day  Saint. 

WAHLQUIST,  Charles  John,  presi- 
dent of  the  High  Priests  quorum  in 
the  Wasatch  Stake,  Wasatch  county. 
Utah,  was  born  Feb.  5,  18  66,  near 
Norrkoping,  Sweden,  the  son  of  An- 
ders F.  Wahlquist  and  Anna  C.  Olof- 
son.  He  was  baptized  June  3,  187  6, 
by  Eric  G.  Johnson;  emigrated  to 
Utah  with  his  parents  in  1877  and 
settled  in  Wasatch  county,  where  he 
was  successively  ordained  a  Teacher, 
Priest  and  Seventy.  He  acted  as 
president  of  a  Ward  Y.  M.  M.  I.  A. 
and  also  as  assistant  superintendent 
of  a  Sunday  school  from  April  18, 
1886,  to  February,  1888.  In  1892-94 
he  filled  a  mission  to  Sweden,  but  in 
January,  1893,  he  was  called  to 
Copenhagen  to  act  as  assistant  editor 
of  "Nordstjernan."  He  was  ordained 
a  High  Priest  and  Bishop  of  the 
Buysville  Ward,  Wasatch  Stake  Nov. 
12,  1898,  by  Apostle  Francis  M.  Ly- 
man, and  acted  in  that  capacity  until 
May  10,  1903,  after  which  he  served 


as  a  member  of  the  High  Council  and 
as  Stake  supervisor  of  parents  classes 
for  several  years.  Bro.  Walquist  be- 
gan his  public  career  in  1889  as  pre- 
cinct road  supervisor,  since  which  he 


276 


LATTER-DAY  SAINT 


has  held  a  number  of  public  posi- 
tions. When  3  6  years  of  age  he 
commenced  to  study  law,  and  in  the 
fall  of  1902  was  elected  county  at- 
torney of  Wasatch  county;  he  was 
re-elected  in  1904.  In  March,  1906, 
he  resigned  that  position  to  accept 
the  appointment  of  county  clerk  and 
recorder  of  Wasatch  county,  which 
position  he  held  until  Dec.  31,  1910. 
In  the  meantime  he  continued  the 
study  of  law  and  was  admitted  to 
the  bar  Oct.  11,  I'dlO,  and  soon  after- 
wards commenced  the  practice  of 
law.  In  1911  he  was  appointed  judge 
of  the  juvenile  court  of  the  Fourth 
Judicial  District,  and  in  1914  was 
again  elected  county  attorney  for 
Wasatch  county.  He  also  acted  as 
postmaster  at  Buysville  for  four  and 
a  half  years.  In  1895  (August  28th) 
he  married  Elizabeth  Campbell,  who 
has  borne  him  six  children,  namely, 
Keith  C,  Charles  F.,  John  T.,  Leroy, 
Mable  and  Ruth.  His  oldest  son  is 
now  (1917)  filling  a  mission  to  the 
Northern  States. 

WAITE,  John  Anson  Jr.,  Bishop  of 
the  Peterson  Ward,  Morgan  county, 
Utah,  from  1889  to  1899,  was  born 
Feb.  16,  1863,  at  Bountiful,  Davis 
county,  Utah,  the  son  of  John  Anson 
Waite  and  Margaret  Barnes.  He  was 
baptized  June  24,  1877,  by  Henry 
Rampton;  ordained  a  Deacon  soon 
afterwards;  ordained  an  Elder  Jan. 
6,  1883,  by  Jaren  Tolman;  attended 
the  district  school  and  received  his 
education  under  the  tutorship  of  An- 
son V.  Call.-  In  1883  (March  29th) 
he  married  Lucina  Sessions  (daugh- 
ter of  Perrigrine  Sessions  and  Em- 
oret  Loveland),  who  was  born  Oct.  4, 
1865,  at  Bountiful.  She  became  the 
mother  of  nine  children.  In  1883- 
84  Bro.  Waite  filled  a  mission  to  the 
Southern  States,  laboring  principally 
In  Alabama  and  Mississippi.  On  his 
return  home  he  taught  school  during 
the  winter  of  188  4-85.  In  April, 
1885,  he  moved  to  Mountain  Green, 
Morgan  county,  Utah,  intending  to 
make  his  future  home  there.     He  re- 


turned for  the  winter  to  Bountiful 
and  taught  the  high  school  there  dur- 
ing the  winter  of  1885-86.  Return- 
ing to  Morgan  county  in  the  spring 
of  1886  he  traveled  as  a  home  mis- 
sionary in  the  Morgan  Stake  in  1886- 
87.  He  was  ordained  a  Seventy  Jan. 
29,  1887,  by  James  Tucker,  and  In 
November,  1888,  appointed  to  act  as 
presiding  Elder  over  the  Peterson 
Ward.  He  was  ordained  a  High 
Priest  and  Bishop  May  19,  1889,  by 
Heber  J.  Grant  and  set  apart  to  pre- 
side over  the  Peterson  Ward.  He 
labored  in  that  capacity  until  April, 
1899,  when  he  moved  to  the  Syra- 
cuse Ward,  Davis  Stake,  and  was 
called  to  labor  as  a  Sunday  school 
teacher.  Ward  teacher,  and  secre- 
tary and  treasurer  of  the  Y.  M.  M.  I. 
A.  of  the  Davis  Stake.  Released 
from  these  various  callings  by  Bishop 
David  Cook,  he  was  sustained  as 
Ward  clerk  June  9,  rd07,  and  is 
laboring  in  that  capacity  at  the  pres- 
ent time.  At  the  November  election, 
1905,  he  was  elected  county  surveyor 
of  Davis  county,  which  office  he  still 
holds.  He  also  acted  as  a  district 
school  trustee  for  a  number  of  years 
and  has  traveled  as  a  home  mission- 
ary in  the  Davis  Stake.  His  princi- 
pal avocation  is  that  of  a  farmer. 

WASDEN,  James  Brooks,  Bishop 
of  the  Penrose  Ward  (Big  Horn 
Stake),  Park  county,  Wyoming,  was 
born  July  16,  1870,  at  Scipio,  Mil- 
lard county,  Utah,  the  son  of  John 
Brooks  Wasden  and  Anna  Sophia 
Olsen.  He  was  baptized  in  June, 
1882,  by  Isaac  Pierce;  ordained  a 
Deacon  in  1882;  ordained  a  Priest 
Jan.  1,  1898,  by  Bishop  Christian  A. 
Madsen  of  Gunnison,  Sanpete  county, 
Utah;  ordained  an  Elder  March  1, 
1898,  by  Thos.  Nielson;  ordained  a 
Seventy  March  16,  18  98,  by  Jonathan 
G.  Kimball;  ordained  a  High  Priest 
July  30,  1910,  by  Jesse  W.  Crosby 
Jr.;  called  to  act  as  Bishop  of  the 
Penrose  Ward,  Big  Horn  Stake,  in 
April,  1915,  and  ordained  a  Bishop 
May    23,    1915,    by    Apostle    Rudger 


BIOGRAPHICAL  ENCYCLOPEDIA. 


2Ti 


Clawson  and  set  apart  to  preside  over 
the  Penrose  Ward,  which  was  then 
organized.  He  filled  a  mission  to 
the  Southern  States,  leaving  Salt 
Lake  City  March  17,  1898,  and  re- 
turning April  6,  1900.  During  this 
mission  he  labored  principally  in  the 
Florida  conference.  At  home  for 
fourteen  years  he  was  engaged  in 
road  building  in  the  Yellowstone 
National  Park;  after  his  arrival  in 
the  Big  Horn  country  in  1904  he  has 
followed  farming  as  his  chief  avo- 
cation. He  built  the  first  house  at 
Penrose.  Since  1905  he  has  acted 
as  a  director  in  the  Elk  Canal  Com- 
pany, was  elected  road  supervisor  for 
District  No.  3,  Park  county,  Wyoming, 
in  November,  1914,  and  was  re- 
elected in  November,  1916.  He  also 
acted  as  superintendent  of  the  Pen- 
rose Sunday  school  from  the  time  of 
its  organization,  Dec.  24,  1905,  to 
Oct.  19,  1913.  In  1898  (March  9th) 
Bro.  Wasden  married  Tilda  Christine 
Christensen  of  Gunnison,  Sanpete 
county,  in  the  Manti  Temple;  his 
wife  has  borne  him  seven  children, 
namely,  David  John,  Sofe  Christina, 
Brooks  Fulton,  Minnie  Arrilla,  Elna 
Tilda,  James  Orvil  and  Lucinda. 

WATSON,  Joseph  M.,  a  president 
of  the  30th  quorum  of  Seventy,  and 
a  leading  citizen  of  Salt  Lake  City, 
Utah,  was  born  July  7,  1840,  at  Blag- 
den,  Northumberland,  England,  the 
seventh  son  of  James  Watson  and 
Barbara  Moralee.  He  was  baptized 
by  his  brother  James  Watson  in  1857 
and  emigrated  to  Utah  the  same  year 
in  a  company  of  emigrating  Saints  in 
charge  of  Robert  F.  Neslen.  In 
18  61  (March  30th)  he  married  Anna 
M.  Thompson,  daughter  of  Edward 
Thompson  and  Marine  Rutherforth 
of  Workworth,  England,  who  were 
pioneers  of  Utah  in  1863.  Sister 
Watson  bore  her  husband  two  chil- 
dren (Joseph  W.  and  Annie  M. )  both 
of  whom  died  in  infancy,  the  young 
mother  following  soon  afterwards. 
In  1881  (April  20th)  Bro.  Watson 
married  Annie  M.  Davis  (daughter  of 


Chas.  Davis  and  Elizabeth  Moore- 
house  of  Stockton,  Lancashire,  Eng- 
land), who  arrived  in  Utah  In  1876. 
Upon  the  occasion  of  a  visit  to  his 
relatives  in  England  Bro.  Watson  was 
retained  by  the  presiding  authorities 
there  to  perform  missionary  labors, 
in  which  he  was  very  successful. 
Being  greatly  interested  in  the  salva- 
tion of  his  dead  kindred  he  per- 
formed much  work  in  the  Temple  on 
their  behalf.  As  a  partner  in  the 
firm  of  Watson  Bros.,  builders  and 
contractors,  he  was  well  known  and 
established  a  record  for  integrity  and 
conscientious  work.  After  the  death 
of  his  brother  James,  he  had  entire 
charge  of  the  business,  proving  him- 


self fully  equal  to  the  task.  The 
Watson  Bros.  Company  built  the  Z.  C. 
M.  I.  shoe  factory,  the  Hooper- 
Eldredge  block,  the  Templeton  build- 
ing, etc.,  in  Salt  Lake  City,  and  as- 
sisted in  building  Fort  Douglas.  Just 
previous  to  his  death,  the  Watson 
Brothers  supplied  the  Utah  onyx 
used  in  the  City  and  County  Build- 
ing, the  beauty  of  which  has  gained 
a  national  reputation.  He  was  a 
member  of  the  city  council  for  two 
terms  and  served  on  several  import- 
ant committees.  Bro.  Watson  died 
Dec.  15,  1895,  in  Salt  Lake  City. 


278 


LATTER-DAY   SAINT 


WATT,  Golightly,  second  Bishop 
of  the  Thatcher  Ward  (Bear  River 
Stake),  Box  Elder  county,  Utah,  was 
born  Nov.  26,  1860,  in  Salt  Lake  City, 
Utah,  the  son  of  Geo.  D.  Watt  and 
Elizabeth   Golightly.      He    was    bap- 


tized when  eight  years  old  and  moved 
to  Layton  Ward,  Davis  county  when 
nine  years  old.  He  was  ordained  a 
Priest  in  1885;  ordained  an  Elder  in 
1886  by  James  H.  Linford,  acted  as 
an  assistant  and  later  as  president  of 
the  Elders  in  the  Layton  Ward.  In 
1886  (Feb.  25th)  he  married  Mary 
Ann  Harris  (daughter  of  Thos.  E. 
Harris  and  Mary  Ann  Payne)  who 
was  born  Jan.  31,  1867,  at  Kaysville. 
This  marriage  has  been  blessed  with 
twelve  children,  namely,  Mary  Hazel, 
Annie  E.,  Wm.  L.  and  Alice  (twins), 
Isabella  H.,  Hattie  H.,  Richard  Gold- 
en, Ruth  H.,  Grace  Darling,  Lois  Jane, 
and  one  babe  who  didn't  live  long 
enough  to  be  blessed.  In  1898  Bro. 
Watt  moved  to  Bothwell,  Box  Elder 
county  (now  Thatcher  Ward).  Here 
he  acted  as  assistant,  and  later  as 
superintendent,  of  the  Bothwell  Sun- 
day school.  He  also  acted  as  Ward 
teacher  for  a  period  of  22  years.  He 
was  sustained  as  Bishop  of  the 
Tatcher  Ward  May  6,  1911,  and  was 
ordained  a  High  Priest  and  Bishop  by 
Heber  J.  Grant.  Bro.  Watt  still  holds 
that  office. 


WELLS,  Samuel  H.,  second  coun- 
selor in  the  presidency  of  the  Moapa 
Stake  of  Zion,  Clark  county,  Nevada, 
was  born  at  St.  George,  Utah,  April 
18,  1871,  the  son  of  Stephen  Robert 
Wells  and  Annie  Thome.  He  was 
baptized  April  18,  1879,  by  his 
father;  was  ordained  a  Deacon  when 
twelve  years  old  and  subsequently  a 
Teacher;  became  a  member  of  Wm. 
H.  Thompson's  brass  band  when  thir- 
teen years  old,  and  continued  with 
that  band  for  fifteen  years.  He  also 
became  a  member  of  the  St.  George 
Stake  choir  when  sixteen  years  old 
and  sang  in  said  choir  for  fifteen 
years.  His  father  died  July  2  6,  1889. 
He  was  ordained  a  Seventy  by  B.  H. 
Roberts  June  15,  1891,  and  became 
a  member  of  the  29th  quorum  of 
Seventy.  The  same  year  he  joined 
the  Home  Dramatic  Company  of  St. 
George.  In  October,  1891,  he  went 
to  Cedar  City,  Iron  county,  and 
learned  the  blacksmith's  trade  with 
Bishop  Wm.  Coray.  Here  he  re- 
mained two  years  and  became  a  mem- 
ber   of    the    Cedar     City     tabernacle 


choir  and  president  of  the  Cedar  City 
Home  Dramatic  Company.  In  1894- 
96  he  filled  a  mission  to  the  Southern 
States,  laboring  principally  in  Texas. 
He  was  eminently  successful  as  a 
missionary;     assisted    in    organizing 


BIOGRAPHICAL   ENCYCLOPEDIA 


279 


two  branches  of  the  Church  and  was 
whipped  by  a  mob  near  Honey  Grove, 
Texas.  After  his  return  home  he 
became  second  assistant  superintend- 
ent of  the  St.  George  Stake  Sunday 
school.  In  December,  1897,  he  was 
appointed  to  labor  as  a  Y.  M.  M.  I.  A. 
missionary  in  Beaver  and  Iron  coun- 
ties. He  married  Mary  Louisa  Wool- 
ley  June  27,  1898;  she  was  the  old- 
est daughter  of  Judge  Edwin  G.  Wool- 
ley  and  Lavina  Bentley.  In  190  0  he 
assisted  in  organizing  auxiliary  or- 
ganizations in  the  White  Pine  Ward, 
Nevada,  and  he  was  ordained  a  High 
Priest  June  14,  1901,  by  Apostle 
Abraham  O.  Woodruff  and  set  apart 
as  an  alternate  member  of  the  St. 
George  Stake  High  Council.  On  ac- 
count of  poor  health  he  took  his 
family  to  Salt  Lake  City  in  October, 
1902,  and  attended  the  L.  D.  S.  Uni- 
versity for  two  years.  In  1894  he 
went  to  Moapa  and  proceeded  down 
the  Muddy  valley,  where  he  pur- 
chased land.  On  a  subsequent  visit 
to  Salt  Lake  City,  he  reported  to  the 
First  Presidency  the  opportunities 
of  making  settlements  in  the  Muddy 
valley  and  that  a  railroad  was  being 
built  through  that  country.  The  fol- 
lowing October  he  moved  his  family, 
consisting  of  wife  and  three  children, 
to  the  Moapa  or  Muddy  valley,  locat- 
ing on  the  Bowman  ranch,  about  one 
and  a  half  miles  above  St.  Joseph, 
or  Logan,  as  it  is  now  called.  The 
following  February  (1895)  he  bought 
520  acres  of  land  at  St.  Thomas, 
which  he  subsequently  sold,  except 
90  acres.  Elder  Wells  shipped  the 
first  carload  of  cantaloupes,  water- 
melons and  onions  ever  shipped  out 
of  the  Moapa  valley  the  same  year. 
Conditions  in  the  valley  at  that  time 
were  rather  unsatisfactory,  as  a  few 
non-Mormons  had  taken  possession 
of  the  best  land,  and  they  were  op- 
posed to  the  Latter-day  Saints  set- 
tling there,  but  Elder  Wells  took 
the  matter  up  with  the  First  Presi- 
dency, and  the  Church  purchased 
2,600  acres  of  land  for  $25,000. 
Subsequently   Bro.    Wells   got   ahead 


of  some  California  capitalists  in  se- 
curing the  surplus  water  of  the  Mud- 
dy river  for  irrigation  purposes. 
When  Clark  county  was  organized 
from  a  part  of  Lincoln  county,  Feb- 
ruary, 1909,  Bro.  Wells  was  ap- 
pointed one  of  the  county  commis- 
sioners; that  year  he  promoted  the 
Moapa  Valley  Telephone  Company, 
and  a  line  was  built  25  miles  in 
length  at  a  cost  of  $4,500;  Elder 
Wells  was  made  president  of  the  com- 
pany. Subsequently  he  used  his  in- 
fluence with  the  San  Pedro,  Los 
Angeles  and  Salt  Lake  Railroad  for 
the  building  of  a  branch  line  down 
the  valley;  the  road  was  built  and 
completed  in  June,  1912.  When  the 
Moapa  Stake  of  Zion  was  organized 
June  9,  1912,  Bro.  Wells  was  chosen 
as  second  counselor  to  Pres.  Willard 
L.  Jones,  which  position  he  still 
holds.  In  1914  he  became  manager 
of  the  Nevada  Land  and  Livestock 
Company  for  the  Church.  Seven 
children  have  been  born  to  him. 

WEST,  John  Anderson,  a  Patriarch 
in  the  Ensign  Stake  of  Zion,  Salt 
Lake  City,   Utah,   was  born  Dec.    19, 


1830.  in  Benton  county,  Tenn.,  the 
son  of  Samuel  Walker  West  and 
Margaret  Cooper.  He  was  baptized 
in  February,   1842,   by  Joseph  John- 


280 


LATTER-DAY   SAINT 


son.  Together  with  his  parents,  who 
had  joined  the  Church  in  1834,  he 
gathered  with  the  Saints  to  Nauvoo, 
111.,  in  1842,  and  while  there  re- 
ceived a  strong  testimony  in  regard 
to  the  truth  of  "Mormonism."  The 
West  family  left  Nauvoo  during  the 
general  exodus  in  1846  and  started 
for  the  West.  After  remaining  in 
Iowa  until  June,  1851,  they  started 
for  Utah  in  Harrison  Walton's  com- 
pany. On  the  journey  across  the 
plains,  in  a  stampede  a  woman 
named  Ellen  Kingsley  jumped  from 
the  wagon  just  at  the  head  of  the 
one  belonging  to  Bro.  West  and  was 
run  over  and  killed.  Elder  West 
arrived  in  the  Valley  Sept.  25,  1851, 
and  located  at  Parowan  the  same 
year.  He  was  ordained  an  Elder  by 
John  L.  Smith  Dec.  2  9,  1851,  and  in 
1854-58  he  filled  a  mission  to  the 
Hawaiian  Islands.  In  1870  he  was 
ordained  a  Seventy  by  Abraham 
Smith  and  became  a  member  of  the 
85th  quorum  of  Seventy.  In  1872- 
75  he  filled  a  second  mission  to  the 
Sandwich  Islands.  In  1875  he  be- 
came superintendent  of  the  Parowan 
Sunday  school.  In  1879  he  moved  to 
Snowflake,  Arizona,  where  he  became 
superintendent  of  the  Sunday  schools 
of  the  Eastern  Arizona  Stake,  and 
later  of  the  Snowflake  Stake,  being 
in  the  superintendency  of  the  Sunday 
school  for  about  thirty  years.  He 
was  ordained  a  High  Priest  and  set 
apart  as  a  High  Councilor  in  the 
Parowan  Stake  August  22,  1875,  by 
Erastus  Snow.  He  was  ordained  a 
Patriarch  May  24,  1910,  by  Apostle 
Anthony  W.  Ivins,  and  that  same  year 
he  sold  his  property  in  Arizona  and 
settled  permanently  in  Salt  Lake 
City.  In  his  early  days  Bro.  West 
took  part  in  the  Walker  Indian  war 
and  later  in  the  Black  Hawk  war. 
In  1854  (May  19th)  he  married  Bet- 
sy Jane  Fish,  who  bore  him  five 
children,  and  in  1865  (May  27th)  he 
married  Mary  Jane  Robinson,  who 
became  the  mother  of  eleven  chil- 
dren, nine  boys  and  two  girls.     Bro. 


West  died  in  Salt  Lake  City  Sept.  28, 
1917. 

WHITWORTH,  Michael  WheaOey, 

first  Bishop  of  Kelley  Ward  (Ban- 
nock Stake),  Bannock  county,  Idaho, 
was  born  Oct.  27,  1872,  at  Calls 
Fort,  Box  Elder  county,  Utah,  the 
son  of  Geo.  Whitworth  and  Mary 
Wheatley.  He  was  baptized  when 
eight  years  old  by  Bishop  Thos.  Har- 
per; ordained  an  Elder  in  September, 
1896,  by  Rudger  Clawson,  and  or- 
dained a  High  Priest  July  15,  1915, 
by  Jos.  F.  Smith  Jr.,  and  set  apart 
to  preside  over  the  Kelly  Ward. 
Bro.  Whitworth  settled  in  that  part 
of  the  country  which  is  now  included 


in  the  Kelly  Ward  in  18  95  and  be- 
came a  successful  farmer  and  stock- 
raiser.  In  1896  (Oct.  27th)  he  mar- 
ried Lucy  Emily  Kelly  (daughter  of 
Chas.  Kelly  and  Emma  Price),  who 
was  born  Nov.  19,  1874,  at  Brigham 
City,  Box  Elder  county,  Utah.  This 
marriage  has  been  blessed  with  eight 
children,  namely,  Emma  E.,  Mary  L., 
Edith  F.,  Emily  I.,  Elsie  L.,  Chas. 
M.,  Herbert  K.  and  Martha  Lois. 

WILLIAMS,     Ebenezer    Albert,     a 

Patriarch  in  the  North  Davis  Stake 
of  Zion,  Davis  county,  Utah,  was  born 
August    5,    1830,    at    Curleen,    Mon- 


BIOGRAPHICAL  ENCYCLOPEDIA. 


281 


mouthshire,  Wales,  the  son  of  Thom- 
as Williams  and  Elizabetl*  Edwards. 
He  was  baptized  in  December,  1849, 
by  Sidney  Bailey.  Shortly  after  his 
baptism  he  was  ordained  a  Priest 
and  sent  out  as  a  local  missionary 


In  1850  he  was  ordained  an  Elder 
and  appointed  to  preside  over  the 
Cowbridge  branch,  filling  that  posi- 
tion for  about  one  and  a  half  years. 
As  a  boy  he  worked  as  a  gardener 
and  farmer,  and  emigrated  to  Utah 
in  1853,  crossing  the  Atlantic  ir  the 
ship  "Jersey"  and  the  plains  in 
Claudius  V.  Spencer's  company.  On 
this  journey,  after  arriving  at  Keo- 
kuk, Iowa,  he  married  Esther  Bow- 
ring  Harris  (daughter  of  Isaac  Bow- 
ring  and  Hannah  Riden)  who  was 
born  in  1820  and  died  in  1855.  On 
Jan,  Id,  185  6,  he  married  Ada  Evans, 
who  has  been  a  good  companion  to 
him  ever  since.  He  settled  on  the 
Mountain  road,  east  of  Kaysville, 
Davis  county,  in  185  3,  but  after  his 
marriage  to  Ada  Evans,  he  bought 
a  lot  and  built  a  house  on  the  town- 
site  of  Kaysville,  a  block  and  a  half 
north  of  the  present  meeting  house, 
where  he  lived  till  the  "move"  in 
1858,  after  which  the  house  was  used 
as  a  school  house,  and  finally  Bro. 
Williams  donated  the  house  and  lot 
to  the  Ward  and  it  became  the  first 


meeting  house  of  Kaysville.  He  took 
part  in  the  Echo  canyon  war  in  1857 
and  settled  temporarily  at  Provo, 
Utah  county,  in  1858,  at  the  time  of 
the  "move."  After  his  return  to 
Kaysville  he  again  located  on  the 
farm  in  the  east  part  of  that  settle- 
ment, but  later  bought  a  house  and 
lot  in  the  old  fort  which  Brother 
Williams  had  helped  to  build.  In 
18  63  Brother  Williams  went  back  to 
the  Missouri  river  after  goods.  Hav- 
ing previously  been  ordained  a  Sev- 
enty, he  was  ordained  a  High  Priest 
and  set  apart  as  a  High  Councilor  of 
the  Davis  Stake  on  Dec.  11,  1881, 
which  position  he  held  till  Sept.  26, 
1904,  at  which  time  he  was  ordained 
a  Patriarch.  For  about  twenty  years 
he  served  as  a  member  of  the  city 
council  of  Kaysville  without  compen- 
sation. Patriarch  Williams  died  Feb. 
18,  1917. 

WILLIAMS,  Ada  Evans,  wife  of 
Ebenezer  A.  Williams,  was  born  May 
1,  1838,  at  Witchurch,  Glamorgan- 
shire,   Wales,    the   daughter   of   Wil- 


liam Evans  and  Elizabeth  Bowering. 
She  was  baptized  in  December,  1849, 
by  Sidney  Bailey,  and  emigrated  to 
Utah  in  1853,  in  the  same  company 
as  Elder  Williams,  whose  wife  she 
became  on  Jan.   19,  1856.     She  bore 


282 


LATTER-DAY   SAiNT 


her  husband  ten  children,  five  boys 
and  five  girls,  and  has  always  been 
a  faithful  Relief  Society  worker.  She 
was  made  a  teacher  in  the  Kaysville 
Relief  Society  when  that  was  first 
organized    in     1871     and    later    she 


served  as  a  counselor  in  said  Society 
for  about  fifteen  years.  She  was  the 
first  president  of  the  Y.  L.  M.  I.  A. 
of  Kaysville,  and  for  a  few  years 
acted  also  as  president  of  the  Suf- 
frage Association  of  Kaysville.  She 
has  been  president  of  the  Columbian 
Club  and  vice  president  of  the  Suf- 
frage Associations  in  Davis  county. 
In  1893  she  took  a  Sunday  school 
course  in  the  B.  Y.  University  at 
Prove,  and  for  many  years  was  a 
very  active  worker  in  the  Sunday 
schools  of  the  Kaysville  Ward. 

WILSON,    George    Deliverance,    a 

Mormon  Battalion  veteran,  was  born 
Dec.  28,  1807,  at  Shelburn,  Chitten- 
don,  Vermont,  the  son  of  Deliver- 
ance Wilson  and  Levina  Fairchild. 
On  account  of  ill  health  he  com- 
menced to  travel  when  a  young  man, 
and  hearing  of  the  restored  gospel, 
he  came  to  Kirtland,  Ohio,  to  investi- 
gate. The  Prophet  Joseph  Smith, 
during  an  interview,  gave  him  a 
Book  of  Mormon.  He  asked  how  he 
could   find   out   if   it   were   true   and 


was  answered,  "Read  it,  and  if  you 
are  not  satisfied  with  it,  read  it 
again."  The  reading  resulted  in  his 
conversion  to  "Mormonism."  Being 
a  mechanic,  he  spent  the  winter  of 
18  37-38  at  Kirtland,  working  in  the 
shop,  repairing  wagons  for  the  breth- 
ren who  were  moving  from  Ohio  to 
Missouri.  He  followed  the  Church 
to  Missouri  and  Illinois.  In  1842  he 
married  Mary  Ellen  Johnson,  who 
became  the  mother  of  two  sons  and 
died  in  1845.  During  the  exodus 
from  Nauvoo  and  the  journey  of  the 
Saints  westward,  Bro.  Wilson  enlisted 
in  the  Mormon  Battalion,  but  on  ac- 
count of  sickness  in  the  company  was 
sent  back  with  Wm.  W.  Willis's  com- 
pany to  winter  at  Pueblo.  He  arrived 
in  Salt  Lake  Valley  in  July,  1847; 
later  he  located  at  Santaquin,  Utah 
county,  Utah,  where  he  married 
Martha  Ann  Risto  in  1856.  After- 
wards he  moved  to  Sanpete  county, 
still  later  to  Sevier  county,  and  after- 
wards he  located  in  Millard  county. 
In  all  of  these  places  he  built  saw 
mills.  He  also  passed  through  the 
troubles  connected  with  the  Black 
Hawk  Indian  war.  In  1867  he  went 
to  the  Muddy  as  a  colonization  mis- 
sionary, and  after  his  release  from 
there,  settled  at  Panguitch.  He 
built  a  saw  mill  at  Hillsdale,  where 
he  resided  until  his  death,  which 
occurred  October  18,  1887.  Bro. 
Wilson  was  ordained  a  High  Priest 
June  23,  1887,  by  Mahonri  M.  Steele, 
having  previously  held  the  office  of 
a  Seventy.  He  was  the  father  of 
thirteen  children.  His  children  by 
his  first  wife  were  David  Johnson 
and  George  Jacob.  Those  by  his  sec- 
ond wife  were  Mary  Johnson,  George 
Hyrum,  Martha  Ann,  James  William, 
Joseph  Deliverance,  Jesse  Stephen, 
Levina  Emeline,  David  Israel,  John 
Thomas,  Sarah  Ann  and  Almera. 

WILSOX,  Orson  Moroni,  a  Patri- 
arch and  member  of  the  High  Coun- 
cil of  the  Hyrum  Stake,  Cache  coun- 
ty, Utah,  was  born  Oct.  1,  1858,  in 
Ogden,  Weber  county,  Utah,  the  son 


BIOGRAPHICAL   ENCYCLOPEDIA. 


283 


of  John  Gill  Wilson  and  Lucy  Ben- 
son. He  is  the  great  grandson  of 
Bradley  Wilson,  who  with  his  entire 
family,  consisting  of  seven  sons  and 
their  families,  became  converts  to 
"Mormonism"  in  the  State  of  Ohio  in 


October,  1837.  Orson  M.  was  bap- 
tized in  June,  18  67,  by  his  father 
John  G.  Wilson,  and  was  soon  after- 
wards ordained  an  Elder.  He  was 
ordained  a  Seventy  Nov.  17,  1885, 
by  Anders  P.  Rose,  ordained  a  High 
Priest  and  set  apart  as  a  High  Coun- 
cilor in  the  Hyrum  Stake  by  Joseph 
Morrell  August  26,  1901,  and  or- 
dained a  Patriarch  Oct.  19,  1913,  by 
Francis  M.  Lyman.  He  filled  a  mis- 
sion to  the  Southern  States  in  1883- 
85.  His  main  avocation  has  been 
that  of  a  farmer,  and  he  has  filled 
many  positions  of  honor  and  respon- 
sibility in  his  home  town.  Thus  he 
served  as  mayor  of  Hyrum  City  two 
terms,  as  city  councilor  two  terms,  as 
city  recorder  two  terms,  as  school 
trustee  one  term  and  as  an  officer 
of  the  Hyrum  Irrigating  Company 
fifteen  years.  In  18  85  (Nov.  25th) 
he  married  Mary  Elizabeth  Jensen, 
and  while  this  marriage  never  was 
blessed  with  children,  Bro.  Wilson 
and  wife  have  raised  a  family  of  five 
children,  three  boys  and  two  girls, 
all  nephews  and  nieces.     These  chil- 


dren have  four  different  mothers,  all 
of  whom  are  dead.  Elder  Wilson  is 
universally  known  as  a  diligent 
worker  in  the  Church  and  a  faithful 
Latter-day  Saint. 

WINEGAR,  WiUiam  Wesley,  Bish- 
op of  the  West  Bountiful  Ward,  Davis 
county,  Utah;  was  born  March  5, 
1864,  at  Salt  Lake  City,  Utah,  the 
son  of  Samuel  Thomas  Winegar  and 
Rachel  Jane  Kilfoyle.  He  was  bap- 
tized August  22,  1877,  by  Bishop 
Wm.  Brown;  ordained  an  Elder  w^hen 
about  twenty  years  old;  ordained  a 
Seventy  Jan.  12,  1890,  by  Seymour 
B.  Young;  ordained  a  High  Priest 
and  set  apart  as  first  counselor  to 
Bishop  Daniel  Muir  of  West  Bounti- 
ful, Dec.  9,  1902,  by  Apostle  John 
W.  Taylor;  was  set  apart  as  an  al- 
ternate High  Councilor  March  20, 
1910,  and  set  apart  as  a  regular 
member  of  the  High  Council  Dec.  27, 
1913.  He  was  ordained  a  Bishop  by 
Francis  M.  Lyman  Feb.  7,  1915, 
and  set  apart  ot  preside  over  the 
West  Bountiful  Ward.  In  1895-9  9 
he    filled    a    mission    to    Samoa.      At 


home  he  has  been  mostly  occupied  at 
market  gardening  and  farming  dur- 
ing the  greatest  part  of  his  life.  In 
1855  (Nov.  18th)  he  married  Myra 
Pace  (of  South  Bountiful)  who  bore 
him  ten  children,  five  boys  and  five 


284 


LATTER-DAY   SAINT 


girls.  She  died  Oct.  29,  1909.  In 
1912  (March  14th)  he  married  Eva 
Asenath  Hasler,  who  joined  the 
Church  in  England  in  1898  and  emi- 
grated to  Utah  in  190  6. 

WOODRUFF,  Asahel  Hart,  Bishop 
of  the  Waterloo  Ward  from  1905  to 


1916,  was  born  Feb.  3.  1863,  in  Salt 
Lake  City,  Utah,  the  son  of  Pres. 
Wilford  Woodruff  and  Emma  Smith. 
He  was  baptized  Feb.  3,  1871,  by 
his  father;  ordained  a  Priest  by  his 
father  when  about  eleven  years  old 
and  ordained  an  Elder  by  Robt.  R. 
Irvine  in  March,  1884.  He  was  or- 
dained a  Seventy  by  Geo.  C.  Lambert 
Nov.  3,  1887;  ordained  a  High  Priest 
by  Hyrum  M.  Smith  Jan.  29,  1905; 
served  as  superintendent  of  the 
Farmers  Ward  Sunday  school  nine 
years  and  as  president  of  Y.  M.  M.  I. 
A.  several  years.  When  the  Granite 
Stake  was  organized  in  1899,  he  was 
appointed  second  counselor  to  Geo. 
M.  Cannon  in  the  Stake  Sunday 
school  superintendency.  When  the 
Waterloo  Ward  was  organized  Jan. 
29,  1905,  he  was  ordained  a  Bishop 
and  set  apart  to  preside  over  the 
Ward,  which  position  he  held  until 
Dec.  17,  1916,  when  he  was  chosen 
as  an  alternate  High  Councilor  in  the 
Granite    Stake.       In    1884-86    Elder 


Woodruff  filled  a  successful  mission 
to  Great  Britain,  where  he  labored 
as  a  traveling  Elder  in  the  Manches- 
ter and  London  conferences.  Having 
been  called  to  preside  over  the  North- 
ern States  Mission,  with  headquar- 
ters at  Chicago,  he  left  home  to  fill 
said  mission  Jan.  18,  1902,  and  re- 
turned Sept.  15,  1904,  on  account 
of  serious  eye  trouble.  Elder  Wood- 
ruff worked  on  his  father's  farm 
until  he  was  sixteen  years  of  age,  and 
he  entered  the  employ  of  the  Z.  C. 
M.  I.  as  an  errand  boy  in  1878.  He 
worked  himself  up  until  he  became 
manager  and  buyer  of  the  wholesale 
dry  goods  department.  Bishop  Wood- 
ruff was  one  of  the  promoters  and 
directors  of  the  Pioneer  Electric 
Power  Company,  which  was  later  ab- 
sorbed into  the  Utah  Light  and  Rail- 
way Company.  At  present  he  is  a 
director  of  the  Zions  Savings  Bank 
and  the  Deseret  Building  Society.  He 
married  Naomi  A.  Butterworth  Dec. 
14,  1887,  which  marriage  has  been 
blessed  with  six  children,  namely, 
Roxie  Norma,  Beulah,  Asahel  H., 
Douglas  Owen,  Emma  Rose  and  Ken- 
neth Claude. 

WOOLLEY,  Henry,  a  veteran  Elder 
in  the  Kaysville  Ward,  Davis  county, 
Utah,  was  born  Oct.  29,  1820,  at 
Dunston.  Staffordshire,  England,  the 
son  of  William  and  Jane  Woolley. 
He  emigrated  to  America  in  1844, 
crossing  the  Atlantic  in  the  ship 
"Fanny,"  which  sailed  from  Liver- 
pool, England,  Jan.  23,  1844,  and 
arrived  at  New  Orleans  March  7, 
1844.  After  spending  a  few  months 
at  St.  Louis,  Mo.,  he  proceeded  up 
the  Mississippi  river  to  Nauvoo,  111., 
where  on  May  12,  1845,  he  married 
Mary  Stretten  Blood  (widow  of  Wil- 
liam Blood).  During  the  exodus,  Bro. 
Woolley  came  west,  and  while  en- 
camped on  the  east  side  of  the  Mis- 
souri river,  near  the  present  Council 
Bluffs,  preparing  to  emigrate  to  the 
Valley  in  the  spring  of  1848,  Pres. 
Brigham  Young  requested  him  to 
lend  his   teams  to  others  who  were 


BIOGRAPHICAL  ENCYCLOPEDIA. 


285 


anxious  to  emigrate  to  the  Valley 
that  year  and  that  he  himself  might 
remain  in  the  States  a  Ititle  longer. 
Complying  with  the  President's  wish, 
Bro.  Woolley  spent  another  winter  in 
the  East  and  finally  emigrated  to  the 
Valley  in  1849,  crossing  the  plains 
in  Allan  Taylor's  company,  which  ar- 
rived in  Salt  Lake  City  Oct.  13,  1849. 
After  residing  in  Mill  Creek  until  the 
fall  of  1850,  he  moved  his  family  to 
Holmes'  creek  (now  in  Kaysville), 
being  one  of  the  first  settlers  in  that 
neighborhood.  He  took  up  a  farm, 
upon    which     he     immediately    com- 


menced to  make  improvements  and 
soon  became  known  as  a  successful 
farmer.  In  1856  he  participated  in 
the  expeditions  that  went  East  to 
rescue  the  hand-cart  emigrants.  In 
1857  he  participated  in  the  Echo 
canyon  campaign  against  Johnston's 
army.  In  the  spring  of  1858  he  was 
sent  to  Salmon  river  (now  in  Idaho) 
to  assist  the  Saints  who  had  settled 
there  (but  had  been  ^ta'^"  d  by 
Indians)  to  return  to  Utah.  Later, 
during  the  same  year,  he  participated 
in  the  general  move  south,  going  as 
far  as  Provo,  Utah  county.  After  his 
return  he  remained  a  permanent  set- 
tler at  Kaysville  until  Oct.  10,  1898, 
when  he  died,  leaving  three  children 
and  many  grandchildren. 


WOOLLEY,  Mary  Stretten  Blood, 

wife  of  Henry  Woolley,  was  born 
July  25,  1811,  at  Yoxall,  Stafford- 
shire, England,  the  daughter  of 
Thomas  Stretten  and  Elizabeth  Stret- 
ten. In  1836  she  was  married  to 
William  Blood  and  became  a  convert 
to  "Mormonism."  Together  with  her 
husband  she  was  baptized  in  1842 
and  emigrated  to  America  in  1844, 
locating  at  Nauvoo,  111.,  where  she 
suffered  the  loss  of  her  husband 
three  weeks  after  their  arrival.  In 
1845  (May  12th)  she  was  married 
to  Henry  Woolley,  who  proved  a  good 


husband  and  a  kind  father  to  her 
children.  The  family  emigrated  to 
Utah  in  1849  and  settled  on  Holmes' 
creek  (now  in  Kaysville),  Davis 
county,  in  18  50,  where  she  reared 
her  family  in  the  fear  of  the  Lord 
and  was  a  zealous  and  energetic  Lat- 
ter-day Saint,  gaining  the  love  and 
respect  of  all  her  associates  in  life. 
She  died  March  3,  1891,  at  Kaysville. 

WOOLLEY,    John    Wickersham,  a 

Patriarch  in  the  South  Davis  Stake 
and  a  resident  of  Centerville,  Davis 
county,  Utah,  was  born  Dec.  30,  1831, 
at  New  Lynn  township,  Chester  coun- 
ty, Pennsylvania,  the  son  of  Edwin 
D.  Woolley  and  Mary  Wickersham. 
He  came  to  the  Valley  in  September, 


286 


LATTER-DAY   SAINT 


1848,  after  crossing  the  plains  in 
Pres.  Brigham  Young's  company,  and 
after  residing  in  the  Ninth  and  sub- 
sequently the  Thirteenth  Ward,  Salt 
Lake  City,  he  settled  at  Centerville, 
Davis    county,    Utah,    in    1864.      He 


was  ordained  a  Priest  by  Bishop  Ed- 
ward Hunter;  subsequently  he  was 
ordained  an  Elder  and  later  ordained 
a  High  Priest  by  Pres.  Brigham 
Young  and  set  apart  as  second  coun- 
selor to  Bishop  Edwin  D.  Woolley. 
Soon  after  this  he  was  set  apart  as 
one  of  the  High  Councilors  in  the 
Davis  Stake,  and  finally  ordained  a 
Patriarch  June  28,  1913.  Besides 
being  active  as  a  Churchman,  Bro. 
Woolley  has  held  many  positions  of 
a  civil  nature  in  the  community;  thus 
he  acted  as  constable  of  Salt  Lake 
county  and  as  justice  of  the  peace  at 
Centerville  precinct  sixteen  years; 
acted  as  deputy  sheriff  of  Salt  Lake 
county,  deputy  territorial  marshal, 
county  commissioner  and  lieutenant, 
captain,  sergeant  and  major  in  the 
Nauvoo  Legion;  participated  in  the 
Black  Hawk  war,  and  was  one  of  the 
first  ten  which  crossed  the  Little 
Mountain  to  meet  Johnston's  army 
in  1857.  He  was  also  among  the 
first  to  meet  the  hand-cart  com- 
panies in  185  6.  He  made  one  trip 
as  far  as  Ice  Springs  on  the  Sweet- 


water to  help  the  emigrants  and  two 
other  shorter  trips.  In  1860  he  went 
back  as  an  assistant  in  Capt.  Joseph 
W.  Young's  Church  company.  In 
1863  he  was  captain  of  a  Church 
train  bringing  emigrants  across  the 
plains.  Bro.  Woolley  married  three 
wives,  namely,  Julia  Sirls  Ensign, 
March  20,  1851  (who  became  the 
mother  of  six  children),  Ann  Evering- 
ton,  Oct.  4,  1886,  and  Annie  Fisher, 
March  2  3,  1910.  The  names  of  his 
children  are  John  E.,  Franklin  L., 
Lorin  C,  Julia  A.,  Mary  E.,  and  Amy  I. 

WOOLLEY,  John  Ensign,  first 
counselor  to  Bishop  Melvin  Randall 
of  Centerville,  Davis  county,  Utah, 
was  born  Jan.  1,  1852,  in  Salt  Lake 
City,  Utah,  the  son  of  John  W.  Wool- 
ley  and  Julia  Ensign.  He  was  bap- 
tized Oct.  18,  1860,  by  John  W. 
Woolley;  was  ordained  an  Elder  at 
an  early  day  and  filled  a  mission  to 
the  Southern  States  in  1882-84.  He 
was  set  apart  Oct.  17,  1882,  by  John 
Henry  Smith;  labored  in  Virginia  and 
West    Virginia    and    returned    home 


Oct.  31,  1884.  At  home  he  acted  as 
president  of  the  Elders  in  Center- 
ville and  later  was  senior  president 
of  a  quorum  of  Seventy.  He  was  also 
called  on  a  mission  to  Colorado, 
where    he    labored    under   the   direc- 


BIOGRAPHICAL   ENCYCLOPEDIA. 


287 


tion  of  Apostle  John  W.  Taylor  for 
two  years.  While  at  Pueblo,  Colo., 
he  was  ordained  a  High  Priest  by 
John  W.  Taylor  and  appointed  to 
preside  over  the  branch  at  that  place. 
Subsequently  he  was  called  to  act  as 
a  counselor  to  Apostle  Taylor  in  the 
presidency  of  the  Colorado  mission. 
His  wife  Mary  was  also  called  on  a 
mission  to  Colorado  and  remained 
there  six  months,  assisting  her  hus- 
band. They  were  both  released  to 
come  home  Sept.  20,  1909.  Soon 
after  his  return  Bro.  Woolley's  health 
began  to  fail  and  he  died  August  8, 
1912,  at  Centerville.  Elder  Woolley 
was  always  diligent  and  faithful  as 
an  ecclesiastical  worker,  and  often 
took  a  leading  part  in  secular  affairs. 

WRIGHT,  Jonathan  Calkins,  a  prom- 
inent Elder  in  the  Church,  was  born 
Nov.  29,  1808,  at  Rome,  Oneida 
county,  New  York,  the  son  of  Peter 
Bice  Wright  and  Elizabeth  Shrad. 
When  six  years  old  he  removed  with 
his  parents  to  Dearborn  county,  Indi- 
ana. His  father  died  when  the  lad 
was  only  fourteen  years  of  age,  after 
which  he  moved  to  Illinois.  While 
working  hard  for  a  livelihood  he  also 
struggled  to  obtain  an  education  and 
succeeded  in  getting  something  bet- 
ter than  a  common  school  education. 
In  1838  (March  1st)  he  married  Miss 
Rebecca  Wheeler  and  settled  at  Exe- 
ter, Scott  county.  111.,  where  he 
gained  much  respect  and  influence 
on  account  of  his  intelligence  and 
ability  and  by  leading  an  upright  life. 
He  was  entrusted  with  the  office  of 
county  commissioner  and  other  posi- 
tions. Being  a  devoted  member  of 
the  Methodist  persuation,  he  was 
solicited  by  many  of  its  members  to 
enter  the  ministry,  but  he  felt  un- 
settled and  troubled  in  his  mind  in 
relation  to  which  one  among  the 
numerous  conflicting  sects  had  the 
true  gospel  of  Christ.  After  seeking 
the  Lord  in  fervent  prayer,  he  went 
to  Nauvoo,  111.,  where  he  met  the 
Prophet  Joseph  Smith  and  became 
firmly  convinced  that  he  was  an  in- 


spired man  of  God.  He  obtained 
some  of  the  Church  works  at  the 
office  of  the  "Nauvoo  Neighbor," 
where  he  also  met  Elders  John  Tay- 
lor, Wilford  Woodruff,  Elias  Smith 
and  others.  While  he  felt  it  was  his 
duty  to  embrace  the  gospel,  he  started 
for  home  without  being  baptized  and 
was  struck  down  with  a  severe  sick- 
ness, as  if  death  were  upon  him. 
This  happened  after  he  left  Nauvoo, 
when  he  decided  to  turn  back.  He 
soon  found  himself  back  in  the  house 
of  Hyrum  Smith,  being  fully  con- 
vinced that  in  "the  waters  of  Jordan" 
there  was  healing  to  be  found  for 
body  and  soul.  He  proceeded  to  the 
banks  of  the  Mississippi  river  and 
was  baptized  and  confirmed  by  Hy- 
rum Smith.  After  being  ordained  an 
Elder  May  29,  1843,  he  returned  to 
his  home  in  Exeter  a  happy  man,  but 
he  soon  bade  farewell  to  that  place 
to  dwell  among  his  brethren  at  Nau- 
voo, where  he  lived  and  shared  with 
the  Saints  in  their  joys,  sorrows  and 
persecutions  until  the  exodus  in  1846. 
After  the  death  of  Bro.  John  P. 
Greene  he  acted  as  marshal  of  Nau- 
voo and  was  a  member  of  the  city 
council  at  the  time  that  the  Illinois 
legislature  annulled  the  charter  of 
the  city  of  Nauvoo.  As  an  officer  at 
Nauvoo  and  Winter  Quarters  he  was 
vigilant,  enduring,  brave  and  fear- 
less, and  wielded  a  strong  arm  in  de- 
fense of  his  people  against  mobs  and 
tyrants.  He  was  sent  from  Winter 
Quarters  back  to  Nauvoo  and  other 
places  to  encourage  the  remaining 
Saints  to  follow  in  the  wake  of  the 
main  body  of  the  Church  to  a  safe 
asylum  in  the  Rocky  Mountains.  He 
came  to  Utah  in  1850  to  continue  a 
long  and  useful  career,  mostly  in  Box 
Elder  county,  where  he  located  in 
1854,  and  officiated  as  a  counselor 
to  Apostle  Lorenzo  Snow  in  the  presi- 
dency of  the  Stake  as  well  as  presi- 
dent of  the  High  Council  of  the 
Stake.  From  the  first  organization 
of  Box  Elder  county  he  held  posi- 
tions as  judge  of  probate,  clerk,  at- 
torney,    superintendent     of    schools. 


288 


LATTER-DAY   SAINT 


county  recorder,  and  was  also  an 
active  member  of  the  Utah  legisla- 
ture twenty-two  sessions.  He  was  a 
wise  counselor  and  a  warm  and  firm 
friend  to  the  weak  and  lowly  and  a 
lover  of  righteousness  and  truth.  He 
died  at  Brigham  City,  Nov.  8,  1880, 
of  inflammation  of  the  lungs  and 
general  debility.  His  last  days  were 
full  of  suffering  and  affliction.  Bro. 
Wright  left  a  large  family  and  a  host 
of  friends  to  mourn  his  loss.  During 
his  life  Brg.  Wright  married  at  dif- 
ferent times  seven  wives  (one  of 
them,  Sister  North,  being  sealed  to 
him), by  whom  he  became  the  father  of 
34  children,  24  sons  and  10  daughters. 

ZUNDEL,  Abraham,  Bishop  of  Wil- 
lard  Ward,  Box  Elder  county,  Utah, 
was  born  Jan.  25,  1836,  at  Phillips- 
burg,  Pennsylvania,  the  son  of  Jacob 
Zundel  and  Sarah  Forstner.  He  came 
to  Utah  with  his  parents  in  October, 
1852,  filled  a  mission  to  Salmon 
river   (now  in  Idaho),  in  18  55,  acted 


as  counselor  to  Bishop  Geo.  Ward 
and  Geo.  Facer  of  Willard  for  twenty 
years,  after  which  he  presided  over 
said  Ward  as  Bishop  for  four  years. 
He  also  acted  as  first  counselor  to 
Pres.  Oliver  C.  Hoskins  of  the  Malad 
Stake  for  four  years,  having  located 
temporarily   at   Washakie.      He    also 


acted  as  an  Indian  missionary  eight 
years,  served  as  senator  from  Box 
Elder  and  Tooele  counties  in  the  first 
Utah  legislature,  acted  as  mayor  of 
Willard  City  two  years,  acted  as  jus- 
tice of  the  peace  three  terms,  and 
filled  many  other  important  positions 
of  honor  and  responsibility.  During 
the  years  1855-57  he  carried  mail 
between  Salmon  river  and  Salt  Lake 
City.  From  1860  to  about  1866  he 
served  as  postmaster  at  Willard.  In 
1857  (Feb.  13th)  he  married  Abigail 
Abbott  (daughter  of  Stephen  Abbott 
and  Abigail  Smith),  who  was  born 
Feb.  3,  1842,  at  Perry,  Pike  county, 
111.,  and  bore  her  husband  ten  chil- 
dren, namely,  Abigail  Lucina,  born 
Jan.  d,  1859;  Cynthia  Matilda,  born 
Jan.  1,  18  61;  Abraham  Eberhart, 
born  March  20,  18  64;  Sarah  Emily, 
born  Feb.  21,  1867;  Maria  Estelle, 
born  Nov.  8,  1869;  Limhi  Forstner, 
born  Sept.  24,  1872  Jacob  Abbott, 
born  March  3,  187  5;  Stephen  Louis, 
born  Oct.  3,  1877;  Joseph  M.,  born 
Dec.  23,  1881,  and  John  Henry  born 
Jan.  8,  1885.  In  1884'' (Sept.  3rd) 
Bishop  Zundel  married  Mary  Elenor 
Ingram  (daughter  of  James  Ingram 
and  Charlotte  Holland)  who  was 
born  Jan.  31,  1866,  at  Three  Mile 
Creek  (now  Perry),  Box  Elder  coun- 
ty, Utah.  The  children  by  this  mar- 
riage were  the  following:  George 
Lorenzo,  born  Dec.  23,  1885;  Fan- 
nie Louise,  born  March  10,  1890; 
Ruth,  born  April  16,  1893;  Mary 
Elenor,  born  Dec.  21,  1894;  Asenath, 
born  Jan.  21,  1897;  Oliver,  born  Feb. 
21,  1899,  and  Theodore  Roosevelt, 
born  March  31,  1901.  Bishop  Zun- 
del died  at  Willard,  March  20,  1917. 
From  the  beginning  he  was  very 
active  in  public  affairs  in  Willard 
and  other  places,  and  in  his  younger 
days  he  took  prominent  parts  in  dra- 
matic activities  for  the  amusement  of 
the  people.  As  one  of  the  coloniza- 
tion missionaries  sent  to  the  Salmon 
river  country  in  1855,  he  and  a  Bro. 
Parry  turned  the  first  water  for  irri- 
gation purposes  in  what  is  now  the 
State  of  Idaho. 


BIOGRAPHICAL   ENCYCLOPEDIA. 


289 


ABBOTT,  William  EUas,  Bishop  of 
the  Mesquite  Ward  (Moapa  Stake), 
Clark  county,  Nevada,  was  born  Oct. 
16,  1869,  at  Ogden,  Utah,  the  son  of 


Myron  Abbott  and  Laura  J.  Allen. 
He  was  baptized  Feb.  15,  1878,  at 
Bunkerville,  Nevada,  by  Geo.  W. 
Lee;  ordained  an  Elder  in  March, 
1890;  acted  as  assistant  superin- 
tendent of  the  Sunday  school  at 
Bunkerville,  filled  a  mission  to  the 
Northern  States,  after  being  ordained 
a  Seventy  by  J.  Golden  Kimball  Sept. 
21,  1896,  and  labored  in  the  Stake 
of  Illinois  until  September,  1898 
In  1901  (Nov,  22nd)  he  was  or- 
dained a  High  Priest  and  Bishop  by 
Apostle  Abraham  O.  Woodruff  and 
set  apart  to  preside  over  the  Mes- 
quite Ward,  which  position  he  still 
holds.  Bro.  Abbott  is  a  diligent 
Church  worker  and  has  filled  many 
positions  of  honor  and  trust  within 
the  gifts  of  his   fellow-citizens. 

ADAMS,  Hugh  Loech,  second  coun- 
selor to  President  Wilford  Day  of 
the  Parowan  Stake,  Iron  county, 
Utah,  was  born  May  23,  1882,  at 
Parowan,  Utah,  the  son  of  Hugh 
Leech  Adams  and  Juliette  Cecelia 
Bayles.  He  was  baptized  Nov.  5, 
1891,    by    David    Matheson    jun.    and 


commenced  his  Church  activities 
very  young.  He  was  ordained  a 
Seventy  March  17,  1907,  by  William 
H.  Lyman,  and  married  Barbara 
Ellen  Matheson  June  7,  1907.  She 
is  the  daughter  of  David  Matheson 
and  Sarah  Gray  Robertson,  and  was 
born  May  22,  1883,  at  Parowan.  The 
following  children  have  been  born 
to  them:  Henry  Matheson,  Lilian, 
Hugh  LeRoy,  Norman  Matheson 
and  Barbara.  Bro.  Adams  took  an 
active  part  in  the  Ward  Y.  M.  M.  I.  A. 
as  a  counselor  for  several  years,  and 
in  1908-1911  he  filled  a  successful 
mission  to  the  Northern  States.  Some 
time  after  his  return  he  was  chosen 
as  one  of  the  presidents  of  the 
69th  quorum  of  Seventy  and  held 
that  position  until  Sept.  24,  1916, 
when  he  was  ordained  a  High 
Priest  by  Anthony  W.  Ivins  and  set 
apart  as  second  counselor  to  Wil- 
ford Day  in  the  Parowan  Stake  presi- 
dency. He  was  appointed  secretary 
and  treasurer  of  a  committee  of 
three  Dec.  27,  1915,  to  build  a 
new     meeting     house     at     Parowan, 


which  house,  a  most  beautiful  struc- 
ture, was  finished  in  two  years  at 
a  cost  of  about  $38,000.  At  the 
present  time  Brother  Adams  is  serv- 


voi.  in.  No.  lit. 


.July.  l!»in. 


290 


LATTER-DAY   SAINT 


ing  a  four  years'  term  as  a  com- 
missioner of  Iron  county.  He  is  also 
secretary  of  the  Parowan  Reclama- 
tion Company,  which  is  driving  a 
tunnel  through  1600  feet  of  solid 
rock,  for  the  purpose  of  bringing 
water  into  the  valley,  sufficient  to 
irrigate  800  acres  of  fertile  land. 
He  is  also  secretary  of  the  Iron 
County  Irrigation  Company  which 
contemplates  draining  Little  Salt 
Lake  and  building  a  reservoir  in  the 
canyon  below  for  the  purpose  of 
irrigating  a  tract  of  country  near 
Rush  lake.  Otherwise  Brother  Adams 
is  a  farmer  and  stock  raiser  by 
avocation. 

ALLPHIN,  Reuben  Lester,  Bishop 
of  the  Imbler  Ward  (Union  Stake), 
Union     county,     Oregon,     was     born 


Dec.  5,  1887,  at  Panguitch,  Gar- 
field county,  Utah,  the  son  of  Israel 
Dodd  Allphin  and  Christina  Riding. 
He  was  baptized  May  24,  1896,  by 
Elder  Allen  Miller.  In  the  spring 
and  summer  of  1902  he  moved  to 
Lovell,  Wyoming,  where  he  helped 
to  found  a  settlement  of  Latter-day 
Saints  in  the  Big  Horn  country.  He 
was  ordained  a  Teacher  Oct.  11, 
1903,  by  Cornelius  Workman  and  or- 
dained an  Elder  by  Cyrus  S.  Robert- 


son Jan.  17,  190^.  In  1910-1911  he 
filled  a  mission  to  the  Eastern 
States,  laboring  in  Northwest  Vir- 
ginia and  Eastern  Pennsylvania  for 
twenty-four  months  ,and  baptized  six 
persons.  Prior  to  filling  this  mission 
(Aug.  15,  1906)  he  married  Ella  El- 
vina  Asay  and  received  his  endow- 
ments in  the  Salt  Lake  Temple  June 
30,  1910.  This  marriage  has  been 
blessed  with  four  children,  namely, 
Joseph  A.,  Velda,  Alva  Dodd,  and 
Anna  Laura.  The  oldest  child  died 
when  four  months  old;  the  other 
three  are  still  alive.  Together  with 
his  family  Elder  Allphin  moved  from 
Wyoming  to  Oregon  in  1914  and 
settled  at  Imbler,  Union  county.  He 
was  ordained  a  High  Priest  and 
Bishop  Sept.  6,  1914,  by  Apostle 
Geo.  F.  Richards.  Bishop  Allphin 
writes:  "I  love  the  work  of  the 
Lord  and  the  people  of  God,  and 
my  chief  desire  is  that  God's  people 
may  be  diligent  in  performing  their 
duties  and  that  many  of  the  children 
of  men  through  the  precepts  and  ex- 
amples of  the  Latter-day  Saints  may 
be  brought  to  a  knowledge  of  the 
truth." 

A\I)KHS<).\,  Aiidois  Poter,  presi- 
dent of  the  Swedish  Mission  from 
1916  to  1919,  was  born  April  12, 
1857,  at  Risinge,  Ostergbtland  l§.n, 
Sweden,  the  son  of  Anders  Jonsson 
and  Karolina  Samuelson.  His  father 
had  three  children  besides  Anders 
Peter,  namely,  Carl  August,  Johan 
Ludvig  and  Matilda  Charlotta.  Bro. 
Anderson  attended  school  from  the 
time  he  was  six  until  he  was  ten 
years  of  age,  after  which  he  hired 
out  to  earn  his  own  living,  his  par- 
ents being  poor.  His  father  and 
mother  both  died  in  December,  1869, 
when  he  was  twelve  years  of  age, 
and  he  was  employed  for  five  and 
a  half  years  at  a  woolen  factory  in 
Wistinge,  Ostergbtland  l§.n,  Sweden. 
When  only  fourteen  years  of  age,  he 
first  heard  "Mormonism"  preached; 
he  became  a  convert  almost  immedi- 


BIOGRAPHICAL   ENCYCLOPEDIA. 


:9i 


ately  and  was  baptized  Jan.  20,  1878 
by  Elder  Carl  A.  Ek  In  Stockholm. 
As  soon  as  it  became  known  that 
he  had  become  a  "Mormon"  he  was 
driven  out  from  the  family  with 
whom  he  had  lived,  though  up  to 
that  time  he  had  been  treated  like 
a  son.  Soon  after  his  baptism  he 
became  an  active  church  worker  and 
was  ordained  a  Teacher  February 
18,  1878,  by  Elder  Carl  A.  Ek  and 
soon  afterwards  was  called  to  labor 
as  a  local  missionary.  He  was  or- 
dained an  Elder  May  22,  1878,  by 
Carl  A.  Ek,  and  after  laboring  as  a 
missionary    for    six    months    in    the 


Stockholm  branch,  he  was  sent  to 
the  Upsala  branch  in  the  fall  of 
1878.  At  this  place  "Mormonism"' 
at  that  time  made  great  progress,  in 
consequence  of  which  the  Elders  suf- 
fered much  persecution  and  Bro.  An- 
derson, together  with  his  brethren, 
were  frequently  called  before  the  Lu- 
theran Church  councils  and  forbid- 
den to  preach.  In  the  fall  of  1879 
Bro.  Anderson  was  sent  to  the  Sunds- 
vall  branch  to  preside,  which  branch 
at  that  time  embraced  all  of  Norrland. 
In  18  80  he  was  called  to  preside  in 
the  0rebro  branch,  where  he  was 
summoned   before  the   Church   coun- 


cil five  times  and  at  last  was  sen- 
tenced to  fourteen  days'  imprison- 
ment on  bread  and  water  for  preach- 
ing, but  he  was  moved  secretly  to 
another  field  of  labor  and  so  es- 
caped the  intended  punishment.  His 
next  missionary  field  was  the  Eskils- 
tuna  branch,  and  later  he  worked 
in  the  conference  office  in  Stock- 
holm. During  this  mission  he  bap- 
tized eighty-five  persons.  In  com- 
pany with  2  70  other  emigrants  he 
emigrated  to  America  in  August, 
1881,  crossing  the  Atlantic  in  the 
ship  "Wyoming."  During  the  win- 
ter of  1881-1882  he  worked  on  the 
railroad  which  was  then  being  built 
between  Lehi  and  Tintic.  Later  he 
worked  on  the  Denver  and  Rio 
Grande  Railway,  and  in  1883  he 
commenced  business  as  a  merchant 
in  Salt  Lake  City,  continuing  in  that 
occupation  for  twenty-five  years. 
In  May,  1889,  he  left  home  on  a 
mission  to  Scandinavia.  On  the  jour- 
ney out  he  visited  Independence, 
Far  West  and  Adam-ondi-Ahman 
in  Missouri  and  Nauvoo  and  Carth- 
age in  Illinois,  and  other  places  con- 
nected with  Church  history.  On  his 
arrival  in  Copenhagen  he  was  called 
to  labor  in  the  Stockholm  confer- 
ence and  after  spending  a  short 
time  in  the  Upsala  branch  he  was 
called  to  preside  over  the  Stockholm 
conference.  While  occupying  that 
position  he  succeeded  in  bringing 
the  conference  out  of  debt.  During 
this  mission  he  baptized  sixty-six 
persons  and  returned  to  his  home 
in  Utah  in  October,  1891.  Also  in 
secular  matters  Bro.  Anderson  has 
been  quite  active.  Thus  he  was 
sworn  in  as  an  extra  policeman  in 
Salt  Lake  City  in  1SS5,  and  in  1908 
he  was  appointed  a  probation  officer. 
In  190  9  he  bought  a  home  in  the 
Miller  Ward,  Salt  Lake  county,  into 
which  he  moved  his  family  and  there 
he  still  resides.  In  1910  (June  3rd) 
he  was  ordained  a  Seventy  by  J. 
Golden  Kimball  and  in  1912  he  was 
appointed  superintendent  of  the  Re- 


292 


LATTER-DAY   SAINT 


ligion  Class  in  the  Miller  Ward.  He 
was  also  chosen  as  one  of  the  presi- 
dents of  the  61st  quorum  of  Seven- 
ty and  appointed  to  act  as  a  coun- 
selor in  the  Scandinavian  organiza- 
tion of  the  Granite  Stake.  In  April, 
1915,  he  was  called  to  take  another 
mission  to  Sweden,  and  after  labor- 
ing a  short  time  in  the  Sundsvall 
conference  he  was  appointed  presi- 
dent of  said  conference,  succeeding 
Nils  A.  Hansen,  who  had  been  ban- 
ished by  the  civil  authorities  for 
preaching.  In  January,  1916,  Bro. 
Anderson  was  called  to  preside  over 
the  Stockholm  conference  and  a  few 
months  later  (May  22,  1916),  he 
was  appointed  to  preside  over  the 
Swedish  Mission,  succeeding  Theo- 
dor  Tobiason,  which  position  he 
held  about  three  years.  During 
these  years  of  war  and  suffering 
he  had  a  most  extraordinary  experi- 
ence and  passed  through  many 
hardships  and  difficulties.  While 
on  this  mission  he  had  the  pleasure 
of  initiating  ninety  persons  into  the 
Church  by  baptism.  Notwithstand- 
ing the  hard  times,  the  Swedish 
Saints  were  very  diligent  in  paying 
their  tithing  which  enabled  Bro. 
Anderson  to  reduce  the  debt  on  the 
Mission  House  at  Stockholm  11,500 
kroner.  President  Anderson  was 
released  from  his  mission  July  2  6, 
1919,  left  for  home  four  days  later 
and  arrived  in  Salt  Lake  City,  Aug. 
17,    1919. 

ANDERSON,  Andrew,  Bishop  of 
Koosharem  (Sevier  Stake),  Sevier 
county,  Utah,  was  born  April  23, 
1871,  at  Spring  City,  Sanpete  coun- 
ty, Utah,  the  son  of  Jens  C.  Ander- 
sen and  Carolina  Jensen.  He  was 
baptized  by  his  father  when  eight 
years  old  and  ordained  successively 
to  the  offices  of  Deacon,  Teacher, 
Priest,  Elder  and  Seventy.  He  filled 
many  positions  in  the  auxiliary  or- 
ganizations in  his  early  youth,  and 
acted  as  secretary  of  the  Y.  M.  M.  I. 
A.  and  Sunday  School  for  a  number 


of  years  in  the  Box  Creek  branch  of 
the  Koosharem  Ward.  In  1901- 
1903  he  filled  a  mission  to  Colorado, 
where  he  labored  as  a  traveling 
Elder,  afterwards  as  president  of 
the  Denver  branch  and  still  later  as 
president  of  the  South  Dakota  con- 
ference. After  his  return  he  acted 
as  superintendent  of  the  Koosharem 
Ward  Sunday  School  for  three  years. 


In  the  year  18S9  (May  3rd  I,  he  mar- 
ried Emma  Mortenson  (daughter  of 
Peter  Mortenson  and  Teline  Christen- 
sen  ) ,  who  was  born  Nov.  1,  18  77,  at 
Ephraim,  Sanpete  county,  Utah.  Six 
children  are  the  issue  of  this  mar- 
riage, namely,  Lila,  Rodney,  Larell, 
LeGrand,  Robert  D,  and  Emma 
Vione.  Bishop  Anderson  is  a  farmer 
by  avocation,  was  one  of  the  early 
settlers  of  Grass  Valley  and  has 
changed  residence  a  number  of 
times. 

ANDKRSOX,    David   Ballaiityne,    a 

promising  member  of  the  Church, 
who  died  in  his  youth,  was  born 
Jan.  30,  1887,  in  Ogden,  Weber 
county,  Utah,  the  son  of  Edward  H. 
Anderson  and  Jane  Ballantyne.  He 
was  baptized  when  about  eight  years 
old  and  took  an  active  part  in 
Church  matters  from  the  beginning. 


BIOGRAPHICAL   ENCYCLOPEDIA. 


293 


He  attended  the  Madison  grade 
school,  beginning  the  day  after  he 
was  eight  years  of  age,  and  gradu- 
ated from  the  Webster  school.  Salt 
Lake  City,  on  January  31,  1902.  He 
then  took  a  three  years'  course  in 
the  preparatory  school  of  the  Uni- 
versity of  Utah,  beginning  that  fall, 
at  which  time  also  he  decided  to 
study  medicine.  Finishing  his  pre- 
paratory school  work  in  1905,  he 
became     a     student     in     the     college 


for  three  years.  During  one  of 
these  years  he  assisted  in  medical 
work  at  the  Latter-day  Saints  Hos- 
pital, staying  there  at  night,  thus 
helping  to  earn  his  way  through  col- 
lege. In  1908  he  entered  the  Uni- 
versity of  Chicago,  studying  in  the 
Medical  College,  and  at  the  same 
time  taking  regular  college  work. 
He  graduated  with  the  degree  of 
B.  S.  in  June,  1910.  The  following 
autumn  he  entered  by  examination 
the  sophomore  year  of  the  medical 
course  in  the  Johns  Hopkins  Uni- 
versity. Here  he  studied  three 
years,  graduating  with  honor  as 
M.  D.,  in  June,  1913,  being  the  sec- 
ond Utah  student  to  graduate  from 
the     medical    school    of    that     great 


institution.  That  summer  he  took 
charge  of  the  Mrs.  Robert  Garrett 
Children's  Hospital,  at  Mt.  Airy, 
near  Baltimore.  He  also  went  to 
New  York  and  took  examinations  as 
interne  in  Mt.  Sinai  Hospital,  and 
was  one  of  the  eight  chosen  from 
about  ninety  applicants.  During  his 
vacation  in  1912,  he  went  to  Cali- 
fornia with  the  medical  staff  of  the 
National  Guard  of  Utah.  In  Septem- 
ber, 1913,  he  passed  the  Utah  state 
medical  examination,  and  was  em- 
ployed by  Dr.  F.  E.  Straup  for  the 
remaining  months  of  that  year,  do- 
ing good  service  in  his  profession  at 
Bingham.  He  loved  his  work  pas- 
sionately and  on  one  occasion  stated: 
•I  cannot  understand  why  all  men 
are  not  doctors."  On  December  27, 
1913,  he  left  for  New  York,  entering 
upon  his  course  in  Mt.  Sinai  on  the 
first  day  of  January,  1914,  where 
his  respectful  and  modest  demeanor 
gained  the  good-will  and  friendship 
of  all,  including  many  leading  physi- 
cians. While  on  a  vacation  he  was 
accidentally  drowned  in  Lake  George, 
New^  York  (near  Bolton),  May  27, 
1915.  He  had  served  as  an  interne 
in  the  Mt.  Sinai  Hospital.  New  York, 
for  nearly  eighteen  months  out  of 
his  term  of  thirty  months  and  had 
been  granted  a  two-week-s'  vacation. 
Together  with  his  companion.  Dr. 
Morris  Kush  (who  was  also  drowned 
with  him),  he  sailed  up  the  Hudson 
river  to  Albany,  May  22,  1915,  arriv- 
ing at  Lake  George  and  walking  to 
Bolton  the  next  day.  His  brother 
Hugo,  while  unsuccessfully  dragging 
Lake  George  for  his  body,  wrote  to 
his  parents  in  Salt  Lake  City,  Utah: 
'I  shall  do  all  in  my  power,  but  if 
I  cannot  succeed,  then  you  should 
take  consolation  in  the  fact  that  he 
lies  in  as  beautiful  a  spot  as  could 
be  found — out  in  the  nature  he  so 
dearly  loved."  The  House  Staff,  of 
which  he  was  a  member,  wrote  to 
his  parents:  'Not  alone  have  you 
lost  a  dear,  good  and  respectful  son, 
but   we  have   lost  a  staunch,   honor- 


294 


LATTER-DAY    SAINT 


able  and  kindly  friend.  Profession- 
ally, David  possessed  marked  tal- 
ent which  he  always  exhibited  in  a 
quiet,  unassuming  manner.  . 
We  feel  that  a  great  future  would 
have  been  in  store  for  him."  Some 
splendid  tributes  were  paid  him  at 
the  memorial  services  held  at  the 
hospital  synagogue  on  June  4,  1915, 
which  hundreds  of  friends  attended. 
Dr.  Anderson  dearly  loved  nature, 
and  from  early  boyhood  spent  his 
summer  vacations  in  the  Wasatch  or 
the  Uintahs.  Scarcely  a  spot  from 
Nebo  to  Bear  Lake,  or  from  Tim- 
panogas  to  Leidy  Peak,  and  where 
the  Green  .River  sweeps  around  the 
eastern  Uintahs,  that  he  had  not 
explored,  camping  in  the  woods  and 
fishing  in  the  lakes.  As  avocations, 
he  delighted  in  music  and  photog- 
raphy. During  his  grade  and  Uni- 
versity of  Utah  years  he  took  active 
part  in  ward  affairs,  in  M.  I.  A., 
Sunday  School,  and  Lesser  Priest- 
hood quorum  work.  During  his 
whole  educational  career  one  of  the 
greatest  pleasures  that  came  to  his 
life  was  the  opportunity  to  explain 
to  his  associates,  in  his  unassuming 
way,  the  beliefs  and  ideals  of  his 
people  and  the  Gospel  teachings 
learned  from  his  parents  and  in 
Sunday  school,  mutual  and  other 
organizations  of  the  Church.  He 
lived  in  conformity  with  these,  his 
life  being  an  every-day  sermon  to 
his  associates,  the  most  effective 
kind  of  preaching  in  all  the  world. 
In  this  way  he  performed  a  lasting 
work  among  a  class  of  educated  men 
whom  it  is  difficult  to  reach  in  the 
ordinary  way,  although  he  was  not 
privileged  to  fill  a  formal  mission. 
While  studying  in  the  University,  he 
with  his  brother  passed  three  sum- 
mers fencing  and  cultivating,  as  pio- 
neers in  that  district,  with  good  suc- 
cess, a  forty-acre  farm  on  the  Sand 
Ridge  in  Weber  county.  He  often 
wrote  that  the  physical  strength 
that  came  to  him  in  this  work  car- 


ried him  in  health  through  the 
strenuous  years  of  mental  toil  In 
his  professional  study.  Always  Dav- 
id rendered  to  his  family  and  friends 
(and  he  had  friends  in  nearly  every 
state  in  the  Union),  cheerful,  help- 
ful and  loving  service.  Besides  the 
geniality  of  his  nature,  he  possessed 
a  keen  sense  of  dry  humor  which, 
added  to  his  general  affability  en- 
abled him  to  make  friends  of  nearly 
all  with  whom  he  came  in  contact. 
His  hopes,  desires,  plans,  and  ambi- 
tions were  to  come  home  to  continue 
the  efficient  service  which  his  high 
scholastic  attainments  had  fully 
equipped  him  to  render  to  the  peo- 
ple in  the  valleys  and  mountains  of 
his  beloved  Utah.  The  characteris- 
tics of  his  nature  were  hard  work, 
perseverance,  clean  morals,  cheer- 
fulness and  efficiency.  His  was  in- 
deed a  beautiful  life. 

AXDERSOX,  James  Peter,  a  High 
Councilor  in  the  Moapa  Stake  of 
Zion,  Clark  county,  Nevada,  was 
born  Nov.  28,  1855,  in  Salt  Lake 
City,  Utah,  the  son  of  Jens  P.  Ander- 
sen and  Christiana  R.  Freeze.  He 
was  baptized  at  Glenwood,  Sevier 
county,  Utah,  by  James  Wareham, 
in  1864,  and  ordained  an  Elder  in 
September,  1878,  by  R.  L.  Johnson. 
From  1875  till  1908  he  resided  at 
Fountain  Green,  Sanpete  county, 
Utah,  where  he  raised  a  large  fam- 
ily, having  married  Elizabeth  Crow- 
ther  Oct.  31,  1875.  He  took  a  very 
active  part  in  the  religious  affairs 
of  the  Ward,  presiding  over  the 
Ward  Y.  M.  M.  I.  A.  and  laboring 
as  a  Ward  teacher,  etc.  In  1896- 
1898  he  filled  a  mission  to  the  In- 
dian Territory.  After  his  return 
home  he  was  chosen  as  a. president 
of  the  49th  quorum  of  Seventy,  and 
filled  that  position  until  August, 
190  8,  when,  together  with  his  fam- 
ily, he  moved  to  Overton,  Nevada. 
He  was  ordained  a  High  Priest  and 
set  apart  as  a  High  Councilor  when 
the  Moapa  Stake  was  first  organized. 


BIOGRAPHICAL  ENCYCLOPEDIA. 


295 


Agreeable  to  predictions  made  on 
the  head  of  Elder  Anderson,  he  has 
been  most  successful  as  a  peace 
maker,  and  has  been  able,  both  at 
home  and  abroad,  to  make  friends 
among  saints  and  strangers. 

ANDERSON,  Christian,  a  promi- 
nent Norwegian  missionary,  was 
born  May  12,  1833,  at  Vestra  Toten, 
Norway,  the  son  of  Anders  Peter- 
sen and   Gunnil   Knudsen.     The  par- 


ents were  extremely  poor,  and  so 
his  childhood  and  young  boyhood 
brought  him  much  privation.  Chris- 
tian, however,  was  of  a  studious 
nature,  and  he  managed  to  acquire 
a  fair  education  through  the  crude 
school  of  those  days  and  his  own 
studying.  He  testified  that  early  in 
his  life  there  came  to  him  a  testi- 
mony that  "some  great  things" 
would  come  to  him  in  the  future. 
The  boy's  vision  reached  to  the  time 
when  the  restored  gospel  would  be 
brought  to  him,  and  its  glorious 
light  would  shine  into  his  soul.  As  a 
youth  Mr.  Anderson  went  to  Christi- 
ania,  where  he  worked  at  various 
trades  until  at  least  he  became 
apprenticed  to  a  painter,  which  busi- 
ness he  largely  followed  all  his  life. 


In  1856  he  married  Petronelle  Niel- 
sen of  Aker,  near  Christiania.  The 
children  of  this  union  were  Carl, 
Rachel,  Richard,  Nephi,  Gunda,  and 
Peter,  all  born  in  or  near  Christi- 
ania. Early  in  his  married  life  the 
gospel  was  brought  to  him  by  the 
Elders  and  Saints  in  Christiania. 
He  said  the  hearing  of  it  brought  a 
"battle  with  myself  and  my  sur- 
roundings"; but  the  right  conquered, 
and  he  was  baptised  Nov.  2  2,  1858. 
He  soon  became  an  able  and  enthusi- 
astic advocate  of  the  truth.  The 
same  year  he  was  ordained  an  Elder 
and  appointed  to  preside  over  a  dis- 
trict of  the  Christiania  branch  of 
the  Church.  In  March,  18  60,  he 
was  appointed  to  preside  over  the 
Aker  branch,  a  suburb  of  Christiania, 
where,  in  his  humble  home,  "Maler- 
stuen,"  the  Saints,  for  a  long  time, 
held  their  meetings.  On  Oct.  22, 
1861,  he  was  released  from  presid- 
ing over  this  branch  and  appointed 
a  mission  to  the  interior  of  Norway. 
He  left  the  2  8th  of  the  month  and 
spent  three  and  a  half  months  walk- 
ing over  the  snow-clad  hills  and 
valleys  of  his  native  land,  preaching 
the  gospel.  He  reached  Trond- 
hjem  on  the  north  coast  and  then 
wended  his  way  back  to  Christiania, 
where  he  was  again  appointed  to 
preside  over  the  Aker  branch.  In 
the  fall  of  18  63  he  was  called  on 
another  mission  to  the  interior  of 
Norway.  At  this  time  the  Elders 
were  persecuted  considerably  for 
preaching.  Elder  Anderson  was  ar- 
rested and  confined  for  eight  days 
in  Hamer  jail,  awaiting  a  hearing. 
At  the  hearing  he  was  released  on 
conditions  that  he  would  not  ad- 
minister any  of  the  ordinances  of 
the  gospel.  He  was  fined  $15  and 
costs.  After  remaining  in  the  local- 
ity until  he  had  worked  off  this 
fine,  he  returned  to  his  home.  He 
had  hardly  got  well  started  in  his 
work  again  before  an  order  came 
from  the  court  that  he  was  to  serve 
a    term    of   six    days    on    bread    and 


296 


LATTER-DAY   SAINT 


water  because  he  had  baptized  per- 
sons for  the  remission  of  their  sins. 
He  served  this  sentence.  This  ex- 
pression is  found  in  his  diary  at 
this  time:  "I  now  find  myself  here, 
and  under  the  circumstances,  quite 
satisfied,  because  the  Lord  strength- 
ens me  both  in  body  and  in  spirit." 
In  May,  1868,  Elder  Anderson  was 
appointed  to  preside  temporarily 
over  the  large  and  prosperous  Chris- 
tiania  branch.  In  December  the 
appointment  was  made  permanent. 
Peter  Brown  was  president  of  the 
conference  which  included  the  whole 
of  Norway.  Elder  Anderson  soon 
became  one  of  the  most  eloquent 
expounders  of  the  gospel.  The  pre- 
siding brethren  of  the  mission  and 
conference  now  decided  to  build  a 
conference  home  and  hall  in  Chris- 
tiania.  Plans  were  made  and  the 
building  erected,  at  Osterhausgade 
27,  which  for  many  years  was  one 
of  the  finest  mission  houses  of  the 
Church.  It  was  dedicated  July  23, 
1871.  Among  the  prominent  Elders 
present  might  be  mentioned  Wm. 
W.  Cluff,  president  of  the  Scandi- 
navian mission;  Peter  Brown,  presi- 
dent of  the  Christiania  conference; 
Martin  Christoffersen,  Olof  J.  An- 
dersen, Halvor  H.  Berg,  Jens  C.  A. 
Weibye,  and  others.  This  occasion, 
with  all  that  pertained  to  it,  must 
have  marked  a  high  tide  in  Elder 
Anderson's  life.  Elder  Anderson 
with  his  family  left  Christiania  for 
Utah,  Oct.  10,  1871.  They  located 
at  Coalville,  Utah,  where  Bro.  An- 
derson filled  the  office  of  High 
Counselor  of  the  Summit  Stake, 
until  he  moved  to  Wilson  Ward, 
just  west  of  Ogden,  in  the  fall  of 
1879.  In.  the  fall  of  1884  he  was 
called  on  a  mission  to  Norway.  He 
arrived  in  Christiania  Nov.  7,  1884, 
where  he  was  appointed  traveling 
Elder  in  the  conference.  Because  of 
ill  health  he  could  not  remain  long, 
so  he  was  released  Oct.  16,  1885, 
to  return  home.  During  the  latter 
years  of  his  life  he  lived  in  Ogden, 


Utah,  following  his  occupation  of 
painting.  His  wife  died  in  Ogden 
Feb.  8,  1903.  Elder  Anderson  died 
in  Salt  Lake  City  while  attending 
the  general  conference  of  the 
Church,  April  9,   1906. 

ANDERSON,  Nephi,  author,  editor 
and  a  member  of  the  general  board 
of  the  Y.  M.  M.  I.  A.  of  the  Latter- 
day  Saints,  was  born  Jan.   22,    1865, 


in  Christiania,  Norway,  the  son  of 
Christian  Anderson  and  Petronelle 
Nielsen.  He  emigrated  to  Utah  with 
his  parents  in  the  fall  of  1871.  The 
family  lived  at  Coalville,  Utah,  un- 
til 18  79,  when  they  moved  to  Wil- 
son, just  west  of  Ogden.  As  a  boy 
he  worked  with  his  father  and 
brothers  at  farming  and  at  paint- 
ing and  paper  hanging,  his  father's 
trade.  He  married  in  the  Logan 
Temple,  Dec.  22,  1886,  Asenath  Til- 
lotson,  daughter  of  Ephraim  Tillot- 
son  and  Ruth  Collinston.  The  chil- 
dren of  this  wife  are,  Ronella,  Ger- 
ald, and  Laurine.  Bro.  Anderson 
taught  school  in  Ogden  in  1886- 
1890,  and  moved  to  Brigham  City 
in  1890,  W'here  he  continued  to 
teach.  In  August,  1891,  he  went  on 
a  mission  to  Norway,  returning  in 
October,    1893.      After   his  return   to 


BIOGRAPHICAL  ENCYCLOPEDIA.                                  297 

Utah  he  continued  teaching  in  Brig-  dained  to  the  latter  Priesthood  un- 
ham,  being  county  superintendent  der  the  hands  of  President  Joseph 
of  schools  from  1900  to  1903.  His  F.  Smith,  on  the  occasion  of  his 
wife  died  Jan.  26,  1904,  and  in  appointment  to  the  superintendency 
March,  1904,  he  left  Brigham  on  a  of  the  Young  Men's  Mutual  Associa- 
mission  to  Great  Britain,  having  tions  of  Box  Elder  Stake,  Jan.  14, 
been  called  to  labor  in  the  Liverpool  1900.  In  his  younger  days  he  held 
office,  under  the  presidency  of  many  positions  in  the  auxiliary  or- 
President  Heber  J.  Grant  as  assist-  ganizations  of  the  Church.  While 
ant  editor  of  the  'Millenial  Star."  living  in  Brigham  City  he  was  also 
During  this  mission  he  was  privi-  for  some  time  president  of  the 
leged  to  visit  most  of  the  European  Scandinavian  organization.  Stake 
countries,  including  a  brief  visit  to  clerk,  and  a  president  of  the  58th 
Scandinavia  and  his  native  Norway,  quorum  of  Seventy.  While  in  Salt 
He  returned  to  Utah  in  September,  Lake  City,  he  has  occupied  the  posi- 
1906,  but  soon  afterwards  moved  to  tions  of  High  Councilor  in  the  Lib- 
Salt  Lake  City  where  he  served  as  erty  Stake  of  Zion,  member  of 
an  instructor  in  the  Latter-day  the  general  committee  on  Courses 
Saints'  University  for  three  years,  of  Study  for  the  Priesthood,  mem- 
Besides  his  classes  in  English,  he  ber  of  the  General  Board  of  Mutual 
had  charge  of  the  missionary  de-  Improvement  Association,  etc.  In 
partment,  both  day  and  evening  these  committees  he  has  frequently 
classes.  In  1908  (June  24th)  he  assisted  in  preparing  manuals  and 
married  in  the  Salt  Lake  Temple,  outlines  for  lesson  work.  Besides 
Maud  Rebecca  Symons,  daughter  of  performing  these  Church  duties  and 
Charles  W.  Symons  and  Arzella  his  daily  labor  to  obtain  a  liveli- 
Whittaker.  The  children  from  this  hood,  he  has  found  time  to  contrib- 
marriage  are  (1919)  Dean  S.,  Ruth  ute  largely  to  the  literature  of  the 
A.,  Grant  S.,  Harald  S.  and  Charles  S.  Church  in  the  form  of  doctrine 
In  July,  190  9,  he  was  called  to  articles,  essays,  and  stories.  These 
Independence,  in  Missouri,  to  take  for  many  years  have  been  published 
charge  of  the  editorial  department  in  the  Church  magazines,  and  are 
of  the  "Liahona,  The  Elders  Jour-  too  numerous  to  mention  here, 
nal,"  to  which  city  he  moved  with  Elder  Anderson  makes  no  secret  of 
his  family.  In  September,  1910,  the  fact  that  besides  telling  as  good 
he  was  recalled  to  Salt  Lake  City  a  story  as  he  can,  his  main  pur- 
to  edit  the  recently  founded  'Utah  pose  is  to  teach  the  principles  of 
Genealogical  and  Historical  Maga-  the  gospel  as  revealed  to  the  Church 
zine,"  and  to  labor  for  the  interest  and  the  world  through  the  Prophet 
of  the  Genealogical  Society  of  Utah,  Joseph  Smith.  This  gospel,  he 
which  at  the  present  writing  (Nov-  claims,  is  the  biggest  thing  in  the 
ember,  1919)  is  his  occupation,  world,  and  deserves  the  best  in 
Elder  Andersons  educational  advan-  literature  that  can  be  given  it.  His 
tages  have  been  the  district  school,  ambition  in  this  line  is  to  present 
the  early-day  high  school  at  Ogden  to  the  understanding  of  all,  to  high 
under  Prof.  T.  B.  Lewis,  and  a  and  low,  the  beautiful  principles  of 
number  of  short  terms  at  the  Uni-  the  gospel,  and  present  them  in  a 
versity  of  Utah.  This  has  been  form  that  will  appeal  to  the  heart 
enriched  largely  by  personal  study  as  well  as  to  the  understanding, 
of  books  and  men  and  things  in  his  Up  to  the  present,  his  larger  liter- 
varied  experiences.  In  the  Church  ary  works,  and  those  published  in 
he  has  held  the  office  of  Deacon,  book  form  are  as  follows:  "Al- 
Seventy   and   High   Priest,    being    or-  mina."  published  in  the  Contributor 


298 


LATTER-DAY   SAINT 


in  1890;  "Beyond  the  Arctic  Circle" 
(Contributor,  1894);  "Added  Upon," 
1896;  "A  Daughter  of  the  North," 
first  published  in  the  "Juvenile  In- 
structor," in  1896,  and  later  re- 
vised and  issued  as  a  book;  'Mar- 
cus King,  Mormon,"  in  the  "Juven- 
ile Instructor,"  in  1897,  and  later 
in  book  form;  "A  Young  Folks  His- 
tory of  the  Church,"  1898;  "The 
Castle  Builder,"  1902,  in  the  "Im- 
provement Era"  and  in  book  form; 
"Piney  Ridge  Cottage,"  in  the 
"Juvenile  Instructor"  and  in  book, 
1912;  "Story  of  Chester  Lawrence," 
1913;  "John  St.  John,"  1917;  "Ro- 
mance of  a  Missionary"  in  the  'Im- 
provement Era,"  in  1908,  and  as  a 
book     in     1919.  "Added     Upon," 

vk^hich  aims  to  present  in  a  simple, 
concrete  form  the  basic  principles 
of  "Mormonism,".  explaining  the 
why,  the  whence,  and  the  whither 
of  man,  has  become  quite  firmly  es- 
tablished in  the  hearts  of  all  Latter- 
day  Saints.  Since  its  first  publica- 
tion in  1896,  seven  editions  of  the 
book  have  been  issued.  It  has  the 
distinction  of  being  the  first  book' 
published  within  the  Church  dealing 
with  a  great  gospel  theme  in  story 
form.  All  of  Elder  Anderson's 
books  have  met  with  favor  and  are 
continued  to  be  read  by  one  genera- 
tion after  another. 

ANDKItvSOX,  John  William,  first 
Bishop  of  the  Grantsville  Second 
Ward,  was  born  May  2,  1877,  at 
Grantsville,  Tooele  county,  Utah, 
the  son  of  John  C.  Anderson  and 
Mary  Ann  Clark  (daughter  of  Thos. 
H.  Clark,  first  Bishop  of  Grants- 
ville). Bishop  Anderson  was  bap- 
tized Aug.  23,  1884,  by  Alma  H. 
Hale,  received  a  common  school 
education,  was  ordained  a  Deacon 
when  quite  young,  ordained  a  Priest 
Feb.  1,  1893.  by  Bishop  James  L. 
Wrathall,  ordained  a  Seventy  Oct. 
9,  1899,  by  Francis  M.  Lyman, 
filled  a  mission  to  the  Southwestern 
States     in      1899-1902,     laboring    in 


eastern  Kansas,  part  of  the  time  as 
a  counselor  to  the  conference  presi- 
dent. At  home  he  has  been  a  dili- 
gent Sunday  School  and  Y.  M.  M. 
I.  A.  worker,  acting  as  president  of 
the  Y.  M.  M.  I.  A.  and  as  assistant 
superintendent  of  the  Sunday  school 
in  Grantville.  He  was  ordained  a 
High  Priest  Aug.  1,  1903,  by  Hugh 
S.  Gowans  and  set  apart  as  an  al- 
ternate member  of  the  Tooele  Stake 
High  Council,  and  labored  as  second 
counselor  to  Bishop  August  K.  An- 
derson  of  Grantsville   from   Jan.    20, 


1906,  till  1910.  He  filled  a  mission  to 
Sweden  in  1910-1912  and  presided 
over  the  Sundsvall  conference.  After 
his  return  home  he  acted  as  first 
assistant  in  the  Stake  superinten- 
dency  of  Religion  Classes  and  also 
as  a  member  of  the  Sunday  School 
Stake  board.  When  Grantsville,  on 
March  29,  1914,  was  divided  into 
two  Wards,  Bro.  Anderson  was  or- 
dained a  Bishop  by  Apostle  Geo.  F. 
Richards  and  set  apart  to  preside 
over  the  Grantsville  Second  Ward, 
which  position  he  still  holds.  Bro. 
Anderson  has  served  as  a  member 
of  the  city  council  and  two  terms  as 
mayor  of  Grantsville.  In  1903  he 
married  Janet  Hale,  daughter  of 
Aroet    H.    Hale    and    Louisa    Crook. 


BIOGRAPHICAL   ENCYCLOPEDIA. 


29d 


This  marriage  has  been  blessed 
with  eight  children.  Bro.  Anderson 
is  an  able  and  energetic  Church 
worker. 

ARAVE,  David  Eli,  Bishop  of 
Taylor  Ward  (Shelley  Stake),  Bing- 
ham county,  Idaho,  was  born  Dec. 
23,  1861,  at  Uintah,  Weber  county, 
Utah,  the  son  of  Nelson  Arave  and 
Caroline  Wadsworth.  He  was  bap- 
tized in  1869  and  ordained  succes- 
sively to  the  offices  of  Deacon, 
Teacher,  Elder  and  Seventy.  In 
188  6  (Dec.  2  2nd)  he  married  Mary 
E.  Fowles  (daughter  of  Joseph 
Fowles  and  Mary  E.  Jones),  who 
was  born  Sept.  20,  1871,  at  Hooper, 
Weber  county,  Utah.  Nine  children 
have  blessed  this  marriage,  namely, 
Joseph  C,  David  E.,  Vernal  L., 
Herchel  D.,  Cecil,  Elgin  P.,  Orland, 
Ellis  S.  and  Ereal.  Bishop  Arave  is 
a  farmer  by  avocation  and  has  been 
a  resident  of  Snake  River  Valley 
since  1890. 

ASHTON,  Elias  Conway,  a  mem- 
ber of  the  Deseret  Sunday  School 
Union  Board,  was  born  Feb.  16, 
1880,  in  Salt  Lake  City,  Utah,  the 
son  of  Edward  T.  Ashton  and  Effie 
W.  Morris.  He  was  baptized  March 
5,  1888,  by  Wm.  L.  Binder,  and 
became  a  diligent  Church  worker 
in  his  early  youth,  being  ordained 
to  different  positions  in  the  holy 
Priesthood.  After  having  received 
a  common  school  education  in  the 
public  schools  of  Salt  Lake  City  he 
attended  the  L.  D.  S.  University, 
and  for  more  than  two  years  studied 
in  the  economics  and  commerce  de- 
partment of  the  University  of  Chi- 
cago. Subsequently  he  studied  in 
the  law  department  of  that  institu- 
tion for  three  years,  being  graduated 
in  1907  with  the  degree  of  L.  L.  B. 
cum  laude.  He  was  admitted  to  the 
bar  of  the  Supreme  Court  of  Utah 
in  1907  and  later  practiced  in  the 
U.  S.  courts  of  Utah,  Idaho  and 
Montana.     For  six  months  Bro.  Ash- 


ton practiced  law  with  Stephen  L. 
Richards  and  subsequently  formed 
partnership  with  others.  He  was 
also  associated  with  the  late  Gen. 
Richard  W.  Young  and  Ashby  Snow 
in  the  practice  of  law  and  was  a 
member  of  the  State  Legislature  in 
1909.  He  was  instructor  in  the  Uni- 
versity of  Utah  law  department  for 
five  years,  became  a  member  of  the 
American  and  Utah  Bar  Associa- 
tions,  and   a  member  of  the  Ameri- 


can Judicature  Society  and  from 
1912  to  1914  he  was  a  member  of 
the  examining  committee  of  the 
Utah  Bar  Association.  In  1899 
(July  14th)  Bro.  Ashton  was  or- 
dained a  Seventy  by  Apostle  Geo. 
Teasdale  and  in  1899-1901  he  filled 
a  mission  to  the  Western  States 
with  headquarters  at  Denver,  Colo- 
rado. While  residing  in  the  15th 
Ward,  Salt  Lake  City,  he  was  always 
engaged  in  Church  activities.  In 
1915  he  was  chosen  as  a  member  of 
the  Deseret  Sunday  School  Union 
board  and  as  such  traveled  exten- 
sively in  different  parts  of  the  coun- 
try in  the  interest  of  Sunday  School 
work.  While  examining  the  Utah 
Apex    mine   at    Bingham,    Salt    Lake 


300 


LATTER-DAY   SAINT 


county,  Oct.  14,  1919,  he  was  caught 
in  a  collision  between  an  ore  train 
and  the  electric  car  in  which  he 
was  riding  and  he  died  as  a  result 
of  this  accident  a  few  hours  after- 
wards. On  Sept.  17,  1908,  he  mar- 
ried Rosabel  Hall  (daughter  of  Pro- 
fessor Mosiah  Hall  and  Rose  Wal- 
ton), who  with  four  children  (two 
boys  and  two  girls)  survive  him. 
Elder  Ashton  was  noted  as  a  bril- 
liant speaker  and  a  good  reasoner, 
giving  special  attention  to  his  activi- 
ties in  the  Church.  In  every  respect 
he  was  an  exemplary  young  man, 
whose  pure  and  consistent  life 
might  with  propriety  be  copied  by 
others.  He  was  stricken  down  in 
the  prime  of  manhood  when  a  long 
and  useful  career  seemed  to  await 
him. 

ATKIN,  Edward  Maughan,  Bishop 
of  the  Tooele  South  Ward  (Tooele 
Stake),  Tooele  county,  Utah,  was 
born    Oct.    30,    1864,    at    Tooele,    the 


son  of  Thomas  Atkin  and  Mary  Ann 
Maughan.  He  was  baptized  when 
about  eight  years  of  age,  received 
a  good  education  and  took  an  active 
part  in  Ward  affairs  from  his  early 
youth.  He  was  ordained  an  Elder 
Dec.    13,    1886,    by    his    father,    and 


three  days  later  (Dec.  16,  1886),  he 
married  Ann  Jenett  Smith  (daughter 
of  John  A.  Smith  and  Mary  Michael- 
john)  in  the  Logan  Temple.  He  was 
ordained  a  Seventy  a  few  years 
later  and  in  1890-1893  he  filled  a 
mission  to  New  Zealand,  where  he 
obtained  by  diligent  study  a  good 
knowledge  of  the  Maori  language. 
Most  of  the  time  while  on  this  mis- 
sion he  presided  over  districts. 
After  his  return  home  in  1893  he 
resumed  his  labor  in  his  native  town 
and  in  1906  (April  14th)  he  was 
ordained  a  High  Priest  by  Geo.  F. 
Richards  and  set  apart  as  a  High 
Councilor  in  the  Tooele  Stake,  which 
position  he  held  until  March  2  6, 
1911,  when  he  was  ordained  a 
Bishop  by  Apostle  Francis  M.  Ly- 
man and  set  apart  to  succeed  Bishop 
Sybee  C.  Orme  as  Bishop  of  the 
Tooele  Ward  with  Peter  M.  Clegg 
and  John  G.  Gillette  as  counselors. 
When  the  Tooele  Ward  was  divided, 
Dec.  29,  1912,  he  was  chosen  as 
Bishop  of  the  South  Ward,  which 
position  he  still  holds.  In  secular 
matters  Bro.  Atkin  has  also  been 
very  energetic,  having  served  as  a 
member  of  the  Tooele  city  council, 
etc.  From  1901  to  1914  he  was 
engaged  in  sheep  business  and  of 
late  he  has  followed  stock  raising. 
In  all  his  business  transactions  Bro. 
Atkin  has  been  very  successful  and 
has  accumulated  considerable  wealth, 
yet  he  devotes  his  best  talent  and 
energy  to  his  calling  as  Bishop.  His 
marriage  has  been  blessed  with  two 
sons,  Edward  L.,  who  was  born  May 

26,  1888,  and  died  Nov.  5,  1888, 
and  Harry  M.  (an  adopted  son), 
who  was  born  April  12,  1901. 

ATWOOD,   Samuel   tYink,     Bishop 

of  the  Kamas  Ward  (Summit  Stake), 
Summit  county,  Utah,  was  born  Feb. 

27,  1825,  at  Wellington,  Tolland 
county,  Connecticut,  the  son  of  Dan 
Atwood  and  Polly  Sawyer  and  grew 
up  to  manhood  in  the  town  of  Fans- 
field,   Tolland   county.      Here  he   be- 


BIOGRAPHICAL   ENCYCLOPEDIA. 


301 


came  a  convert  to  "Mormonism"  and  turned  his  attention  to  Temple  work 
was  baptized  by  Cyril  Brown,  Oct.  and  at  length  passed  to  his  final  rest 
14,  1849.  He  came  to  Utah  with  his  May  1,  1906,  at  Kamas.  The  Im- 
father's  family  in  1850,  crossing  the  mediate  cause  of  his  death  was  par- 
alysis. He  left  a  wife  and  four  chil- 
dren. Bishop  Atwood,  besides  being 
^"^JBHI^^  ^  diligent  Church  worker,  filled  many 

/  'VH^iik  secular    positions    of    honor    and    re- 

sponsibility. He  served  as  a  delegate 
to  one  of  the  constitutional  conven- 
tions in  1872  and  also  served  as  a 
member  of  the  Utah  Legislature  in 
1876  and  1881. 


AUSTIN,  Heber  Charles,  President 
of  the  Bingham  Stake,  Bonneville 
county,  Idaho,  was  born  Dec.  20, 
1855,  in  Sudham,  Bedfordshire,  Eng- 
land, the  son  of  John  Austin  and 
Emma  Grace.  He  was  baptized  when 
about  eight  years  old  and  emigrated 
with  his  parents  to  America  in  1868, 
crossing  the  Atlantic  in  the  steamship 
"Minnesota,"  which  sailed  from  Liv- 
erpool June  30,  1868.  The  emi- 
grants that  year  traveled  as  far  as 
Laramie  by  rail  and  from  that  point 
the  Austin  family  traveled  in  Capt. 
Joseph  S.   Rawlins'   company  to  Salt 


plains  in  Wilford  Woodruff's  com- 
pany. After  residing  in  Salt  Lake 
City  about  three  years  he  was  called 
to  fill  a  mission  to  the  Indians  at  Las 
Vegas,  and  on  the  Santa  Clara,  act- 
ing as  second  counselor  to  Rufus  C. 
Allen,  president  of  the  Indian  mis- 
sion. Subsequently  he  was  called  to 
accompany  Nathaniel  V.  Jones  to  the 
Las  Vegas  lead  mines.  In  June, 
1857,  he  was  called  in  connection 
with  the  Y  X  Company  to  Deer  Creek, 
west  of  Ft.  Laramie,  and  came  back 
because  of  the  Johnston  army  trou- 
bles. Subsequently  he  spent  two 
years  (1856-1858)  in  the  Dixie  mis- 
sion. In  1859  (Jan.  8th)  he  married 
Mary  Jane  Cornwall.  He  spent  the 
winter  of  1868-1869  on  a  mission  in 
the  Eastern  States,  visiting  his  native 
State  while  away.  In  August,  1870, 
he  was  called  and  ordained  a  Bishop 
and  appointed  to  preside  over  Kamas, 
Peoa,  Rockport,  Wanship  and  Par- 
leys Park.  Locating  at  Kamas,  he 
held  that  position  until  1877,  when 
he  was  made  local  Bishop  of  Kamas 
and  held  that  office  until  1902.  After 
his    release    from    that    position    he 


Lake  City,  where  they  arrived  Au- 
gust 20th.  The  family  resided  for 
many  years  in  Lehi,  Utah,  and  in 
1903     Heber     C.     Austin     moved     to 


302 


LATTER-DAY   SAINT 


Idaho  Falls,  Idaho,  in  the  interest 
of  the  Sugar  Company,  and,  being 
an  agriculturist,  he  took  a  most 
active  part  in  laying  off  the  ground 
for  the  sugar  factory,  planting  fields 
of  beets,  trees,  etc.,  and  in  the 
founding  and  building  up  of  the 
town  of  Lincoln,  Bingham  (now 
Bonneville)  county,  Idaho.  He  was 
ordained  an  Elder  in  1893  by  Lott 
Russon;  was  ordained  a  Seventy  in 
1899  by  Seymour  B.  Young  and 
filled  a  mission  to  Great  Britain  in 
1899-1900,  during  which  he  presided 
over  the  Norwich  conference  part  of 
the  time.  He  was  ordained  a  High 
Priest  Jan.  13,  1901,  by  Stephen  L. 
Chipman,  and  set  apart  as  an  alter- 
nate High  Councilor  in  the  Alpine 
Stake,  which  position  he  filled  until 
he  moved  to  Idaho  in  1903.  He  was 
ordained  a  Bishop  April  30,  1905,  by 
Hyrum  M.  Smith,  and  set  apart  to 
preside  over  the  Lincoln  Ward,  and 
in  November,  1909,  he  was  set  apart 
to  preside  over  the  Bingham  Stake, 
which  position  he  still  holds.  At 
present  Brother  Austin  is  special- 
izing in  the  raising  of  beet  seed  for 
the  Idaho  Sugar  Company  and  has 
under  cultivation  about  1,000  acres 
of  land.  In  1879  (Dec.  31st)  Brother 
Austin  married  Miss  Deseret  Taylor 
(daughter  of  James  Taylor  and  Ann 
Rodgers),  who  was  born  March  29, 
1859,  at  Lehi,  Utah.  She  has  borne 
her  husband  nine  children,  namely, 
Daisy  M.,  Raymond,  Margaret  A., 
Victor  H.,  Bernice  E.,  Alice,  Myrtle, 
Edith  and  Bessie. 

BAGLEY,  Edward  A.,  Bishop  of 
the  Koosharem  Ward  (Sevier  Stake), 
Sevier  county,  Utah,  was  born  April 
10,  1847,  at  New  Brunswick,  Canada, 
the  son  of  Edward  Bagley  and  Julia 
Ann  Grant.  He  made  his  home  with 
his  parents  until  1855,  when  he 
migrated  to  Provo,  Utah,  where  he 
was  baptized,  and  subsequently 
moved  to  Payson,  Utah  county.  Later 
he  was  ordained  a  Priest.  In  1869 
(Sept.    17th)    he    married    Mary    Al- 


media  McClellan  (daughter  of  Wm. 
McClellan  and  Almedia  Day).  In 
1875  he  moved  to  Koosharem,  Sevier 
county,  Utah,  where  he  was  ordained 
an  Elder.  In  October,  1879,  he  re- 
ceived his  blessings  in  the  Saint 
George  Temple.  In  1885  (February 
10th)  he  was  ordained  a  Seventy, 
and  married  Christine  Torgerson 
(daughter  of  Hans  Torgerson  and 
Annie  Gurena  Olsen).  Bishop  Bag- 
ley  has  from  his  early  youth  been 
a  most  energetic  and  earnest  Church 
worker  and  has  also  held  a  number 
of  secular  positions.  He  resigned  a 
position    as    county    commissioner   of 


Piute  county  to  fill  a  mission  to 
Iowa  and  Illinois  in  1886.  He  was 
ordained  a  High  Priest  and  Bishop 
May  27,  1891.  by  Apostle  Francis 
M.  Lyman,  and  set  apart  to  preside 
over  the  Koosharem  Ward,  which 
position  he  held  for  14  years.  Bishop 
Bagley  has  been  a  very  successful 
farmer  and  stock  raiser  and  has  also 
been  engaged  in  the  mercantile 
business.  At  present  he  is  a  director 
and  stockholder  in  the  Richfield 
Commercial  and  Savings  Bank.  The 
names  of  his  children  from  his  first 
marriage  are  Mary  Adelina,  Edward 
C,    Estella    J.,    Emerette,    James    A., 


BIOGRAPHICAL  ENCYCLOPEDIA. 


303 


Cynthia  A.,  Rhoda  A.,  George  A., 
and  Cyrenius.  The  children  of  the 
second  marriage  are  Anna  Chris- 
tina, Mary  Ellen,  Netta  Alonda,  Hy- 
rum  O.,  Joseph  M.,  Lorenzo  D., 
Owen  R.,  Helen  E.,  and  Talmage  C. 

BAILEY,    Thomas,    Bishop    of   the 
Xephi     Ward      (Juab     Stake),     Juab 


1913  to  1914  he  acted  as  Stake 
superintendent  of  Sunday  schools 
and  served  as  a  High  Councilor  from 
1902  to  1914,  being  ordained  a 
High  Priest  April  27,  1902,  by 
George  Teasdale.  In  1914  (August 
9th)  he  was  ordained  a  Bishop  by 
Francis  M.  Lyman  and  set  apart  to 
preside  over  the  Nephi  Ward.  Bro. 
Bailey  has  also  filled  numerous  po- 
sitions of  a  secular  nature;  thus  he 
acted  as  county  assessor  one  term 
and  has  been  county  recorder  since 
1916.  From  1915  to  1919  he  served 
as  a  member  of  the  Nephi  city  coun- 
cil. In  1900  (May  31st)  he  married 
Mary  E.  Chapman  (daughter  of  John 
Chapman  and  Eliza  Jackson),  who 
was  born  Oct.  28,  1870,  at  Nephi. 
Three  children  have  blessed  this 
marriage,  namely,  Trenna  Eliza, 
Raymond  Thomas,  and  Mary  Thelma. 

BALLE,  Christian  Thomseii,  Bish- 
op of  the  Fremont  Ward  (Wayne 
Stake),  Wayne  county,  Utah,  was 
born  in  Aalborg,  Denmark,  Nov.  22, 
1849,  the  son  of  Jens  Thomsen  Balle 
and    Inger    Kirstine    Pedersen.      To- 


county,  Utah,  was  born  Nov.  7,  1869, 
at  Nephi,  the  son  of  Langley  A. 
Bailey  and  Sarah  Andrews.  He  was 
baptized  Nov.  7,  1877,  by  Joel 
Grover;  ordained  a  Deacon  about 
1880;  ordained  a  Priest  Dec.  19, 
188  9,  by  James  \v.  Paxman;  or- 
dained a  Seventy  July  19,  1890,  by 
George  Q.  Cannon  and  became  a 
member  of  the  71st  quorum  of 
Seventy.  Prior  to  this  (from  1881 
to  1889)  he  had  presided  over  a 
Deacons'  quorum  at  Nephi.  In  1896- 
1898  he  filled  a  mission  to  Great 
Britain,  during  which  he  presided 
part  of  the  time  over  the  Nottingham 
conference.  From  1898  to  1902  he 
acted  as  Stake  superintendent  of 
Religion  Classes.  He  acted  as  second 
counselor  in  the  Stake  presidency  gether  with  his  parents  he  left  his 
of  Y.  M.  M.  I.  A.  from  1894  to  1895  Aalborg  home  in  December,  1853,  for 
and  as  Ward  president  of  Y.  M.  M.  America  and  arrived  in  Salt  Lake 
I.    A.    from     1901     to    1908.       From    City,  Utah,  in  the  fall  of  1854.    After 


304  LATTER-DAY   SAINT 

residing  in  Salt  Lake  City  until  Stake,  making  a  house-to-house  visit 
April,  1860,  he  moved  with  his  par-  among  the  Saints,  preaching  the  Gos- 
ents  to  Ephraim,  Sanpete  county,  pel  and  ascertaining  the  general  con- 
Utah,  where  he  herded  cows  and  dition  of  the  Saints.  He  also  acted 
helped  his  father  on  the  farm.  When  as  second  assistant  superintendent  of 
the  Black  Hawk  war  broke  out  in  the  Sunday  school.  For  a  period  of 
1865  he  was  enrolled  in  Peter  ten  years  he  served  as  a  forest 
Isaksen's  infantry  company,  but  was  ranger  and  supervisor  on  the  Fish 
soon  afterwards  transferred  to  Lake  Forest  Reserve.  From  April 
Lewis  Larsen's  cavalry  company.  In  29,  to  Jan.  13,  1907,  he  served  as 
a  skirmish  with  the  Indians,  July  7,  first  counselor  to  Hiett  B.  Maxfield, 
1867,  west  of  Ephraim,  his  horse  Bishop  of  the  Fremont  Ward.  On 
was  shot  under  him.  He  was  finally  the  latter  day  he  was  chosen  as 
discharged  from  military  service  Bishop  of  said  Ward  and  ordained 
Nov.  1,  1867.  After  first  being  or-  to  that  office  May  10,  1907,  by 
dained  a  Deacon  in  the  early  60's  Apostle  Orson  F.  Whitney.  He  served 
he  was  ordained  an  Elder  June  5,  in  that  capacity  until  August  2, 
1876,  by  John  Smith  and  on  the  1919,  when  he  was  honorably  re- 
same  day  married  Emma  Eugenie  leased.  Bishop  Balle  is  universally 
Thustrup.  This  marriage  was  sub-  known  for  his  honesty,  integrity  and 
sequently  blessed  with  eleven  chil-  fidelity  to  the  work  of  the  Lord, 
dren,  namely:  Eugenie,  James  C,  He  is  a  farmer  and  stock  raiser  by 
William  A.,  Emma  R.,  Myrtle  E.,  avocation. 
Homer    Leroy,    Evalena,    Leo    Royal, 

Pearl  J.,  Flossie  B.  and  Lillian  O.  ItALLE,  Emma  Eugenie  Thu.strup, 
His  wife  had  taught  school  in  wife  of  Bishop  Christian  Thomsen 
Ephraim  for  some  time  previous  to  Balle,  was  born  Sept.  15,  1854,  in 
her  marriage.  Bro.  Balle  moved  to  Store  Lindet,  Lolland,  Denmark,  the 
Mayfield  in  1877  and  was  ordained  daughter  of  Jens  Christian  Thus- 
a  Seventy  March  1,  1885,  by  Fred-  trup  and  Anne  Marie  Nielsen.  She 
erik  J.  Christiansen;  he  acted  as  attended  a  country  school  until 
president  of  the  Ward  Y.  M.  M.  I.  A.  June,  1868,  and,  becoming  a  convert 
in  Mayfield  five  years  and  as  coun-  to  "Mormonism,"  was  baptized  in 
selor  in  the  same  organization  two  June,  1864,  by  Ole  H.  Berg.  Her 
years.  In  July,  1886,  he  was  called  father  had  died  Sept.  17,  1855,  and 
on  a  mission  to  Scandinavia,  during  her  mother  had  become  a  convert 
which  he  labored  in  the  Aalborg  to  "Mormonism"  some  time  after- 
conference,  part  of  the  time  as  pres-  wards.  Emma  emigrated  to  Utah,  to- 
ident  of  the  Frederikshavn  branch,  gether  with  her  mother  and  brother. 
He  returned  on  account  of  sickness  in  1868,  crossing  the  Atlantic  Ocean 
in  1887.  In  the  hope  of  improving  in  a  sailing  vessel  and  the  plains 
his  health  he  removed  with  his  with  ox  teams.  She  located  tempo- 
family  to  Fremont,  Piute  (now  rarily  in  Provo,  where  she  was  treat- 
Wayne)  county,  where  he  labored  as  ed  with  much  kindness  by  the 
a  Ward  teacher  and  as  a  home  mis-  family  of  Ole  H.  Berg.  After  attend- 
sionary  for  a  number  of  years,  and  ing  the  district  school  at  Provo  she 
also  as  president  of  the  Ward  Y.  M.  studied  in  the  Timpanogas  Univer- 
M.  I.  A.  He  was  chosen  as  a  presi-  sity,  after  which  she  taught  school 
dent  of  a  quorum  of  Seventy  in  in  the  family  of  Jens  Hansen  in 
August,  1891,  and  ordained  a  High  Spanish  Fork.  Later  she  taught 
Priest  May  30,  1897,  by  Francis  M.  school  in  Salem,  Utah  county,  and 
Lyman.  For  two  years  he  labored  afterwards  in  Ephraim,  Sanpete 
as  a  local  missionary  in  the  Wayne  county.     After  her  marriage  she  con- 


BIOGRAPHICAL   ENCYCLOPEDIA. 


305 


tinued  school  teaching  for  a  short 
time  and  then  moved  to  Mayfield 
with  her  husband  in  June,  1877, 
where  she  continued  school  teaching. 
In  Mayfield  she  acted  as  secretary 
of  the  Ward  Relief  Society  and  of 
the  Ward  Y.  L.  M.  I.  A.  In  April, 
1889,  the  family  moved  to  Fremont, 
Wayne  county,  where  Sister  Balle 
was  chosen  as  president  of  the  Ward 
Primary  Association  in  1890  and 
served  in  that  capacity  until  Octo- 
ber, 1899.  From  1891  to  January, 
1896,  she  served  as  secretary  of  the 
Fremont  Relief  Society,  a  member 
of  the  Wayne  Stake  Board  of  Pri- 
mary Association  and  as  secretary  of 
the  School  Board  of  Education.  In 
September,  1907,  she  was  appointed 
postmaster  of  Fremont,  which  po- 
sition she  still  holds  (1919).  She 
was  set  apart  as  clerk  of  the  Fre- 
mont Ward  May  10,  1907,  and  still 
holds  that  position.  Sister  Balle  has 
been  a  Sunday  school  teacher  for 
over  forty  years  and  is  now  the 
teacher  of  the  theological  class  in 
the  Fremont  Ward.  She  is  the 
mother  of  eleven   children. 

BALLIF,  Serge  Louis,  president  of 
the  Swiss  and  German  mission,  was 
born  April  17,  1821,  in  Perroy,  near 
Lausanne,  Canton  Vaud,  Switzerland, 
the  son  of  J.  F.  Fredrick  Ballif  and 
Alexandrine  Beque.  He  was  edu- 
cated in  Switzerland  and  Odessa, 
Russia,  receiving  a  classical  edu- 
cation. After  his  return  to  Switzer- 
land from  Russia  he  became  a  con- 
vert to  "Mormonism"  and  was  bap- 
tized by  Thomas  B.  H.  Stenhouse 
June  6,  1852.  He  was  quite  wealthy 
when  he  joined  the  Church  and  spent 
his  means  freely  feeding  the  Elders 
and  poor  Saints.  He  also  financed 
the  printing  of  the  periodical  "Re- 
flecteur"  published  in  the  interest  of 
the  Church  in  Switzerland,  and  paid 
for  printing  several  tracts.  Soon  he 
was  ordained  to  the  Priesthood  and 
called  to  labor  as  a  local  missionary. 
After    laboring   for   several    years    in 


Basil,  he  was  sent  to  Neuchatel  and 
in  the  village  of  Saules  in  the  valley 
of  Russ  (seven  miles  from  Neu- 
chatel) he  baptized  three  families, 
all  of  whom  soon  emigrated  to 
Utah.  Bro.  Ballif  emigrated  to 
America  in  18  54,  together  with  ten 
families  from  Switzerland,  namely, 
three  from  the  valley  of  Russ  and 
the  others  from  Lausanne  and  Gen- 
eva, traveling  under  the  direction  of 
James  Woodard.  This  small  com- 
pany of  Saints  left  Switzerland  Feb. 
10,  1854,  and  arrived  in  Salt  Lake 
City  Oct.  28,  1854.  Several  of  the 
company  died  with  cholera  near 
Kansas  City  and  Leavenworth.  After 
arriving  in  the  Valley,  Brother 
Ballif  located  in  Big  Cottonwood  and 
participated  in  the  Echo  Canyon 
war,  spending  considerable  time  in 
the  mountains  riding  a  mule.  In 
1858  he  went  south  in  the  general 
move.  Not  being  successful  as  a 
farmer,  he  located  temporarily  in 
Ogden,  and  in  the  spring  of  1860  he 
settled  in  Logan,  Utah,  where  he 
made  his  home  until  he  died.  Being 
called  on  a  mission  to  Europe, 
when  his  Logan  home  was  about 
half  finished,  he  left  part  of  his 
family  in  Logan  and  part  in  Ogden 
and  started  on  his  mission  in  May, 
1860.  He  drove  cattle  across  the 
plains  and  walked  part  of  the  way 
through  the  Southern  States,  and 
when  he  reached  New  York  he  had 
thirty-eight  cents  left  with  which  to 
cross  the  ocean.  After  laboring 
faithfully  as  a  missionary  in  Switz- 
erland two  and  a  half  years,  he  re- 
turned to  Utah  in  charge  of  a  com- 
pany of  emigrating  Saints,  who 
crossed  the  Atlantic  in  the  ship 
"Windermere."  Soon  afterwards  he 
was  appointed  to  preside  over  the 
German  meetings  in  Logan,  which 
position  he  occupied  until  he  died. 
During  his  presidency  a  meeting- 
house was  erected  in  Logan  in 
which  to  hold  German  meetings.  In 
1879-81  he  filled  another  mission  to 
Switzerland     and     Germany,     during 


Vol.    Ill,  Xo.   -20. 


August,   1919 


306  LATTER-DAY    SAINT 

which  he  presided  over  the  mission  John  R.  Park.  Bro.  Ballif  was  bap- 
and  returned  in  charge  of  a  large  tized  when  about  eight  years  of  age 
company  of  emigrating  Saints.  While  and  ordained  successively  to  the 
on  this  mission  he  was  arrested  in  offices  of  Deacon,  Teacher,  Priest 
Berlin,  Aug.  16,  1880,  for  preaching  and  Elder.  He  presided  over  the 
the  gospel.  For  many  years  Bro.  Y.  M.  M.  I.  A.  in  the  Logan  Fourth 
Ballif  acted  as  a  president  of  a  Ward  for  a  number  of  years,  after 
quorum  of  Seventy  and  remained  which  he  acted  as  Stake  president  of 
faithful  and  true  to  the  Church  till  Y.  M.  M.  I.  A.  in  the  Cache  Stake, 
the  day  of  his  death  which  occurred  In  1890-18  93  he  filled  a  mission  to 
in  Logan  April  20,  1901.  Bro.  Ballif  Switzerland,  during  which  he  pre- 
was  a  well  educated  man,  under-  sided  part  of  the  time  over  the 
stood  German  and  French  almost  to  French  conference  comprising  the 
perfection  and  could  read  Latin  and  branches  of  Neuchatel,  Lausanne  and 
Greek.  He  was  a  humble  and  un-  Geneva.  After  returning  from  this 
assuming  man  and  on  that  account  mission  he  was  ordained  a  Seventy 
perhaps  was  not  appreciated  as  much  by  Christian  D.  Fjeldsted  and  later 
as  he  would  have  been  had  he  been  was  chosen  as  a  president  of  the 
of  a  more  aggresive  nature.  In  64th  quorum  of  Seventy.  Later  he 
1848  (Nov.  24th)  he  married  Elise  filled  a  second  mission  to  Europe, 
Lacoultre  and  before  he  left  the  during  which  he  first  labored  in 
old  country  three  daughters  (Louisa,  Belgium,  where  he  presided  over  the 
Marie  and  Helene)  were  born  to  Liege  conference  thirteen  months, 
him  at  Lausanne.  His  wife  died  and  was  then  called  to  preside  over 
May  13,  1872,  in  Logan,  after  bear-  the  Swiss  and  German  mission,  suc- 
ing  him  nine  children,  one  of  which  ceeding  Hugh  J.  Cannon.  He  held 
is  Serge  F.  Ballif  who  now  presides  that  important  position  about  five 
over  the  Cache  Stake  of  Zion.  The  and  a  half  years  and  part  of  the 
names  of  the  other  children  are:  time  his  family  was  with  him.  He 
Louisa  Alexandrine,  Marie  Jean,  returned  home  in  190  9,  being  suc- 
Helene  Caroline,  Kathinka  Caroline,  ceeded  in  the  presidency  of  the 
Rachel  Elizabeth,  Sergine  Cecile,  mission  by  Thomas  E.  McKay.  Dur- 
Serge  Fredrick,  John  Lyman,  Jenny  ing  his  presidency  the  Book  of 
and  Charlotte.  In  February,  1857,  Mormon  was  re-printed  in  the  Ger- 
Bro.  Balif  married  Harriette  Jean-  man  language,  and  a  number  of 
ette  Vuffrey,  a  native  of  Switzer-  other  books  and  pamphlets  (Church 
land.  This  wife  also  bore  her  bus-  publications)  were  published  in  the 
band  nine  children,  namely:  Julia  German  and  P"'rench  languages.  He 
Susanne,  Franklin  Fredrick,  Olga,  petitioned  through  the  American 
Louis  Henry,  Eva,  Henrietta  Allie,  Consul  at  Berne  for  religious  free- 
Adeline  Marie,   Joseph   and   Fenelon.  dom,    or    permission    to    preach    the 

gospel  in  Switzerland  unmolested  by 
BALLIF,  Serge  I<>edrick,  Presi-  the  authorities.  At  the  time  of  his 
dent  of  the  Cache  Stake  of  Zion,  release  he  left  50,000  francs  in  the 
was  born  Sept.  23,  1859,  at  Ogden,  bank  at  Zurich  in  the  interest  of 
Utah,  the  son  of  Serge  Louis  Ballif  the  mission  after  paying  the  fares 
and  Elise  Lacoultre.  He  came  to  of  the  Elders  home  and  publishing 
Logan,  Utah,  with  his  parents  as  an  all  the  books  and  pamphlets  men- 
infant  and  has  resided  in  that  city  tioned.  The  German  books  were 
ever  since.  Here  he  received  a  com-  printed  in  Leipsic  and  the  French 
men  school  education  and  then  at-  books  in  Geneva.  After  his  return 
tended  the  University  of  Deseret  in  from  this  mission  Bro.  Ballif  en- 
Salt  Lake  City,  presided  over  by  Dr.  gaged  in  business  in   Portland,   Ore- 


BIOGRAPHICAL   ENCYCLOPEDIA. 


307 


gon,  but  was  called  back  to  Utah 
by  the  Church  authorities  in  1911 
to  preside  over  the  Cache  Stake  of 
Zion,  succeeding  Isaac  Smith.  In 
1885  (July  29th)  he  married  Zel- 
nora  Eliza  Angell  (daughter  of 
Truman  Osborne  Angell)  in  the 
Logan  Temple.  This  marriage  has 
been  blessed  with  six  children, 
namely:  Hazel,  Frederick,  Leonard 
H.,  Zelnora,  Rachel  and  Evelyn. 

BARKER,  Frederick,  Bishop  of 
North  Ogden  (Ogden  Stake),  Weber 
county,  Utah,  was  born  March  26, 
1876,  at  North  Ogden,  Utah,  the 
son  of  Henry  Barker  and  Margaret 
Staley.  He  was  baptized  Sept.  18, 
1884,  by  Newman  H.  Barker;  or- 
dained a  Priest  in  his  youth;  or- 
dained an  Elder  Nov.  17,  1902,  by 
James  Ward,  and  ordained  a  High 
Priest  July  26,  1908,  by  Charles  C. 
Richards  and  set  apart  as  a  mem- 
ber of  the  High  Council  of  the 
Ogden  Stake.  In  1902-1905  he  filled 
a  mission  to  Great  Britain,  where  he 
acted  as  secretary  of  the  Bristol  con- 
ference 18  months.  He  also  visited 
France,  Italy,  Switzerland,  Germany, 
Holland  and  Belgium.  At  home  he 
has  acted  as  assistant  and  subse- 
quently as  superintendent  of  the 
North  Ogden  Sunday  school,  labored 
as  an  alternate  and  afterwards  as 
a  regular  member  of  the  High  Coun- 
cil and  subsequently  as  first  coun- 
sp'  to  Bishop  Ward  of  the  North 
C  a  Ward,  which  position  he  held 
until  Dec.  29,  1912,  when  he  was 
ordained  a  Bishop  by  David  O.  Mc- 
Kay and  set  apart  to  preside  over 
the  North  Ogden  Ward,  which  po- 
sition he  still  holds.  Brother  Bar- 
ker has  always  been  active  in  Church 
matters  and  when  quite  young  acted 
as  a  Y.  M.  M.  I.  A.  officer.  Other- 
wise he  was  a  member  of  the  county 
school  board  from  1911  to  1915  and 
has  filled  many  other  secular  of- 
fices. In  190  9  (April  2  9th)  he 
married  Delia  Ann  Hickenlooper 
(daughter     of     Charles     A.     Hicken- 


looper and  Medora  Blanchard),  who 
was  born  Sept.  24,  1888,  in  Pleasant 
View,  Weber  county,  Utah,  and  has 
borne  her  husband  four  children, 
namely:  Kenneth  H.,  Lowell  P., 
Vanese  and  Myra.  Brother  Barker's 
principal  avocation  is  that  of  a 
farmer  and  fruit  grower. 

BARNES,  Lorenzo  D.,  the  first 
Latter-day  Saint  Elder  who  died  while 
laboring  as  a  missionary  in  a  foreign 
land,  was  born  March  22,  1812  in 
Tolland,  Hampden  county,  Mass.,  the 
son  of  Phineas  Barnes,  a  New  England 
farmer.  He  removed  with  his  parents 
to  the  eastern  part  of  Ohio  in  1815 
and  thence^  in  1816,  moved  to  Norton, 
Medina  county,  Ohio,  where  he  be- 
came a  convert  to  'Mormonism"  and 
was  baptized  by  Elder  Thomas  Gor- 
den  June  16,  1833.  He  was  ordained 
an  Elder  by  Sidney  Rigdon  July  18, 
183  3,  soon  after  which  he  went  to 
Kirtland,  the  headquarters  of  the 
Church  at  that  time.  While  there  he 
was  called  on  a  mission  by  the  coun- 
cil of  High  Priests  and  left  Thomp- 
son Aug.  1.  1833,  in  company  with 
Elial  Strong.  On  this  mission  to 
western  Ohio  they  held  a  number  of 
meetings  in  Lerado,  Westville,  Har- 
mony, Jamestown,  Pomfret  and 
Perrysburgh  and  in  the  regions  round 
about.  Bro.  Barnes  returned  to  Kirt- 
land in  October  and  during  the  win- 
ter of  1833-1834  he  taught  school  at 
Norton.  In  the  spring  of  1834,  when 
the  call  was  made  for  volunteers  to 
go  to  Missouri,  Lorenzo  D.  Barnes  re- 
sponded and  marched  as  a  member 
of  Zion's  Camp,  under  the  leadership 
of  the  Prophet  Joseph  Smith,  to  Mis- 
souri. This  company  marched  on 
foot  nearly  a  thousand  miles  for  the 
purpose  of  assisting  the  Saints  who 
had  been  driven  from  their  homes  in 
Jackson  county,  Missouri.  In  the 
spring  of  1835,  he  was  ordained  one 
of  the  first  Seventy,  and  commenced 
preaching  through  several  counties 
of  Ohio.  In  1835  he  took  a  mission 
to  Virginia,  and  having  a  limited  edu- 


308 


LATTER-DAY   SAINT 


cation  and  an  impediment  in  his 
speech,  he  was  frequently  singled  out 
by  the  sectarian  preachers  as  an  ob- 
ject of  attack.  He  held  several  de- 
bates with  the  clergymen  of  different 
denominations  and  had  unusual  suc- 
cess, for,  the  close  of  every  debate 
was  followed  by  baptisms.  By  faith 
and  perseverence  he  overcame  the 
impediment  in  his  speech  and  be- 
came an  orator  of  superior  powers. 
In  June,  1838,  he  was  ordained  a 
High  Priest  and  became  a  member  of 
the  High  Council  of  Adam-ondi-Ah- 
man,  and  in  September  of  that  year 
he  was  sent  on  a  mission  to  the 
Southern  and  Eastern  States;  travers- 
ing on  foot  the  states  of  Ohio,  Ken- 
tucky, Pennsylvania  and  Virginia, 
preaching  without  purse  or  script.  In 
1839  he  built  up  a  large  branch  of 
the  Church  in  Chester  county,  Penn- 
sylvania, and  established  many  other 
branches  in  different  parts  of  the 
Eastern  States.  He  continued  his 
labors  until  the  year  1841  when  he 
led  a  company  of  Saints  to  Nauvoo. 
In  the  fall  of  the  same  year  (1841) 
he  was  sent  on  a  mission  to  England, 
and  labored  for  a  short  season  in  and 
about  Manchester.  From  there  he 
went  to  the  Cheltenham  conference, 
in  Gloucestershire,  where  he  labored 
until  the  general  conference,  held  in 
England,  when  he  received  an  ap- 
pointment to  preside  over  the  Brad- 
ford conference,  where  he  labored 
faithfully  until  his  death,  which  oc- 
curred Dec.  20,  1842.  Bro.  Barnes 
was  possessed  of  most  untiring  per- 
severence. industry  and  application, 
and  wore  out  his  life  by  constant 
preaching  and  exposure.  At  the  fol- 
lowing general  conference  held  in 
England,  the  American  Elders  and 
many  of  the  Saints  donated  the  sum 
of  five  pounds  five  shillings  and  six 
pence  ($26.00)  for  the  purpose  of 
erecting  over  his  grave,  at  Idle,  York- 
shire (where  his  remains  were  in- 
terred) a  stone,  upon  which  is  found 
the  following  epitaph:  "In  memory 
o£  Lorenzo  D.  Barnes,   who  died  on 


the  20th  of  December,  1842,  age  30 
years.  He  was  a  native  of  the  United 
States,  an  Elder  in  the  Church  of 
Jesus  Christ  of  Latter-day  Saints,  a 
member  of  the  High  Priests'  quorum 
and  also  of  Zion's  Camp  in  the  year 
1834,  and  the  first  gospel  messenger 
from  Nauvoo  who  has  found  a  grave 
in  a  foreign  land."  The  remains  of 
Elder  Barnes  were  subsequently 
shipped  to  Utah  and  interred  in  the 
city  cemetery  in  Salt  Lake  City  and 
the  2nd  quorum  of  Seventy  has  erect- 
ed a  modest  monument  over  his 
grave. 

BARROW,  Freeman  Frank,  Pre- 
siding Elder  over  the  West  Warren 
Branch  (North  Weber  Stake),  Weber 
county,  Utah,  from  1908  to  1917, 
was  born  July  21,  1858,  at  Marilla, 
Erie  county,  New  York,  the  son  of 
Thomas  Carter  Barrow  and  Susan- 
nah Phillips  Dowell.  Bro.  Barrow- 
was  raised  on  a  farm  and  becoming  a 
convert  to  "Mormonism,"  he  was  bap- 
tized by  Elder  Mark  Hall,  April  18, 
1882.  His  mother  had  been  a  member 
of  the  Church  since  she  was  twelve 
years  old,  being  baptized  in  the  city 
of  Rochester,  New  York,  by  Freeman 
Rogers.  Brother  Barrow  emigrated 
to  Utah  in  June,  1883,  was  ordained 
an  Elder  in  1884  by  President  Chas. 
F.  Watkins,  of  Ogden;  received  his 
blessings  in  the  Logan  Temple  in  the 
spring  of  1887;  was  ordained  a 
Seventy  by  John  Morgan  and  became 
a  member  of  the  76th  quorum  of 
Seventy;  filled  a  mission  to  the 
Eastern  States  in  1907-1909,  during 
which  time  he  acted  as  president  of 
the  New  York  conference  for  14 
months.  This  conference  extended 
into  Pennsylvania  and  Canada.  In 
1908  he  was  appointed  first  coun- 
selor to  Bishop  Wayment  of  the 
Warren  Ward,  after  which  he  pre- 
sided over  the  West  Warren  branch 
of  the  Warren  Ward  until  1917. 
In  1880  (April  6th)  Brother  Bar- 
row married  Henrietta  Barkhuff  of 
Marilla,  Erie  county.  New  York.     This 


BIOGRAPHICAL   ENCYCLOPEDIA. 


309 


union  has  been  blessed  with  seven 
children,  namely:  Paul  Frank,  Edith 
May,  James  Albert,  Thomas  Wil- 
liam, Ethel  Susannah,  Sarah  Mabel, 
and  Lester  John,  who  has  served 
one  year  in  France  in  the  United 
States  army. 

BARRUS,  Albert  Almon,  second 
counselor  in  the  presidency  of  the 
Star  Valley  Stake,  Lincoln  county, 
Wyoming,  was  born  June  1,  1875,  at 
Grantsville,  Tooele  county,  Utah,  the 
son  of  Benjamin  F.  Barrus  and 
Lovina  Ann  Steel.  He  was  baptized 
Sept.  8,  1883,  by  Alma  Hale;  or- 
dained an  Elder  in  1894;  ordained 
a  Seventy  Nov.  17,  1897,  by  Sey- 
mour B.  Young,  and  filled  a  mission 
to  the  Southern  States  in  1897-1898. 
In  1896  (March  4th)  Bro.  Barrus 
married  Margaret  Alice  Millward, 
who  has  borne  her  husband  eleven 
children,  namely:  Margaret  Fay, 
Nielson,  Albert  Rodney,  Lester  Mill- 
ward,  Rondo  Thayer,  Grace  Louise, 
Emily,  Alice,  Wilda,  Nora,  Benjamin 
Franklin  and  Lucy.  In  1891  Bro. 
Barrus  moved  with  his  family  to 
Star  Valley,  locating  at  Fairview. 
In  1906  he  was  ordained  a  High 
Priest  by  John  U.  Moser  and  set 
apart  to  act  as  a  High  Councilor  in 
the  Star  Valley  Stake.  He  was  or- 
dained a  Bishop  Aug.  23,  1907,  by 
Orson  P.  Whitney  and  set  apart  to 
preside  over  the  Fairview  Ward. 
After  acting  in  this  position  until 
June,  1914,  he  was  set  apart  as 
second  counselor  in  the  presidency 
of  the  Star  Valley  Stake,  which 
position  he  still  holds. 

BARTHOLOMEW,  John,  Bishop  of 
Fayette  Ward  (South  Sanpete  Stake) , 
Sanpete  county,  Utah,  was  born  Sept. 
11,  1845,  at  Mackinaw,  McLean 
county,  Illinois,  the  son  of  Joseph 
Bartholomew  and  Polly  Benson.  He 
came  to  Utah  with  his  parents  in 
1852  and  settled  in  Springville, 
Utah  county,  Utah,  and  later  in 
Gunnison,      Sanpete      county,      Utah. 


John  Bartholomew,  who  was  bap- 
tized in  1856,  became  a  resident  of 
Warm  Creek  (now  Fayette)  about 
18  61  and  passed  through  all  the  ex- 
periences incident  to  pioneer  life  at 
that  place,  and  also  took  part  in  the 
Black  Hawk  war  in  1865-1868. 
From  1874  to  1877  he  acted  as  Pre- 
siding Elder  at  Payette  and  was 
ordained  a  High  Priest  and  Bishop 
July  7,  1877,  and  appointed  to  pre- 
side over  the  Fayette  Ward,  which 
position  he  held  until  his  death. 
He  also  served  as  road  supervisor 
and    school    trustee    and    also    as    a 


member  of  one  of  the  constitutional 
conventions  which  met  to  frame  the 
Utah  State  constitution.  In  1868 
(Oct.  11th)  Bro.  Bartholomew  mar- 
ried Eliza  Roxey  Metcalf,  daughter 
of  England  Metcalf  and  Mary  Wash- 
lim,  which  marriage  was  blessed 
with  eleven  children,  namely:  John 
Edward,  Roxey  Ellen,  William, 
Sarah  Jane,  Alma,  Joseph,  Julia, 
Mary  Elizabeth,  Rose  Alice  and 
Henry.  Bishop  Bartholomew  died  at 
Fayette  Sept.   23,    1914. 

BARTHOLOIVIEW,      Noah      Willis, 

first  Bishop  of  Fillmore  (Millard 
Stake),  Millard  county,  Utah,  was 
born  April  1,   1808,  at  Dryden,  New 


310 


LATTER-DAY   SAINT 


York.  He  emigrated  to  Utah  in 
1848  and  settled  in  Fillmore,  Mil- 
lard county,  where  he  was  called  to 
act  as  the  first  Bishop.  In  1828 
(Jan.  21st)  he  married  Miranda 
Catlin,  who  was  born  Sept.  17,  1806, 
and  who  bore  her  husband  seven 
children,  namely,  Emily,  George  W., 
Lewis  L.,  Nelson,  Willis,  Lyman  and 
Miranda.  Later  he  married  Mary 
Attana  Catlin,  who  became  the 
mother  of  five  children,  namely, 
Matilda,  Edwin,  Noah,  Laura  and 
Don  Alonzo.  Bro.  Bartholomew  emi- 
grated to  Utah  in  1848  and  settled 
in  Fillmore  in  1851.  Here  he  re- 
sided until  his  death  which  oc- 
curred in  Fillmore,  Aug.  1,  1876,  he 
being  68  years  old. 

BARTON,  Walter  Herl>ert,   one  of 

the     Latter  day     Saint     Elders     who 


died  in  the  missionary  field,  was 
born  April  15,  1869,  at  Kaysville, 
Davis  county,  Utah,  the  son  of  John 
Barton  and  Sarah  Flint.  He  was 
baptized  Aug.  5,  1877,  by  Thos.  F. 
Rouche;  ordained  a  Deacon  Feb.  24, 
1884,  by  Peter  Barton,  and  ordained 
an  Elder  Feb.  12,  1893,  by  Albert 
Beazer.  He  also  served  as  an  officer 
in  the  Ward  Y.  M.  M.  I.  A.  Being 
called  on  a  mission  to  the  Southern 


States,  he  left  his  home  in  Decem- 
ber, 1893,  arriving  at  Chattanooga, 
Tenh.,  Dec.  20,  1893.  He  at  once 
commenced  a  successful  missionary 
labor,  his  first  companion  being  Jo- 
seph M.  Felt  of  Idaho.  He  soon  con- 
tracted the  fever  and  ague,  so  prev- 
alent in  the  Southern  States,  and, 
gradually  sinking  under  his  suffer- 
ings, he  finally  died  at  McComb  City, 
Mississippi,  Feb.  18,  1894.  His  body 
was  brought  home  for  burial.  Bro. 
Barton  was  a  highly  respected  young 
man,  beloved  by  all  who  knew  him 
at  home  as  well  as  in  the  missionary 
field.  He  will  always  be  looked  up- 
on as  a  star  of  the  first  magnitude 
among  the  many  faithful  ones  who 
have  made  the  Bartons  a  family  of 
great  renown  in  the  midst  of  the 
Latter-day  Saints. 

BAXTER,  Samuel  Fmorson,  an  ac- 
tive Elder  in  the  Tenth  Ward    (Lib- 
erty   Stake),    Salt    Lake    City,    Utah, 
was  born  Aug.  10,  1858,  at  Dresden, 
Tennessee,  the  son  of  Samuel  Martin 
Baxter  and   Holly   Ann   Murphy.      In 
1869  he  emigrated  to  Utah  with  his 
parents    and    settled    in    Mill    Creek, 
Salt  Lake  county.      Two   years   later 
his  parents  moved  to  the  Tenth  Ward, 
Salt  Lake  City,  where  he  has  resided 
ever  since.     He  was  baptized  Nov.  2  6, 
1875,   by   Wm.    Ashman;    ordained   a 
Deacon  about  Dec.  1,  1875,  and  pre- 
sided  over   the   first   organized   Dea- 
cons'   quorum    of    the    Tenth    Ward; 
ordained  an  Elder  Nov.  22,  1878,  by 
James  E.  Malin;   ordained  a  Seventy 
July  6,  190i),  by  Seymour  B.  Young, 
and  acted  as  a  president  of  the  16th 
quorum  of  Seventy,  being  senior  pres- 
ident about  four  years,  and  ordained 
a  High  Priest  Sept.  30,  1917,  by  Jos- 
eph Keddington.     Bro.  Baxter  has  al- 
ways been  a  diligent  Church  worker. 
He  labored  in  the  Tenth  W^ard  Sun- 
day School  for  over  thirty-five  years, 
as    assistant    superintendent    fifteen 
years     and     as     superintendent     two 
years;    at    the    present    time    he    has 
charge   of   the   parents'   class   in   the 


BIOGRAPHICAL   ENCYCLOPEDIA 


311 


Tenth  Ward.  In  1881  he  was  chosen  BAXTER,  Lotta  Robina  Paul,  pres- 
as  1st  counselor  in  the  Y.  M.  M.  I.  A.  ident  of  the  Liberty  Stake  Relief  So- 
of  that  Ward  and  served  as  president  ciety,  was  born  Feb.  14,  1870,  in  Salt 
of  the  association  from  1882  to  1886.     Lake    City,    Utah,    the    daughter    of 

James  P.  Paul  and  Elizabeth  Evans. 
She  attended  the  University  of  Des- 
eret  and  later  took  a  special  course 
in  literature  at  the  University  of 
Utah.  She  was  baptized  when  eight 
years  of  age  and  when  nine  years  old 
began  serving  as  secretary  in  the 
Ward  Primary  Association.  In  1887 
she  was  chosen  as  secretary  of  the 
Y.  L.  M.  I.  A.  of  the  Tenth  Ward, 
Salt  Lake  City,  which  position  she 
held  until  April  12.  18  92,  when  she 
was  chosen  as  second  counselor  to  the 
president  of  the  Y.  L.  M.  I.  A.  in  the 
Tenth  Ward.  From  July  6,  188  7,  to 
April  26,  1903,  she  acted  as  presi- 
dent of  that  association,  and  later 
served  as  an  aid  in  the  Salt  Lake 
Stake  Board  of  Y.  L.  M.  I.  A.  When 
the  Salt  Lake  Stake  was  divided  into 


In  1878  Bro.  Baxter  married  Eliza- 
beth Cheshire  (daughter  of  George 
Cheshire  and  Elizabeth  Kees),  who 
was  born  March  24,  1858,  at  Barton, 
England,  and  died  Feb.  3,  1895.  Six 
children  were  the  issue  of  this  mar- 
riage, namely:  Arzella  May,  Ella 
Maud,  Reuben  Emerson,  Bertha  Lu- 
cile,  Clarence  Ottis  and  Samuel 
George.  In  1896  (April  30th  Bro. 
Baxter  married  Lotta  Robina  Paul 
(daughter  of  James  P.  Paul  and  Eliza- 
beth Evans),  who  was  born  Feb.  14, 
1870,  in  Salt  Lake  City,  Utah.  Four 
children  are  the  issue  of  this  mar- 
riage, namely,  Elizabeth  Robina,  Hol- 
ly Elaine,  Paul  Martin  and  Wallace 
Kent.  Bro.  Baxter  was  associated  as 
salesman  with  the  Dinwoodey  Furni- 
ture and  The  Salt  Lake  Hardware 
Co.  for  many  years,  and  at  present 
is  conducting  a  business  in  his  own 
name  for  the  sale  of  bank,  office  and 
store  fixtures,  in  Salt  Lake  City.  Bro. 
Baxter  is  a  man  of  unswerving  in- 
tegrity to  duty  whether  it  be  to  his 
Church,  family  or  business. 


four  stakes  in  1904,  she  was  chosen 
as  Stake  president  of  the  Y.  L.  M.  I. 
A.  in  the  Liberty  Stake,  which  posi- 
tion she  held  until  1912,  and  then 
acted  as  class  teacher  for  one  year 
in  the  Tenth  Ward  Y.  L.  M.  I.  A.  In 
1914  she  was  chosen  as  second  coun- 
selor in  the  Liberty  Stake  Relief  So- 


312 


LATTER-DAY   SAINT 


ciety  and  in  October,  1915,  was  set 
apart  as  president  of  the  Liberty 
Stake  Relief  Societies,  which  position 
she  still  holds.  In  1896  (April  30th) 
she  married  Samuel  Emerson  Baxter, 
a  widower  with  six  children.  Sister 
Baxter  is  the  mother  of  four  children. 
She  gives  her  family  great  credit  for 
the  success  she  has  had  as  a  Church 
worker,  for  no  sacrifice  has  been  too 
great  on  their  part  to  have  her  per- 
form whatever  duties  were  required 
of  her  in  her  public  life. 


BECKSTRAND,  John  August,  first 
counselor  to  President  Orvil  L.Thomp- 
son of  the  Millard  Stake,  Millard  coun- 
ty, Utah,  was  born  March  19,  1865, 
in  Deseret,  Millard  county,  Utah, 
being  the  son  of  Elias  August 
Beckstrand  and  Anna  Sophia  Heg- 
lund.  He  moved  with  his  parents  to 
Meadow,  Millard  county,  Utah,  in 
18  69,  where  he  was  baptitzed  in  1873 
by  Wm.  H.  Stott.  He  was  ordained 
an  Elder  and  received  his  blessings 
in  the  St.  George  Temple  when  only 


BECK,  Herbert,  the  second  Bishop 
of  Centerfield  (South  Sanpete  Stake), 
Sanpete  county,  Utah,  was  born  July 
25,  1884,  in  Ephraim,  Sanpete  coun- 
ty, Utah,  the  son  of  James  Nielsen 
Beck  and  Oline  Maria  Jensen.  He 
was  baptized  when  a  boy,  raised  in 
Ephraim,  where  he  received  a  com- 
mon school  education,  and  continued 
his  education  in  the  college  at 
Provo.  Together  with  his  parents 
he  moved  to  Centerfield  in  1898 
where  he  acted  as  a  choir  leader  and 
a  counselor  in  the  Ward  Y.  M.  M. 
I.  A.  He  also  labored  as  an  ordi- 
nance worker  in  the  Manti  Temple 
six  months.  Prior  to  that  he  had 
been  ordained  successively  to  the 
offices  of  Deacon,  Teacher,  Priest 
and  Elder.  He  was  ordained  a  High 
Priest  by  Lewis  Anderson,  May  17, 
1908,  and  set  apart  as  a  second 
counselor  to  Bishop  Andrew  C. 
Fjeldsted  of  Centerfield,  and  in  1918 
(August  4th)  he  was  ordained  a 
Bishop  by  Rudger  Clawson  and  set 
apart  to  preside  over  the  Centerfield 
Ward.  In  1906  (March  7th)  he 
married  Blanch  Kearnes  (daughter 
of  Austin  Kearnes  and  Mary  Jor- 
gensen).  After  bearing  her  husband 
one  child  (Lavona),  his  wife  died, 
Dec.  16,  1906.  In  1909  (Nov.  24th) 
he  married  May  Bardsley  (daughter 
of  Joseph  Bardsley  and  Alice  Duf- 
fin),  who  is  the  mother  of  three 
children,  namely,  Fay,  Oline  and 
Lucy. 


fourteen  years  old;  obtained  a  com- 
mon school  education  in  Meadow  and 
afterwards  attended  the  Church  Acad- 
emy at  Fillmore.  He  filled  a  mission 
to  Sweden  in  1889-1891,  laboring  in 
the  Goteborg  conference  and  was 
with  John  Anderson  Quist  when  that 
Elder  died  as  a  missionary  in  Swe- 
den. After  his  return  from  his  mis- 
sion, Elder  Beckstrand  acted  as  sup- 
erintendent of  the  Y.  M.  M.  I.  A.  of 
the  Millard  Stake  for  about  ten  years, 
and  was  chosen  as  a  president  of  the 
42nd  quorum  of  Seventy,  having  been 
ordained  a  Seventy  before  going  on 
his  mission.  He  was  ordained  a  High 
Priest  Nov.  20,  1899,  by  Francis  M. 
Lyman  and  ordained  a  Bishop  Jan. 
31,  1909,  by  George  F.  Richards  and 


BIOGRAPHICAL   ENCYCLOPEDIA. 


313 


set  apart  to  preside  over  the  Meadow 
Ward,  succeeding  Neil  M.  Stewart. 
He  was  set  apart  as  first  counselor  to 
President  Orvil  L.  Thompson  Aug. 
11,  1912,  when  the  Milard  Stake  was 
divided  and  the  Deseret  Stake  was 
organized.  Elder  Beckstrand  mar- 
ried Mary  Elizabeth  Stott  of  Meadow 
in  November,  1892.  She  was  the 
daughter  of  Edwin  Stott  and  Sarah 
Jane  Holder,  and  has  borne  her  hus- 
band five  children,  namely,  John 
Morale,  Orvil  Edwin,  Arland  Stott, 
Grant  Heglund  and  Blake  Holder. 
Bro.  Beckstrand  is  a  farmer  and  stock 
raiser  and  also  one  of  the  successful 
business  men  of  Millard  county. 

BELLISTOX,  Albert  Henry,  Bishop 
of  the  Nephi  South  Ward  (Juab 
Stake),  Juab  county,  Utah,  was  born 


I 


June  29,  1876,  in  Nephi,  Utah,  the 
son  of  Thomas  Belliston  and  Sophia 
Bardsley.  He  was  baptized  Sept.  1, 
1884,  by  Gideon  Wilson;  ordained 
a  Deacon  Jan.  28,  1892,  by  W.  H. 
Warner;  ordained  a  Teacher  Nov. 
28,  1893,  by  Thomas  Crawley;  or- 
dained a  Priest  Jan.  14,  1896,  by 
Edwin  Harley;  ordained  an  Elder 
Feb.  20,  1898,  by  Geo.  Teasdale, 
and  ordained  a  Seventy  and  set 
apart  for  a  mission  to  the  Sandwich 


Islands  by  Seymour  B.  Young,  April 
1,  1898.  He  returned  home  from 
this  mission  May  1,  1902.  Having 
been  chosen  to  act  as  second  coun- 
selor to  Bishop  Wm.  H.  Pettigrew  of 
the  Nephi  1st  Ward  in  November, 
1901,  before  returning  from  his  mis- 
sion, he  was  ordained  a  High  Priest 
by  Geo.  Teasdale  and  set  apart  to 
the  office  named  May  6,  1902,  which 
position  he  held  until  Sept.  22,  1912, 
on  which  date  he  was  ordained  a 
Bishop  by  Francis  M.  Lyman  and  set 
apart  to  preside  over  the  Nephi 
South  Ward,  which  position  he  still 
holds.  In  November,  1913,  he  was 
elected  a  member  of  the  Nephi 
city  council,  which  office  he  held  for 
four  years.  In  August,  1917,  he 
was  appointed  by  Governor  Bamber- 
ger to  act  as  a  member  of  the  Juab 
county  local  draft  board,  which  po- 
sition he  held  until  the  close  of  the 
war.  In  1903  (October  21st)  Bishop 
Belliston  married  Jennie  G.  Wheeler, 
who  has  borne  her  husband  five 
children,  namely,  Albert  Leland, 
Dion,  Harold  W.,  Nelda,  and  Gerald 
T.  Brother  Belliston  is  a  farmer  by 
occupation. 

BENSON,  Yeppa,  fifth  Bishop  of 
Weston  (Oneida  Stake),  Franklin 
county,  Idaho,  was  born  April  1, 
1866,  at  Lehi,  Utah  county,  Utah, 
the  son  of  Jeppe  Benson  and  Hannah 
Hansen.  He  was  baptized  Dec.  23, 
1889,  by  Peter  Mickelson;  ordained 
an  Elder  in  18  87;  ordained  a 
Seventy,  March  1,  1890,  by  John 
Maughan,  and  ordained  a  High 
Priest  and  Bishop  Sept.  10,  1911, 
by  Charles  W.  Penrose  and  set  apart 
to  preside  over  the  Weston  Ward. 
Bro.  Benson  settled  at  Weston  with 
his  parents  in  1870  and  has  since 
then  been  a  successful  farmer  and 
stock  raiser.  From  his  earlier  youth 
Bro.  Benson  has  taken  an  active 
part  in  Church  affairs.  Thus  he 
acted  as  Ward  chorister  a  number  of 
years,  was  Ward  Sunday  school 
superintendent,   a   diligent   Y.   M.    M. 


314 


LATTER-DAY    SAINT 


I.  A.  worker  and  acted  as  a  presi- 
dent of  the  142nd  quorum  of  Sev- 
enty. In  1899  (Sept.  25th)  he  mar- 
ried Catherine  Zweifel  (daughter  of 
Jacob  Zweifel  and  Anna  D.  Martz), 
who  was  born  April  1,  1868,  in  Prov- 
idence, Cache  county,  Utah.  Nine 
children  are  the  issue  of  this  mar- 
riage, namely,  Edna  C,  Clarence  Y., 
Aaron  C,  Yetta  E.,  Annie  E.,  Flor- 
ence Z.,  Minnie  Z.,  Adelia  Z.,  and 
Thelma  C. 

BERREY,  John  Alphonzo,  fourth 
Bishop  of  the  Wardsboro  Ward 
(Montpelier  Stake),  Bear  Lake  coun- 
ty, Idaho,  was  born  Oct.  29,  1879, 
at  Cottonwood  (now  Dingle),  Idaho, 
the  son  of  John  Henry  Berrey  and 
Phoebe  R.  Wilcox.  He  was  baptized 
May  2,  1889,  by  Samuel  Humphrys; 
ordained  a  Deacon  soon  afterwards; 
ordained  an  Elder  Oct.  28,  1898,  by 
Wilford  W.  Clark;  ordained  a  High 
Priest  May  21,  1905,  by  William 
Budge  and  set  apart  to  act  as  second 
counselor  to  Bishop  Charles  S. 
Keetch;  afterwards  he  acted  as  first 
counselor  to  Bishop  John  G.  Had- 
dock, and  on  Sept.  22,  1917,  he  was 
ordained  a  Bishop  by  Hyrum  M. 
Smith  and  set  apart  to  preside  over 
the  Wardsboro  Ward,  which  position 
he  still  holds.  From  January,  1904, 
to  May,  1905,  he  acted  as  Sunday 
school  superintendent.  He  has  also 
acted  as  constable  of  a  precinct  four 
years  and  as  school  trustee  twelve 
years.  In  1898  (Nov.  9th)  he  mar- 
ried Mary  E.  Humphrys  (daughter 
of  Samuel  Humphrys  and  Mary 
Clifton),  who  was  born  Oct.  29, 
1880,  at  Paris,  Idaho.  This  marriage 
has  been  blessed  with  eight  children, 
namely,  Mary  E.,  Alphonzo  D., 
Phoebe  G.,  Asenath  E.,  Mae  L., 
Ruby  Q.,  Samuel  B.,  Helen  M.,  and 
David  L. 


becca  Beck.  He  was  baptized  Sept. 
27,  1885  (when  about  eight  years 
old),  by  John  W.  Brown;  ordained 
a  Deacon  in  1870;  ordained  an  Elder 
Jan.  1,  1899,  by  John  W.  Platte; 
ordained  a  Seventy  Jan.  19,  1899, 
by  Anthon  H.  Lund,  and  filled  a 
mission  to  the  Southern  States  in 
1899-1901.  He  was  ordained  a  High 
Priest  Nov.  18,  1901,  by  Hyrum  M. 
Smith  and  set  apart  as  first  coun- 
selor to  Bishop  Joseph  S.  Berry, 
which  position  he  held  until  June  23, 
1906,     when     he     was     ordained     a 


Bishop  by  .Apostle  David  O.  McKay 
and  set  apart  to  preside  over  the 
Kanarra  Ward,  which  position  he 
still  holds.  In  1902  (Jan.  14th) 
Bro.  Berry  married  Susanna  E. 
Williams  (daughter  of  William  R. 
Williams  and  Mary  1.  Roundy),  who 
was  born  March  31,  188  0,  at  Ka- 
narra. Following  are  the  children 
by  this  marriage:  Cloyd  B.,  Lela, 
Thelma,  Ethelyn,  Maxine,  and  Glen- 
na.  Bishop  Berry  is  a  farmer  and 
stock  raiser  by  avocation. 


BERRY,  John  William,   Bishop   of  BERRY,    AVilliam    Shank.s,    one    of 

Kanarra,  Iron  county,  Utah,  was  the  martyrs  of  the  Church,  was 
born  Jan.  17,  1877,  at  Kanarra,  the  born  Feb.  3,  1838,  in  Dresden,  Week- 
son    of    William    S.    Berry    and    Re-  ly     county,    Tennessee,     the     son     of 


BIOGRAPHICAL   ENCYCLOPEDIA. 


315 


Jesse  Berry  and  Amelia  Shanks. 
Four  of  his  grandfathers — that  is, 
his  two  grandfathers,  his  great- 
grandfather and  his  grandmother's 
second  husband,  his  step-father — 
were  Revolutionary  soldiers  and 
fought  to  establish  freedom  upon 
the  American  continent.  His  father 
served  his  country  as  a  soldier  in 
the  war  of  1812  and  re-enlisted  in 
1814.  Bro.  Berry,  the  martyr, 
joined  the  Church  in  his  youth  and 
came  to  Utah  with  his  mother  in 
1844.     In  April,   1884,  he  was  called 


on  a  mission  to  the  Southern  States, 
and  while  holding  a  meeting  in 
Lewis  county,  Tennessee,  Aug.  10, 
1884,  together  with  others,  he  was 
assaulted  by  a  mob  of  twenty-five 
masked  men.  Two  local  brethren, 
who  attempted  to  defend  the  Elders, 
were  instantly  killed  and  two  of  the 
Elders,  namely,  William  S.  Berry 
and  John  Henry  Gibbs,  shared  the 
same  fate.  The  following  account 
of  the  massacre  was  published  in 
the  "Millennial  Star,"  Vol.  46,  page 
570:  "Elders  John  H.  Gibbs,  Wm. 
S.  Berry  and  Wm.  H.  Jones  had  met 
at  the  house  of  James  Condor,  on 
Cane  Creek,  Lewis  county,  Tennes- 
see,   that    Sabbath    morning    for    the 


purpose  of  holding  religious  service. 
They  had  been  there  but  a  short 
time  when  a  body  of  masked  men 
rode  up  to  the  house  and  fired  at  the 
Elders,  instantly  killing  Elders  Gibbs 
and  Berry  and  wounding  Mrs.  Con- 
dor. Martin  Condor  was  then  shot 
and  killed,  and  his  half-brother, 
James  R.  Hutson,  after  shooting  one 
of  the  assassins,  met  the  same  fate. 
Elder  Jones,  seeing  that  the  only 
chance  to  save  his  life  was  by  run- 
ning to  the  woods,  fled,  followed 
and  fired  at  by  some  of  the  mob,  but 
escaped  unhurt.  Elder  Henry  Thomp- 
son, who  was  found  by  the  mob  at 
the  house  of  Mr.  Garrett,  near  by, 
also  managed  to  escape  to  the  woods, 
where  he  remained  without  food  or 
water  for  thirty-six  hours,  after 
which  he  was  conducted  by  Mr. 
Garrett  to  Shady  Grove.  The  bodies 
of  the  murdered  men  were  buried, 
but  those  of  Elders  Gibbs  and  Berry 
were  subsequently  taken  up  and  sent 
to  Utah,  where,  at  last  accounts, 
they  were  expected  to  arrive  on  the 
2  2nd  ult.  The  remains  of  Elder 
Gibbs  were  to  be  sent  to  Paradise, 
Cache  county,  where  his  family  re- 
sides, and  those  of  Elder  Berry 
were  to  go  to  Kanarra,  Iron  county, 
his  late  residence.  President  Joseph 
F.  Smith,  in  the  absence  of  Presi- 
dents Taylor  and  Cannon,  who  were 
on  a  preaching  tour  in  Idaho,  pub- 
lished a  request  that  memorial  ser- 
vices over  the  sorrowful  event  should 
be  held  in  the  various  Stakes  of 
Zion  on  Sunday,  Aug.  24th.  The 
notice  closed  with  a  recommendation 
that  moderation  and  the  patience 
of  the  Gospel  be  observed  in  all 
these  ceremonies,  rendering  honor 
and  regret  to  the  slain,  and  remem- 
bering that  our  mission  is  not  to 
wreak  vengeance  on  the  ungodly, "but 
to  preach  peace  on  earth  and  good- 
will to  all  men.'  "  Thus  it  will  be 
seen  that  Elder  Berry  was  killed  in 
his  native  State,  one  which  his  fore- 
fathers had  helped  to  settle  in  the 
beginning.      They    were    among    the 


;i6 


LATTER-DAY   SAINT 


first  whites  to  settle  in  that  country 
and  were  compelled  to  build  their 
hog  pens  adjoining  their  houses  in 
order  to  protect  the  inmates  of  the 
former  from  the  bears  which  at- 
tacked them  unless  guarded  with 
great  care.  Bro.  Berry  left  a  family 
of  thirteen  children,  the  youngest  of 
whom  he  never  saw,  it  having  been 
born  after  the  father's  departure 
upon  his  mission.  The  oldest  boy 
was  about  nine  years  of  age  and 
the  youngest  about  three  months  old 
when  the  father  was  murdered.  The 
martyred  Elder  was  known  as  one  of 
the  very  best  of  men;  he  was  just, 
conscientious,  industrious,  and  affec- 
tionate, and  died  as  he  had  lived,  in 
the  service  of  his  Master,  and  passed 
away  to  meet  the  martyr's  reward. 
The  following  was  published  in  the 
"Millennial  Star,"  Vol.  26,  page  587: 
"It  was  rather  a  hazardous  under- 
taking to  go  to  Cane  Creek  after  the 
bodies  of  Elders  Berry  and  Gibbs. 
Elder  W.  E.  Robison,  on  learning 
that  the  Elders  had  been  attacked  in 
that  region,  disguised  himself  and 
proceeded  thither  immediately,  in 
the  hope  of  being  able  to  render 
them  some  assistance  (as  he  had  not 
learned  the  particulars  of  the  affair, 
and  was  not  aware  that  the  Elders 
were  killed).  Before  he  arrived  at 
the  Condor  farm,  he  met  two  men 
who  were  guarding  the  road,  and  on 
entering  into  conversation  with 
them,  learned  that  they  were  two  of 
the  assassins.  They  were  evidently 
expecting  the  arrival  of  Elder  B.  H. 
Roberts  after  the  bodies  of  the  mur- 
dered Elders,  and  were  prepared  to 
waylay  and  kill  him.  Elder  Rob- 
erts subsequently  disguised  himself 
and  proceeded  by  another  route  to 
the  Condor  farm,  where,  with  the 
assistance  of  some  of  the  local 
Saints,  he  disinterred  the  bodies, 
placed  them  in  metallic  coffins,  and 
conveyed  them  safely  away.  Elder 
Robison  accompanied  the  bodies  to 
Utah,  where  they  arrived  on  the 
22nd    ult.      Thousands   of  people  as- 


sembled at  the  various  railway  sta- 
tions as  the  bodies  were  transported 
through  the  Territory — that  of  Elder 
Berry  southward  towards  Kanarra, 
and  that  of  Elder  Gibbs  northward 
to  Cache  county — to  manifest  their 
honor  for  the  noble  martyrs  and 
profound  sorrow  over  their  shocking 
death.  Bands  of  music  were  also  in 
attendance,  playing  solemn  airs.  No 
vindictive  or  revengeful  feelings 
were  manifested  by  the  Saints,  but 
the  sentiment  expressed  on  every 
hand  was,  that  though  the  officers 
of  the  law  should  fail  to  bring  the 
murderers  to  justice,  that  Being 
should  be  relied  upon  to  do  so  who 
has  said  'Vengeance  is  mine;  I  will 
repay."  " 

BIESIXGER,  Thomas,  a  prominent 
Elder  in  the  Church  and  a  success- 
ful missionary,  was  born  Dec.  20, 
1844,  at  Wiesenstetten,  Wurtemberg, 


Germany,  the  son  of  Joseph  Biesin- 
ger  and  Maria  Josepha  Maier.  Be- 
coming a  convert  to  "Mormonism" 
he  was  baptized  July  27,  1862,  in 
Lake  Constanz,  by  Joseph  Zollig, 
Emigrating  to  America  in  1865,  he 
crossed  the  Atlantic  in  the  sailing 
vessel   "Belle  Wood"  and  the  plains 


BIOGRAPHICAL  ENCYCLOPEDIA.                                  317 

as  a  teamster  in  a  merchant  train,  chen  in  a  disorganized  condition, 
donating  his  wages  toward  the  trans-  and  Elder  Biesinger  wes  sent  there 
portation  of  poor  Saints.  He  ar-  to  reorganize  the  branches  and  set 
rived  in  Salt  Lake  City  Oct.  8,  1865,  things  in  order  generally.  In  this 
and  resided  successively  in  Lehi  and  work  he  was  eminently  successful, 
Fairfield,  Utah  county.  In  1874  notwithstanding  the  efforts  on  the 
(March  9th)  he  was  ordained  an  part  of  police  authorities  to  hinder 
Elder.  He  was  appointed  superin-  him  in  his  labors.  At  length  he 
tendent  of  the  Fairfield  Sunday  was  summoned  before  the  author- 
school  June  27,  1875,  and  later  of  ities  and  ordered  to  leave  Bavaria 
the  Cedar  Valley  Ward  Sunday  in  twenty-four  hours.  On  this  oc- 
school,  including  Cedar  Fort  and  casion  he  had  a  splendid  opportunity 
Fairfield;  was  also  head  teacher  in  to  bear  his  testimony  before  the 
the  Ward.  He  was  ordained  a  Sev-  chief  magistrate  and  others.  Soon 
enty  May  14,  1876;  was  appointed  in  afterwards  he  was  released  from  his 
September,  1875,  to  rebaptize  the  mission  and  on  returning  home,  to- 
Saints  in  Fairfield  into  the  United  gether  with  sixteen  other  returning 
Order;  acted  as  presiding  teacher  in  Elders  and  324  emigrating  Saints, 
Fairfield  and  superintendent  of  the  he  was  placed  in  charge  of  the  Swiss 
Sunday  school  until  he  moved  to  and  Germain  Saints  and  also  acted 
Lehi  in  1880.  While  a  resident  of  as  a  counselor  to  Elder  John  W. 
Fairfield  he  also  acted  as  school  Thornley,  the  president  of  the  com- 
trustee  in  Fairfield  and  carried  the  pany,  which  arrived  in  Salt  Lake 
mail  from  Lehi  to  Ophir  two  years.  City  Sept.  14,  1885.  After  his  re- 
in October,  1883,  he  was  called  on  turn  to  Utah,  Elder  Biesinger  took 
a  mission  to  Austria.  After  his  charge  of  Beck's  Hot  Springs,  near 
arrival  in  Vienna,  Nov.  25,  1883,  Salt  Lake  City,  and  for  six  months 
he  labored  three  months  with  Elder  managed  Solomon  Bros.'  restaurant. 
Paul  E.  B.  Hammer  and  baptized  In  September,  1887,  he  went  to  Eu- 
three  persons.  He  then  went  to  rope  on  a  business  trip,  expecting 
Prague,  Bohemia,  where  he  was  ar-  to  return  in  a  few  months,  but 
rested  March  25,  1884,  and  after  a  President  George  Teasdale  appointed 
preliminary  hearing  he  was  confined  him  to  labor  as  a  missionary  in 
in  the  State  prison  for  38  days.  He  Switzerland,  where  he  presided  over 
was  then  tried  and  sentenced  to  the  East  Swiss  conference  until  De- 
serve 30  more  days  in  prison.  After  cember,  1888,  after  which  he  labored 
his  release  from  prison  he  labored  a  for  a  short  time  in  Berlin,  Germany, 
short  time  in  Switzerland,  where  he  In  188  9  he  was  released  to  return 
presided  over  the  Berner  conference  home,  crossing  the  Atlantic  in  the 
from  August  to  December,  1884.  In  steamship  "Wyoming,"  together  with 
December,  1884,  he  was  called  by  359  emigrating  Saints  and  18  re- 
Apostle  John  Henry  Smith  to  make  turning  Elders;  at  this  time  he 
a  second  attempt  to  do  missionary  again  had  charge  of  the  Swiss  and 
work  in  Austria  and  Hungary,  but  his  German  Saints  and  was  also  coun- 
name  being  known  to  the  police  au-  selor  to  Lars  S.  Anderson,  president 
thorities  throughout  the  empire  and  of  the  company.  They  arrived  in 
the  newspapers  having  given  him  con-  Salt  Lake  City  June  26,  1889.. 
siderable  unsolicited  advertising,  he  Since  his  return  from  that  mission 
was  forced  to  leave  Austria  again  after  Bro.  Biesinger  has  been  engaged  in 
a  sojourn  there  of  three  months,  merchandizing,  mining,  insurance 
At  that  time  several  Elders  were  and  optical  business,  etc.  In  a 
banished  from  Bavaria,  which  left  Church  capacity  he  is  at  present  a 
the    Saints    in    Nurenberg    and    Mun-  Ward      teacher,      a     Sunday      school 


318 


LATTER-DAY    SAINT 


teacher,  has  been  a  Ward  represen- 
tative of  the  Genealogical  Society 
during  the  past  three  years  and  now 
labors  as  a  special  missionary  and 
ordinance  worker  in  the  Salt  Lake 
Temple.  Bro.  Biesinger  had  three 
wives, wives,  namely,  Caroline  Hart- 
korn  and  Elizabeth  Kroph,  whom  he 
married  March  9,  1874,  and  Louise 
Markham.  to  whom  he  was  married 
in  1886.  His  first  wife  was  a  widow 
with  small  children  to  whom  he  be- 
came a  guardian.  There  were  no 
children  by  this  marriage.  His  second 
wife,  Elizabeth,  bore  him  seven  chil- 
dren and  his  third  wife,  Louise,  six 
children. 

BILLINGS,  George  Pierce,  Bishop 
of  the  Bonneville  Ward  in  Provo 
(Utah  Stake),  Utah  county,  Utah, 
was  born  Dec.  4,  1856,  at  Manti, 
Sanpete  county,  Utah,  the  son  of 
Alfred  Nelson  Billings  and  Deborah 
Patten.  He  removed  with  his  par- 
ents to  Provo  in  1862.  Here  he  re- 
ceived good  schooling  and  was  bap- 
tized in  1866  by  Chas.  D.  Miller.  In 
1878  (Dec.  2  7th)  he  married  Lydia 
Anna  Young,  who  bore  him  seven 
children,  namely,  Winnie  L.,  George 
Victor,  Emily  Deborah,  Leon  Young. 
Florence  Laura,  Alfred  Vivian  and 
Kenneth  Patten.  All  these  are  mar- 
ried, except  the  youngest,  and  Bro. 
and  Sister  Billings  have  already 
tw^enty-eight  grandchildren.  In  1885 
Bro.  Billings  moved  to  Jensen,  Uin- 
tah county,  where  he  engaged  in 
general  mercantile  business.  After 
being  ordained  an  Elder  by  John  P. 
R.  Johnson  March  31,  1883,  at 
Provo,  he  was  ordained  a  High 
Priest  Aug.  7,  1894,  by  Abraham  H. 
Cannon  and  set  apart  to  act  as 
Bishop  of  the  Jensen  Ward  in  the 
Uintah  Stake.  He  held  this  posi- 
tion until  August,  1908,  when  he 
was  honorably  released,  because  of 
his  return  to  Provo.  While  a  resi- 
dent of  Uintah  county  he  served  as 
justice  of  the  peace  and  as  county 
commissioner,    and  was    also    elected 


a  member  of  the  Utah  State  Legis- 
lature in  1901-1902  from  Uintah 
county.  He  acted  as  chaplain  in  the 
State  Legislature  in  1916.  After  his 
return  to  Provo  in  1908  he  again 
became  a  diligent  Church  worker 
and  was  set  apart  as  Bishop  of  the 
Bonneville  Ward,  Feb.  19,  1918. 
Since  he  became  Bishop  of  that 
Ward  a  fine  chapel  has  been  erected 
at  a  cost  of  about  $25,000.  As  far 
back  as  he  can  remember  Bro. 
Billings  has  had  a  testimony  of  the 
truth  of  the  gospel  and  has  always 
responded  willingly  to  any  call  made 
upon  him  to  labor  in  the  Priest- 
hood. He  has  an  abiding  faith  in 
the  great  Latter-day  W^ork  and  has 
placed  his  Church  duties  above 
everything  else  in  life.  The  Bishop 
is  a  farmer  and  stock  raiser  by 
avocation. 

BINGHAM,    Alberii    A.,    Bishop    of 

Middleton  Ward  (Ogden  Stake), 
Weber  county,  Utah,  and  later  Bish- 
op   of    Riverside,    Idalyo,    was    born 


April  14,  1876,  at  Huntsville,  Weber 
county,  Utah,  the  son  of  Erastus  P. 
Bingham  and  Emmeline  C.  Allen. 
He  was  baptized  June  5,  1884,  by 
Peter   C.   Geertsen;    ordained   a   Dea- 


BIOGRAPHICAL   ENCYCLOPEDIA. 


319 


con  March  16,  1889,  by  George 
Langlois;  ordained  a  Teacher  March 
25,  1895,  by  David  McKay;  ordained 
a  Priest  Oct.  8,  1898,  By  David 
McKay;  ordained  a  Seventy  Nov.  7, 
1900,  by  Heber  J.  Grant;  filled  a 
mission  to  the  Eastern  States  in 
1900-1902,  and  was  ordained  a  High 
Priest  and  Bishop  Sept.  10,  1905,  by 
Joseph  F.  Smith  and  set  apart  to 
preside  over  the  Middleton  Ward. 
Early  in  life  Bro.  Bingham  served 
as  first  counselor  in  a  Teachers' 
quorum,  acted  as  secretary  of  an 
Elders'  quorum  and  later  as  secretary 
of  a  Seventies  quorum;  also  as  an 
officer  in  the  Ward  Y.  M.  M.  I.  A. 
and  Sunday  school.  He  moved  to 
Riverside,  Idaho,  in  July,  1909,  and 
acted  as  a  member  of  the  Sunday 
School  Board  of  the  Blackfoot  Stake 
from  1909  to  1912.  He  also  served 
as  superintendent  of  the  Ward  Sun- 
day school  and  was  set  apart  as  first 
counselor  to  Bishop  O.  J.  Cobley 
on  Aug.  18,  1912;  he  was  chosen  as 
first  counselor  to  Bishop  Geo.  H. 
Smith  Nov.  10,  1915.  In  March, 
1919,  he  was  sustained  as  Bishop 
of  the  Riverside  Ward  and  was  set 
apart  to  that  position  May  18,  1919, 
by  Apostle  Joseph  F.  Smith  junior. 
In  1904  (Jan.  27th)  Bishop  Bingham 
married  Petra  J.  Poulsen  (daughter 
of  Andrew  P.  Poulsen  and  Sine  Ben- 
son), who  was  born  Dec.  26,  1877, 
in  Plain  City,  Weber  county,  Utah. 
The  issue  of  this  marriage  was 
three  children,  namely,  Wintle  A. 
and  Eva  and  Neva  (twins).  Bishop 
Bingham  is  a   farmer  by  avocation. 

BIRD,  Mormon  Delheit,  fourth 
Bishop  of  the  Mendon  Ward  (Hy- 
rum  Stake),  Cache  county,  Utah, 
was  born  Sept.  2,  1877,  at  Wells- 
ville.  Cache  county,  Utah,  the  son  of 
Mormon  Bird  and  Emerine  E.  Gard- 
ner. He  was  baptized  Nov.  6,  1885, 
by  Christian  Sorensen,  ordained  suc- 
cessively to  the  office  of  Deacon  and 
Priest;  ordained  an  Elder  June  19, 
1898,  by  Alexander  H.  Richards;  or- 


dained a  Seventy  July  6,  1898,  by 
Seymour  B.  Young,  and  ordained  a 
High  Priest  and  Bishop  April  26, 
1903,  by  Matthias  F.  Cowley.  When 
quite  young  he  acted  as  a  counselor 
in  a  Ward  Y.  M.  M.  I.  A.,  superin- 
tendent of  a  Religion  Class,  presi- 
dent of  a  Deacons'  quorum,  and  was 
also  an  active  worker  in  the  Ward 
Sunday  school.  In  1898-1900  he 
filled  a  mission  to  the  Northwestern 
States,  laboring  in  the  State  of  Ore- 
gon,   part    of   the    time    as    president 


of  the  Baker  conference.  In  a  civil 
capacity  he  has  served  one  term  as 
a  councilman  in  the  town  of  Men- 
don. In  1901  (Dec.  18th)  he  mar- 
ried Mary  Ann  Hughes  (daughter  of 
Chas.  Hughes  and  Sarah  Walker), 
who  was  born  Dec.  14,  1879,  at  Men- 
don. This  marriage  has  been  blessed 
with  five  children,  namely,  Irvin  D., 
Violet,  Artice  C,  Orlie  and  Marcell 
F.  Farming  is  Bishop  Bird's  main 
occupation. 

HIS(  HOFF,  Joseph  Peter,  fourth 
Bishop  of  Woodville  (Shelley  Stake), 
Bingham  county.  Idaho,  was  born 
Oct.  22,  1872,  at  Fountain  Green, 
Sanpete  county,  Utah,  the  son  of 
Jacob  Bischoff  and  Maria  Jensen. 
He  was  baptized   in   1881,  by  Chris- 


320  LATTER-DAY   SAINT 

tian  J.  Christiansen;  ordained  a  Dea-  tiful,  Davis  county,  he  moved  to 
con  and  afterwards  a  Priest;  or-  Eagle  Rock  (now  Idaho  Falls), 
dained  a  Seventy  in  1898,  by  Francis  Idaho,  in  1884.  Here  he  took  an 
M.  Lyman,  and  ordained  a  High  active  part  among  the  Saints,  a 
Priest  and  Bishop  in  1916,  by  George  branch  of  the  Church  being  organ- 
F.  Richards  and  set  apart  to  preside  ized  there  about  that  time.  He 
over  the  Woodville  Ward.  Brother  attended  meetings  and  Sunday 
Bischoff  taught  school  for  twelve  schools  in  private  houses  and  assist- 
years;  he  has  acted  as  justice  of  ed  materially  in  the  erection  of 
the  peace,  member  of  the  Fountain  the  first  Latter-day  Saint  meeting 
Green  town  board,  county  commis-  house,  which  was  built  in  Eagle 
sioner  in  Franklin  county,  Idaho,  Rock  in  the  summer  of  1885.  He 
school  trustee,  etc.  As  a  Church  also  acted  as  an  assistant  to  the 
man  he  has  always  been  active  and  first  superintendent  of  the  Eagle 
energetic;  thus  he  acted  as  president  Rock  Sunday  school.  Later  he  acted 
of  the  Ward  Y.  M.  M.  I.  A.,  presi-  as  regular  assistant  superintendent 
dent  of  a  Deacons'  quorum  and  of  the  Sunday  school  and  also  as 
president  of  the  106th  and  137th  clerk  of  the  branch.  Still  later  he 
Quorum  of  Seventy.  In  1898-1900  was  appointed  presiding  Elder  of 
he  filled  a  mission  to  the  Southern  the  Eagle  Rock  branch,  succeeding 
States,  laboring  principally  in  North  John  D.  Evans  in  that  position. 
Carolina.  He  also  acted  as  confer-  Bro.  Blackburn  also  paid  the  first 
ence  superintendent  of  Sunday  tithing  that  was  ever  contributed  to 
schools,  counselor  to  the  president  the  Church  from  the  Eagle  Rock 
and  afterwards  as  president  of  the  branch  which  in  the  beginning  con- 
conference.  In  1902  (Sept.  3rd)  stituted  a  part  of  the  Lewisville 
Bishop  Bischoff  married  Eleanore  Ward.  In  June,  1885,  Bro.  Black- 
C.  Olsen  (daughter  of  Hans  P.  Ol-  burn  re-baptized  61  members  of  the 
sen  and  Ellen  K.  Aagaard),  who  was  Church  who  by  this  means  became 
born  May  7,  1877,  in  Fountain  identified  with  the  Eagle  Rock 
Green,  Sanpete  county,  Utah.  Five  branch.  He  moved  part  of  his 
children  have  blessed  this  marriage,  family  to  Lewisville,  where  he  built 
namely.  Garland  P.,  Morris  J.,  Dan-  a  small  log  house  and  entered  160 
iel  R.  and  James  R.  (twins),  and  acres  of  land  as  a  homestead,  but 
Hazel.  having     yielded     obedience     to     the 

higher  law  of  marriage,  Bro.  Black- 
BIjACKBUKN,  William,  a  faithful  burn  found  it  necessary  to  remove  to 
Elder  and  Church  worker,  was  born  other  parts  of  the  country,  in  order 
in  Manchester,  England,  Feb.  5,  to  avoid  arrest.  He  remained  on 
1857,  the  son  of  Samuel  Blackburn  the  'underground"  about  five  years 
and  Sarah  S.  Lamb.  His  parents  and  made  a  home  for  his  plural 
having  embraced  the  fullness  of  the  family  in  St.  Charles,  Idaho,  his 
gospel  in  1844,  William  was  also  first  family  residing  in  the  13th 
baptized  as  a  convert  to  "Mormon-  Ward,  Salt  Lake  City.  From  1887 
ism"  March  28,  1868,  and  became  a  to  1890  Brother  Blackburn  lived  at 
diligent  worker  for  the  Church.  He  Yost,  Utah,  where  he  acted  ably  as 
was  ordained  an  Elder  July  20,  branch  clerk  and  secretary  and 
1876,  and  appointed  to  preside  over  treasurer  in  the  Sunday  school  and 
the  Burnley  and  Rawtenstall  branch-  filled  other  important  positions, 
es  of  the  Liverpool  conference.  Later  he  located  at  Moreland,  near 
which  position  he  held  until  he  emi-  Blackfoot,  Idaho,  and  also  took  em- 
grated  to  Utah,  in  May,  1883.  After  ployment  at  Scofield  or  Winter 
residing  temporarily  in  South  Boun-  Quarters,    Utah,    being    there    at    the 


BIOGRAPHICAL   ENCYCLOPEDIA. 


321 


time  of  the  terrible  explosion  which 
caused  the  loss  of  twenty  lives,  but 
through  the  providence  of  the  Lord, 
his  own  was  spared.  He  was  one  of 
the  seven  volunteers  who  broke 
through  into  mine  No.  4  to  rescue 
the  living  and  remove  the  bodies  of 
the  dead.  On  that  trying  occasion 
he  put  in  26  shifts  in  12  days  as 
one  of  the  rescuers.  Together  with 
his  wife  and  five  sons  (the  oldest 
11  and  the  youngest  5  years  old), 
Bro.  Blackburn  moved  to  Byron, 
Wyoming,  in  the  summer  of  1892. 
On  his  arrival  there  he  was  almost 
penniless,  but  he  renewed  his  efforts 
and  became  one  of  the  Latter-day 
Saint  pioneers  of  the  Big  Horn  coun- 
try. He  studied  land  surveying  and 
map-making  and  for  a  number  of 
years  worked  for  the  Oil  Land  Com- 
pany. Always  taking  an  active  part 
in  public  affairs,  he  acted  as  a 
notary  public  for  12  years.  He  has 
lived  in  the  Penrose  branch  and 
Ward  ever  since  that  branch  and 
Ward  was  first  organized,  and  was 
appointed  the  first  branch  clerk 
Dec.  17,  1905,  and  Ward  clerk  when 
the  Ward  was  organized.  He  plat- 
ted and  surveyed  the  town  of  Pen- 
rose, and  on  April  11,  1915,  he  was 
sustained  as  first  counselor  to  Bish- 
op James  B.  Wasden  of  the  Penrose 
Ward.  Bro.  Blackburn  is  still  an 
active  and  energetic  Church  worker 
and  has  raised  a  fine  family,  all  of 
his  children  being  active  Church 
workers.  Through  his  financial  as- 
sistance two  of  his  sons  have  filled 
honorable  missions,  one  to  the  Cen- 
tral States,  laboring  in  Texas,  and 
the  other  to  the  Southern  States, 
laboring  in  North  Carolina.  Two  of 
his  sons  also  rendered  efficient  mili- 
tary service  in  the  U.  S.  army  over- 
seas during  the  late  war,  and  one 
of  them  (Lafayette  Blackburn)  died 
as  a  result  of  being  gassed. 

BLAKE,  James,  first  counselor  to 
Mark  Austin,  president  of  the  Fre- 
mont Stake,   Madison  county,  Idaho, 


was  born  Aug.  23,  1855,  in  Brid- 
port,  Doretshire,  England,  the  son  of 
John  Blake  and  Sally  Piper.  He 
was  baptized  Dec.  21,  1865,  by  Har- 
rison T.  Shurtliff.  In  1873  his 
father     moved     to     Oldham,     Lanca- 


shire. England,  where  James  worked 
in  a  cotton  factory,  and,  assisted  by 
his  father,  saved  enough  money  to 
pay  his  fare  to  America.  He  crossed 
the  Atlantic  in  the  steamship  "Ne- 
vada," which  sailed  from  Liverpool, 
England,  in  June,  1874.  After  lo- 
cating temporarily  at  Fillmore,  Mil- 
lard county,  and  working  in  a  black- 
smith's shop  in  the  United  Order, 
he  went  to  Salt  Lake  county,  where 
he  worked  on  canals  and  on  smelt- 
ers, making  his  temporary  home  in 
West  Jordan.  He  also  worked  for 
Henry  Byron  Beckstead  of  South 
Jordan.  In  1877  he  sent  the  neces- 
sary means  to  England  for  the  emi- 
gration of  his  father,  who  arrived  in 
Utah  that  summer  and  located  in 
South  Jordan.  In  November,  1878, 
Bro.  Blake  married  Elizabeth  C 
Beckstead  (eldest  daughter  of  George 
Wesley  Beckstead),  who  has  borne 
her  husband  sixteen  children,  name- 
ly, Sarah  Ellen,  Bertha,  Frank  J., 
Beatrice  M.,  Olive  E.,  Warren  W., 
Gladys  C,  George  Harold,   Ruby  O., 


Vol.  Ill,  No.  23. 


September,  1919. 


322 


LATTER-DAY   SAINT 


Alzina  R.,  Rulon  M.,  Grant  M.,  Glen 
R.,  and  Reed  W.  Fourteen  of  these 
children  are  still  alive.  Brother 
Blake  was  ordained  an  Elder  in 
1874  by  Joseph  Gee;  ordained  a 
Seventy  June  23,  1887,  by  John  A. 
Egbert,  and  later  set  apart  as  a 
president  of  the  95th  quorum  of 
Seventy.  In  1896-1898  he  filled  a 
mission  to  Great  Britain.  In  1908 
(Sept.  21st)  he  was  ordained  a  High 
Priest  and  set  apart  as  a  High  Coun- 
cilor in  the  Fremont  Stake  of  Zion. 
In  1910  (Dec.  18th)  he  was  set 
apart  as  second  counselor  to  Pres- 
ident Mark  Austin  of  the  Fremont 
Stake  and  held  that  position  until 
June  22,  1919,  when  he  was  set 
apart  as  first  counselor  to  President 
Mark  Austin.  At  Sugar  City,  Idaho, 
at  the  present  time,  he  is  agricul- 
turist for  the  Utah-Idaho  Sugar  Co. 

BLUNCK,    Hans    Henry   Cliristian, 

first  presiding  Elder  of  the  Herbert 
Branch  (Fremont  Stake),  Madison 
county,    Idaho,    was    born    Aug.    25, 


1877,  in  Kiel,  Holstein,  Germany,  the 
son  of  Claus  Christian  Blunck  and 
Annie  M.  Schulter.  He  was  baptized 
May  15,  1889,  by  Lewis  M.  Cannon; 
ordained   successively   to   the   offices 


of  Deacon,  Priest,  Elder  and  High 
Priest.  When  ordained  to  the  latter 
office  he  was  also  set  apart  to  pre- 
side over  the  Herbert  Branch.  He 
filled  a  home  mission  for  three 
months  in  1900.  In  1903  (Sept. 
29th)  he  married  Hedvig  Staub, 
(daughter  of  William  Staub  and 
Sophia  Struhs),  who  was  born 
March  9,  188  6.  This  marriage  has 
been  blessed  with  six  children, 
namely:  George  H.,  William  H., 
George  C,  Kenneth  E.,  Rulon  D., 
and  Lulu  M.  Bro.  Blunck  emigrated 
to  America  in  1891  and  settled  at 
Rexburg,  Idaho,  in  1896.  In  1901 
he,  together  with  others,  commenced 
successful  dry  farming  on  the  bench 
lying  at  the  foot  of  the  mountains 
south  of  Rexburg. 

BOGGS,  Francis,  one  of  the  orig- 
inal Utah  pioneers  of  1847,  was 
born  May  17,  1807,  at  Belmont, 
Ohio,  the  son  of  Alexander  Boggs 
and  Hannah  Martin.  He  was  bap- 
tized May  17,  184^,  by  John 
Cairn  and  took  an  active  part  in 
the  building  of  Nauvoo,  111.  He 
participated  with  the  Saints  in  their 
exodus  and  when  a  selection  of  men 
was  made  to  pioneer  the  way  to 
Great  Salt  Lake  Valley,  he  was 
chosen  as  one  of  that  historic  band 
who  crossed  the  plains  and  moun- 
tains under  the  direction  of  Prest. 
Brigham  Young,  arriving  in  the 
Valley  in  July,  1847.  After  resid- 
ing in  the  8th  Ward,  Salt  Lake 
City,  about  three  years  he  located 
at  Springville,  Utah  county,  and 
later  located  temporarily  in  Fill- 
more, Millard  county.  Still  later  he 
was  called  to  strengthen  the  settle- 
ment of  Parowan  and  also  filled  a 
mission  to  Las  Vegas,  (now  in 
Nevada).  After  his  return  from 
that  mission  he  was  called  to  Dixie, 
(southern  Utah),  arriving  in  Wash- 
ington Dec.  7,  1861.  Here  he  re- 
sided until  the  day  of  his  death 
which  occurred  Jan.  22,  1889.  Bro. 
Boggs   was  a   faithful   Church   mem- 


BIOGRAPHICAL  ENCYCLOPEDIA. 


323 


ber  and  a  hardy  pioneer;  he  was  a 
carpenter  by  trade,  but  also  en- 
gaged in  farming.  He  filled  a  num- 
ber of  positions  of  honor  and  re- 
sponsibility and  served  one  term  in 
the  Utah  legislature.  In  1846  he 
married  Eveline  Martin  (daughter 
of  Reuben  Martin  and  Eveline  Mar- 
tin), who  was  born  in  1816  and 
died  in  1887.  She  bore  her  husband 
11  children,  namely:  Helen,  Fran- 
ces, Zachariah,  William,  Frank, 
Mary,  Eveline,  Hyrum,  Hannah, 
Phoebe  Jane,  Nancy  and   Reuben. 

BOND,  William  Samuel,  Bishop  of 
Reed  Ward,  Beaver  Stake,  Beaver 
county,  Utah,  was  born  Feb.  5, 
18  64,  at  Porterville,  Morgan  county, 
Utah,  the  son  of  Wm.  Bond  and 
Ann  Adams.     He  was  baptized  Sept. 

15,  1872,  by  Elias  A.  Beckstrand 
and  became  a  resident  in  that  dis- 
trict of  country  which  is  now  in- 
cluded in  the  Reed  Ward  in  1893, 
engaging  in  farming  and  stock- 
raising  which  is  his  present  occupa- 
tion. He  acted  as  superintendent 
of  the  Reed  Sunday  School  for 
thirteen  years,  after  being  ordained 
an  Elder  Aug.  13,  1905,  by  Jacob 
Tanner.  He  was  ordained  a  High 
Priest  and  Bishop  Feb.  14,  1914,  by 
John  F.  Tolton  and  set  apart  to 
preside  over  the  Reed  Ward  which 
was  organized  at  that  time.  In 
1885  (Nov.  25th)  he  married  Ar- 
mena  Barkdull  (daughter  of  Solo- 
mon Barkdull  and  Lucy  J.  Clark), 
who  was  born  March  5,  18  63,  in 
Goshen,  Utah  county.  Five  children 
blessed  this  marriage,  namely,  Wil- 
liam M.,  Charlotte  Ann,  Ervin  J., 
Clinton  and  Cuma. 

BRIGHT,  John  Parley,  a  member 
of  the  High  Council  in  the  Port- 
neuf  Stake  of  Zion,  was  born  March 

16,  1875,  at  Richmond,  Cache 
county,  Utah,  the  son  of  Gilbert 
Bright  and  Alice  Hill.  He  was 
baptized  May  3,  1883,  when  eight 
years   of  age   by   Christian   H.    Mon- 


son  and  confirmed  by  A.  C.  Brewer; 
ordained  a  Teacher  in  his  early 
youth;  ordained  an  Elder  in  1898 
by  Joseph  Webb,  and  a  High  Priest 
and  Bishop  in  1908  by  Hyrum  M. 
Smith  and  set  apart  to  preside  over 
the  Grant  Ward.  While  a  resident 
of  Richmond,  he  was  an  active 
worker  in  the  Y.  M.  M.  I.  A.  In 
1898  he  moved  to  Downey,  Idaho, 
and  was  a  pioneer  settler  in  that 
part  of  Marsh  Valley  which  is  now 
included  in  the  Grant  Ward.  There 
again  he  took  a  most  active  part 
in   the    Y.    M.    M.    I.    A.,   acting   first 


as  a  counselor  and  subsequently  as 
president  of  that  association.  In 
August,  1915,  when  the  Pocatello 
Stake  was  divided,  Bro.  Bright  was 
chosen  as  a  High  Councilor  in  the 
Portneuf  Stake,  which  position  he 
still  holds.  In  1898  (Dec.  21st)  he 
married  Ellen  C.  Anderson  (daugh- 
ter of  Lars  E.  Anderson  and  Annie 
C.  Anderson),  who  was  born  in 
Sweden,  Sept.  24,  1876.  This  mar- 
riage has  been  blessed  with  eight 
children,  namely,  Elmer  P.,  Edna 
C,  Alton  C,  Julia  M.,  Sadonia  E., 
Kenneth  F.,  Donald  M.  and  Alice  L. 

BRIGHTON,      Robert     Alexander, 

Bishop     of     the    Thirty-third     Ward 


324 


LATTER-DAY   SAINT 


(Liberty  Stake)  Salt  Lake  City,  Utah, 
was  born  June  19,  1855,  in  Jeffer- 
son county,  Missouri,  the  son  of 
Wm.  Stuart  Brighton  and  Catherine 


Bow.  With  his  parents  he  emi- 
grated to  Utah  in  1857  crossing  the 
plains  with  Israel  Evans'  handcart 
company,  and  with  his  parents  par- 
ticipated in  the  "move"  south  in 
1858.  Returning  to  Salt  Lake  City 
later  he  was  baptized  June  19, 
1865,  in  Salt  Lake  City  by  his  father, 
and  ordained  an  Elder  Nov.  19, 
1877,  by  Alonzo  H.  Raleigh.  In 
1879  Bro.  Brighton  married  Ellen 
Allen  (daughter  of  James  H.  Allen 
and  Susannah  Smith),  who  was  born 
April  12,  1855,  at  Beverley,  York- 
shire, England.  Nine  children  have 
blessed  this  marriage,  namely,  Cath- 
erine B.  (now  dead),  Allison  (now 
dead),  Ellen  F.,  Robert  and  Allen 
(who  died  in  infancy),  Janet  M., 
James  Roy  (who  died  while  on  ship- 
board on  his  way  to  France,  Sept. 
23,  1918,  twenty-eight  years  old), 
Lucile,  Wendella  S.  and  Carl  Wil- 
liam (who  died  in  infancy).  In 
1902  (Dec.  28th)  Brother  Brighton 
was  ordained  a  High  Priest  and 
Bishop  by  Apostle  Rudger  Clawson 
and  set  apart  to  preside  over  the 
Thirty-third   Ward,    Salt   Lake    City, 


which  was  then  organized.  He  held 
that  position  for  eight  and  a  half 
years.  From  1911  to  1913  Bishop 
Brighton  filled  a  mission  to  Eng- 
land, where  he  presided  over  the 
Leeds  conference  for  some  time  and 
was  later  transferred  to  the  London 
conference.  His  chief  avocations  in 
life  have  been  mining  and  prospect- 
ing. 

BRIM,  William  Franklin,  a  Patri- 
arch in  the  Church,  was  born  Aug. 
23,  1850,  in  Pottawattamie  county, 
Iowa,  the  son  of  Alexander  Brim 
and  Anna  Bishop,  while  his  parents 
were  en  route  from  Nauvoo  to  the 
Rocky  Mountains.  Together  with 
his  parents  he  arrived  in  Great 
Salt  Lake  Valley  in  1852  and  set- 
tled in  the  First  Ward,  Salt  Lake 
City,  where  he  was  raised  and  bap- 
tized. His  father  was  one  of  the 
first  tanners  in  the  Valley.  When 
William  F.  was  sixteen  years  old  he 
located  in  Coalville,  Summit  county, 
and  worked  in  18  68  on  the  Union 
Pacific    Railroad    on    Yellow    Creek, 


east  of  Echo  Canyon.  In  1871  he 
and  some  of  his  brothers  went  to 
Ophir,  Rush  Valley,  where  they 
spent  four  years  engaged  in  mining. 


BIOGRAPHICAL  ENCYCLOPEDIA. 


325 


In  1875  Bro.  Brim  married  Rosabell 
Phippen  (daughter  of  Worthington 
Phippen  and  Julia  Pratt),  who  was 
born  in  1855  in  Salt  Lake  City.  At 
this  time  Bro.  Brim  was  ordained 
an  Elder  in  the  Salt  Lake  Temple. 
In  May,  1876,  he  moved  to  Owyhee 
(now  Cassia)  county,  Idaho,  where 
he  figured  prominently  as  one  of 
the  first  "Mormon"  settlers.  There 
also  he  acted  as  assistant  superin- 
tendent of  the  Albion  Ward  Sun- 
day School.  When  the  Cassia  Stake 
was  organized  in  18  8  4  he  was  or- 
dained a  High  Priest  by  Apostle 
John  W.  Taylor  and  set  apart  as 
second  counselor  to  President  Hor- 
ton  D.  Haight.  At  the  same  time 
his  wife  Rosabell  was  set  apart  as 
Stake  president  of  the  Y.  L.  M.  I. 
A.  of  the  Cassia  Stake,  which  posi- 
tion she  held  for  thirteen  years. 
Bro.  Brim  also  held  his  position  as 
second  counselor  in  the  Stake  presi- 
dency for  thirteen  years,  during 
which  time  he  made  the  almost  un- 
precedented record  of  never  being 
late  to  any  of  the  important  meet- 
ings held  at  Oakley,  though  he 
lived  twenty-five  miles  away  from 
the  Stake  headquarters.  He  after- 
wards moved  to  Oakley,  Cassia 
county,  where  he  resided  until  1916. 
In  1897,  while  a  member  of  the 
Stake  presidency  he  filled  a  mission 
to  the  State  of  New  York,  laboring 
principally  in  Fayette  Twp.,  Seneca 
county  (where  the  Church  was  or- 
ganized) and  .  where  no  Latter-day 
Saint  Elder  had  visited  as  a  mis- 
sionary for  twenty  years.  His  mis- 
sionary companion  was  Elder  Theo- 
dore T.  Burton  of  Salt  Lake  City. 
After  the  death  of  President  Haight, 
Jan.  19,  1900,  Elder  Brim,  together 
with  Counselor  Moroni  Pickett,  pre- 
sided over  the  Cassia  Stake  until  a 
new  presidency  was  chosen.  At 
that  time  he  was  ordained  a  Patri- 
arch by  Apostle  Mathias  F.  Cowley. 
His  wife  died  March  10,  1910,  child- 
less, but  in  their  early  married  life 
they  adopted  an  infant  only  ten  days 


old,  and  raised  her  to  womanhood; 
she  is  now  the  wife  of  Samuel 
Cook  of  Oakley,  Idaho.  In  1917 
Elder  Brim  married  Elizabeth  Has- 
lem  (daughter  of  John  S.  Haslem 
and  Martha  Hammer  of  Salt  Lake 
City).  She  was  born  Sept.  14, 
1857.  Bro.  Brim's  present  home  is 
in  the  Emigration  Ward,  Salt  Lake 
City,  Utah. 

BRIMHALL,  George  Henry,  presi- 
dent of  the  Brigham  Young  Univer- 
sity, of  Provo,  Utah  county,  Utah, 
was  born  Dec.  9,  1852,  in  Salt  Lake 


City,  the  son  of  George  Washington 
Brimhall  and  Rachel  Ann  Mayer.  He 
occupies  a  position  of  distinctive  pre- 
cedence in  educational  circles  in  the 
west.  His  father  was  born  Nov.  14, 
1814,  became  a  resident  of  Utah  dur- 
ing the  era  of  pioneer  development, 
and  was  identified  with  its  industrial 
interests  as  a  master  mechanic.  He 
was  prominent  in  religious  and  politi- 
cal circles  and  was  a  member  of  the 
Territorial  legislature.  Rachel  Ann 
Mayer,  a  daughter  of  George  Mayer 
and  Ann  Yost,  was  born  in  Indiana, 
Feb.  9,  1829.  The  daughter  of  pio- 
neers, she  herself  was  a  pioneer  and 
did  the  work  incident  to  those  days. 
Her  family,  consisting  of  ten  children 


326 


LATTER-DAY   SAINT 


(four  sons  and  six  daughters),  as  a 
rule,  bear  the  impress  of  her  strong 
will  and  sturdy  character;  particularly 
is  this  true  in  relation  to  her  eldest 
son,  George  H.,  who  greatly  resem- 
bles his  mother.  He  first  attended 
a  private  school  in  Ogden,  for  in 
those  pioneer  days  public  schools 
were  unknown.  Later  he  attended 
the  public  schools  in  Salt  Lake  City, 
Cedar  Fort,  in  the  Dixie  country,  and 
in  Spanish  Fork.  Afterward  he  be- 
came a  student  at  Provo,  attending 
the  first  high  school  of  that  city.  At 
a  still  later  date  he  was  a  student  in 
the  Brigham  Young  Academy,  the  in- 
stitution that  became  the  successor 
of  the  Timpanogas  Academy.  Presi- 
dent Brimhall  has  often  said  in  pub- 
lic that  it  was  due  mainly  to  his 
mother's  determination,  in  the  face 
of  the  greatest  financial  odds,  that 
he  was  enabled  to  attend  school  in 
Provo.  In  his  school  days  he  was 
eager  to  advance,  eager  to  obtain 
knowledge.  Many  lessons  were  pre- 
pared while  he  was  teaming  and 
herding.  He  was  one  of  a  group  of 
forty-two  young  men  who  established 
a  high  school  in  Spanish  Fork,  known 
as  the  Young  Men's  Academy.  A 
student  of  the  school,  at  first,  he  soon 
became  one  of  its  teachers.  While 
thus  engaged  he  worked  out  a  sys- 
tem of  public  school  grading.  In 
educational  circles  his  progress  has 
been  continuous.  From  being  a  sup- 
erintendent of  the  Spanish  Fork 
schools,  he  became  county  superin- 
tendent of  Utah  county  and  later  city 
superintendent  of  Provo  City.  It  was 
this  latter  position  he  was  filling 
when  he  was  called  to  the  faculty  of 
the  Brigham  Young  Academy.  Dur- 
ing his  period  of  service  on  the  facul- 
ty, he  held  the  chair  of  psychology 
and  pedagogy  for  the  greater  part  of 
the  time.  At  all  times  during  his 
connection  with  the  institution  he  has 
held  some  executive  position.  By  an 
action  of  the  board  of  trustees  he  be- 
came its  chief  executive  Jan.  3,  1903. 
Prior  to  this  time  he  had  served  as 


president  of  the  Utah  State  Teachers' 
Association.  President  Brimhall's 
professional  career  falls  naturally 
under  three  heads:  his  work  as  a 
teacher,  as  an  executive  and  as  an 
educational  lecturer.  He  has  always 
been  recognized  in  the  profession  as 
one  of  Utah's  foremost  teachers;  with 
him  it  is  a  gift  as  well  as  a  profes- 
sion. In  all  the  years  of  teachers 
coming  and  going  at  the  Brigham 
Young  University,  no  other  teachor 
ever  attracted  so  many  students  to 
his  classes  as  has  Professor  Brimhall. 
Prior  to  Professor  Brimhall's  coming 
to  the  presidency  of  the  school,  two 
degrees  had  been  conferred  upon, 
him,  the  first  the  degree  of  Bachelor 
of  Pedagogy,  the  second  the  degree 
of  Doctor  of  Science  and  Didactics. 
It  is  self-evident  that  he  has  suc- 
ceeded as  an  executive,  because  of 
his  having  been  called  to  one  execu- 
tive position  after  another  successive- 
ly. A  steady  progressive  expansion 
in  the  Brigham  Young  University  as 
to  buildings,  equipment,  faculty  and 
students  has  occurred  under  his  ad- 
ministration. In  all  probability  Pres- 
ident Brimhall  is  most  gifted  as  a 
public  speaker.  His  ability  to  lay 
hold  of  an  apt  illustration  on  the  in- 
stant, and  drive  it  home,  has  been 
one  of  the  elements  of  his  good 
teaching.  He  is  one  of  the  best 
known  educational  lecturers  in  this 
intermountain  country,  lecturing  at 
institutes  and  in  educational  meet- 
ings throughout  this  entire  region. 
But  the  scope  of  President  Brimhall's 
public  addresses  reaches  far  beyond 
that  of  an  educational  lecturer.  Rare- 
ly has  any  man  been  as  generally 
sought  for  on  platform  and  in  pulpit 
as  has  he.  It  is  safe  to  say  that  there 
is  no  public  movement  of  any  gen- 
eral interest  that  he  has  not  been 
asked  to  champion  by  word  of  mouth. 
Suffrage,  prohibition,  civic  better- 
ment, public  welfare  movements  have 
each  sought  and  received  such  sup- 
port as  his  talent  affords.  There  is 
one    variety    of    discourse    in    which 


BIOGRAPHICAL  ENCYCLOPEDIA. 


327 


President  Brimhall  is  past  master; 
it  is  in  the  short  address  and  short 
sermon.  These  addresses  have  made 
the  chapel  exercises  of  the  Brigham 
Young  University  noted  and  their 
author  famous.  They  are  always 
short,  racy  and  to  the  point,  filled 
with  apt  illustration  and  telling  epi- 
gram. Dr.  Brimhall  has  served  for 
many  years  on  the  general  Church 
board  of  education,  the  Church  board 
of  e.xaminers,  the  general  board  of 
religion  classes,  and  on  the  general 
board  of  the  Young  Men's  Mutual 
Improvement  Association.  He  is  one 
of  the  oldest  members  of  the  Y.  M. 
M.  I.  A.  board.  In  connection  with 
Dr.  Milton  H.  Hardy  he  wrote  the 
first  manual,  a  series  of  lessons  for 
the  young  people  all  over  the  Church. 
In  a  period  covering  thirty-three 
years  there  have  been  comparatively 
few  summers  when  he  has  not  been 
engaged  in  writing  lessons  for  the 
M.  I.  manuals.  But  his  literary 
achievements  have  not  been  confined 
to  writing  lessons;  he  has  been  a 
constant  contributor  to  local  maga- 
zines and  has  given  out  many  inter- 
views to  the  public  press.  His  com- 
position is  not  confined  to  prose.  He 
has  written  a  measurable  quantity 
of  creditable  verse.  His  "Old  Glory," 
written  on  the  entry  of  the  United 
States  into  war,  set  to  music  by  Prof. 
Clair  W.  Reid,  was  sung  all  over  Utah 
and  in  many  of  the  adjoining  States. 
In  addition  to  being  connected  with 
the  various  Church  boards,  before 
mentioned.  President  Brimhall  has 
served  his  Church  in  the  capacity  of 
a  Stake  superintendent  of  the  Y.  M. 
M.  I.  A.  Associations  of  Utah  Stake, 
and  as  a  member  of  the  High  Council 
of  that  Stake.  He  has  always  taken 
great  interest  in  civic  affairs.  He 
was  a  member  of  the  city  council  of 
Spanish  Fork  during  the  period  of 
his  residence  in  that  city.  In  1896 
he  was  a  candidate  on  the  Republican 
ticket  for  the  State  senate,  but  a 
democratic  landslide  resulted  in  the 
defeat   of  all   Republicans.      He   has 


been  a  speaker  in  practically  every 
political  campaign  since  the  days  of 
statehood.  In  1874  President  Brim- 
hall was  married  to  Alsena  E.  Wil- 
kins.  To  them  were  born  six  child- 
ren, namely,  Lucy  J.,  Alsena  E., 
George  W.,  Mark  H.,  Wells  L.,  and 
Milton  H.  In  1885  President  Brim- 
hall married  Flora  Robertson.  The 
children  born  to  them  are:  Dean  R., 
Fay  R.,  Fawn  R.,  Ruth  Afton,  Paul 
R.,  Alta  R.,  Golden  H.,  and  Arco  R. 
Prof.  Brimhall  is  fond  of  fishing  and 
hunting  and  mountain  climbing.  His 
leisure  hours  find  him  haunting  can- 
yons and  streams  with  his  boys  and 
other  members  of  his  family  who  de- 
light in  manly  outdoor  sports.  He 
is  endowed  with  rich  spiritual  and 
rich  intellectual  endowments,  whose 
gifts  have  been  supported  by  a  life 
of  strenuous  work.  Whatever  his 
limitations  may  be  he  never  fails  to 
scintillate.  Brilliancy  is  in  the  es- 
sence of  all  his  power.  His  style, 
whether  in  oral  or  written  discourse, 
is  full  of  originality,  and  presents 
many  surprises  in  analysis,  thought, 
and  sentence  structure.  He  possesses 
a  personality  that  has  impressed  it- 
self upon  thousands  of  students;  a 
personality  that  has  attracted  the  at- 
tention of  many  persons  from  both 
east  and  west  because  of  its  force 
and  originality;  a  personality  that 
compels  and  comands,  and  rarely  fails 
to  grip  those  with  whom  he  comes 
in  contact. 

BRINKERHOFF,  James,  Bishop 
of  the  Woodruff  Ward  (Snowflake 
Stake),  Navajo  county,  Arizona, 
was  born  March  20,  1880,  at  Glen- 
dale,  Kane  county,  Utah,  the  son  of 
David  Brinkerhoff  and  Lydia  Ann 
Nelson.  Together  with  his  parents 
he  went  to  Lee's  Ferry  as  an  in- 
fant, his  father  helping  Warren 
Johnson  to  run  that  ferry  across 
the  Colorado  river.  The  family 
moved  to  Tuba,  Arizona,  when 
James  was  about  six  years  old. 
Here    he   received    a    limited    educa- 


328 


LATTER-DAY   SAINT 


tion  and  became  a  faithful  Church 
worker  in  his  youth,  his  father  be- 
ing Bishop  of  Tuba.  He  was  bap- 
tized March  31,  1888,  by  Joseph 
Y.  C.  Lee,  ordained  a  Deacon  Oct. 
12,  1890,  by  David  Brinkerhoff  and 
ordained  a  Teacher  Jan.  7,  1900,  by 
James  A.  Allen.  He  also  acted  as 
secretary  of  the  Y.  M.  M.  L  A.  at 
Tuba  and  as  a  teacher  in  the  Ward 
Sunday  School.  In  1902  he  was 
ordained  an  Elder  and  filled  a  mis- 
sion to  the  Southwestern  States 
(later  the  Central  States)  in  1902- 
1904.  Returning  from  his  mission, 
he  settled  at  Woodruff,  Navajo 
county,  Arizona,  Tuba  having  been 
broken  up  as  a  settlement  during 
his  absence.  Ever  since  then  Wood- 
ruff has  been  his  permanent  home. 
He  was  ordained  a  High  Priest  by 
Smith  D.  Rogers  Nov.  13,  1904,  and 
set  apart  as  second  counselor  to 
Bishop  Levi  M.  Savage;  he  acted  in 
that  position  until  Sept.  29,  1918, 
when  he  was  sustained  as  Bishop  of 
the  Woodruff  Ward  and  later  (April 
26,  1919)  ordained  a  Bishop  by 
Richard  R.  Lyman  and  set  apart 
to  preside  over  that  Ward.  In  1905 
(Oct.  5th)  he  married  Sarah  Huldah 
Eagar  (daughter  of  Joel  S.  Eagar 
and  Lucy  J.  De  Witt),  who  was 
born  Nov.  6,  188  3,  at  Pima.  Gra- 
ham county,  Arizona.  The  children 
of  this  marriage  are  the  following: 
Belle,  Nina,  Alta,  James  Ross,  June, 
Ruth  and  Lester  Grant.  Bishop 
Brinkerhoff  is  a  farmer  by  vocation. 

BROWN,  EUsha,  Bishop  of  the 
Payson  Second  Ward  (Nebo  Stake, 
Utah  county,  Utah,  was  born  Dec. 
16,  1874  at  Draper,  Salt  Lake 
county,  Utah,  the  son  of  Ebenezer 
Brown  and  Samantha  Pulsipher.  He 
was  baptized  in  August,  1884,  by 
Lauritz  Smith,  ordained  a  Deacon 
when  twelve  years  old,  attended 
the  B.  Y.  Academy  at  Provo  from 
1889  to  1894,  and  the  University 
of  Utah  from  1894  to  1895,  was 
graduated    from    the    latter     school 


in  1895,  taught  school  at  Draper 
during  the  winter  of  1895-1896, 
went  on  a  mission  to  the  Southern 
States,  June  16,  1896,  and  labored 
in  the  Virginia  conference;  returned 
home  March  10,  1899.  After  his 
return  from  that  mission  he  again 
taught  school  until  1904,  when  he 
started  to  work  for  the  Utah-Idaho 
Sugar  Company  at  Lehi.  He  is 
still  working  for  that  company  as 
superintendent  of  the  Payson  fac- 
tory. While  at  Draper  he  was 
chosen  as  Stake  superintendent  of 
the  Y.  M.  M.  I.  A.  of  the  newly  or- 
ganized Jordan  Stake,  and  was  or- 
dained a  High  Priest  by  Apostle 
Francis  M.  Lyman.  He  also  labored 
in  the  Draper  Ward  Sunday  School 
and  Y.  M.  M.  I.  A.  While  living 
at  Lehi  he  labored  in  the  Ward 
Sunday  School  and  Y.  M.  M.  I.  A. 
and  also  on  the  Alpine  Stake  Sun- 
day School  Board.  In  1911  he 
moved  to  Monroe,  Sevier  county,  to 
work  at  the  new  sugar  factory 
which  was  being  built  there.  While 
at  that  place  he  labored  in  the 
local  Sunday  school.  In  June,  1913, 
he  moved  to  Payson,  Utah  county, 
to  work  at  the  new  sugar  factory 
then  being  built  at  that  place.  In 
September,  1913,  he  was  chosen  as  a 
counselor  to  Bishop  Samuel  E.  Tay- 
lor in  the  Payson  Second  Ward.  In 
1916  he  was  sustained  as  Bishop  of 
that  Ward,  Bishop  Taylor  having 
moved  away.  He  was  ordained  a 
Bishop  and  set  apart  by  Apostle 
Orson  F.  Whitney.  May  10,  1899,  he 
married  Lilly  Rawlins,  which  mar- 
riage has  been  blessed  with  seven 
children,  namely,  Virginia,  Joseph 
Jerome,  Athon,  Douglass,  Ruth, 
Martha  and  Nile  Besides  being 
superintendent  of  the  Payson  Sugar 
factory  Bro.  Brown  is  connected  with 
many  other  important  enterprises. 

BROWN,  Mahonri  E.,  Bishop  of 
Milo  Ward  (Bingham  Stake), 
Bonneville  county,  Idaho,  was  born 
Jan.    25,    1878,   at   South    Bountiful, 


BIOGRAPHICAL   ENCYCLOPEDIA. 


329 


Davis  county,  Utah,  the  son  of  Ma- 
honri  M.  Brown  and  Amy  Fackerel. 
He  was -baptized  by  his  father  Feb. 
4,  1886;  ordained  a  Deacon  in  his 
youth;    ordained   an   Elder   June    27, 

1898,  by  Charles  A.  Ashby;  or- 
dained a  High  Priest  July  18,  1909, 
by  Heber  C.  Austin  and  set  apart 
as  first  counselor  to  Bishop  Parley 
J.  Davis  of  the  Milo  Ward.  Frona 
January,  1910,  to  April,  1912,  he 
took  charge  of  the  Milo  Ward, 
while  the  Bishop  was  absent  on  a 
mission.  He  was  ordained  a  Bishop 
by  James  E.  Talmage  Feb.  2  4,  1917, 
and  set  apart  to  preside  over  the 
Milo  Ward.  Bishop  Brown,  who  is 
a  farmer  and  stock  raiser  by  avoca- 
tion,   located    in    the    Milo    Ward    in 

1899.  He  served  as  a  special  home 
missionary  among  the  young  for 
some  time,  acted  as  Ward  presi- 
dent of  Y.  M.  M.  I.  A.  from  1900 
to  1910  and  was  set  apart  as  a 
Stake  aid  in  the  Y.  M.  M.  I.  A. 
work  April  23,  1908,  holding  that 
position  two  years.  He  also  acted 
as  school  trustee  five  years.  In 
1898  (Oct.  12th)  he  married  Clara 
Ethel  Morris  (daughter  of  Frank- 
lin M.  Morris  and  Elizabeth  A. 
Mitchell),  who  was  born  Aug.  29, 
1881,  in  Salt  Lake  City,  Utah.  This 
marriage  has  been  blessed  with  ten 
children,  namely:  Ernest  M.,  Earl, 
Clifford,  Jesse,  Marvel  C,  Amy  E., 
Lawrence,  Clara  L.,  Orvil  and  Effie  L. 

BROWNING,       George       Emmett, 

Bishop  of  the  Ogden  Second  Ward 
(Weber  Stake),  in  Weber  county, 
Utah,  was  born  Aug.  1,  1866,  in 
Ogden,  Utah,  the  son  of  Jonathan 
Browning  and  Ann  Emmett.  He 
was  baptized  Sept.  3,  187  4;  was 
educated  and  raised  principally  in 
the  Ogden  Second  Ward;  ordained 
a  Deacon  Feb.  13,  1883,  and  after- 
wards presided  over  the  Deacons' 
quorum  in  the  Ogden  Second  Ward; 
ordained  a  Teacher  Nov.  10,  1885, 
and  presided  over  a  Teachers' 
quorum;   ordained  a  Priest  Nov.   23, 


1886;  ordained  an  Elder  Jan.  17, 
1887;  ordained  a  Seventy  April  20, 
1890,  and  subsequently  (Oct.  11th) 
1908,  set  apart  as  a  president  of 
the  76th  quorum  of  Seventy.  After- 
wards he  acted  as  president  of  the 
160th  quorum  of  Seventy.  Bro. 
Browning  received  an  ordinary  edu- 
cation in  the  common  schools  and 
afterwards  studied  in  the  High 
School  in  Ogden.  In  1890  he  was 
called  on  a  mission  to  Samoa.  Be- 
ing set  apart  for  that  mission  Nov. 
11,  1890,  he  left  home  two  days 
later;  he  labored  on  the  island  of 
Savaii     and     afterwards     on     Upolu, 


and  finally  presided  over  the 
Samoan  mission  from  Feb.  4,  1892, 
to  Nov.  8,  18  93.  He  returned  home 
Nov.  27,  1893.  Before  leaving  on 
this  mission  Bro.  Browning  had 
labored  diligently  in  the  Ogden 
Second  Ward  Sunday  School  and 
Y.  M.  M.  I.  A.  and  also  acted  on 
the  Y.  M.  M.  1.  A.  Stake  Board. 
After  his  return  from  his  mission 
he  labored  as  a  home  missionary, 
president  of  Seventies,  etc.  He  was 
ordained  a  High  Priest  Feb.  15, 
1916,  and  set  apart  to  act  as  an 
alternate  High  Councilor  in  the 
Weber  Stake,  and  he  was  ordained  a 


330 


LATTER-DAY   SAINT 


Bishop  Oct.  15,  1917,  by  David  O. 
McKay  and  set  apart  to  preside  over 
the  Ogden  Second  Ward,  succeed- 
ing the  late  Robert  McQuarrie. 
Bro.  Browning  married  Marian 
Manning  Jan.  26,  1887,  and  located 
later  in  the  Ogden  Fifth  Ward,  but 
moved  back  into  the  Second  Ward. 
His  wife  has  borne  him  the  follow- 
ing children:  George  Emmett,  Vera, 
Marian,  Harold  L.,  Floyd  Wallace 
and  Roland  S.  His  son  Harold  has 
filled  a  mission  to  Great  Britain, 
his  son  Wallace  served  in  the  U.  S. 
army  in  France,  and  his  son  George 
Emmett  was  commissioned  first  lieu- 
tenant and  is  now  practicing  medi- 
cine in  New  York. 

BRUNSON,  Lewis,  Bishop  of  Fill- 
more (Millard  Stake),  in  Millard 
county,  Utah,  was  born  Jan.  2  7, 
1831,    at    Mantua,    Portage    county. 


Ohio,  the  son  of  Seymour  Brunson 
and  Harriet  Gould.  Together  with 
his  parents  he  passed  through  the 
persecutions  against  the  Saints  in 
Missouri  and  Illinois  and  was  an 
exile  with  his  people  when  he  was 
baptized  in  1849  by  Uriah  Cutler  in 
Iowa.  He  crossed  the  plains  as  cap- 
tain of  a  company  and  at  the  end 
of  the  journey  received  the  warmest 


thanks  from  those  over  whom  he 
had  presided.  Arriving  in  Utah  he 
settled  in  Provo,  Utah  county,  but 
was  soon  afterwards  called  by 
President  George  A.  Smith  to  as- 
sist in  forming  a  settlement  on 
Chalk  Creek,  Millard  county;  thus 
he  became  one  of  the  earliest  set- 
tlers of  Fillmore.  On  May  7,  1885, 
when  only  22  years  of  age,  he  was 
ordained  and  set  apart  by  Presi- 
dent Brigham  Young  to  act  as 
Bishop  of  Fillmore,  which  position 
he  held  for  six  years.  In  1857 
(Oct.  16th)  he  married  Amanda 
Louisa  Park  of  Provo  (daughter  of 
John  and  Matilda  Park.)  She  bore 
her  husband  six  children,  namely, 
Mary  Louisa,  Joseph  Lewis,  Har- 
riet Matilda,  Adeline,  George  Can- 
non and  Peter  Lorenzo.  In  1861 
he  w'as  released  from  his  office  as 
Bishop  and  called  on  a  mission  to 
the  United  Stat^^s.  He  returned  in 
18  62  as  captain  of  a  company  of 
Saints.  After  his  return  from  his 
mission  he  was  called  by  the  Church 
authorities  to  act  as  a  High  Coun- 
cilor and  as  president  of  the  High 
Priests'  quorum  in  the  Millard  Stake 
( being  set  apart  by  Wilford  Wood- 
ruff) which  positions  he  held  at  the 
time  of  his  death.  Bro.  Brunson 
married  Lamira  Mace  Jan.  13,  1857; 
she  was  born  Jan.  14,  1840,  in  Salt 
Lake  City.  Seven  children  were  the 
issue  of  this  marriage,  namely,  Sey- 
mour L.,  Reuben  E.,  Arthur  M., 
Hyrum,  Daniel,  Clarilda  and  Har- 
vey. Later  the  same  year  (March 
31,  1857)  he  married  Catherine 
Carling  who  bore  him  seven  chil- 
dren, namely,  Annie,  Jeanette,  John 
L.,  James  William,  Isaac  F.,  Lewis 
and  Charles  A.  Bro.  Brunson  died 
at  Fillmore  Jan.  4,  1888,  beloved 
and  respected  by  all  who  knew  him. 

BRUNSOX,  Peter  Liorenzo,  Bishop 
of  Fillmore  and  second  counselor 
in  the  presidency  of  the  Millard 
Stake  of  Zion  and  a  resident  of  Fill- 
more, Millard  county,  Utah,  was  born 


BIOGRAPHICAL  ENCYCLOPEDIA. 


331 


July  20,  1866,  at  Fillmore,  the  son  of 
Lewis  Brunson  and  Amanda  Louisa 
Park.  He  was  baptized  Oct.  2,  1874, 
by  his  father,  was  raispd  in  Fillmore 


and  received  a  common  school  edu- 
cation. He  was  ordained  a  Deacon 
and  afterwards  a  Teacher  and  in 
June,  1887,  he  was  ordained  an 
Elder  by  Christian  Anderson;  or- 
dained a  High  Priest  Nov.  13,  1904, 
by  Mahonri  M.  Steele  and  set  apart 
as  second  counselor  to  Culbert  L. 
King  of  the  Marion  Ward,  Pan- 
guitch  Stake.  In  the  year  188  7  (March 
11th)  he  married  Clarinda  A.  Mc- 
Cullough  of  Fillmore,  daughter  of 
Henry  J.  McCullough,  which  mar- 
riage has  been  blessed  with  eleven 
children,  namely,  Peter  Lorenzo, 
Mary  Altana,  Amy  Louisa,  Helen, 
Harriet,  Myrtle,  Henry  Rollo,  Nora, 
Lewis  Clark,  Elbert  Lamar  and 
Max  Eliot.  Bro.  Brunson  located 
in  Marion,  Garfield  county,  Utah, 
soon  after  his  marriage  and  lived 
there  twenty  years,  during  which 
time  he  acted  as  assistant  superin- 
tendent of  the  Ward  Sunday  school, 
was  religion  class  teacher,  coun- 
selor and  president  of  the  Ward  Y. 
M.  M.  I.  A.  ,  counselor  to  Bishop 
Culbert  L.  King,  etc.,  and  moved 
back     to     Fillmore     in     September, 


1906.  At  Fillmore  he  acted  as 
Ward  teacher,  president  of  Y.  M. 
M.  I.  A.,  counselor  to  Bishop  Part- 
ridge, etc.  In  1909  (Oct  17th)  he 
was  ordained  a  Bishop  by  Francis 
M.  Lyman  and  set  apart  to  preside 
over  the  Fillmore  Ward.  He  acted 
in  that  capacity  three  years,  or  until 
he  was  chosen  to  act  as  second 
counselor  to  President  Orvil  L. 
Thompson  of  the  Millard  Stake. 
President  Brunson  has  filled  many 
positions  of  a  secular  nature.  Thus 
he  acted  eight  years  as  a  school 
trustee  at  Marion,  served  as  a  mem- 
ber of  the  city  council  at  Fillmore 
eight  years,  etc.  He  is  a  farmer  by 
occupation;  otherwise  he  is  a  dealer 
in  monuments  and  an  efficient  carver 
in   stone. 

BRUNSON,    Seymour,    one    of    the 

first  Elders  of  the  Church,  was  born 
Sept.  18,  1799,  in  Virginia,  the  son 
of  Reuben  Brunson  and  Salley 
Clark.  He  served  in  the  war  of 
1812,  became  a  convert  to  "Mor- 
monism"  and  was  baptized  in  Janu- 
ary, 1831,  by  Solomon  Hancock  at 
Strongsville,  Cayhoga  county,  Ohio; 
was  ordained  an  Elder  by  John 
Whitmer  Jan.  21,  1831,  and  labored 
as  a  missionary  in  Ohio,  Virginia 
and  other  States,  raising  up  several 
branches  of  the  Church.  He  moved 
to  Bloomfield,  Ohio,  in  1834,  thence 
to  the  town  of  Tompkins,  Illinois, 
and  moved  to  Missouri  in  the  spring 
of  1837.  He  located  near  Far  West, 
Caldwell  county,  and  passed  through 
the  persecutions  to  which  the  Saints 
in  that  part  of  Missouri  were  ex- 
posed. Being  expelled  from  Mis- 
souri, he  settled  temporarily  in 
Quincy,  Illinois,  and  a  few  months 
later  moved  to  Commerce  (after- 
wards Nauvoo).  When  the  Nauvoo 
Stake  of  Zion  was  organized  in 
October,  1839,  Seymour  Brunson 
was  chosen  as  a  member  of  the 
High  Council  and  served  in  that 
capacity  until  the  time  of  his  death 
which  occurred  Aug.    10,    1840. 


332 


LATTER-DAY   SAINT 


BUDGE,  Wm.  Arthur,  Bishop  of 
the  Ogden  Seventh  Ward  (Ogden 
Stake),  Weber  county,  Utah,  was 
born  Nov.  5,  1885,  at  Pleasant  View, 
Weber  county,  Utah,  the  son  of 
Thomas  Budge  and  Mary  F.  Wil- 
liams. He  was  baptized  in  April, 
1894,  by  his  father  and  ordained 
successively  to  the  offices  of  Dea- 
con, Teacher  and  Elder.  He  acted 
as  president  of  a  Deacons*  quorum, 
was  secretary  of  the  Ward  Y.  M.  M.  I. 
A.,  acted  as  choir  leader,  Sunday 
school  librarian,  etc.  In  1908-1911 
he  filled  a  mission  to  Turkey  and 
Great  Britain,  laboring  in  Asia  Minor 
and  later  in  the  Scottish  conferences 
of  the  British  Mission.  He  was  or- 
dained a  High  Priest  and  Bishop 
Dec.  16,  1916,  by  David  O.  McKay 
and  set  apart  to  preside  over  the 
Ogden  Seventh  Ward.  Bro.  Budge 
has  taught  school  a  number  of  years 
and  occupied  a  responsible  position 
in  a  local  bank.  In  1911  (Oct. 
11th),  he  married  Georgina  Jennie 
Farr  (daughter  of  Asael  Farr  and 
Georgina  J.  Drake),  who  was  born 
Dec.  17,  1888,  in  Ogden,  Utah.  The 
issue  of  this  marriage  is  one  child 
(Athleen),  who  was  born  Feb.  9,  1913. 

BURNSIDE,  Alexander,  Bishop  of 
the  Chapin  Ward  (Teton  Stake), 
Teton  county,  Wyoming,  was  born 
May  7,  1875,  at  American  Fork, 
Utah  county,  Utah,  the  son  of  John 
Burnside  and  Elizabeth  Prentis.  He 
was  baptized  when  about  eight 
years  of  age  and  ordained  succes- 
sively to  the  offices  of  Deacon, 
Elder  and  Seventy;  acted  as  presi- 
dent of  the  Y.  M.  M.  I.  A.  in  Mountain- 
ville,  Sanpete  county,  and  also  as  sup- 
erintendent of  Sunday  school  there; 
later  he  acted  as  assistant  superin- 
tendent of  Sunday  School  for  five 
years  in  the  Mount  Pleasant  North 
Ward,  Sanpete  county,  Utah.  In  1896 
(May  7th)  he  married  Sarah  A.  Mot- 
tishaw  (daughter  of  Elijah  Mottis- 
haw  and  Elizabeth  Bacon),  who  was 
born  Feb.    14,     1877,    in    Newstead, 


Nottinghamshire,  England,  and  who 
bore  her  husband  nine  children, 
namely,  John  A.,  Lawrence,  Mel- 
vina,  Levar,  Alvin,  George  Vernon, 
Percy  Harlan,  Edith  E.  and  Sarah  C. 
Bro.  Burnside  is  a  farmer  and  dairy- 
man by  avocation.  He  moved  to 
Mount  Pleasant  in  1879  and  became 


a  settler  in  Teton  Valley  in  1914.  He 
was  set  apart  as  presiding  Elder  at 
Chapin,  June  6,  1915,  by  Don  C. 
Driggs,  and  ordained  a  High  Priest 
and  Bishop  Feb.  2,  1918,  and  set 
apart  to  preside  over  the  Chapin 
Ward. 

BURROWS,    James    Bascom,     the 

third  Bishop  of  the  Hatch  Ward 
(Panguitch  Stake),  Garfield  county, 
Utah,  was  born  July  13,  1861,  near 
Springtown,  Parker  county,  Texas, 
the  son  of  Wm.  Henderson  Bur- 
rows and  Eliza  H.  Collins.  He  came 
to  Utah  in  1890  and  settled  tem- 
porarily at  Georgetown,  Kane 
county;  thence  he  moved  to  Hatch 
in  1895.  Becoming  a  convert  to 
"Mormonism,"  he  was  baptized  Sept. 
26,  1897,  by  Cornelius  Workman; 
ordained  an  Elder  Jan.  2,  1898,  by 
Abraham  S.  Workman;  ordained  a 
Seventy  Aug.  4,  188  9,  by  Geo.  Rey- 


BIOGRAPHICAL  ENCYCLOPEDIA. 


333 


QOlds  and  ordained  a  High  Priest 
and  Bishop  Sept.  5,  190  6,  by  Hyrum 
M.  Smith  and  set  apart  to  preside 
over  the  Hatch  Ward.  Prior  to 
this  he  had  acted  as  counselor  and 
later  as  president  of  the  Ward  Y.  M. 
M.  I.  A.  He  was  elected  justice  of  the 
peace  one  term  and  was  postmaster 
three  years  at  Georgetown  and  two 
years  at  Hatch.  In  1899-1902  he 
filled  a  mission  to  the  Eastern  States, 
laboring  principally  in  West  Virginia 
and  New  York,  seventeen  months 
of    this    time    being    spent    in    New 


York  as  president  of  the  Brooklyn 
conference.  In  1901  (Sept.  1st) 
Bro.  Burrows  married  Lucy  Eliza- 
beth Workman  (daughter  of  Abra- 
ham S.  Workman),  who  bore  her 
husband  three  children,  namely, 
James  H.,  Effel  H.  and  Myrtle.  In 
1905  (June  14th)  he  married  Mary 
Ann  Hatch  (daughter  of  Meltiar 
Hatch  and  Mary  Ann  Ellis),  a 
widow.  She  was  born  March  10, 
1880,  and  is  the  mother  of  nine 
children,  namely,  Lorenzo  W.,  Fran- 
cis, Eva,  Carl,  Horace,  Herbert, 
Zella,  Lorin  and  Delia.  The  first 
three  named  were  by  her  former 
husband. 

CALL,    Christian,    Bishop    of    the 
Chesterfield    Ward     (Idaho    Stake), 


Bannock  county,  Idaho,  was  born 
Jan.  2  4,  1887,  at  Chesterfield, 
Idaho,  the  son  of  Ira  Call  and 
Emma  Jane  Barlow.  He  was  bap- 
tized Jan.  24,  1895,  by  Moses  Muir; 
ordained  an  Elder  Sept.  8,  1908,  by 
Joseph  T.  Pond;  married  Anne 
Elizabeth  Rugger  Oct.  8,  1908,  in 
the  Salt  Lake  Temple,  was  chosen 
as  assistant  superintendent  of  the 
Chesterfield  Sunday  School  in  1909 
and  filled  a  mission  to  the  Central 
States  from  1913  to  1916.  After 
his  return  he  was  ordained  a  High 
Priest  by  Heber  J.  Grant  May  21, 
1916,  and  set  apart  as  second  coun- 
selor to  Bishop  Carlos  H.  Loveland. 
Finally  he  was  ordained  a  Bishop 
Feb.  25,  1917,  by  Hyrum  M.  Smith 
and  set  apart  to  preside  over  the 
Chesterfield  Ward,  succeeding  Car- 
los H.  Loveland.  This  position  he 
still  holds.  Bishop  Call's  avocations 
in  life  have  been  those  of  merchan- 
dizing and  farming.  He  has  man- 
aged a  store  since  he  was  fifteen 
years  of  age,  and  a  farm  also  for 
the  same  length  of  time,  and  is  still 
making  a  success  of  both  undertak- 
ings. 

CALLAHAN,        William        Henry, 

Bishop  of  Loa  Ward  (Wayne 
Stake),  Wayne  county,  Utah,  was 
born  Dec.  18,  1885,  at  Payson, 
Utah  county,  Utah,  the  son  of  Wil- 
liam Irvin  Callahan  and  Phoebe 
Elizabeth  Parker.  He  was  baptized 
in  April,  1895  by  William  A.  Tay- 
lor and  ordained  a  Deacon  and 
afterwards  a  Priest.  He  moved  with 
his  parents  to  Fremont  Valley  in 
1892,  when  only  seven  years  old, 
and  received  a  common  school  edu- 
cation in  Lyman,  Wayne  county, 
Utah.  At  Lyman  he  acted  as  presi- 
dent of  a  Deacons'  quorum,  teacher 
in  the  Ward  Sunday  School,  aid  in 
the  Stake  organization  of  Y.  M.  M. 
I.  A.,  etc.  He  was  ordained  a 
Seventy  by  Brigham  H.  Roberts  and 
became  a  member  of  the  112th 
quorum    of    Seventy,   filled    a    mis- 


334 


LATTER-DAY   SAINT 


sion  to  the  Netherlands  in  1908- 
1911  (33  months);  laboring  prin- 
cipally in  Belgium  and  France  he 
learned  the  French  language  and 
baptized  a  number  of  people.  He 
presided  successively  over  the  Sera- 
ing  branch,  the  Brussels  branch  and 
the  Liege  branch  in  Belgium  and 
the  Lille  branch  in  France.  He 
was  ordained  a  High  Priest  and 
Bishop  May  5,  1918,  by  Orson  F. 
Whitney  and  set  apart  to  preside 
over   the   Loa  Ward,    which   position 


a^!'  ■  ■  / 


he  still  holds.  Since  his  earliest 
youth  Bro.  Callahan  has  always 
been  active  in  Church  and  secular 
matters.  After  laboring  as  assist- 
ant superintendent,  he  was  chosen 
as  Stake  superintendent  of  Sunday 
Schools  in  the  Wayne  Stake  and  as 
choir  leader  at  Loa.  Here  also  he 
assisted  in  establishing  a  library  and 
in  getting  Loa  incorporated  as  a 
town.  He  commenced  his  mercan- 
tile career  as  a  clerk  in  the  Loa 
Co-op  and  advanced  until  he  be- 
came assistant  superintendent  of  the 
institution.  In  1911  (Nov.  29th)  he 
married  Frances  Grundy  (daughter 
of  Alphonzo  Grundy  and  Bathsheba 
Blackburn),  who  was  born  Nov.  16, 
1889,    at    Loa.      Two    children    have 


blessed  this  marriage,  namely,  Wil- 
liam Guy,  born  Nov.  29,  1912,  and 
Stirling  Grundy,  born  June  23, 
1916.  Both  children  were  born  at 
Loa. 

CALLAN,  Stephen  James,  second 
Bishop  of  the  Dayton  Ward  (Oneida 
Stake),  Oneida  county,  Idaho,  was 
born  Dec.  16,  1871,  at  Brigham 
City,  Utah,  the  son  of  Stephen  Cal- 
lan  and  Mary  Boden.  He  was  bap- 
tized Dec.  16.  1879,  by  his  father; 
ordained  a  Deacon  and  afterwards 
a  Teacher;  ordained  an  Elder  Dec. 
1,  1896,  and  filled  a  mission  to  the 
Southern  States  and  Europe  in 
1896-99,  laboring  principally  in  the 
States  of  Alabama  and  Mississippi 
for  2  6  months  and  later  in  Wales 
(British  Mission)  for  five  months. 
At  home  Bishop  Callan  acted  three 
years  as  superintendent  of  the  Day- 
ton Sunday  School  and  also  a  short 
time  as  president  of  the  Ward  Y. 
M.  M.  I.  A.  He  also  acted  as  presi- 
dent of  the  Fifth  Quorum  of  Elders 
for  two  years;  was  elected  county 
commissioner  of  Franklin  county  in 
the  fall  of  1916  and  was  a  member 
of  the  State  Livestock  Sanitary 
Board.  He  was  ordained  a  High 
Priest  and  Bishop  in  November, 
1897,  by  Apostle  Heber  J.  Grant  and 
set  apart  to  preside  over  the  Dayton 
Ward,  which  position  he  held  until 
July  11,  1909,  when  he  was  re- 
leased and  chosen  as  an  alternate 
member  of  the  High  Council;  later 
in  the  fall  of  1917  he  became  a 
regular  member  of  the  High  Coun- 
cil. In  1905  (November  15th)  he  mar- 
ried Emma  Hulet  (daughter  of  Syl- 
vester S.  Hulet  and  Mary  E.  Dalley), 
who  was  born  Feb.  1,  1884,  in  Sum- 
mit, Iron  county,  Utah.  She  bore 
her  husband  six  children,  namely, 
Golden  J.,  Ross  H.,  Norma,  Venita, 
Oenone  and  Mary.  Bishop  Callan  is  a 
farmer  and  stock  raiser  by  avocation. 

CANNON,    Annie    Wells,    a    mem- 
ber of  the  General  Board  of  the  Re- 


BIOGRAPHICAL  ENCYCLOPEDIA. 


335 


lief  Society,  was  born  Dec.  7,  1859, 
in  Salt  Lake  City,  Utah,  the  daugh- 
ter of  Daniel  H.  Wells  and  Emme- 
line  B.  Woodward.  She  was  bap- 
tized by  Hamilton  G.  Park  in  City 
Creek  in  18  68.  She  received  her 
early  Education  in  the  city  schools 
under  such  pioneer  teachers  as  Mrs. 
Randall,  Orson  H.  Riggs,  Milton  H. 
Hardy  and  others,  later  attending 
the  private  school  of  Miss  Mary  E. 
Cook  in  the  Social  Hall  until  enter- 
ing the  University  from  which  in- 
stitution she  graduated  in  1879.  Al- 
ways inclined  to  literary  work  Mrs. 
Cannon  was  helpful  to  her  mother 
with  the  "Woman's  Exponent"  and 
about  1895  became  assistant  editor, 
a  position  which  she  held  until 
1914,  when  that  publication  was 
suspended.  As  a  young  girl  she  was 
quite  active  in  the  Retrenchment 
Society  of  the  13th  Ward,  Salt  Lake 
City,  and  joined  the  Ward  Relief 
Society  when  only  fourteen  years  of 
age.  In  November,  1901,  she  was 
appointed  a  member  of  the  Relief 
Society  General  Board,  in  which 
position  she  served  on  important 
committees  and  visited  nearly  every 
Stake  of  Zion.  When  the  Pioneer 
Stake  of  Zion  was  organized  in 
1904  Sister  Cannon  was  appointed 
Stake  president  of  the  Relief  So- 
ciety, holding  the  dual  positions  six 
years,  when  in  October,  1910,  to- 
gether with  four  other  Relief  So- 
ciety Stake  presidents,  she  was  re- 
leased from  the  General  Board,  in 
order  to  give  their  undivided  atten- 
tion to  the  Stake  work,  but  in  Decem- 
ber, 1919,  she  was  again  appointed 
a  member  of  the  General  Board  by 
the  First  Presidency  and  after  six- 
teen years  in  Stake  work  will  be  re- 
leased from  that  detail  for  the 
higher  position.  The  years  1883 
and  1884  Mrs.  Cannon  spent  in 
travel  in  Europe,  where  her  hus- 
band was  presiding  over  the  Swiss 
and  German  mission.  While  there 
she  prepared  a  brief  history  of  the 
Relief  Society  which  was  printed  in 


the  "Stern"  and  the  "Millennial 
Star"  for  the  benefit  of  the  sisters 
in  the  foreign  missions  and  interest- 
ed herself  in  the  Relief  Society 
work  among  the  foreign  women. 
Mrs.  Cannon  has  always  taken  an 
interest  in  the  government  of  the 
State  and  at  the  age  of  twenty  was 
appointed  a  delegate  to  the  Terri- 
torial convention.  In  1912  she  was 
elected  to  the  lower  house  of  the 
Utah  Legislature,  where  she  made 
a  splendid  record  in  the  1913  ses- 
sion. She  never  missed  a  roll-call 
during  the  entire  session  and  shares, 
with  other  women  members,  the 
credit  for  the  splendid  social  legisla- 
tion of  that  session.  The  measures 
in  which  she  was  specially  inter- 
ested were  the  Minimum  Wage  for 
Women,  the  Widowed  Mother's  Pen- 
sion Bill  and  the  Equal  Guardian- 
ship Bill.  In  the  Republican  con- 
vention of  1912,  Mrs.  Cannon  was 
nominated  for  the  State  Senate,  be- 
ing the  only  woman  thus  honored 
by  her  party.  On  July  5,  1918, 
Mrs.  Cannon  was  elected  president 
of  the  War  Mothers  of  Utah,  in 
which  capacity  many  opportunities 
for  service  were  afforded.  She  was 
also  most  active  in  Red  Cross  work 
throughout  the  period  of  the  world 
war,  acting  on  the  executive  home 
service  and  canteen  committees — a 
work  not  altogether  new  to  her  as 
she  was  corresponding  secretary  in 
the  first  Red  Cross  Society  in  the 
State  of  Utah  during  the  Spanish- 
American  war  in  1898.  She  has  al- 
ways maintained  an  active  interest 
in  the  suffrage  cause,  both  for  the 
women  of  the  State  and  the  nation. 
She  is  a  charter  member  of  the 
Utah  Women's  Press  Club,  and  the 
Daughters  of  the  Pioneers,  also  of 
the  national  society  known  as  the 
Daughters  of  the  American  Revolu- 
tion. She  is  also  a  member  of  the 
Salt  Lake  City  Library  Board,  be- 
ing appointed  to  that  position  March 
20,  1918.  Sister  Cannon's  home 
life,  though  mentioned  last,  is  really 


336 


LATTER-DAY    SAINT 


first,  and  is  as  beautiful  as  it  is 
busy.  She  has  reared  a  large  and 
lovely  family  of  eleven  children  and 
had  the  sorrow  of  losing  one  little 
daughter,  about  two  years  old.  Mrs. 
Cannon  was  married  March  17, 
1880,  to  John  Q.  Cannon,  eldest 
son  of  President  George  Q.  Cannon, 
and  they  have  had  twelve  children, 
namely,  George  Q.,  Louise  B.,  Mar- 
garet, Daniel,  Eleanor  A.,  Emmeline, 
Cavendish  W.,  Katherine,  Abraham 
H.  and  Daniel  W.  (twins),  John  Q. 
Jr.,  and  Theodore  L.  Three  of  the 
boys  were  in  the  U.  S.  service  during 
the  world  war. 

CAPSON,  Albert  Alphonzo,  Bishop 
of  the  East  Mill  Creek  Ward  (Gran- 
ite Stake),  Salt  Lake  county,  Utah, 
was  born  Dec.  11,  1862,  at  East 
Mill  Creek,  the  son  of  Carl  Johan 
Capson  and  Ingrid  Joranson.  He 
was  raised  upon  a  farm  at  East  Mill 
Creek  and  received  a  common  school 
education  in  the  local  schools.  As 
a  boy  he  was  a  diligent  Sunday 
School  worker  and  an  officer  in  the 
Y.  M.  M.  I.  A.  He  was  baptized 
when  about  eight  years  old  by 
Joseph  E.  Morris,  and  when  still 
quite  young  was  ordained  a  Priest 
and  later  an  Elder.  In  1897  he  was 
ordained  a  Seventy  and  filled  a  mis- 
sion to  Sweden,  the  land  of  his  fore- 
fathers, in  1897-1899,  laboring  prin- 
cipally in  Dalarne,  in  the  Stockholm 
conference.  After  his  return  from 
that  mission  he  continued  to  be  a 
steadfast  worker  in  Church  activi- 
ties. From  1908  to  1910  he  filled  a 
second  mission  to  Sweden,  laboring 
for  some  time  in  the  Goteborg  con- 
ference and  later  acted  as  president 
of  the  Sk&ne  conference,  Sweden. 
In  the  beginning  of  1911  (soon 
after  his  return  home  from  that 
mission)  he  was  ordained  a  High 
Priest  by  John  M.  Cannon  and  set 
apart  as  second  counselor  to  John 
Neff,  of  the  East  Mill  Creek  Ward, 
which  position  he  held  until  Feb. 
25,    1912,   when    he   was   ordained   a 


Bishop  by  Apostle  Hyrum  M.  Smith 
and  set  apart  to  preside  over  the 
East  Mill  Creek  Ward,  which  posi- 
tion he  still  holds.  Bishop  Capson's 
occupation  is  that  of  a  farmer,  he 
being  the  owner  of  the  old  Capson 
homestead  where  he  was  born,  in 
East  Mill  Creek.  In  1892  Bro.  Cap- 
son  married  Martha  Ann  Russell 
(daughter  of  Valoran  Russell  and 
Ida  Neff),  who  was  born  March  9, 
1869,  in  East  Mill  Creek.  The  chil- 
dren by  this  marriage  are  the  follow- 
ing: Ada  Hazel,  Esther  Luella,  Al- 
bert, Ida,  Velma,  Valoran  and  Frank. 

CAPSON,  Carl  Johan,   one   of  the 

first  converts  to  "Mormonism"  in 
Sweden,  was  born  June  16,  182  2, 
in  Slemminge  parish,  Malmohus  l&n. 


Sweden,  the  son  of  Mons  Capson 
and  Metta  Olson.  When  a  youth 
he  learned  the  avocation  of  a  gard- 
ener and  was  well  established  in 
that  business  when  "Mormonism" 
found  him  early  in  1852.  Elder 
Anders  W.  Winberg.  who  at  that 
time  had  charge  of  the  Swedish 
Mission,  converted  him  to  "Mor- 
monism" and  baptized  him  at  Lund, 
August  10,  1852.  A  few  others 
were  baptized  soon  afterwards,  and 
when   these   new    converts    were    or- 


BIOGRAPHICAL  ENCYCLOPEDIA. 


337 


ganized  into  a  branch  of  the  Church 
April  30,  1853,  Bro.  Capson  was 
ordained  an  Elder  by  Anders  W. 
Winberg  and  set  apart  to  preside 
over  the  branch  which  was  called 
the  Lund  Branch  of  the  Church  of 
Jesus  Christ  of  Latter-day  Saints. 
It  was  one  of  the  first  branches  of 
the  Church  in  Sweden.  Prior  to 
this  Bro.  Capson,  who  had  been 
ordained  a  Priest,  had  worked  zeal- 
ously to  spread  the  gospel  truths 
among  his  neighbors  and  others. 
The  first  conference  meeting  ever 
held  by  Latter-day  Saints  in  Sweden 
convened  in  a  barn  belonging  to 
Carl  J.  Capson,  June  25,  1853,  on 
which  occasion  the  Sk3,ne  confer- 
ence was  organized,  which  confer- 
ence has  had  a  continued  existence 
ever  since.  For  the  purpose  of  emi- 
grating to  Zion  Bro.  Capson  left 
his  native  land,  together  with  his 
wife  and  two  children,  Nov.  2  6, 
1853,  and  after  a  short  stay  in 
Denmark  he  continued  the  journey 
over  England,  crossing  the  Atlantic 
in  the  ship  "Benjamin  Adams," 
which  sailed  from  Liverpool  Jan. 
2  2,  1854.  The  company  in  which 
he  crossed  the  plains  reached  Salt 
Lake  City,  Oct.  5,  1854.  After  his 
arrival  in  Salt  Lake  City,  Bro.  Cap- 
son  became  a  gardener  for  Presi- 
dent Brigham  Young.  Later  he  took 
up  a  farm  in  South  Cottonwood  and 
still  later  located  in  Mill  Creek,  where 
he  owned  a  big  farm  on  which  he  re- 
sided until  his  death.  Ever  since 
he  became  a  convert  to  "Mormon- 
ism"  in  his  native  land  he  was  a 
faithful  and  diligent  Church  worker. 
Before  he  joined  the  Church  in 
Sweden  he  married  Ingrid  Joran- 
son,  who  was  born  March  11,  1882, 
at  Lund.  Three  children  were  born 
to  them  in  Sweden,  namely,  Wil- 
helmina,  Johan  Cornelius  and  Charles 
W.  Wilhelmina  died  in  Sweden  and 
the  other  two  children  accompanied 
the  parents  to  America,  where  a  third 
son,  Albert  (now  the  Bishop  of  East 
Mill  Creek)  and  two  daughters,  Mary 


and  Elizabeth  (twins),  were  born  to 
them.  Afterwards  Bro.  Capson  mar- 
ried Caroline  Malmgren,  who  bore 
him  eleven  children,  namely,  Joseph, 
Emma,  James,  Oscar,  Celia,  Clara, 
Louise,  Edward  and  Edwin  (twins), 
George  and  Jettie.  Later  Bro.  Cap- 
son  married  Matilda  Cannon,  who 
bore  him  a  son,  Alfred,  and  a  daugh- 
ter, Charlotte.  Bro.  Capson  died  Nov. 
22,  1901,  at  East  Mill  Creek,  as  a 
faithful  Latter-day  Saint. 

CAPSOX,  Nils,  one  of  the  first 
local  missionaries  in  Sweden,  was 
born  May  30,  1816,  in  Skonabeck, 
Slemminge  parish,  Malmohus  19,n, 
Sweden,  the  son  of  Mons  Capson 
and  Metta  Olson.  He  went  to  Den- 
mark in  1844  and  worked  as  a  gard- 
ener in  Copenhagen  and  Roeskilde. 
Becoming  a  convert  to  "Mormon- 
ism"  he  was  baptized  by  John  E. 
Forsgren  Dec.  27,  1851,  in  Copen- 
hagen, Denmark,  and  was  confirmed 
Dec.  30,  1851,  by  Apostle  Erastus 
Snow.  Soon  afterwards  he  was  or- 
dained to  the  Priesthood  and  called 
to  labor  as  a  local  missionary  on  the 
island  of  Sjselland.  Having  first  been 
ordained  an  Elder  Feb.  22,  1852,  he 
was  sent  on  a  mission  to  Sweden, 
arriving  there  on  his  first  visit  in 
August,  1852.  He  was  quite  suc- 
cessful in  making  converts  and  pre- 
sided a  short  time  over  the  Malmo 
branch,  but  as  there  was  no  re- 
ligious liberty  in  Sweden  at  that 
time,  he  was  finally  arrested  and 
banished  from  his  native  land.  Soon 
afterwards  he  was  released  from  his 
missionary  labors  to  emigrate  to 
America.  He  left  Copenhagen,  Den- 
mark, Dec.  26,  1853,  and  crossed 
the  Atlantic  in  the  ship  "Benjamin 
Adams"  which  sailed  from  Liver- 
pool Jan.  22,  1854.  On  the  voyage 
(Feb.  5,  1854)  he  married  Gustafva 
Amalia  Lundstrom,  whom  he  had 
baptized  in  Copenhagen  Sept.  12, 
1853.  She  was  born  Feb.  17,  1836, 
in  Skurup,  Malmohus  lS.n,  Sweden. 
Bro.       Capson      and     wife,      having 


Vol.  III.  No.  22. 


October,  1919. 


338 


LATTER-DAY   SAINT 


crossed  the  plains  in  an  ox  train,  ar- 
rived in  Salt  Lake  City  Sept.  7, 
1854,  and  spent  the  following  win- 
ter in  the  Second  Ward  (Salt  Lake 
City),  renting  a  room  of  Bro.  Chris- 
tian Christiansen.  In  the  spring  of 
1856  Bro.  Capson  went  to  South 
Cottonwood  and  took  his  brother, 
Carl  Capson's  farm  on  shares.  In 
1858,  at  the  time  of  the  general  move 
he  went  to  Spanish  Fork,  Utah 
county,  and  he  settled  in  Ephraim, 
Sanpete  county,  in  the  spring  of 
1861.  In  the  fall  of  the  same  year 
(1861)  he  was  called  on  a  coloniza- 
tion mission  to  southern  Utah  and 
thus  became  one  of  the  pioneer  set- 
tlers of  Virgen  City,  where  he  died 
with  pneumonia  Sept.  10,  1863.  His 
wife  died  in  Gunnison,  Sanpete 
county,  Utah,  Aug.  16,  1914.  Bro. 
Capson  was  a  large,  handsome  man, 
with  black,  curly  hair,  dark  eyes 
and  a  powerful  physique.  He  was 
the  father  of  three  daughters, 
namely,  Mary  Magdelene,  born  Sept. 
1,  1856,  in  South  Cottonwood,  Sarah 
Christina,  born  July  31,  1858,  in 
Spanish  Fork,  Utah,  and  Emma 
Ulrikka,  born  March  17,  1862,  in 
Virgen  City,   Utah. 

CARD,  Zina  Young,  a  member  of 
the  General  Board  of  Primary  As- 
sociation in  the  Church  of  Jesus 
Christ  of  Latter-day  Saints,  was 
born  April  3,  1850,  in  Salt  Lake 
City,  Utah,  the  daughter  of  Presi- 
dent Brigham  Young  and  Zina  D. 
Huntington.  She  was  born  in  the 
old  log  row,  which  stood  where  the 
Emery  Holmes  Apartment  is  now 
located  on  1st  Avenue.  Here  her 
mother  had  a  room,  12x15  feet, 
where  she  taught  school.  Sister 
Zina  has  a  vivid  recollection  of  the 
grasshopper  famine,  as  her  mother 
had  a  cow,  and  this  was  the  means 
of  feeding  many  needy  ones,  and 
sometimes  her  own  children  went 
hungry  in  consequence.  In  1856 
the  Lion  House  was  completed  and 
with    others    of    President    Young's 


family.  Sister  Zina  and  her  mother 
went  there  to  live.  She  was  present 
at  the  celebration  held  in  Cotton- 
wood Canyon  July  24,  1857,  when 
the  news  was  brought  of  the  ap- 
proach of  Johnston's  army,  and  in 
company  with  her  mother  and  two 
brothers  (Zebulon  and  Henry  Chari- 
ton Jacobs)  took  part  in  the  move 
south  in  1858.  Upon  the  return  of 
the  family  to  Salt  Lake  City  her 
mother  took  charge  of  "Aunt  Clara's" 
(Clara  Chase  Young)  four  mother- 
less children.  This  gave  a  broad, 
unselfish  training  to  her  childhood, 
and    future   years    have   proven    that 


her  mother's  "mothering"  of  her 
husband's  children  has  returned  an 
hundred-fold  of  blessings  to  her 
daughter,  Zina.  Together  with  a 
number  of  her  sisters,  Zina.  when 
quite  young,  played  on  the  stage  of 
the  Salt  Lake  Theatre  and  had  fond 
anticipations  of  becoming  an  actress, 
but  she  changed  her  mind  at 
eighteen  and  became  the  plural 
wife  of  Thomas  Williams,  an  em- 
ployee of  her  father's  office,  in 
1868.  Two  sons.  Sterling  and 
Thomas  Edgar,  were  born  to  them. 
When  her  father  first  called  his 
family  together  to  organize  a  Re- 
trenchment Association  she  at  once 


BIOGRAPHICAL  ENCYCLOPEDIA. 


339 


complied  with  all  the  requirements 
made  in  dress,  etc.,  and  was  one  of 
the  original  officers  selected  by  her 
father  and  Eliza  R.  Snow.  She  also 
learned  to  raise  silk  and  to  reel  it, 
and  has  been  the  possessor  of  two 
fine  "home  raised  silk"  dresses.  In 
1874  (July  21st)  her  husband  was 
suddenly  taken  from  her  by  death, 
but  the  presence  of  her  noble  par- 
ents was  a  source  of  comfort  and 
strength  to  her  in  this  hour  of 
bereavement.  She  then  engaged  in 
making  wax  flowers  and  fruit  and 
taught  this  art  to  many  at  home 
and  in  the  settlements.  In  187  8 
she  moved  to  Provo,  in  order  that 
her  sons  might  be  under  the  care 
of  Professor  Karl  G.  Maeser,  the 
beloved  instructor  of  her  girlhood. 
In  1879  (Feb.  12th)  she  left  home 
for  Washington,  D.  C,  in  company 
with  Sister  Emmeline  B.  Wells, 
having  been  appointed  by  President 
John  Taylor  as  a  delegate  to  the 
Woman's  Suffrage  Congress  to  be 
held  there.  Upon  her  return  she 
took  charge  of  the  Primary  Depart- 
ment of  the  B.  Y.  Academy  at  Provo 
and  also  acted  as  matron  there.  She 
was  also  chosen  this  year  (1879)  to 
fill  the  position  of  Stake  president 
of  Primary  Associations  in  the  Utah 
Stake  of  Zion.  Her  second  son, 
Thomas  Edgar,  was  taken  from  her 
by  that  dread  disease,  diptheria, 
in  April,  1881,  and,  becoming  ill 
♦  igh  grief  and  excessive  labor, 
b.c^er  Zina  was  compelled  to  re- 
sign her  position  in  the  Academy. 
In  1884  (June  17th)  she  was  mar- 
ried to  President  Charles  Ora  Card, 
and  moved  to  Logan,  where  she  was 
called  to  labor  in  the  Logan  Temple 
and  also  to  act  as  second  counselor 
to  Sister  Carrie  Smith  in  the  Y.  L. 
M.  I.  A.  of  the  Cache  Stake.  Presi- 
dent Card  was  called  to  go  to  Al- 
berta, Canada,  which  country  he 
had  previously  explored,  and  had 
selected  a  place  in  the  southern  part 
for  a  settlement  of  Saints.  With 
her    son.    Sterling,    and    a    two-year- 


old  baby  boy,  named  Joseph  Young, 
Sister  Zina  started  to  journey  north- 
ward by  team,  in  company  with 
Elder  John  A.  Woolf  and  family, 
with  their  herd  of  stock.  They  en- 
dured many  hardships  from  stormy 
weather  and  other  difficulties  of 
overland  travel  under  such  condlr 
tions.  She  was  met  by  her  husband 
at  Helena,  Montana,  and  they  then 
continued  their  arduous  journey  un- 
til they  arrived  on  Lees  Creek,  a 
little  company  of  forty  people,  who 
were  the  actual  pioneers  of  the 
Canadian  colony  of  Saints.  Led  by 
President  Card,  they  soon  had  an 
ecclesiastical  organization  and  were 
free  and  happy — united  in  their 
labor  of  firmly  establishing  them- 
selves in  their  new  abiding  place. 
As  there  were  no  doctors  to  call  in. 
Sister  Card  cared  for  and  waited 
upon  some  twenty-five  cases  of  con- 
finement, all  the  patients  doing  well 
through  the  blessings  of  the  Lord. 
In  the  spring  of  1888  Sister  Card 
was  chosen  as  president  of  the  Y. 
L.  M.  I.  A.  at  Cardston,  a  position 
which  she  filled  for  sixteen  years. 
The  devotion  of  Sister  Card  for  her 
mother  and  the  equal  devotion  of 
her  mother  toward  herself  was  un- 
usually strong,  and  when,  in  1888, 
(June  12th)  a  little  daughter  was 
born,  her  mother  having  come  from 
Utah  to  be  with  her  at  the  time, 
the  name  of  Zina  was  given  to  the 
little  stranger,  being  the  fourth  girl 
in  direct  line  to  receive  this  name. 
The  home  of  President  Card  and  his 
wife  was  ever  open  to  the  new  set- 
tlers and  also  to  travelers,  as  there 
was  no  place  of  entertainment  in 
this  new  locality.  It  transpired  that 
many  very  eminent  people  were  en- 
tertained by  them,  among  them  be- 
ing members  of  parliament  from 
east  and  west,  the  president  of  a 
Montreal  bank,  Minister  Mackenzie 
Bowell  and  President  White  of  the 
Canadian  Pacific  Railroad,  not  to 
speak  of  dukes,  barons,  etc.  The 
lieut-governor  of  the  Northwest  Ter- 


340 


LATTER-DAY   SAINT 


ritories  with  his  suite  was  at  one 
time  snowbound  in  their  log  house 
of  four  rooms  for  three  days,  the 
whole  settlement  responding  to 
make  their  stay  pleasant.  Presi- 
dent Lorenzo  Snow  and  part  of  his 
family  also  stayed  with  them  for 
some  time.  Sister  Zina  formed  a 
dramatic  company  in  Cardston 
which  proved  of  great  value  to  the 
people,  as  it  kept  them  from  feel- 
ing homesick  during  the  long  winter 
evenings  and  was  also  of  educa- 
tional value.  In  1891  (June  9th) 
Zina  Card's  youngest  child  (Orson 
Rega)  was  born,  her  mother  again 
braving  the  fatigues  of  the  long 
journey  to  be  by  her  side.  During 
the  building  of  the  so-called  Fifty- 
Mile  Canal  Apostle  Joseph  F.  Smith 
and  his  wife,  Julina,  made  their 
home  with  President  Card  and 
family,  where  they  were  honored 
guests.  In  1900  Sister  Card  moved 
into  her  new  home,  the  construc- 
tion of  which  she  had  superintended 
and  paid  for,  but  her  joy  was  of 
short  duration,  for  President  Card's 
health  failed  him,  and  the  family 
moved  to  Logan  in  1903  where  he 
passed  away  Sept.  6,  190  6.  During 
her  stay  in  Logan  Sister  Zina  was 
matron  of  the  B.  Y.  College  for 
three  years  and  later,  moving  to 
Salt  Lake  City,  she  held  the  same 
position  in  the  L.  D.  S.  University 
for  nearly  five  years.  During  this 
time  she  acted  as  an  aid  on  the 
General  Board  of  Primary  Associa- 
tions. Later  she  served  as  matron 
of  the  State  Industrial  School  at 
Ogden  and  is  at  present  a  member 
of  the  Relief  Society  Board  of  the 
Ensign  Stake,  having  charge  of  the 
genealogical  lessons,  and  is  second 
vice-president  of  the  Daughters  of 
the  Utah  Pioneers. 

CAZIER,  Charles  Drake,  first 
Bishop  of  Afton  Ward  (Star  Valley 
Stake),  Lincoln  county,  Wyoming, 
was  born  Jan.  21,  1837,  in  Ken- 
tucky,  the   son   of   Wm.    Cazier   and 


Pleasant  Drake.  Becoming  a  con- 
vert to  "Mormonism"  he  joined  the 
Church  in  his  youth  and  was  bap- 
tized about  18  47  by  Ezra  Chase.  He 
came  to  Utah  in  1851,  and  in  the 
fall  of  the  same  year  located  on 
Salt  Creek,  Juab  county,  and  thus 
became  one  of  the  founders  of 
Nephi.  Here  he  passed  through  all 
the  scenes  and  hardships  of  pioneer 
life.  He  did  considerable  military 
service  during  the  Walker  war  and 
later  during  the  Black  Hawk  war, 
and  his  life  was  often  exposed  to 
the  greatest  danger,  while  standing 
guard  and  discharging  other  mili- 
tary duties.  He  was  ordained  a 
Seventy  May  18,  1857,  at  Nephi  by 
Timothy  S.  Hoyt,  and  a  High  Priest 
by  President  Brigham  Young  July 
7,     1877,     at     the     same    place.       In 

1879  he  moved  to  Clifton,  Oneida 
county,    Idaho,    and    in    the    fall    of 

1880  to  Star  Valley,  Wyoming;  he 
was  one  of  the  first  settlers  of 
Afton.  In  1881  he  moved  to  Ben- 
nington, Bear  Lake  county,  Idaho,  but 
was  called  back  to  Afton  to  act  as 
presiding  Elder;  later  he  became 
Bishop,  when  the  Ward  was  or- 
ganized Sept.  21,  1887.  This  posi- 
tion he  occupied  until  1894.  After 
that  he  acted  as  president  of  the 
High  Priests'  Quorum  in  the  Star 
Valley  Stake.  For  four  years  Bro. 
Cazier  acted  as  State  Senator,  while 
residing  in  Wyoming  and  filled 
many  other  positions  of  responsi- 
bility in  Utah  and  Idaho.  In  1858 
(June  12th)  he  married  Harriet 
Gates,  the  ceremony  taking  place  in 
an  Indian  wickiup  in  Payson,  Utah 
county,  Utah.  By  this  marriage 
Bro.  Cazier  had  twelve  children 
born  to  him,  namely,  Charles  G., 
Margaret,  Lydia,  William  H.,  Samuel 
G.,  Sarah  Ellen,  Harriet,  Eva, 
George,  Maranda,  Artello  and  Wil- 
lard  O.  Of  these,  five  children, 
four  boys  and  one  girl,  were  still 
living  in  1918.  Sister  Cazier  acted 
as  president  of  the  Relief  Society 
in   the  Afton  Ward   for  many  years 


BIOGRAPHICAL  ENCYCLOPEDIA. 


341 


and  died  April  3,  1907.  Bro  Cazier 
was  ordained  a  Patriarch  Aug.  13, 
1894,  by  Francis  M.  Lyman,  and 
died  May    12,    1916. 

CHAPIN,  Uriah  Calvin,  a  veteran 
Elder  in  the  Morgan  Stake  of  Zion 
and    a    resident    of    South    Morgan, 


home  in  Morgan  in  1865.  In  1866 
(Oct.  9th)  he  married  Ann  Richard- 
son (daughter  of  Robert  Richard- 
son and  Elizabeth  Robson),  who 
was  born  Aug.  25,  1850,  in  Cram- 
lington,  Northumberland  county, 
England,  where  she  was  baptized  in 
April,  18  61.     She  emigrated  to  Utah 


Morgan  county,  Utah,  was  born  Jan. 
25,  1836,  near  Gallipolis,  Ohio,  the 
son  of  Robert  Park  Chapin  and 
Elizabeth  Farmer.  When  about 
eleven  years  old  he  removed  with 
his  parents  to  Clyde,  Ohio,  and  in 
1850  into  the  western  part  of 
Michigan,  where  his  father  farmed 
one  season  and  then  moved  to 
Indiana,  where  he  bought  thirteen 
acres  of  land  and  died  Feb.  6,  1851. 
The  following  season  (1852)  the 
widow  sold  her  farm  and  returned 
to  Clyde,  Ohio.  Uriah  left  his 
mother  and  her  family  at  that  place, 
March  11,  185  4,  and  started  for 
Utah  with  his  neighbor,  Bartlet 
Brown.  After  his  arrival  in  Utah 
he  located  at  Centerville,  Davis 
county,  where  he  was  baptized  in 
the  spring  of  1855.  In  1856  he 
went  to  Carson  Valley,  but  returned 
to  Davis  county,  Utah,  in  1857.  In 
1858  he  located  at  Springville,  Utah 
county,     but     made     his     permanent 


ANNA  E.  R.  Chapin 

in  1861,  crossing  the  Atlantic  in 
the  ship  "Underwriter"  and  the 
plains  in  Milo  Andrus's  company 
which  arrived  in  Salt  Lake  City 
September  13,  18  61.  She  located  in 
Morgan  county  in  1862  where  she 
was  an  active  Relief  Society  worker, 
and  died  Dec.  17,  1911.  Sister 
Chapin  was  the  mother  of  six  chil- 
dren, namely,  Elizabeth  Ann  (born 
Nov.  1,  1868),  Mary  Jane  (born 
Jan.  13,  1871),  Ellen  Loretta  (born 
March  7,  1873),  Joanna  Upion 
(born  March  29,  1875),  Eliza  Selina 
(born  Dec.  11.  1883),  and  Robert 
Calvin  (born  Aug.  8,  1887).  Bro. 
Chapin  was  ordained  a  Seventy  in 
1858  and  later  a  High  Priest.  His 
occupation  is  that  of  a  farmer. 

CHIPMAX,  Otto  Lyman,  a  faithful 
young  Elder  in  the  Church  who  died 
while  filling  a  foreign  mission,   was 


342 


LATTER-DAY   SAINT 


born  Oct.  21,  1870,  in  Pleasant 
Grove,  Utah  county,  Utah,  the  son 
of  Washburn  Chipman  and  Caroline 
Mayhew.  He  was  baptized  when 
about  nine  years  old  by  James  Pres- 
ton; re-baptized  Nov.  2  0,  1890  by 
Wm.  R.  Webb,  and  re-confirmed  Nov. 
20,  1890,  by  Wm.  R.  Webb.  Being 
called  on  a  mission  to  New  Zealand 
he  willingly  responded  and  after 
leaving  his  home  in  American  Fork 
he  was  ordained  a  Seventy  by  Bishop 
George  Reynolds  in  Salt  Lake  City 
Feb.  1,  1892,  and  set  apart  for  his 
mission.  Together  with  other  mis- 
sionaries he  arrived  in  New  Zea- 
land Feb.  27,  1892,  having  crossed 
the  Pacific  ocean  in  the  steamship 
"Alemeda."  On  the  voyage  he  en- 
deared himself  to  his  traveling  com- 
panions by  his  amiable  and  quiet 
disposition.  On  his  arrival  in  New 
Zealand  he  was  appointed  to  labor 
in  the  Waikato  district,  and  while 
traveling  in  the  discharge  of  his 
duties  a  canoe  in  which  he  was 
riding  capsized  giving  him  a  chill 
which  caused  severe  sickness  from 
the  effects  of  which  he  died  at  the 
town  of  Huntley,  Waikato,  New  Zea- 
land, Aug.  31,  1892.  His  remains 
were  shipped  home  in  charge  of  Thos. 
E.  Stanford  and  Lewis  J.  Hawkes, 
returning  missionaries.  Bro.  Chip- 
man  was  a  very  studious  young 
man  and  well  qualified  for  mis- 
sionary labors.  He  was  making 
rapid  progress  in  mastering  the 
Maori  language  when  stricken  with 
his  last  sickness. 

CHIPIVLIN,  Stephen  L.,  president 
of  the  Alphine  Stake  of  Zion,  Utah 
county,  Utah,  was  born  March  18, 
1864,  in  American  Fork,  the  son  of 
James  Chipman  and  Sarah  A.  Green. 
He  was  baptized  March  19,  1878  by 
Wm.  R.  Webb,  and  after  receiving  a 
common  school  education  in  the  dis- 
trict school  in  his  native  town  he 
continued  his  studies  in  the  B.  Y. 
Academy  at  Provo.  When  quite 
young    he    was    ordained    a    Priest 


and  was  a  diligent  student  in  the 
Ward  Sabbath  School  and  Ward  Y, 
M.  M.  I.  A.  After  being  ordained 
a  Seventy  by  Seymour  B.  Young,  he 
became  a  member  of  the  67th 
quorum  of  Seventy.  In  1885-1887 
he  filled  a  mission  to  the  Southern 
States,  laboring  principally  in  North 
Carolina,  Virginia  and  Tennessee. 
After  returning  from  this  mission 
he  acted  as  president  of  the  Ward 
Y.  M.  M.  I.  A.  and  in  the  spring 
of  1889  he  was  ordained  a  High 
Priest  and  set  apart  to  act  as  second 
counselor  to  Bishop  George  Halli- 
day,  which  position  he  held  until 
1889,  when  he  moved  to  Provo.  He 
acted  as  a  member  of  the  school 
board  of  American  Fork  and  also 
as  a  member  of  the  city  council. 
For  a  number  of  years  he  was  en- 
gaged as  salesman  and  bookkeeper 
in  the  Chipman  Mercantile  Institu- 
tion of  American  Fork.  At  Provo 
he  was  chosen  as  a  member  of  the 
Utah  Stake  High  Council  and  also 
acted  as  assistant  superintendent  of 
the  Provo  Fourth  Ward  Sunday 
School.  Still  following  the  mercan- 
tile business  he  acted  as  superin- 
tendent of  the  Provo  East  Co-op. 
In  June,  1892,  he  moved  back  to 
American  Fork,  where  he  became 
manager  of  the  Chipman  Mercantile 
Company.  He  also  served  as  county 
commissioner  and  was  a  member  of 
the  Utah  Legislature  in  1903.  He 
was  chosen  as  second  counselor  to 
Edward  Partridge  in  the  presidency 
of  the  Utah  Stake  of  Zion,  succeed- 
ing Reed  Smoot  and  acted  in  that 
capacity  until  January,  1901,  when 
the  Alpine  Stake  of  Zion  was  or- 
ganized, and  he  was  chosen  as 
president  of  the  same,  which  posi- 
tion he  still  holds.  Under  his  ad- 
ministration a  new  tithing  office  and 
four  fine  Ward  meeting  houses  have 
been  built  in  American  Fork  and 
later  (1909-1913)  the  beautiful  Al- 
pine Stake  tabernacle,  the  erection 
of  which,  including  seating,  light- 
ing and  heating,  cost  $81,000.     Dur- 


BIOGRAPHICAL  ENCYCLOPEDIA. 


343 


Ing  his  administration  the  Alpine 
Stake  has  grown  from  a  member- 
ship of  8,330  to  9,000  and  the  num- 
ber of  Wards  have  increased  from 
7  to  17.  In  1885  President  Chip- 
man  married  Sina  Nielsen  (daugh- 
ter of  Niels  Nielsen  and  Karen 
Pedersen),  who  was  born  Nov.  7, 
1860,  in  American  Pork.  The  chil- 
dren by  this  marriage  are  the  fol- 
lowing: Zina  Annadella,  Lorina  K., 
Bessie  Fern,  Stephen  Howell,  Al- 
fred Stanley,  Elva  and  Leah.  All 
the  children  are  now  living,  except- 
ing Alfred  Stanley,  who  died  in  in- 
fancy. 

CHRISTENSEN,    Antone    C,     the 

fourth  Bishop  of  the  South  Hooper 
Ward,  Davis  county,  Utah,  was  born 
Nov.  5,  1859,  at  Riverdale,  Weber 
county,  Utah,  the  son  of  Anders  C. 
Christensen  and  Mary  Sophia  Abi- 
sen.  He  was  baptized  in  July,  1868, 
by  Warren  G.  Child;  ordained  a 
Deacon  when  a  boy;  ordained  an 
Elder  Feb.  3,  1879,  by  Ole  Olesen; 
ordained  a  Seventy  April  13,  1885, 
by  Heber  J.  Grant  and  ordained  a 
High  Priest  Sept.  3,  1893,  by  John 
Henry  Smith.  On  the  latter  date 
he  was  also  set  apart  as  second 
counselor  to  Bishop  Cook  of  the 
Hooper  Ward  and  on  Dec.  7,  1895, 
he  was  ordained  a  Bishop  by  Geo. 
Q.  Cannon  and  set  apart  to  preside 
over  the  South  Hooper  Ward.  He 
held  that  position  until  May,  1898, 
when  he  moved  to  the  Hooper  Ward, 
Weber  county,  and  on  Dec.  16,  1900, 
he  was  set  apart  as  second  counselor 
to  Bishop  Wm.  W.  Child.  In  1912 
(Feb.  24th)  he  was  set  apart  as 
first  counselor  to  the  same  Bishop 
and  served  in  that  capacity  until 
the  death  of  Bishop  Child  which  oc- 
curred June  16,  1913.  In  1886- 
1888  Bishop  Christensen  filled  a 
mission  to  the  Northern  States, 
laboring  principally  in  Illinois.  He 
also  presided  over  a  Deacons'  quo- 
rum when  quite  young  and  acted  as 
superintendent  of  the  South  Hooper 


Sunday  School  and  as  president  of 
the  Y.  M.  M.  I.  A.  in  the  Hooper 
Ward  (Weber  Stake).  In  1879 
(Feb.  6th)  he  married  Elizabeth 
Ann  Bond  (daughter  of  James  Bond 
and  Ann  Boot),  who  was  born  June 
11,  1863,  at  Peterson,  Morgan 
county,  Utah.  She  bore  her  hus- 
band fourteen  children,  eight  boys 
and  six  girls.  Bishop  Christensen 
has  served  four  terms  as  justice  of 
the  peace,  is  now  president  and 
director  of  the  Hooper  Irrigation 
Company  and  a  member  of  the 
Weber  County  Board  of  Education. 
In  his  younger  days  he  took  an 
active  part  in  home  dramatics  and 
played   in   a   local   brass   band. 

CLARK,  Ezra  Thompson,  a  Patri- 
arch, president  of  the  High  Priests' 
quorum  of  the  Davis  Stake  of  Zion 
and  a  resident  of  Farmington,  Davis 


county,  Utah,  was  born  at  Law- 
renceville,  Lawrence  county,  Illi- 
nois, Nov.  23,  1823,  the  son  of 
Timothy  B.  Clark  and  Mary  Keeler. 
He  was  baptized  by  Wm.  O.  Clark 
in  Fishing  River,  Clay  county,  Mis- 
souri, in  March,  1836,  and  was  with 
the  Saints  during  the  mobbings  of 
Missouri  and  Illinois.  In  1845  he 
was  ordained  a  Seventy  and  be- 
came a  member  of  the  19th  quorum 


344  LATTER-DAY   SAINT 

of  Seventy.  He  left  Nauvoo  as  an  field),  Timothy  Baldwin,  Mary 
exile  together  with  the  rest  of  the  Elizabeth,  William  Henry,  Joseph 
Saints  in  1846,  and  reached  Great  Smith,  Hyrum  Don  Carlos,  Edward 
Salt  Lake  Valley  in  1848.  Together  Barrett,  Charles  Rich,  Wilford 
with  a  few  other  settlers  he  spent  Woodruff,  Amasa  Lyman  and  David 
the  first  winter  near  the  mouth  of  Patten.  By  his  second  wife,  Susan 
North  Canyon  in  Davis  county,  Leggett,  he  had  ten  children, 
about  one  mile  south  of  Bountiful,  namely,  Seymour  Thompson,  Anna 
and  located  in  184;)  at  Farmington,  Vilate,  Sarah  Lovina,  Susan  Alice 
where  he  resided  during  the  re-  Bell,  John  Alexander  (who  died  in 
mainder  of  his  life.  When  he  the  missionary  field  in  Palestine) ,  Eu- 
crossed  the  plains  in  1848  his  gene  Henry,  Nathan  George,  Marion 
earthly  possessions  amounted  to  a  Franklin,  Laura  Blanch  and  Horace 
very  little,  but  by  industry  and  hard  Wells.  Brother  Clark's  third  wife, 
labor  he  succeeded  in  acquiring  con-  Nancy  Porter,  had  no  children  by 
siderable  property.  In  1856-1858  Bro.  Clark.  Bro.  Clark  is  the  only 
he  filled  a  successful  mission  to  man  in  the  Church  known  to  have 
Great  Britain.  In  the  year  1869  he  lost  two  sons  by  death  in  the  mis- 
went  to  the  States  after  the  remains  sionary  field, 
of  his  son,  Ezra  James,  who  had  died 

the  year  before  while  returning  CLARK,  Amasa  Lyman,  Bishop 
from  a  mission  to  Great  Britain.  In  of  Farmington  (South  Davis  Stake), 
1869-1870  he  filled  a  short  mission  Davis  county,  Utah,  was  born  June 
to  the  States,  and  in  1876  he  labor-  6,  1865,  at  Farmington,  the  son  of 
ed  as  a  missionary  in  Oregon  and  Ezra  T.  Clark  and  Mary  Stevenson. 
California.  When  the  Davis  Stake  He  was  baptized  by  Oliver  Lee  Robin- 
of  Zion  was  organized  in  1877  he  son  when  eight  years  of  age;  or- 
was  chosen  as  a  member  of  the  dained  a  Deacon  when  a  boy;  or- 
High  Council.  Responding  to  a  call  dained  an  Elder  in  1885  by  Orrin 
from  the  Church  authorities  he  P.  Randall  and  a  Seventy  soon 
assisted  in  locating  the  settlement  afterwards  by  Seymour  B.  Young, 
of  Georgetown,  Bear  Lake  county.  In  1887-1889  he  filled  a  mission  to 
Idaho.  Having  yielded  obedience  to  the  Southern  States,  laboring  prin- 
the  principle  of  plural  marriage  he  cipally  in  North  and  South  Carolina 
served  a  short  term  in  the  Utah  and  at  the  mission  office  at  Chat- 
penitentiary,  having  been  convicted  tanooga.  At  home  he  has  been  a 
under  the  provisions  of  the  Ed-  diligent  Sunday  School  worker.  For 
munds  law  of  so-called  unlawful  several  years  he  acted  as  secretary 
co-habitation.  He  was  ordained  a  and  treasurer  of  the  Sunday  school 
Patriarch  about  1895.  Elder  Clark  board  and  from  1901  to  1915  he 
died  at  Farmington  Oct.  17,  1901,  filled  the  position  of  Stake  superin- 
leaving  a  large  posterity.  He  was  tendent  of  Sunday  Schools.  He  was 
a  natural  financier  and  spent  his  ordained  a  Bishop  in  1915  and  set 
means  liberally  in  the  interest  of  apart  to  preside  over  the  Farming- 
the  Church,  and  not  only  did  he  fill  ton  Ward,  which  position  he  still 
a  number  of  missions  himself,  but  holds.  In  secular  affairs  Bro. 
he  also  assisted  a  number  of  his  Clark  has  been  successful  and  has 
sons  to  fill  successful  missions  to  been  entrusted  with  a  number  of 
different  parts  of  the  world.  Bro.  positions  of  responsibility  and  trust 
Clark  married  three  wives.  By  his  within  the  gift  of  his  fellow-citizens, 
first  wife,  Mary  Stevenson,  he  had  Thus  he  served  two  years  as  county 
eleven  children,  namely,  Ezra  treasurer  and  eighteen  years  as  city 
James    (who  died   in   the  missionary  treasurer  of  the  city  of  Farmington. 


BIOGRAPHICAL   ENCYCLOPEDIA. 


345 


From  1908  to  1911  he  acted  as  mayor 
of  Farmington.  In  1885  (Dec.  16th) 
he  married  Alice  C.  Steed,  daughter 
of  Thomas  Steed  and  Laura  Read, 
who  was  born  June  10,  1867,  at 
Farmington.  After  giving  birth  to 
five  children  this  wife  died  Aug.  2, 
1895.  Bro.  Clark  married  Susan 
Duncan  March  31,  1897;  she  was 
the  daughter  of  John  Duncan  and 
Martha  Lewis  and  was  born  at 
Bountiful,  Davis  county,  Utah,  Nov. 
3,  1873;  she  also  has  borne  her 
husband  five  children.  Bro.  Clark's 
principal  avocation  is  that  of  a 
farmer  and  banker.  Since  1892  he  has 
been  cashier  of  the  Davis  County 
Bank. 

CLARK,    Ezra  Janie.s,    one    of   the 

Elders  of  the  Church  who  died  in 
the  missionary  field,  was  born  Feb. 
30,    1846,    in  Lee    county,    Iowa,    the 


son  of  Ezra  T.  Clark  and  Mary 
Stevenson.  In  1848  his  parents  mi- 
grated to  Great  Salt  Lake  Valley  and 
settled  at  Farmington,  Davis  county, 
where  he  was  reared  in  the  midst 
of  the  Saints,  and  under  the  in- 
fluence of  good  teaching  became  a 
much  respected  youth.  He  was  bap- 
tized by  Elder  Jesse  Hobson  when 
eight  years   old,   and   afterwards   be- 


came a  member  of  the  40th  quorum 
of  Seventy,  and  of  the  Farmington 
Lyceum  and  Dramatic  Association. 
On  the  6th  of  April,  1865,  he  was 
called  to  go  on  a  mission  to  Europe, 
cheerfully  obeying  the  call.  He 
landed  in  Liverpool  on  the  11th  of 
the  following  August,  and  was  ap- 
pointed to  labor  in  the  Worcester- 
shire conference  as  a  traveling 
Elder.  On  the  30th  of  January,  1866, 
he  was  appointed  to  preside  over 
the  Dorsetshire  conference,  and  on 
the  21st  of  March,  1867,  was  re- 
moved to  the  presidency  of  the 
Kent  conference.  In  each  of  these 
positions  he  labored  faithfully  and 
with  earnest  zeal,  gaining  the  confi- 
dence and  esteem  of  the  Saints 
among  whom  he  labored,  and  of 
those  who  presided  over  him  in 
the  British  Mission.  His  modest, 
unassuming  manner,  combined  with 
his  truthfulness  and  circumspect 
conduct,  won  for  hiim  the  admiration 
and  good  will  of  all  his  associates. 
On  the  30th  of  June,  1868,  he  took 
passage  on  board  the  steamship 
"Minnesota,"  having  been  honorably 
released  from  his  labors  in  Eng- 
land, with  permission  to  return 
home.  He  was  appointed  first  coun- 
selor to  Elder  John  Parry,  presi- 
dent of  the  company  of  Saints  on 
board,  and  discharged  his  duty  to 
the  best  of  his  ability,  although  his 
health  was  poor  during  the  voyage. 
He  landed  in  New  York  on  the 
12th  of  July,  and  exerted  himself 
beyond  his  strength  in  assisting 
those  who  were  unable  to  help 
themselves.  The  heat  was  very  in- 
tense when  he  started  with  the 
Saints  on  the  railroad  for  the  west, 
and  at  Albany  he  complained  of  a 
severe  pain  in  the  head,  which 
rapidly  grew  worse,  and  in  a  few 
hours  he  expired  in  the  arms  of 
his  brethren  on  July  14,  1868,  at 
Fonda,  N.  Y.  A  year  later  his  re- 
mains were  shipped  to  his  home  in 
Farmington  for  interment.  He  died 
unmarried,    but    was    known    as    an 


346  LATTER-DAY   SAINT 

exceptionally     good     and     exemplary     Elders  there,  and  they  tried  to  make 
young  man.  his  stay    with   them    as    pleasant    as 

possible.  At  Leipzig,  Germany,  he 
CLARK,  John  Alexander,  one  of  joined  Elder  E.  W.  Robinson,  who 
the  Latter-day  Saint  Elders  who  had  also  been  called  to  labor  in 
died  in  the  missionary  field,  was  the  Turkish  mission,  and  traveled  in 
born  Feb.  28,  1871,  at  Farmington,  his  company  to  Beyrout,  Syria, 
Davis  county,  Utah,  the  son  of  Ezra  where  the  president  of  the  mission, 
T.  Clark  and  Susan  Leggett.  He  Don  C.  W.  Musser,  was  at  that 
was  baptized  by  Oliver  Lee  Robin-  time.  During  the  summer  he  labor- 
son  when  about  nine  years  of  age,  ed  together  with  Bro.  Robinson 
and  later  ordained  an  Elder.  In  among  the  German  speaking  popu- 
1894    (Feb.    2nd)    he    was  ordained     lation  of  Beyrout,  at  the  same  time 

studying  the  Arabic  language.  In 
August  they  went  to  Haifa,  Pales- 
tine. Bro.  Robinson  now  being 
president  of  the  mission,  his  pres- 
ence was  needed  at  Aleppo,  where 
there  were  several  members  of  the 
Church,  and  he,  therefore,  left  Bro. 
Clark  alone  at  Haifa.  In  a  letter 
written  by  Bro.  Clark,  Nov.  10, 
1894,  he  says:  "Though  I  am 
alone  (without  a  companion)  I  am 
having  an  enjoyable  time.  I  have 
learned  the  German  language  well 
enough  to  explain  the  principles  of 
the  gospel  to  the  German  colony 
here.  I  have  carried  a  tract  to 
nearly  every  family,  and,  where  al- 
lowed, have  explained  to  the  people 
the  gospel  which  I  have  been  sent 
here  to  preach.  On  each  tract  I 
a  Seventy  by  Abraham  H.  Cannon  wrote  the  time  and  place  of  our 
and  set  apart  for  a  mission  to  Tur-  meetings.  Some  have  read  their 
key.  He  arrived  in  Liverpool,  Eng-  tracts  and  made  the  request  for 
land,  Feb.  17,  1894,  on  his  way  books  to  read,  which  I  have  com- 
to  Palestine.  Before  leaving  home  plied  with  as  nearly  as  possible.  I 
Elder  Clark  had  commenced  his  have  written  to  Bern  (Switzerland) 
studies  in  German  at  the  Brigham  for  some  more  books  and  tracts. 
Young  Academy  at  Provo.  When  Getting  out  among  the  people  ap- 
the  first  model  Sunday  School  was  pears  to  be  the  only  way  of  reach- 
organized  in  that  institution  he  was  ing  them,  although  I  believe  they 
called  to  teach  a  class,  thus  show-  would  attend  our  meetings  if  held 
ing  the  great  confidence  the  in-  in  a  public  place.  In  the  meantime 
structors  had  in  him.  The  pupils  1  shall  learn  the  language  better, 
in  his  class  were  heard  to  speak  labor  in  a  quiet  way,  and  also  con- 
In  his  praise  for  the  manner  in  tinue  my  studies  in  Arabic."  Bro. 
which  he  interested  them  in  their  Clark  was  hopeful  of  success,  and 
lessons,  and  for  the  instructions  he  the  whole  letter  breathed  the  spirit 
gave  them.  His  engaging  manners  of  an  earnest  worker  in  the  Lord's 
and  the  pleasant  spirit  he  was  in  vineyard.  There  were  a  few  mem- 
possession    of   endeared    him    to    the    hers  of  the  Church  at  Haifa,  and  he 


BIOGRAPHICAL  ENCYCLOPEDIA. 


347 


writes  of  the  joy  he  had  in  meet- 
ing with  them.  He  was  living  with 
a  family  named  Hilt,  but  spent  much 
time  in  his  labors  among  the  Arabs 
In  the  city  of  Haifa,  and  it  was 
among  them  that  he  was  exposed  to 
the  dreaded  disease  of  small-pox 
which  carried  him  off.  He  died 
Feb.  8,  18  95,  at  Haifa,  while  en- 
gaged in  the  noble  work  of  com- 
bating error,  and  bringing  tidings 
of  great  joy  to  men.  He  died  hav- 
ing his  "loins  girt  about  with 
truth"  and  with  "the  sword  of  the 
Spirit"  in  hand.  As  far  as  his  few 
years  had  given  him  the  oppor- 
tunity to  do  so,  he  could  say  with 
Paul  that  he  had  fought  the  good 
fight,  and  had  kept  the  faith.  He 
died   unmarried. 

CLARK,  Joseph  Smith,  a  High 
Councilor  in  the  South  Davis  Stake 
of  Zion,  was  born  March  21,  1854, 
at  Farmington,  Davis  county,  Utah, 
the  son  of  Ezra  T.  Clark  and  Mary 
Stevenson.  He  was  baptized  when 
about  nine  years  of  age  by  William 
Budge  and  ordained  a  Seventy  about 
1875.  He  was  chosen  as  an  officer 
in  the  Y.  M.  M.  I.  A.  at  Farmington 
when  that  association  was  first  or- 
ganized in  1875;  married  Lucy 
Maria  Robinson,  Jan.  19,  1876,  and 
moved  the  same  year  to  George- 
town, Bear  Lake  county,  Idaho, 
where  he  resided  until  1892.  While 
a  resident  of  Georgetown  he  pre- 
sided over  the  Ward  Y.  M.  M.  I.  A. 
and  also  acted  as  a  counselor  to 
Bishop  Henry  Lewis,  being  ordained 
a  High  Priest  in  1887  by  George 
Osmond.  In  1882-1884  he  filled  a 
mission  to  the  Southern  States, 
laboring  principally  in  Mississippi, 
where  he  had  charge  of  the  Missis- 
sippi conference  during  the  latter 
part  of  his  mission.  After  his  re- 
turn to  Georgetown  he  resumed  his 
former  position  in  the  Bishopric, 
and  in  May,  1894,  after  returning  to 
his  original  home  in  Farmington, 
Davis    county,    he  was    set   apart    as 


second  counselor  to  John  W.  Hess, 
president  of  the  Davis  Stake,  which 
position  he  held  until  the  Davis 
Stake  in  1915  was  divided  into  two 
Stakes,  since  which  he  has  acted  as 
a  High  Councilor  in  the  South  Davis 
Stake.  Elder  Clark  is  a  farmer  and 
stock  raiser  by  avocation,  but  is  also 
engaged  in  banking  business,  be- 
ing now  president  of  the  Davis 
County  Bank  at  Farmington.  He 
has  served  as  a  member  of  the 
Farmington  city  council  two  terms 
and  served  several  years  as  presi- 
dent of  the  North  Cottonwood  Irri- 
gation Company.  His  marriage  has 
been  blessed  with  nine  children, 
namely,  Lucy  A.,  Joseph  S.,  Jr., 
Ezra  T.,  Ora  W.,  Mary,  Oliver  R., 
Leroy  R.  and  Iris  and  Irvin  B. 
(twins).  Seven  of  these  children 
are  still  living. 

COALTER,  Fergus,  an  active  El- 
der in  the  Church,  was  born  March 
19,  1854,  in  Glasgow,  Scotland, 
the  son  of  John  Coalter  and  Mar- 
garet Windsor.  Becoming  a  con- 
vert to  "Mormonism"  he  was  bap- 
tized in  Glasgow  Dec.  10,  1870, 
by  Thomas  H.  Godfrey,  being  the 
first  of  his  father's  family  to  re- 
ceive the  fullness  of  the  gospel. 
He  was  ordained  a  Deacon  in  18  72 
by  David  O.  Calder  and  emigrated 
to  Utah  in  1874,  embarking  at 
Liverpool,  England,  May  6,  1874, 
and  crossed  the  Atlantic  on  the 
steamship  "Nevada,"  together  with 
a  company  of  emigrating  Saints 
which  arrived  in  Salt  Lake  City 
May  30,  1874.  He  located  at  once 
in  Salt  Lake  City  which  has  been 
his  permanent  home  ever  since.  In 
1878  (Aug.  8th)  he  married  Agnes 
McDonald  Irvine,  having  previously 
been  ordained  successively  to  the 
offices  of  Teacher,  Priest  and  Elder. 
He  established  himself  as  a  music 
dealer  on  Main  Street,  Salt  Lake 
City,  where  he  carried  on  a  success- 
ful business  for  many  years,  and 
published  the  first  Latter-day   Saint 


34S 


LATTER-DAY   SAINT 


anthem  book  and  also  many  an- 
thems in  sheet  form  used  by  the 
Tabernacle  Choir,  of  which  he  was 
a  member  for  thirty  years.  He  also 
served  as  a  school  trustee  in  the 
Third  Ward  of  Salt  Lake  City  and 
as  secretary  and  treasurer  of  the 
Ward  Ecclesiastical  Board.  In  the 
year  1887  (July  27th)  he  was  ordain- 
ed a  High  Priest  by  Charles  W.  Pen- 
rose and  set  apart  as  second  coun- 
selor to  Bishop  Thomas  Maycock 
of  the  Third  Ward,  which  position 
he  occupied  until  the  death  of 
Bishop  Maycock.  Prior  to  this  he 
had  acted  for  a  number  of  years 
as  president  of  the  Third  Ward  Y. 
M.  M.  I.  A.  and  as  Ward  organist. 
His  marriage  has  been  blessed  with 
eight  children,  namely,  Agnes  Mc- 
Donald, Margaret  Windsor,  Adelina, 
Furgus  Ernest,  Martha  May,  Viola, 
Janette  McMurrin  and   Blanche. 

COFFIN,  Nathan  Samuel,  Bishop 
of  Marsh  Center  Ward  ( Portneuf 
Stake).  Bannock  county,  Idaho,  was 
born  Sept.  11,  1870,  at  Huntsville, 
Weber  county,  Utah,  the  son  of 
Nathan  H.  Coffin  and  Chestina  Mc- 
Murtrey.  He  was  baptized  April  2, 
1899,  by  Lehi  Wright;  ordained  an 
Elder  Sept.  29,  1899,  by  Samuel 
Roskelly;  ordained  a  High  Priest 
and  Bishop  June  7,  1903,  by  Reed 
Smoot  and  set  apart  to  preside  over 
the  Marsh  Center  Ward,  which  posi- 
tion he  still  occupies.  Bro.  Coffin 
moved  to  Marsh  Valley  with  his 
parents  when  a  boy,  was  raised  as 
a  farmer  and  is  still  engaged  in 
that  avocation.  In  1900-1901  he 
filled  a  mission  to  the  Eastern 
States,  laboring  principally  in  West 
Virginia.  From  October,  1902,  to 
October,  1903,  he  acted  as  Ward 
president  of  the  Y.  M.  M.  I.  A.  He 
also  acted  as  secretary  of  the  Ward 
Sunday  School  and  filled  many 
other  positions,  both  ecclesiastically 
and  of  a  secular  nature  in  Marsh 
Valley.  He  also  acted  as  justice  of 
the    peace    for    a    number    of   years. 


In  1892  (Aug.  26th)  he  married 
Margaretta  Cooper  (a  daughter  of 
Vincent  Cooper  and  Mary  Miller), 
who  was  born  Dec.  14,  1870,  at 
Oxford,  Idaho.  Nine  children  have 
blessed  this  marriage,  namely, 
Clarence  James,  Martha  Irene,  Mary 
Lucile,  Nathan  Sherman,  Golden 
Agrippa,  Margaretta,  Frederick 
Samuel,  Hazel  and  Jesse  Cooper. 
Bro.  Coffin  was  honorably  released 
as  Bishop  June  15,  1919,  and  sus- 
tained and  set  apart  as  a  High 
Counselor  in  the  Portneuf  Stake, 
Aug.  24,  1919,  by  Jos.  F.  Smith  jun. 

COOK,  Samuel,  second  counselor 
to  Bishop  Frank  Nalder  of  the 
Syracuse  Ward  (Davis  Stake),  Davis 
county,     Utah,     was    born      Feb.      4, 


1881,  at  Bountiful,  Davis  county, 
Utah,  the  son  of  David  Cook  senior 
and  Hannah  Holt.  He  was  baptized 
when  about  eight  years  old  and  or- 
dained successively  to  the  offices 
of  Deacon,  Elder  and  High  Priest, 
the  latter  ordination  taking  place 
Oct.  5,  1909,  under  the  hands  of 
Apostle  Franklin  D.  Richards,  on 
which  occasion  also  he  was  set 
apart  as  second  counselor  to  Bishop 
Nalder  of  the  Syracuse  Ward.  Prior 
to  this  he  had  acted  as  an  officer 
in  the  Ward  Y.  M.  M.  I.  A.  and  Sun- 


BIOGRAPHICAL   ENCYCLOPEDIA. 


349 


day  School  and  also  as  a  member  ot 
the  presidency  of  the  10th  quorum 
of  Elders.  From  1902  to  1904  he 
filled  a  mission  to  the  Southern 
States,  laboring  principally  in  the 
States  of  Mississippi  and  Georgia. 
For  eight  months  he  presided  over 
the  Mississippi  conference.  In  1905 
(Nov.  2  9th)  he  married  Elsie  Wil- 
liams (a  daughter  of  Ebenezer  H. 
Williams  and  Isabella  G.  Watt),  who 
was  born  Jan.  20,  1885,  at  Kays- 
ville,  Utah.  This  marriage  has 
been  blessed  with  three  children, 
namely,  Dell  W.,  Ben  S.  and  Wayne 
H. 


ternate  High  Councilor  in  the  Oneida 
Stake  and  in  March,  1919,  he  was 
called  to  act  as  Bishop  of  the  Preston 
Fourth  Ward  a  second  time.  From 
1909  to  1911  he  served  as  mayor  of 
Preston  and  from  1908  to  1912  he 
was  a  teacher  of  English  in  the 
Oneida  Stake  Academy.  In  1903 
(Dec.  31st)  he  married  Rilla  Pendle- 
ton (daughter  of  Joshua  Pendleton 
and  Delphia  Stewart),  who  was  born 
May  4,  1881,  in  Wanship,  Summit 
county,  Utah.  Six  children  have 
blessed  this  marriage,  namely,  Mel- 
vin  L.,  Evelyn,  Lucile,  Vera,  Gladys 
and  Woodrow  J. 


I 


CONDIE,  John  William,  Bishop  of 
the   Preston   Fourth    Ward     (Oneida 
Stake),  Franklin  county,  Idaho,  was 
born   Sept.    21,     18  78,     at     Croydon, 
Morgan  county,  Utah,  the  son  of  Gib- 
son Condie  and  Elizabeth  Robinson. 
He  was   baptized  Oct.    16,     1886,    by 
George  Knight,  received  a  good  edu- 
cation  and   graduated   as     a    normal 
student  from  the  University  of  Utah 
in  1900.     After  that  he  taught  school 
in    Wanship,     Summit     county,     one 
year.     He  then  took  a  two  years'  col- 
lege course  in  the  University  of  Utah, 
after  which  he  became  the  principal 
of  the  Malad  public  schools.     In  1905 
he  took  a  leading  part  in  centralizing 
the  schools  and  getting  the  new  Jef- 
ferson school  built,  since  which  time 
he   has    been   city   superintendent   of 
schools.      Bro.    Condie   was   ordained 
a  Deacon  Dec.  3,  1893,  by  William  H. 
Toone  and  was  afterwards  ordained  a 
Teacher.     He  was  ordained  an  Elder 
June  22,   1904,  by  Albert  W.   Davis, 
served   as   second    counselor     in     the 
Oneida    Stake    Religion    Class    Board 
in    190  6-1907,    after    which    he    was 
chosen     as     superintendent     of     the 
Preston   First   Ward    Sunday    school. 
He  was  ordained  a  High   Priest  and 
Bishop  Nov.  30,  1907,  by  Francis  M. 
Lyman  and  set  apart  to  preside  over 
the  Preston  Fourth  Ward  which  posi- 
tion   he    held    until    1916.      In    1916 
(Dec.   3rd)   he  was  chosen  as  an  al- 


COOK,   William,   Bishop    of   Cedar 
Valley    Ward    (Alpine    Stake),    Utah 
county,     Utah,     was     born     Oct.    19, 
184  7,      in      Pottawattamie      county, 
Iowa,    the    son    of    Henry    F.    Cook 
and      Sophronia      Strawbridge.       He 
was    baptized    in    1855  .by    Preston 
Thomas;   ordained  a  Deacon  in  1857 
by    Eli  Bennett    and    afterwards    or- 
dained   a    Teacher,    an    Elder    and    a 
High    Priest,    the    latter    ordination 
by   David   John.      Bishop    Cook   emi- 
grated to  Utah  in   1852   and  settled 
in    Cedar    Fort    in    1853.       Here  he 
acted  as  superint-endent  of  the  Ward 
Sunday     School     for     a     number     of 
years    and    later    as    a    counselor    to 
Bishop    Eli    Bennett.       He    was    or- 
dained  a  Bishop    Dec.    30,    1906,    by 
Anthon    H.    Lund    and    set    apart    to 
preside  over  the  Cedar  Valley  Ward, 
which    position    he    held    until    1911. 
In     1871      (May     4th)     he     married 
Almina    Weeks    (daughter    of    Allen 
Weeks     and    Sarah     Jane     Bennett), 
who    was    born    Oct.     21,     1848,    in 
Illinois;    she   bore   her   husband    one 
child   ((William  L.),  and  died  a  few 
days    later    (March    12,    1873).      In 
1875    Oct.    25th)    Bro.   Cook  married 
Rebecca    Rodeback     (a    daughter    of 
James  Rodeback  and  Phoebe  Begal), 
who    was    born    in    Nauvoo,    Illinois, 
May    2,    1846.      Six  children   blessed 
this      marriage,      namely,      Edward, 
Helen,    Clifford,    Mark,    Phoebe   Re- 


350 


LATTER-DAY   SAINT 


becca  and  Barnes  A.  Bishop  Cook 
is  a  farmer  and  stock  raiser  by  avo- 
cation. His  wife,  Rebecca  Rodeback 
Cook,  died  Aug.  12,   1910. 

COOIvEY,  Andrew  Wood,  the  first 
Bishop  of  the  Brighton  Ward  (Salt 
Lake  Stake),  Salt  Lake  county,  Utah, 
was  born  May  24,  1837,  at  Bruce, 
McComb  county,  Michigan,  the  son  of 
Benjamin  Cooley  and  Clarissa  Wood. 
In  1858  (June  1st)  he  married  Dinah 
Briggs  at  St.  Cain,  Michigan.  She 
never  came  to  Utah  and  had  no  chil- 
dren. Bro.  Cooley  migrated  to  Utah 
in  18  6.3,  where  he  became  a  convert 


to  "Mormonism"  and  was  baptitzed 
in  1864,  being  the  only  one  of  his 
father's  family  who  joined  the  Church 
and  also  the  only  one  of  his  father's 
children  who  raised  a  family.  In  Utah 
he  engaged  in  farming  and  stock  rais- 
ing, and  in  1866  (Feb.  17th)  he  mar- 
ried Mary  Asenath  Huntington,  who 
was  born  May  31,  1846,  in  Cambria, 
Niagara  county.  New  York,  and  bore 
her  husband  seven  children,  namely, 
Clarissa  M.,  Andrew  W.,  Benetta  B., 
George  W.,  Harold  Ghesa,  Chester 
N.,  and  May  Asenath.  When  the 
Saints  residing  on  the  west  side  of 
the  Jordan  river,  immediately  west 
of   Salt    Lake    City,    were    organized 


into  the  Brighton  Ward  of  the  Salt 
Lake  Stake,  Bro.  Cooley  was  chosen 
and  ordained  a  Bishop  and  set  apart 
to   preside   over   said   Ward,    the   or- 
dination taking  place  Feb.  24,  1867. 
He  held  that  position  until  1877.    In 
1868     (Feb.    22nd)     Bishop     Cooley, 
yielding  obedience  to  the  higher  law 
of  marriage,  was  united  to  Jane  Jen- 
kins,  who  was  born  June   25,    1844, 
and  who  bore  her  husband  eight  chil- 
dren,  namely,   William   J.,   John   B., 
Henry  W.,  Alva  L.,  Melissa  J.,  Fanny 
Elizabeth,    Samuel   B.,   and   Ethel   C. 
On   the   same   date    (Feb.    22,    1868) 
Bro.  Cooley  married  Rachel  Caroline 
Coon    (daughter    of    Abraham    Coon 
of  Ohio  and  Elizabeth  Yarbrough  of 
Tennessee)  who  was  born  March  2  2, 
1848,   at   Council   Bluffs,   Iowa,   and 
came   to   Utah   with    her   parents   in 
1850.      She   bore    her   husband    nine 
children,  namely,  Samuel  B.,  Idabel, 
Maretta  E.,  Isabel,  Lucretia  May,  Os- 
car W.,   Andrew    W.     junior,    Abra- 
ham C,  and  Francis  Ann.      In   1870 
(February  14th)  Bro.  Cooley  married 
Ann  Hazen  (daughter  of  Robert  Haz- 
en  and  Mary  Ann  Bainbridge  of  New- 
castle, England)   who  was  born  Sept. 
25,  1854,  in  England.     Her  children 
(eight  in  number)   were  Marcus  R., 
John  S.,  Ezra  H.,  Mary  A.,  Martha  J., 
Inez,  Arthur  D.,  and  Walter  A.   Bish- 
op Cooley  died  Oct.  11,  1887,  at  his 
home  in  Brighton.     His  descendants 
in    1919    numbered    more    than    120 
souls;    they  are  all  members  of  the 
Church  and  all  abstainers  from  the 
use   of   intoxicants   and   tobacco.      A 
number  of  them  are  occupying  promi- 
nent Church  and  secular  positions  in 
the  community.   Thus  Ezra  H.  Cooley 
acts  as  Stake  superintendent  of  Sun- 
day   schools    in    the    Hyrum    Stake, 
Utah;    Henry  W.   Cooley  is  superin- 
tendent   of    the    West    Jordan    (Salt 
Lake  county)  Sunday  school;  Lucre- 
tia May  is  treasurer  in  the  Liberty 
Stake     Relief     Society,     and     many 
others    hold    positions    in    different 
Wards.     Abraham  C.  has  filled  a  mis- 
sion  to   Germany,    Ezra   H.    to   Aus- 


BIOGRAPHICAL   ENCYCLOPEDIA. 


351 


tralia  and  Henry  W.  to  the  Central 
States.  Arthur  Dyke  Cooley  is  a 
practising  physician  at  Brigham  City, 
Utah;  Abraham  C.  Cooley  is  agri- 
culturist, in  charge  of  demonstration 
of  reclamation  projects  for  the  U.  S. 
government  in  sixteen  western  States, 
and  Lucretia  May  held  the  position 
of  deputy  county  clerk  in  Salt  Lake 
county  for  nine  years.  This  large 
family  has  been  remarkably  united, 
each  working  for  the  benefit  of  the 
whole,  with  four  of  the  best  mothers 
that  were  ever  given  in  marriage  to 
any  man.  For  so-called  infraction  of 
the  Edmund's  law  Bishop  Cooley 
served  two  terms  in  the  Utah  peni- 
tentiary, during  which  he  suffered 
severely  from  the  illness  which  soon 
after  his  release  caused  his  demise. 

COOPER,  John,  a  veteran  Elder  in 
the  Church  and  a  resident  of  Fill- 
more (Millard  Stake),  Millard  county, 
Utah,  was  born  May  27,  1834,  at 
Loughborough,  Leicestershire,  Eng- 
land, the  son  of  James  Cooper  and 
Ann  North.  He  was  baptized  Nov.  5, 
1850,  by  Langley  Allgood,  ordained 
an  Elder  by  Henry  George  in  1852 
and  labored  as  a  local  missionary. 
He  emigrated  to  Utah  in  1856,  cross- 
ing the  Atlantic  in  the  ship  "Enoch 
Train"  and  the  plains  in  Capt.  Wm. 
B.  Hodgett's  company  as  far  as 
Devil's  Gate,  where  he,  together  with 
about  twenty  other  men,  was  left 
during  the  winter  of  1856-1857  to 
watch  the  goods  which  had  been 
cached  there  by  the  late  emigration 
of  185  6.  He  finally  reached  the 
Valley  June  6,  1857.  Soon  after- 
wards he  located  in  Fillmore  which 
has  been  his  permanent  home  ever 
since.  In  1880-1882  he  filled  a  mis- 
sion to  Great  Britain,  during  which 
he  acted  as  president  of  the  Leeds, 
Nottingham  and  London  conferences. 
At  home  he  has  acted  as  Sunday 
school  superintendent.  Ward  clerk, 
counselor  in  the  Stake  presidency  ot 
the  High  Priests'  quorum  and  filled 
many  other  positions  in  the  Church. 


He  has  also  served  as  a  member  ot 
the  Fillmore  city  council,  justice  ot 
the  peace,  watermaster,  school  trus- 
tee, deputy  county  clerk  and  recorder, 
county  treasurer  (12  years),  etc.  He 
held  the  latter  office  until  he  was  80 
years  old.  Otherwise  his  main  avoca- 
tions in  life  have  been  those  of  a 
mechanic  and  farmer.  In  1857  (June 
8th)  he  married  Mary  Ann  Lewis, 
who  bore  him  eight  children,  and  in 
18  82  (July  11th)  he  married  Sarah 
Ann  Kate  Newbold,  who  bore  him 
seven  children.  Following  are  the 
names  of  his  children:  John  Lewis, 
Mary  Ann,  Charles  William,  James 
Henry,  Isabella,  Franklyn,  Arthur, 
Florence  May,  George  Albert,  Kate 
May,  Florence  Emily,  Amy  Ethel, 
Robert  Nelson,  Fred  Wilford  and 
Kimball  Benjamin. 

COOPER,  Joseph  Parker,  fifth 
Bishop  of  the  Mount  Sterling  Ward, 
(Hyrum  Stake),  Cache  county,  Utah, 
was  born  Feb.  21,  1877,  at  Wells- 
ville.  Cache  county,  Utah,  the  son  of 
Joseph  Cooper  and  Ruth  Parker.  He 
was  baptized  Aug.  5,  1886,  by  Rich- 
ard Branchley;  ordained  a  Deacon 
soon  afterwards;  ordained  a  Teacher 
Nov.  10,  1895,  by  Robert  Redford; 
ordained  a  Priest  Dec.  24,  1899,  by 
Bishop  Wm.  J.  Hill;  ordained  an 
Elder  June  17,  1900,  by  Peter  M. 
Maughan;  ordained  a  Seventy  July 
10,  1900,  by  Jos.  W.  McMurrin  and 
ordained  a  High  Priest  June  22, 
1903,  by  Wm.  C.  Parkinson.  He 
served  as  president  of  the  Mt.  Ster- 
ling Ward  Y.  M.  M.  I.  A.  for  a  long 
time.  In  1900-1902  he  filled  a  mis- 
sion to  Great  Britain,  laboring  in  the 
Sheffield  conference.  After  his  re- 
turn home  he  served  as  second  coun- 
selor to  Bishop  Lars  Peter  Christian- 
sen, second  counselor  to  Bishop  David 
Murray  and  Bishop  John  S.  Sloan, 
and  was  himself  ordained  a  Bishop 
July  18,  1915,  and  set  apart  to  pre- 
side over  the  Mt.  Sterling  Ward.  He 
acted  as  assistant  superintendent  to 
John   Redford   in   the  Ward   Sunday 


352 


LATTER-DAY    SAINT 


School  for  thirteen  years  and  acted 
as  a  counselor  for  thirteen  years  to 
the  three  Bishops  named.  In  1900 
(June  20th)  he  married  Ellen  Dell 
Redford,  who  has  borne  her  husband 
nine  children,  namely,  Ida,  Henry, 
Marvin,  Louis,  Alta,  Luther,  Heber, 
Carl  and  Eleanor. 

CORBRIDGE,  Samuel  Ray,  Bishop 
of  the  West  Layton  Ward  (North 
Davis  Stake),  Davis  county,  Utah, 
was  born  Feb.  19,  1889,  at  Auburn, 
Wyoming,  the  son  of  William  Henry 
Corbridge  and  Emma  Howard.  He 
was  baptized  Oct.  3,  1897,  by  Orson 
Layton  and  ordained  a  Deacon  April 
30,  1901,  by  Geo.  V.  Stevenson.  Later 
he  was  ordained  a  Priest  and  in  June, 
1907,  he  was  ordained  an  Elder  by 
John  M.  Baxter.  He  acted  as  second 
counselor  to  Lawrence  Berg  and  Wal- 
lace Cragun,  the  presiding  Elder  of 
the    Elkol    branch    of    the    Woodruff 


Stake,  and  also  acted  as  first  assist- 
ant superintendent  of  the  Sunday 
School  in  said  branch.  At  another 
time  he  acted  as  an  officer  in  the 
West  Layton  Y.  M.  M.  I.  A.  He  was 
ordained  a  High  Priest  and  Bishop 
Dec.  29,  1914,  by  Heber  J.  Grant  and 
set  apart  to  preside  over  the  West 
Layton  Ward.  Bishop  Corbridge  re- 
ceived   his    education    in   the    Layton 


schools  and  at  the  B.  Y.  College  at 
Logan.  He  followed  bookkeeping  and 
clerical  work  for  six  years,  but  since 
1912  he  has  made  farming  his  prin- 
cipal avocation.  In  1909  (Dec.  22nd) 
he  married  Ruby  Whitesides  (daugh- 
ter of  Marian  Mark  Whitesides  and 
Mary  E.  Bennett),  who  was  born 
Aug.  7,  1890.  This  marriage  has 
been  blessed  with  two  children, 
namely,  Thayne  W.  and  Afton  W. 

CORDON,  Omer  Samuel,  second 
Bishop  of  Rigby  Ward  (Rigby  Stake) 
Idaho,  was  born  August  7,  1885,  at 
Willard.  Box  Elder  county,  Utah,  the 
son  of  George  A.  Cordon  and  Sally  A. 
Call.  He  was  baptized  by  his  father 
when  eight  years  old,  ordained  a 
Deacon  when  quite  young,  ordained 
an  Elder  in  190  6  by  Robert  L.  By  bee, 
filled  a  mission  to  the  Northern 
States  in  1906-1908,  laboring  prin- 
cipally in  Indiana  and  Illinois,  was 
appointed  Sunday  School  superin- 
tendent at  Rigby  in  1908  and  a  year 
later  chosen  as  Stake  superintendent 
of  Sunday  Schools,  which  position  he 
held  until  1912,  when  he  moved  out 
on  a  homestead  at  Dehlin  and  while 
there  presided  over  the  Butte  branch. 
In  1909  he  was  ordained  a  Seventy 
by  Rulon  S.  Wells,  and  was  ordained 
a  High  Priest  and  Bishop  Dec.  2, 
1917,  by  Stephen  L.  Richards  and 
set  apart  to  preside  over  the  Rigby 
Ward.  In  1906  (Sept.  19th)  he  mar- 
ried Ruth  Chandler  (daughter  of 
James  J.  Chandler  and  Mary  Ann 
Williams),  who  was  born  June  2  8, 
1886,  in  Samaria,  Oneida  county, 
Idaho.  After  bearing  her  husband 
five  children  (Louis  O.,  Theone  C, 
Gladys,  William  A.  and  Ruth)  the 
wife  died  in  childbed  Oct.  6,  1917. 
In  1918  (Nov.  27th)  Bishop  Cordon 
married  Phoebe  J.  Thomas  (daugh- 
ter of  Chas.  R.  Thomas  and  Emeline 
E.  Waldrom),  who  was  born  Nov.  14, 
1884,  in  Samaria,  Oneida  county, 
Idaho. 

CORRV,  William  Henry,  Bishop  of 
Cedar  City  Ward  from  1888  to  l!J02, 


BIOGRAPHICAL  ENCYCLOPEDIA. 


353 


was  born  July  30,  1850,  in  Provo, 
Utah  county,  Utah,  and  located  as  a 
child  in  Cedar  City  where  he  resided 
until  the  day  of  his  death.  He  held 
numerous  offices  of  trust  and  figured 
prominently  in  the  history  of  the  set- 
tlement, taking  a  leading  part  in 
most  of  its  ecclesiastical  and  civil  af- 
fairs. After  laboring  sixteen  years 
as  Bishop  of  Cedar  City  he  acted  as 
a  member  of  the  Parowan  Stake 
High  Council.  He  also  served  for 
several  years  as  a  member  of  the 
Cedar  City  council,  acted  as  school 
trustee,  president  of  the  Cedar  City 
Sheep  Association  and  held  many 
other  positions  of  responsibility  and 
trust.  In  1872  (Oct.  30th)  Bishop 
Corry    married    Elizabeth    L.    Parry 


(daughter  of  John  and  Elizabeth 
Parry),  who  was  born  May  12,  1850, 
in  Newmarket,  Flintshire,  North 
Wales.  The  children  of  this  mar- 
riage were  the  following:  William 
Henry,  Jr.,  George  E.,  Margaret  E., 
John  P.,  Willard  E.,  Elias  M.,  Mary 
J.,  Arthur  E.,  Marian  P.,  Winnifred 
P.  and  Lulu  F.  He  was  stricken  most 
suddenly  with  sickness  and  died 
within  a  few  minutes  after  that,  Sept. 
4,  1917,  at  Cedar  City.  At  his  de- 
mise  Bishop     Corry     left     a    widow, 

Vol.  Ill,  No.  23. 


three  sons  and  four  daughters  and  a 
large  family  of  grandchildren. 

COTTAM,  Thomas  P.,  Patriarch 
and  first  counselor  in  the  presidency 
of  the  St.  George  Stake  of  Zion  and 
a  resident  of  St.  George,  Utah,  was 
born  Sept.  28,  1857,  in  Salt  Lake 
City,  Utah,  the  son  of  Thomas  Cot- 
tam  and  Caroline  Smith.  He  was 
baptized  by  William  Carter  when 
about  eight  years  of  age,  ordained 
successively  to  the  offices  of  Deacon 
and  Teacher;  ordained  an  Elder  Sept. 
11,  1877,  and  a  High  Priest  July  1, 
1883,  by  John  D.  T.  McAllister  and 
set  apart  as  second  counselor  to 
Bishop  David  H.  Cannon  of  the  St. 
George  Fourth  Ward.  Prior  to  this 
he  had  acted  as  president  of  a  Dea- 
cons' quorum  and  a  counselor  in  an 
Elders'  quorum.  He  was  ordained  a 
Bishop  by  Wilford  Woodruff,  April 
24,  1887,  and  set  apart  to  preside 
over  the  St.  George  Fourth  Ward, 
which  position  he  held  until  June, 
1896,  when  the  four  Saint  George 
Wards  were  consolidated  into  one 
Ward  and  he  was  set  apart  as  a 
counselor  to  Bishop  James  Andrus. 
In  1901  (June  15th)  he  was  sus- 
tained as  first  counselor  to  President 
Edward  H.  Snow  of  the  St.  George 
Stake  and  set  apart  by  A.  O.  Wood- 
ruff, which  position  he  still  holds. 
Bro.  Cottam  came  to  St.  George  as  a 
pioneer  in  18  62,  together  with  his 
parents  and  has  ever  since  been  one 
of  the  leading  citizens  of  the  town. 
Thus  he  served  as  a  member  of  the 
city  council  eleven  years,  as  mayor 
four  years  and  as  assessor  and  col- 
lector in  Washington  county  for  a 
number  of  years.  He  also  served  as 
a  member  of  the  Utah  Legislature 
from  1905  to  1908.  Bro.  Cottam  is 
a  farmer  and  stock  raiser  and  has 
also  engaged  in  the  plastering  busi- 
ness. He  had  charge  of  the  orna- 
mental plaster  work  in  the  Manti 
Temple.  In  1882  (Jan.  26th)  Bro. 
Cottam  married  Emmaline  Jarvis 
(daughter  of  George  Jarvis  and  Ann 
November,  1919. 


354 


LATTER-DAY    SAINT 


Pryor),  who  was  born  March  21, 
1863,  and  became  the  mother  of  ten 
children,  namely,  Emma,  Thomas, 
Heber,  Arthur,  Annie,  Moroni  J., 
Walter  P.,  Ivins,  Clarence  and  Eva. 
Bro.  Cottam  was  ordained  a  Patri- 
arch Dec,  16,  1917,  by  James  E.  Tal- 
mage  and  is  at  present  a  member  of 
the  Stake  board  of  education  and  as- 
sistant to  David  H.  Cannon,  presi- 
dent of  the  St.  George  Temple. 

COWLEY,  Joseph  Curtis,  the  first 
Bishop     of     Venice     (Sevier     Stake) 


Sevier  county,  Utah,  was  born  Oct. 
27,  1869,  at  Logan,  Cache  county, 
Utah,  the  son  of  Charles  C.  Cowley 
and  Eleanor  C.  Curtis.  He  was  bap- 
tized July  5,  1875,  by  John  Ash  and 
ordained  successively  to  the  offices 
of  Deacon,  Teacher  and  Priest.  He 
was  ordained  an  Elder  July  6,  1893, 
by  John  D.  T.  McAllister  and  married 
Minnie  Ann  Wall  the  same  day.  She 
was  the  daughter  of  Francis  J.  Wall 
and  Mary  Bench  and  was  born  Oct. 
20,  1874,  at  Manti,  Utah.  Bro.  Cow- 
ley was  ordained  a  High  Priest  June 
23,  1900,  by  Anthon  H.  Lund  and  set 
apart  to  preside  over  the  Venice 
Ward  which  was  organized  at  that 
time.      For  about  one  year  prior  to 


that  date  he  had  acted  as  presiding 
Elder  of  the  Venice  branch  of  the 
Glenwood  Ward.  In  1907-1909  he 
filled  a  mission  to  the  Northwestern 
States,  laboring  principally  in  Oregon 
and  Montana,  part  of  the  time  as 
president  of  the  Butte  conference. 
At  home  Bishop  Cowley  has  been 
active  in  Church  and  secular  matters. 
Thus  he  acted  as  superintendent  of 
the  Venice  Sunday  School  four  years 
and  as  school  trustee  six  years.  He 
is  the  father  of  ten  children,  namely, 
Laura  May,  Elmo  J.,  Joseph  E.,  Fan- 
nie L.,  Francis  C,  Naoma  C,  An- 
thony C,  Elva  C,  Angus  Wayne  and 
Jessie.  Bishop  Cowley  settled  at 
Venice  in  188  6  and  has  engaged  in 
farming  ever  since. 

COX,  Everard  Alvin,  Presiding 
Elder  of  Hamilton  (Parowan  Stake), 
Iron  county,  Utah,  was  born  May  12, 
1871,  at  Williamsburg,  Long  Island, 
New  York,  the  son  of  Edwin  Charles 
Cox  and  Elizabeth  Mary  Reed.  He 
came  to  Utah  with  his  parents  in 
1874  and  resided  in  Cedar  City  until 
1909,  when  he  located  at  Hamilton. 


He  was  baptized  May  12,  1879,  by 
his  father  and  confirmed  the  same 
day  by  Samuel  Cox;  ordained  a  Dea- 
con   April    2,    1884,    and    a    Teacher 


BIOGRAPHICAL  ENCYCLOPEDIA. 


355 


Nov.  3,  1886,  by  Francis  Webster; 
ordained  a  Priest  Feb.  17,  1892,  by 
Bishop  William  H.  Coray;  ordained 
an  Elder  Sept.  23,  18  99,  by  Christo- 
pher J.  Arthur;  ordained  a  Seventy 
Oct.  9,  1899,  by  Christian  D.  Fjeld- 
sted  and  filled  a  mission  to  Colorado 
in  1899-1901;  ordained  a  High  Priest 
Nov.  16,  raOl,  by  Hyrum  M.  Smith 
and  set  apart  as  second  counselor  to 
Bishop  Henry  W.  Lunt  of  Cedar  City 
Ward.  After  moving  to  Hamilton's 
Fort  in  190  9  he  was  set  apart  to  pre- 
side at  that  place  in  July,  1910.  In 
1902  (June  11th)  he  married  Annie 
A.  Thorley  (daughter  of  Thomas 
Thorley  and  Ann  Allridge),  who  was 
born  June  2,  1872,  at  Iron  Springs, 
Utah.  This  marriage  has  been  blessed 
with  six  children,  namely,  Ruth  T., 
Carl  T.,  Ann  T.,  Everard  Thorley, 
Elizabeth  and  Jennie. 

CROSBY,  George  Henry,  Bishop 
and  Patriarch  and  a  most  active 
member  of  the  Church,  was  born  Oct. 
25,  1846,  in  Kennebec  county,  Maine, 


the  oldest  son  of  Jesse  W.  Crosby  and 
Hannah  Baldwin.  His  son.  Judge 
Geo.  Henry  Crosby,  jun.,  of  Mesa, 
Arizona,  writes  the  following  sketch 
of   Patriarch     Crosby:      "The     'Mor- 


mon' frontier  Bishop  was  a  type  of 
man  such  as  no  other  time  in  the 
world's  history  ever  did  or  ever  will 
again  produce.  Father  of  the  Ward 
in  spiritual  affairs,  a  friend  to  all  in 
times  of  trouble  and  sickness,  judge 
in  the  disputes  of  his  people,  the 
leader  in  building  canals,  reservoirs 
and  roads,  and  the  fencing  of  the 
fields,  the  overseer  of  the  people's 
amusements  and  the  one  who  led  in 
giving  the  initial  blessing  of  child- 
hood and  assisted  in  closing  the  eyes 
of  the  aged  in  death,  devoted  in  his 
religion,  earnest  in  his  convictions, 
untiring  in  his  duty  and  ready  to 
obey  the  call  of  the  Priesthood,  no 
matter  how  unglorious  the  task,  such 
a  man  was  George  H.  Crosby.  He  is 
perhaps  the  only  man  in  the  Latter- 
day  Saint  Church  who  was  ever 
Bishop  of  four  Wards.  By  nature  he 
was  a  frontier  Bishop,  adapted  to 
governing  a  community  in  spiritual 
matters  as  well  as  in  building  canals, 
reservoirs  and  roads,  laying  out 
townsites  and  doing  other  duties  in- 
cumbent upon  a  pioneer  leader.  His 
parents  met  and  married  in  Nauvoo, 
Illinois,  but  at  the  time  of  George's 
birth  the  mother  was  sojourning  in 
Kennebec  county.  Me.  When  he  was 
a  few  weeks  old  his  parents  started 
West  with  him  and  he  reached  the 
Salt  Lake  Valley  with  the  second 
company  of  Mormon  pioneers,  Sept. 
25,  1847,  on  the  day  he  was  eleven 
months  old.  After  living  in  the  old 
fort,  the  Crosby  family  moved  into 
the  Seventeenth  Ward,  where  George 
H.  lived,  excepting  the  time  of  the 
move,  till  he  was  a  boy  of  fifteen 
years.  Then  the  family  went  to 
"Dixie"  and  helped  to  settle  Saint 
George.  As  a  youth  George  H.  par- 
ticipated in  several  Indian  expedi- 
tions and  when  Dr.  Whitemore  was 
killed,  had  a  life  and  death  struggle 
with  an  Indian  who  fought  to  throw 
him  over  a  ledge,  but  he  succeeded  in 
throwing  the  Indian  over.  In  18  63 
he  made  a  trip  across  the  plains  with 
Captain    Daniel     D.     McArthur     and 


356 


LATTER-DAY   SAINT 


again  in  1866  he  made  the  same  trip 
in  Daniel  Thompson's  company.  In 
August,  1867,  before  he  was  21  years 
old,  he  was  elected  sheriff  of  Wash- 
ington county,  and  toward  the  close 
of  his  term,  and  at  twenty-three  years 
of  age,  at  the  instigation  of  Erastus 
Snow,  he  was  sent  out  on  Shoal  Creek 
to  be  the  first  Bishop  of  the  Hebron 
Ward  (now  Enterprise),  which  then 
included  Clover  Valley  (now  Bar- 
clay), Nevada,  as  a  branch.  The 
young  Bishop  was  a  very  determined 
opponent  to  an  organized  band  of  out- 
laws that  hovered  near  the  Utah- 
Nevada  line  and  in  October,  1877, 
one  whose  enmity  he  had  incurred, 
burned  the  Bishop's  home  and  store. 
That  winter,  and  again  at  the  sug- 
gestion of  Bro.  Erastus  Snow,  he  was 
called  to  act  as  Bishop  of  the  Leeds 
Ward  in  the  St.  George  Stake,  where 
the  Church  members  were  about  to 
lose  control  because  of  the  establish- 
ment of  Silver  Reef  as  a  mining 
camp.  Narrow  resources  at  Leeds 
and  a  large  family  of  boys,  and  his 
dread  of  Dixie  wine,  induced  him  to 
seek  a  new  home  for  the  Crosby 
family,  and  in  the  spring  of  1886 
they  migrated  to  eastern  Arizona,  and 
after  a  sojourn  of  a  few  months  at 
Nutrioso,  and  again  at  the  behest  of 
Elder  Erastus  Snow,  he  was  called  to 
act  as  Bishop  of  the  shattered  Omer 
and  Amity  Wards  of  the  Eastern  Ari- 
zona Stake,  which  were  united  under 
the  name  of  the  Union  Ward  (now 
the  Eagar  Ward)  of  the  St.  Johns 
Stake.  The  new  Bishop  quickly  put 
renewed  life  and  energy  into  the  set- 
tlement of  Round  Valley,  and  under 
his  leadership  an  excellent  co-opera- 
tive system  of  canals  and  reservoirs 
were  built  and  the  new  town  of  Eagar 
sprung  into  existence.  However,  mat- 
ters, over  which  he  had  no  control, 
again  broke  him  up,  and  in  1899  he 
was  sent  to  Torrey  in  Wayne  county, 
Utah  (where  his  son  George  H.  Cros- 
by, jun.,  had  previously  located),  to 
be  for  the  fourth  time,  a  Bishop. 
Torrey  was  a  new  town  and  age  was 


beginning  to  creep  on  the  successful 
pioneer  who  had  stood  so  much  hard- 
ship and  the  Church  authorities  re- 
leased him  after  a  year  and  a  half  of 
service.  He  then  joined  his  brother 
Jesse  W.  in  the  settlement  of  the  Big 
Horn  Basin  in  Wyoming  in  the  spring 
of  Id 01.  During  his  life.  Bishop 
Crosby  filled  a  considerable  number 
of  civil  offices.  Besides  being  sheriff 
he  was  twice  a  selectman  of  Washing- 
ton county,  Utah,  and  did  long  ser- 
vice as  school  trustee  and  as  justice 
of  the  peace,  and  for  a  quarter  of  a 
century  was  overseer  of  roads.  In 
1895  he  served  as  a  member  of  the 
18th  territorial  legislature  of  Ari- 
zona, where  he  made  a  local  repu- 
tation by  a  determined,  though  losing 
fight  against  the  division  of  his  home 
county  of  Apache,  and  in  Wyoming 
he  was  foreman  of  the  famous  grand 
jury  who  for  six  weeks  investigated 
the  cruel  lynchings  that  resulted 
from  the  range  war  between  the  sheep 
and  cattle  men  of  Northern  Wyo- 
ming. Upon  the  organization  of  the 
Big  Horn  Stake  he  was  selected  as 
its  first  Patriarch  and  was  very 
active  in  his  new  calling.  He  made 
his  home  first  at  Lovell  and  then  at 
Cowley  until  1915,  when  he  returned 
to  his  old  home  in  St.  George  to 
spend  the  last  part  of  his  toilsome 
busy  life  in  quiet  Temple  work,  but 
he  had  scarcely  began  that  work 
when  his  death  occurred  suddenly, 
Oct.  10,  1916.  Patriarch  Crosby  was 
married  three  times.  His  first  wife 
was  Sarah  H.  Brown  whom  he  mar- 
ried in  1869;  she  became  the  mother 
of  twelve  of  his  children  and  shared 
his  early  pioneer  life.  His  two  other 
wives  were  Amelia  Laney  (whom  he 
married  in  March,  188  5,  and  who  ac- 
companied him  to  Torrey  and  to  the 
Big  Horn  Basin),  and  Mary  Lake, 
whom  he  married  about  a  year  pre- 
ceding his  death.  He  was  the  father 
of  fourteen  children  of  whom  seven, 
Benjamin  B.,  George  H.,  jun.,  Amelia 
Wiltbank,  Jesse  E.,  Charles  W.,  Al- 
bert W.,  and  Fred  are  living,  while 


BIOGRAPHICAL  ENCYCLOPEDIA. 


357 


William  H.,  Lorenzo,  John  A.  and 
Elizabeth  grew  to  maturity,  but  have 
since  died.  Helaman  and  Frank  and 
Francis  (twins)  died  in  babyhood." 
(See  also  Vol.  2,  page  44). 

CROSBY,     George    Henry    junior, 

formerly  a  member  of  the  Saint  Jos- 
eph Stake  High  Council,  and  now  a 
resident  of  Mesa,  Maricopa  county, 
Arizona,  was  born  Feb.  29,  1872,  at 
Hebron,  Washington  county,  Utah, 
the  son  of  George  H.  Crosby  and 
Sarah  H.  Brown.  At  the  time  of  his 
birth  his  father  was  Bishop  of  Heb- 
ron.    As  a  child  of  five  years  he  was 


taken  by  his  parents  to  Leeds  in  the 
same  county  and  at  fourteen  years  of 
age  to  Round  Valley  (now  Eagar), 
Apache  county,  Arizona.  His  sur- 
rounding educational  advantages 
were  very  poor  and  his  early  years  in 
Arizona  gave  him  no  chance  to  at- 
tend school,  as  he  had  to  help  sup- 
port the  family  by  carrying  mail;  yet 
by  home  study  and  after  spending 
nine  weeks  at  the  St.  Johns  Stake 
Academy,  and  getting  a  start  at 
school,  he  went  to  Utah  in  18^0,  and 
after  a  few  weeks'  schooling  at  St. 
George  went  to  Salt  Lake  City  where 
he  studied  under  the  tutorage  of  Dr. 


James  E.  Talmage  in  the  L.  D.  S. 
College.  After  a  year  there  he  taught 
school  at  Eagar,  Arizona,  and  at 
Ramah,  New  Mexico;  he  then  re- 
turned to  Utah  for  a  one  year's  tui- 
tion in  the  Church  University  and 
later  studied  at  the  University  of 
Utah,  of  which  he  became  a  graduate. 
After  spending  a  year  in  teaching  he 
began  the  publication  of  the  "Cen- 
sor" at  Richfield,  Utah,  April  2  5, 
1896,  with  the  primary  object  of  de- 
fending the  Latter-day  Saints  against 
the  attacks  of  an  unfriendly  paper. 
During  this  time  he  also  published  a 
small  paper  at  Loa,  in  Wayne  county, 
known  as  the  "Loa  Advice."  Through 
the  advertising  medium  of  these  two 
papers  he  sought  to  start  a  new  town 
in  Wayne  county  on  what  was  known 
as  Poverty  Flat  and  later  decided  to 
join  in  the  colonizing  of  the  new 
town  which  was  named  Torrey. 
Financial  reverses  brought  on  by 
colonizing  put  him  back  to  newspaper 
work  and  he  again  became  an  editor 
at  Richfield,  this  time  of  the  "Rich- 
field Reaper."  During  all  this  time 
he  was  studying  law  and  in  Febru- 
ary, 1903,  he  was  admitted  to  the 
bar  of  the  Utah  Supreme  Court.  In 
1903,  with  his  wife  and  two  children, 
he  again  made  his  home  in  Arizona, 
and  during  the  school  year  of  1903- 
1904  was  principal  of  the  Snowflake 
Stake  Academy.  In  the  fall  of  1904 
he  was  elected  district  attorney  of 
Apache  county  and  lived  at  St. 
Johns,  where  he  was  also  chosen  as 
a  member  of  the  Stake  High  Council. 
After  serving  one  term  as  district  at- 
torney he  took  up  law  practice  in 
Graham  county  where  he  was  Stake 
superintendent  of  the  Y.  M.  M.  I.  A. 
for  four  years,  a  member  of  the  St. 
Joseph  Stake  High  Council  for  six 
years  and  county  attorney  for  three 
years.  In  the  fall  of  1914  he  was 
elected  judge  of  the  Superior  Court 
of  Apache  county,  being  the  first 
Latter-day  Saint  to  be  elected  to  the 
bench  in  Arizona.  During  the  time 
he  was  judge  in  St.  Johns,   he  also 


358 


LATTER-DAY   SAINT 


served  as  Stake  superintendent  of  the 
Y.  M.  M.  I.  A..  But  as  the  judge's 
work  did  not  suit  him  so  well  as  the 
private  practice  of  law  he  resigned 
his  position  to  practice  law  at  Mesa, 
Maricopa  county,  Arizona,  where  he 
is  now  located.  Life  has  been  activ- 
ity with  Judge  Crosby.  When  only 
eleven  years  of  age  he  was  secretary 
of  his  Ward  Mutual,  at  fifteen  he 
acted  as  a  counselor  in  the  Mutual 
and  as  the  first  Stake  secretary  of 
the  Sunday  schools  of  the  St.  Johns 
Stake.  At  seventeen  he  served  in 
the  Stake  superintendency  of  the 
Mutuals.  During  twenty-six  years  he 
has  taught  a  Sunday  school  class  and 
has  been  a  Mutual  class  leader  for 
twelve  years.  Besides  this  he  has  had 
a  long  service  as  a  school  trustee  and 
acted  two  terms  as  justice  of  the 
peace;  twice  he  served  as  county 
chairman  and  three  times  as  secre- 
tary of  his  political  party.  In  1899, 
and  again  in  1903,  he  served  with  the 
Utah  legislature.  During  his  term  as 
judge  he  successfully  headed  a  move- 
ment to  build  a  new  court  house  for 
Apache  county,  while  he  was  a  leader 
in  the  construction  of  the  Smithville 
Extension  Canal  in  Graham  county. 
In  his  labors  among  the  young  he  has 
a  Church  distinction,  for  since  1891, 
when  manuals  were  first  used,  he  has 
never  gone  to  a  Mutual  meeting  with- 
out preparing  his  lesson.  When  a 
young  teacher  at  a  teachers'  institute, 
George  H.  met  Martha  Miller,  a 
daughter  of  Hans  P.  and  Caroline 
Miller  (prominent  Scandinavians  of 
Richfield,  Utah).  At  once  he  loved 
the  sweet  country  girl  and  two  years 
later,  Aug.  8,  18  94,  they  were  mar- 
ried. The  union  has  been  a  very 
happy  one,  the  faithful  wife  helping 
him  to  earn  the  means  wherewith  to 
continue  his  education.  Four  chil- 
dren, Gwendolyn,  Kent  and  Laprele 
and  Lucile  (twins)  have  been  born 
to  them.  Judge  Crosby  was  the  first 
Latter-day  Saint  lawyer  in  Arizona, 
the  first  Latter-day  Saint  district  at- 
torney in  territorial  days,  one  of  the 


first  two  Latter-day  Saint  county  at- 
torneys (when  statehood  came  on) 
and  the  first  Latter-day  Saint  judge 
in  the  new  State  (Arizona). 

CROWTHER,  William  Orson,  sixth 
president  of  the  San  Luis  Stake, 
Colorado,  was  born  Oct.  27,  1866, 
at  Fountain  Green,  Sanpete  county, 
Utah,  the  son  of  Thomas  Crowther 
and  Jane  Jewkes.  He  was  baptized 
July  29,  1877,  by  James  Guymon, 
ordained  a  Teacher  March  3,  1881, 
and  became  active  as  a  Ward  teacher 
and  a  Y.  M.  M.  I.  A.  worker.  He  was 
educated  in  the  common  schools  and 
specialized  in  music  under  Prof.  A. 
C.  Smyth.  After  moving  to  Colorado 
in  1885  he  located  at  Richfield, 
Conejos  county,  and  took  a  most 
active  part  in  the  location  of  San- 
ford,  being  elected  president  of  the 
Sanford  Town  Company.  As  one  of 
the  first  settlers  of  Sanford  he  hauled 
some  of  the  first  timber  onto  the 
townsite  with  which  to  erect  the 
first  log  meeting  house  in  the  new 
settlement.  He  also  took  an  active 
part  in  the  Ward  Y.  M.  M.  I.  A.  and 
acted  as  president  of  that  associa- 
tion. He  was  ordained  a  Seventy 
Aug.  4,  1884,  by  Seymour  B.  Young 
at  Moroni,  Sanpete  county,  Utah,  and 
after  settling  in  the  San  Luis  Stake, 
Colorado,  he  became  a  member  of 
the  92nd  quorum  of  Seventy.  In 
1886  (Oct.  1st)  in  the  Logan  Temple 
he  married  Mary  Caroline  Mortensen 
(daughter  of  Anders  J.  Mortensen 
and  Christine  Anderson),  who  was 
born  in  Parowan,  Iron  county,  Utah, 
Feb.  21,  1868,  and  went  to  Colorado 
in  1885.  Following  are  the  names 
of  the  children  of  this  marriage: 
Wm.  Alma,  Mary  Estella,  Sarah 
Mabel,  Thos.  Walter,  Clara  Emily, 
Jesse  Anders,  Jane  Christine,  Horace 
Clive,  Laura  Verina  and  Don  Q.  Bro. 
Crowther  was  ordained  a  High  Priest 
April  15,  1888,  by  John  Henry  Smith 
and  set  apart  as  second  counselor  to 
Bishop  Soren  C.  Berthelsen  when 
the   Sanford   Ward    was    first   organ- 


BIOGRAPHICAL  ENCYCLOPEDIA. 


359 


ized.  He  filled  this  position  until 
1896  when  he  was  called  and  set 
apart  by  President  F.  M.  Lyman  as 
chorister  of  the  Sanford  Ward  and 
leader  of  the  Stake  choir  which  posi- 
tion he  filled  until  he  was  ordained 
a  Bishop  Jan.  31,  1899,  by  Apostle 
Abraham  O.  Woodruff.  He  succeeded 
Soren  C.  Berthelsen  as  Bishop  of  the 
Sanford  Ward  and  acted  in  that 
capacity  until  May  21,  1911,  when 
he  was  chosen  as  first  counselor  to 
Erastus  S.  Christensen,  president  of 
the  San  Luis  Stake.  Later  he  acted 
in  the  same  position  to  President 
Hyrum  S.  Harris,  and  in  1919  (May 
25th)  he  was  chosen  and  set  apart 
as  president  of  the  San  Luis  Stake, 
which  position  he  still  holds.  Be- 
sides being  a  most  active  Church 
worker  President  Crowther  served  as 
secretary  of  the  district  school  board 
for  fifteen  years  and  took  an  active 
part  in  the  County  Council  of  De- 
fense in  the  late  war.  In  1910  he 
purchased  a  tract  of  480  acres  of 
land  north  of  Sanford.  With  his 
oldest  son  (who  had  just  returned 
from  the  German  Mission) ,  his  second 
son  and  a  nephew  (H.  Eugene  Mor- 
tensen),  they  formed  a  partnership 
and  did  all  their  business  under  the 
name  of  Wm.  O.  Crowther  and  Sons 
Co.  Afterwards  this  company  added 
by  purchase  440  acres  of  land  to  their 
original  purchase,  and  they  now  own 
one  of  the  largest  and  best  ranches 
in  Conejos  county,  Colorado.  They 
also  own  several  hundred  acres  of 
homestead  land  in  the  mountains 
west  of  San  Luis  Valley  and  handle 
sheep  and  cattle  quite  extensively. 
Although  spending  a  great  portion 
of  his  time  in  the  interest  of  the 
Church,  Bro.  Crowther  has  been  very 
successful  in  financial  affairs.  Dur- 
ing his  administration  as  Bishop  of 
the  Sanford  Ward  a  beautiful  meet- 
ing house  was  built,  and  he  also  took 
an  active  part  in  the  building  of 
school  houses,  roads,  etc.  President 
Crowther  is  a  man  of  great  influence, 
not  only  among  the  Saints,  but  also 


with  non-Mormons,  and  has  gained 
an  enviable  reputation  for  honor  and 
truth  among  all  his  associates  in 
life.  He  and  his  large  family  are 
quite  noted  for  their  musical  ability 
and  are  frequently  invited  to  sing  at 
county  festivals  and  on  many  other 
occasions. 

CUMMARD,  John,  second  coun- 
selor in  the  presidency  of  the  Mari- 
copa Stake  of  Zion  and  a  resident  of 
Mesa,  Maricopa  county,  Arizona,  was 
born  May  16,  1882,  in  Birchfield 
street,  Liverpool,  England,  the  son 
of  John  and  Mary  Ellen  Cummard. 
He  was  raised  and  educated  in  Liver- 
pool, and  at  the  age  of  twenty-three 
he     married     Eva     Anna     Thompson 


(daughter  of  John  Thompson  of  Nor- 
wich, Norfolkshire,  England).  In 
1907  (January  1st)  two  "Mormon" 
Elders  (William  A.  Morton  of  Salt 
Lake  City  and  Robert  Price,  now 
Bishop  of  Phoenix,  Arizona),  visited 
the  Cummard  home  at  Needham 
Road,  Liverpool,  and  on  the  15th  of 
April,  1^07,  Bro.  Cummard  and  wife 
joined  the  Church.  Bro.  Cummard 
was  ordained  a  Deacon  Aug.  10, 
1907,  and  early  in  1908  he  emigrated 
with  his  family,  consisting  of  wife 
and  two  children    (John  and  Zena), 


360 


LATTER-DAY   SAINT 


to  Utah,  crossing  the  Atlantic  in  the 
steamship  "Canada,"  which  sailed 
from  Liverpool  Feb.  29,  1908.  On 
their  arrival  in  Utah  the  family 
located  temporarily  in  Heber  City, 
Wasatch  county,  where  Bro.  Cum- 
mard  was  employed  with  a  lumber 
company  and  assisted  with  the  Wa- 
satch Stake  amusement  hall  and  the 
Timpanogas  Canal.  Bro.  Cummard 
then  went  to  Provo,  where  he  be- 
came associated  with  the  Barton  and 
Blake  Furniture  Company.  He  was 
ordained  an  Elder  Oct.  9,  1908,  and 
later  ordained  a  Seventy.  He  acted 
as  secretary  of  an  Elders'  quorum, 
chairman  of  the  Provo  Fifth  Ward 
amusement  committee  and  counselor 
in  the  presidency  of  a  Y.  M.  M.  I.  A., 
was  a  member  of  the  faculty  of  the 
B.  Y.  U.,  being  instructor  of  physical 
culture.  During  the  absence  of  his 
wife  and  family  in  England  Bro. 
Cummard  went  to  Arizona  and  as- 
sociated himself  with  the  Intermoun- 
tain  Life  Insurance  Co.  of  Utah, 
locating  in  Mesa  Jan.  2,  1912.  Dur- 
ing the  next  four  years  he  traveled 
in  the  interest  of  life  insurance,  visit- 
ing practically  every  town  in  Arizona 
and  New  Mexico.  During  this  time 
he  was  a  member  of  the  Maricopa 
board  of  Y.  M.  M.  I.  A.  and  in  1916- 
1918  he  acted  as  chairman  of  the 
Stake  Amusement  Committee  and  of 
the  Stake  Old  Folks  Committee  and 
teacher  of  the  junior  class  of  Y.  M. 
M.  I.  A.  and  scout  master.  While 
thus  engaged  he  built  the  boy  scouts' 
swimming  pool  at  Mesa.  In  1916  he 
was  set  apart  as  first  counselor  to 
the  Stake  superintendent  of  Y.  M. 
M.  I.  A.,  and  in  1917-1918  he  acted 
as  president  of  that  association.  Dur- 
ing the  time  of  the  world  war  he 
acted  as  chairman  of  the  Red  Cross 
work,  having  under  his  jurisdiction 
the  entire  Red  Cross  organization  of 
Arizona.  He  was  elected  president 
of  the  Mesa  Commercial  Club  in 
1918.  Since  1915  he  has  been  man- 
ager and  half  owner  of  the  Arizona 
Land   Co.,   and   is   at  present   finan- 


cially interested  with  both  banks  in 
Mesa.  He  is  also  director  of  the 
South  Side  Hospital,  director  of  the 
Maricopa  County  Realty  Board,  direc- 
tor of  the  so-called  Dry  Land  As- 
sociation and  holds  other  positions  in 
civic  improvement  affairs.  He  was 
the  president  of  the  first  Arizona 
Cotton  Congress  held  in  Mesa  in 
1919  and  owns  and  manages  large 
tracts  of  farming  land  now  planted 
in  cotton.  In  1919  (May  31st)  he 
was  ordained  a  High  Priest  by  Chas. 
W.  Penrose  and  set  apart  to  act  as 
second  counselor  to  President  James 
W.  Lesueur  of  the  Maricopa  Stake, 
which  position  he  still  holds  and  is 
now  taking  an  active  part  in  getting 
funds  for  the  Arizona  Temple.  Bro. 
Cummard  is  the  father  of  six  chil- 
dren, namely,  John,  Zena,  Mable, 
Nadine,  Eva  and  Leonard  Blain. 

CUTLER,     John     Christopher,     a 

member  of  the  Pioneer  Stake  High 
Council,  Salt  Lake  City,  Utah,  was 
born  Feb.  5,  1846,  in  Sheffield,  Eng- 
land,  the  son  of    John    Cutler    and 


Elizabeth  Robinson.  His  father  was 
an  edge  tool  manufacturer,  and  both 
father  and  mother  were  Methodists, 
but  becoming  converts  to  "Mormon- 
ism"  his  father  was  baptized  in  1857 
and  emigrated  to  Utah,  where  he  re- 


BIOGRAPHICAL  ENCYCLOPEDIA. 


361 


mained  until  1860  when  he  returned 
to  England  for  the  purpose  of  bring- 
ing his  family  to  America.  In  1864 
his  parents  and  six  children  (includ- 
ing John  C. )  emigrated  to  Utah, 
crossing  the  plains  by  ox  teams.  John 
C,  prior  to  this  (when  a  little  over 
twelve  years  of  age)  was  offered  a 
position  with  S.  and  J.  Watts  of  Man- 
chester, England,  where  he  remained 
employed  as  a  clerk  until  1864,  and 
during  this  time,  being  away  from 
his  relatives,  he  learned  economy  and 
dependence  upon  himself.  The  day 
after  his  arrival  in  Salt  Lake  City,  he 
with  his  brother,  Thos.  R.,  and  their 
father  commenced  digging  beets,  car- 
rots and  potatoes  on  shares  and  dig- 
ging on  what  is  called  the  Church 
canal  to  pay  their  assessment  for 
water  on  a  small  farm  which  they 
bought  in  East  Mill  Creek.  John  C. 
continued  at  such  work  until  the  fall 
of  1865,  when  Thomas  Taylor,  a 
merchant,  offered  him  a  position  as 
clerk.  John  C.  started  back  with 
Thos.  Taylor  to  Sweetwater  and  as- 
sisted in  bringing  in  the  last  com- 
pany of  emigrants  that  year,  and  also 
brought  in  a  stock  of  goods.  In  1866 
John  C.  went  to  New  York  and  St. 
Louis  to  assist  as  purchasing  agent 
for  another  stock  of  goods  and  con- 
tinued clerking  for  Thomas  Taylor 
until  1871,  when  he  was  taken  into 
partnership.  After  that  partnership 
was  dissolved  by  mutual  consent  in 
1879  John  C.  Cutler  took  the  agency 
of  the  Provo  Woollen  Mills,  Presi- 
dent Brigham  Young  kindly  renting 
a  portion  of  the  Old  Constitution 
Building  to  him  at  a  nominal  rent, 
as  he  wished  to  encourage  the  enter- 
prise. The  sales  of  goods  the  first 
year  amounted  to  $28,000  and  the 
sales  gradually  increased  until  they, 
in  1884,  amounted  to  $150,000.  In 
1885  John  C.  associated  himself  with 
his  brother,  Joseph  G.  Cutler,  under 
the  firm  name  of  Joseph  G.  Cutler 
and  Bro.  as  agents  for  the  Provo 
Woollen  Mills  and  they  sold  about 
$100,000   worth   of  goods  that  year. 


In  August,  1885,  John  C.  Cutler  pur- 
chased a  portion  of  the  Old  Constitu- 
tion Building,  27  feet  front  by  124 
feet  deep,  and  in  the  spring  of  1886, 
having  remodeled  the  store  and  made 
it  one  of  the  most  attractive  stores  on 
Main  St.,  the  firm  of  John  C.  Cutler 
and  Bro.  moved  into  it.  Later  they 
added  a  tailoring  establishment  to 
their  business.  The  business  was  in- 
corporated in  1895  under  the  name 
of  Cutler  Bros,  and  Co.  of  which 
John  C.  was  made  the  president, 
which  proved  quite  a  success.  Cut- 
ler Brothers  and  Co.  is  still  one  of 
the  best  known  business  establish- 
ments in  Salt  Lake  City,  manufactur- 
ing knitted  goods  in  addition  to  their 
wholesale  and  retail  business.  In 
August,  1884,  John  C.  Cutler  was 
elected  county  clerk  of  Salt  Lake 
county  to  which  office  he  was  subse- 
quently re-elected  a  number  of  times. 
When  political  parties  in  Utah  were 
divided  upon  national  lines  John  C. 
Cutler  cast  his  lot  with  the  Republi- 
cans. In  1904  he  was  elected  gov- 
ernor of  the  State  of  Utah,  his  term 
beginning  Jan.  2,  1905,  and  expiring 
Jan.  4,  1909.  For  more  than  forty 
years  Governor  Cutler  has  been  one 
of  the  most  successful  business  men 
of  Utah.  Among  the  corporations 
with  which  he  has  been  connected 
may  be  mentioned  the  Utah  Sugar 
Co.,  Utah  Light  and  Power  Co.,  Bene- 
ficial Life  Insurance  Company,  Home 
Fire  Insurance  Co.  of  Utah,  Deseret 
Savings  Bank,  Monroe  State  Bank, 
Bank  of  Garland,  First  National 
Bank  of  Murray,  and  the  Utah  Hotel 
Co.,  in  most  of  which  he  has  held 
positions  as  director  or  one  of  the 
executive  officers.  For  many  years 
he  was  a  director  in  the  Deseret 
Agricultural  and  Manufacturing  So- 
ciety. On  May  1,  1911,  he  was 
elected  president  of  the  Deseret  Na- 
tional Bank,  which  position  he  still 
holds.  He  is  a  member  of  the  Com- 
mercial Club,  Salt  Lake  City,  and 
has  served  as  treasurer  of  the  Lat- 
ter-day  Saints    University   of     Utah. 


362 


LATTER-DAY   SAINT 


He  was  baptized  in  July,  1865,  the 
year  after  his  arrival  in  Utah,  by 
Henry  Skidmore,  and  soon  after- 
wards ordained  to  the  Priesthood, 
took  an  active  part  in  Sunday  school 
work  and  labored  for  many  years  as 
a  block  teacher.  He  was  ordained  a 
High  Priest  and  set  apart  as  a  coun- 
selor to  Bishop  Sperry  of  the  Fourth 
Ward,  which  position  he  held  for  a 
number  of  years.  Later  he  was 
chosen  as  a  member  of  the  High 
Council  of  the  Salt  Lake  Stake  of 
Zion,  and  when  that  Stake  was 
divided  in  1904  he  was  chosen  as  a 
High  Councilor  in  the  Pioneer  Stake 
which  position  he  still  holds.  In 
1890-1892  he  filled  a  mission  to 
Great  Britain,  laboring  in  the  Man- 
chester conference,  part  of  the  time 
as  president  of  said  conference.  When 
the  Salt  Lake  Temple  was  finished 
in  18  93  he  was  called  to  labor  in  the 
same  as  an  ordinance  worker,  which 
position  he  held  for  two  years  and 
a  half.  In  1871  he  married  Sarah 
Elizabeth  Taylor  (daughter  of  Bishop 
Thomas  Taylor),  which  marriage  has 
been  blessed  with  seven  children, 
namely,  John  C,  Jr.,  Elizabeth  T.  C, 
Herbert  E.,  Mabel  B.,  Alfred  T., 
Harold  Y.  and  Hazel  A.  Bro.  Cutler 
is  occupying  a  home  on  West  Temple 
street  which  was  erected  by  the  late 
George  Romney  thirty-five  years  ago. 

DALIjEY,  John  Edward,  Patriarch 
in  the  Oneida  Stake,  and  a  resident 
of  Preston,  Franklin  county,  Idaho, 
was  born  Nov.  12,  1852,  in  Pleasant 
Grove,  Utah  county,  Utah,  the  son  of 
James  Dalley  and  Emma  Wright.  He 
was  baptized  in  June,  1861,  by  James 
Dalley  and  ordained  a  Deacon  in 
1868  by  Samuel  H.  Rogers;  ordained 
an  Elder  March  24,  1872,  by  Wm. 
Laney  and  a  High  Priest  July  2  9, 
1877,  by  Wilford  Woodruff,  at  which 
time  he  was  set  apart  as  a  High 
Councilor  in  the  Parowan  Stake, 
whence  he  had  moved  in  1876.  He 
acted  in  this  position  until  Nov.  27, 
1879,  when  he  was  ordained  a  Bishop 


by  Erastus  Snow  and  set  apart  to 
preside  over  the  Parowan  Second 
Ward,  a  position  which  he  held  until 
188  4,  when  he  was  called  to  act  as 
first  counselor  to  President  Thomas 
J.  Jones  of  the  Parowan  Stake.  Hav- 
ing obeyed  the  law  of  celestial  mar- 
riage he  was  obliged  to  move  away 
from  Parowan,  and  he  settled  at 
Lewiston,  Cache  county,  Utah,  where 
he  taught  school  for  six  months.  His 
family  moved  from  Parowan  to 
Draper,  Salt  Lake  county,  in  1887, 
and  in  1888  he  moved  to  Pleasant 
Grove,  Utah  county,  where  he  taught 
school  until  1893  when  he  moved  to 
Preston,  Idaho.  Prior  to  this  Bro. 
Dalley  had  taught  school  in  Parowan 
from  1876  to  1886  and  acted  as 
county  superintendent  of  public  in- 
struction in  Iron  county  from  1877 
to  1881,  teaching  school  at  the  same 
time.  He  also  acted  as  recorder  in 
Parowan  and  was  county  clerk  of 
Iron  county  from  1879  to  1881.  After 
settling  in  Preston,  Idaho,  he  took 
charge  of  the  Oneida  Stake  Academy 
and  acted  as  president  of  that  insti- 
tution three  years  and  afterwards  as 
department  teacher  two  years.  He 
acted  as  superintendent  of  schools  in 
Oneida  county  two  terms  (from  Nov., 
1898,  to  1902).  Besides  his  school 
work  Bro.  Dalley  carried  on  the  busi- 
ness of  farmer  and  stock  raiser.  He 
also  acted  as  a  home  missionary  and 
was  active  in  many  church  enter- 
prises. In  March,  1895,  he  was  set 
apart  as  a  High  Councilor  in  the 
Oneida  Stake  by  Joseph  F.  Smith  and 
on  March  8,  1917,  he  was  ordained 
a  Patriarch  by  Hyrum  G.  Smith.  In 
1875  (Oct.  4th)  Bro.  Dalley  married 
Lurena  Elizabeth  Fitzgerald  (daugh- 
ter of  Perry  Fitzgerald  and  Agnes 
Wadsworth),  who  was  born  Aug.  10, 
1855,  at  Draper,  Salt  Lake  county, 
Utah.  After  bearing  her  husband 
eight  children  (Emma  Agnes,  John 
Edward,  Lula  Effie,  Wealthy  Virtue, 
Harriet  Fitzgerald,  Abraham  F.,  Mil- 
ton F.  and  Lurene  E.)  she  died  Nov. 
6,   1914.      In  1884    (Feb.   14th)    Bro. 


BIOGRAPHICAL  ENCYCLOPEDIA. 


363 


Dalley  married  Mary  D.  Hansen 
(daughter  of  Jorgen  Hansen  and 
Anna  C.  Mortensen),  who  was  born 
Feb.  10,  1865.  She  bore  her  ..hus- 
band two  children,  namely,  Georg- 
anna  and  Marguerite.  Bro.  Dalley 
has  been  actively  engaged  in  Church 
duties  from  his  earliest  youth. 

DALTON,  George  M.,  Bishop  of 
Bench  Ward  (Bannock  Stake),  Ban- 
nock county,  Idaho,  was  born  Feb. 
1,  1891,at  Willard,  Box  Elder  county, 
Utah,  the  son  of  John  A.  Dalton  and 
Elizabeth  Cook.  He  was  baptized 
when  eight  years  old  and  ordained  a 
Deacon,  Priest  and  Elder  succes- 
sively. From  his  earliest  youth  he 
has  taken  an  active  part  in  Church 
affairs.  Together  with  his  parents 
he  left  Willard  in  1898  and  located 
in  Grace,  Gentile  Valley,  Idaho,  en- 
gaging in  farming.  He  located  in 
Bench  in  l!)16.  In  1913-1915  he 
filled  a  mission  to  the  Western 
States,  laboring  principally  in  Colo- 
rado and  New  Mexico.  In  1916 
(June  7th),  he  married  Zenna  Ander- 
son (daughter  of  George  Anderson 
and  Annie  Hogan),  who  was  born 
Dec.  12,  1892,  in  Richmond,  Cache 
county,  Utah.  He  was  ordained  a 
High  Priest  and  Bishop  May  18,  1918, 
by  Orson  F.  Whitney. 

DAY,  AVilford,  president  of  the 
Parowan  Stake  and  a  resident  of 
Parowan,  Iron  county,  Utah,  was 
born  May  8,  1870,  at  Kanarra,  Utah, 
the  son  of  Thomas  Day  and  Char- 
lotte Clark.  He  was  baptized  by  his 
father  when  about  eight  years  old 
and  ordained  an  Elder  in  November, 
1904,  by  William  C.  McGregor;  or- 
dained a  High  Priest  Sept.  19,  1909, 
by  Anthony  W.  Ivins  and  set  apart 
as  first  counselor  to  President  Lucius 
N.  Marsden.  He  was  chosen  and 
sustained  as  president  of  the  Parowan 
Stake  Sept.  25,  1916.  Prior  to  this, 
in  1904-1906,  he  filled  a  mission  to 
Great  Britain,  during  which  he  pre- 
sided over  the  Bristol  conference 
about  eighteen  months  and  in  return- 


ing home  had  charge  of  a  company 
of  42  Elders  and  43  Saints.  After 
returning  from  his  mission  he  acted 
as  second  assistant  superintendent  of 
the  Parowan  Sunday  school  and  acted 
as  president  of  an  Elders'  quorum. 
In  July,  1900,  he  was  elected  a  mem- 
ber of  the  school  board,  was  re-elect- 
ed to  the  same  position  in  1904  and 
resigned  to  go  on  his  mission.  He 
was  elected  county  commissioner  in 
1902  and  appointed  a  member  of  the 
State  Board  of  Sheep  Commissioners 
in    March,    1903.      In    1907    he    was 


elected  mayor  of  Parowan  and  served 
two  years.  In  1910  he  was  elected 
a  representative  of  the  State  Legisla- 
ture from  Iron  county  and  was  re- 
elected in  1912,  1914  and  1918.  He 
was  a  member  of  the  Parowan  civic 
council  from  1915  to  1917,  acted  as 
chairman  of  the  County  Council  of 
Defence,  took  an  active  part  in  Red 
Cross  activities  and  was  county  food 
administrator.  He  was  one  of  the 
main  founders  of  the  Bank  of  Iron 
County,  chairman  of  a  committee  of 
three  in  the  planning  and  building  of 
the  new  Ward  chapel  at  Parowan, 
which  was  completed  in  two  years  at 
a  cost  of  $38,000.  He  also  revived 
the  Parowan  Co-op  Store  which  had 
almost  run  down  to  nothing,  became 


364 


LATTER-DAY   SAINT 


its  manager  in  1909  and  changed  its 
name  to  the  Parowan  M.  &  M.  Co.; 
the  business  is  now  in  a  flourishing 
condition.  At  present,  Bro.  Day  is 
also  engaged  in  tunneling  1,600  feet, 
through  a  mountain  to  bring  water 
for  irrigation  purposes  into  Parowan 
Valley  from  a  small  creek  beyond  a 
mountain  ridge.  He  is  also  taking 
an  active  part  with  the  Iron  County 
Irrigation  Company  to  drain  the 
Little  Salt  Lake  and  reclaim  the 
ground  now  occupied  by  that  body 
of  water,  build  a  reservoir  and  irri- 
gate thousands  of  acres  of  land  be- 
low known  as  the  Rush  Lake 
Benches.  In  1898  (July  13th)  Presi- 
dent Day  married  Elizabeth  Scott 
(daughter  of  Robert  M.  Scott  and 
Harriet  Foster),  who  was  born  March 
11,  1878,  in  Santaquin,  Utah  county, 
Utah.  Five  children  are  the  issue  of 
this  marriage,  namely,  Agatha,  Al- 
berta, Wilford  S.,  Orville  H.  and 
La  Priel. 

DE     LANGE,      Joseph      Franklin, 

Bishop  of  the  Koosharem  Ward 
(Sevier  Stake),  Sevier  county,  Utah, 
was  born  March  26,  1880,  at  Koo- 
sharem, Utah,  the  son  of  Leonard 
Gabriel  De  Lange  and  Gurina  Tor- 
gensen.  He  was  baptized  in  1888  by 
Francis  H.  Petersen,  and  was  raised 
in  Koosharem,  where  he  also  re- 
ceived a  common  school  education 
and  then  studied  two  years  in  the 
Sanpete  Stake  Academy  at  Ephraim; 
was  ordained  successively  to  the  of- 
fices of  Deacon  and  Teacher.  Being 
ordained  an  Elder  by  Wm.  H.  Seeg- 
miller  in  1902,  he  presided  for  a 
short  time  over  an  Elders'  quorum. 
After  being  ordained  a  Seventy  by 
Joseph  W.  McMurrin  he  was  chosen 
as  a  president  of  the  82nd  quorum 
of  Seventy.  He  also  acted  as  second 
assistant  superintendent  of  the  Koo- 
sharem Sunday  school.  In  rdl2 
(June  2  5th)  he  was  ordained  a  High 
Priest  and  Bishop  by  George  F. 
Richards  and  set  apart  to  preside 
over   the   Koosharem    Ward,     which 


position  he  still  holds.  In  1915  he 
filled  a  three  months  mission  to 
California,  laboring  in  the  San  Fran- 
cisco conference.  Although  he  was 
raised  as  a  farmer.  Bishop  De  Lange 
has  since  early  youth  been  engaged 
in  the  mercantile  business  and  is  now 
manager  of  the  Grass  Valley  Mercan- 
tile Co.  In  1902  he  married  Rhoda 
Ann  Bagley  (daughter  of  Bishop  Ed- 


ward A.  Bagley  and  Mary  McClellan), 
who  was  born  Aug.  24,  1884.  The 
children  of  this  marriage  are  the  fol- 
lowing: Rhoda  Lavon,  Alma  Leon- 
ard, Talmage  Young,  Mary  Gurina, 
Winona  Christina,  Elna  Lenea,  Inez 
Wanda  and  Joseph  Leland. 

DICK,  John,  second  Bishop  of 
Jameston  Ward  (Shelley  Stake), 
Bingham  county,  Idaho,  was  born 
June  2,  1868,  at  Colavis,  near  Glas- 
gow, Scotland,  the  son  of  David  Dick 
and  Helen  Duff.  Emigrating  to  Am- 
erica with  his  parents  as  an  infant 
in  1868  he  crossed  the  Atlantic  in 
the  ship  "Constitution."  The  com- 
pany traveled  by  rail  to  Fort  Benton 
and  thence  by  ox  train  (54  wagons) 
to  Salt  Lake.  The  family  remained 
in  Echo  Canyon  one  year  to  work  on 
the  Union  Pacific  Railroad  and  set- 
tled   in    Pleasant    Green,    Salt    Lake 


BIOGRAPHICAL  ENCYCLOPEDIA. 


366 


county,  in  18  69,  remaining  there  two 
years,  after  which  they  resided  in 
Salt  Lake  City  until  1877,  when  they 
returned  to  Pleasant  Green  to  make 
final  proof  on  a  homestead.  Later 
they  located  in  Taylorsville,  Salt 
Lake  county,  where  they  resided  un- 
til 1905,  when  they  removed  to  Idaho 
Falls,  Idaho.  About  three  years  later 
(1908)  they  located  in  Jameston. 
John  Dick  was  baptized  June  6,  1877, 
by  David  W.  Leaker  in  Salt  Lake 
City;  was  ordained  a  Deacon  Jan.  3, 
1882;  was  ordained  successively  to 
the  offices  of  Teacher,  Priest  and 
Elder,  the  latter  ordination  taking 
place  Feb.  1,  1892,  by  William  E. 
Mower  at  Milburn,  Sanpete  county, 
Utah.  He  was  ordained  a  Seventy  in 
1910  and  ordained  a  High  Priest 
April  30,  1911,  by  John  F.  Shelley 
and  set  apart  to  act  as  second  coun- 
selor to  Bishop  Christian  Anderson; 
in  1916  he  was  chosen  as  first  coun- 
selor to  the  same  Bishop  and  in 
August,  1917,  he  was  ordained  a 
Bishop  by  George  Albert  Smith  and 
set  apart  to  preside  over  the  James- 
ton  Ward.  In  1^02  (Feb.  3rd)  he 
married  Mary  E.  Bills  (daughter  of 
Wesley  Bills  and  Sarah  Wilcox),  who 
was  born  Sept.  13,  1873,  at  Fairview, 
Sanpete  county,  Utah.  The  issue  of 
this  marriage  is  nine  children, 
namely.  Maul  L.,  Ethel,  David  W., 
Glen,  Janet,  Helen,  Archibald,  John 
R.  and  Max. 

DURRANT,  William  Rendell,  first 
counselor  in  the  presidency  of  the 
Teton  Stake  of  Zion  and  a  resident 
of  Driggs,  Teton  county,  Idaho,  was 
born  Nov.  6,  1877,  at  Vernon,  Tooele 
county,  Utah,  the  son  of  William  W. 
D.  Durrant  and  Ada  Rendell.  He 
was  baptized  Nov.  6,  1885,  by  his 
father  and  became  a  diligent  Church 
worker  in  his  early  youth.  He  was 
ordained  a  Deacon  when  twelve  years 
of  age  and  was  ordained  an  Elder  in 
1899.  Prior  to  this,  in  1896,  he  com- 
menced a  two  years  course  in  the  L. 
D.  S.  College  in  Salt  Lake  City  and 


taught  school  two  years  at  Elkhorn, 
in  Wasatch  county,  Utah.  He  moved 
to  the  Teton  Valley  in  1906  and  in 
1908  he  was  ordained  a  High  Priest 
by  Don  C.  Driggs  and  set  apart  as 
first  counselor  in  the  Bishopric  of 
the  Darby  Ward.  In  1909  he  was 
chosen  as  second  assistant  In  the 
Stake  superintendency  of  Sunday 
schools.  In  the  meantime  he  moved 
to  Driggs,  where  he  was  chosen  as 
Ward  clerk,  and  in  1911  was  chosen 
as  first  counselor  in  the  Bishopric 
of  the  Driggs  Ward.  In  1912  he  was 
ordained  a  Bishop  by  Apostle  Francis 
M.  Lyman  and  set  apart  to  preside 
over  the  Driggs  Ward.  In  November, 
1913,  he  was  set  apart  as  first  coun- 
selor in  the  Teton  Stake  presidency, 
which  position  he  still  holds.  In 
1899  (Nov.  30th)  Bro.  Durrant  mar- 
ried Elizabeth  Home  (daughter  of 
Richard  S.  Home  and  Mary  Price), 
who  was  born  Aug.  27,  1873,  and  has 
borne  her  husband  five  children, 
namely,  Ardella,  Verna,  Ada,  Eva 
and  Harvey  R.  President  Durrant  is 
a  merchant  by  occupation  and  has 
always  taken  an  active  part  in  public 
affairs,  both  ecclesiastical  and  secu- 
lar. 

EARL,  James  Calvin,  a  member  of 
the  Mormon  Battalion,  was  born 
March  27,  1822,  in  Logan  county, 
Ohio,  the  son  of  Joseph  and  Dorcas 
Tabitha  Earl.  He  was  baptized  Oct. 
2  4,  18  38,  in  Schuyler  county,  Illinois, 
by  his  brother  Sylvester  H.  Earl.  He 
passed  through  the  persecutions  of 
the  Saints  in  Illinois  and  went  into 
exile  with  his  co-religionists  in  1846. 
While  stopping  temporarily  at  Mount 
Pisgah,  Iowa,  he  enlisted  in  the  Mor- 
mon Battalion  July  10,  1847,  and 
marched  as  far  as  Santa  Fe,  New 
Mexico,  with  the  main  body  of  the 
battalion;  thence  he  was  assigned  to 
the  sick  detachment  under  Captain 
James  Brown  and  spent  the  winter 
of  1846-1847  on  the  Arkansas  river 
and  arrived  in  Great  Salt  Lake  Valley 
July  29,   1847,  a  few  days  after  the 


366 


LATTER-DAY   SAINT 


arrival  of  the  pioneers  under  Prest. 
Brigham  Young.  In  1848  he  mar- 
ried Mary  Elizabeth  Parsons  in  Salt 
Lake  City.  Miss  Parsons  had  crossed 
the  plains  in  1848,  driving  two  yoke 
of  oxen.  She  was  born  May  12,  1829, 
and  baptized  by  Isaac  Clark  in  Mace- 
donia, Hancock  county,  Illinois.  Her 
marriage  to  James  Calvin  Earl  was 
blessed  with  nine  children,  namely, 
Amanda  Ellen,  James  Calvin  junior, 
Tabitha  Jane,  Louise  Ann,  Mary 
Elizabeth,  Cyrus  Hibbert  Wheelock, 
Sylvester  Henry,  Minerva  and  Ro- 
setta.  Bro.  Earl  died  in  Pine  Val- 
ley, Washington  county,  Utah,  Feb. 
27,  1871.  His  wife  survived  him  and 
died  Feb.    23,    1917,   aged   49   years. 

EAIUj,  Sylvester  Henry,  Bishop  of 
Virgen  Ward  (St.  George  Stake), 
Washington  county,  Utah,  was  born 
Oct.  23,  1863,  at  St.^  George,  Utah, 
the  son  of  James  Calvin  Earl  and 
Mary  Elizabeth  Parsons.  He  was 
baptized  in  18  72  and  took  an  active 
part  in  Church  and  business  affairs 
early  in  life.  In  1890  (May  29th) 
he  married  Sarah  Delmina  Niles  (a 
daughter  of  Lansen  A.  Niles  and 
Catherine  FoUett).  She  bore  her 
husband  four  children,  namely,  Mu- 
riel Mignon,  James  Niles,  Paula 
Elizabeth  and  Alanson.  This  wife 
died  July  31,  1901.  Two  of  her 
children  also  died.  In  1904  (March 
8th)  Bishop  Earl  married  Esther  A. 
Bradshaw  (daughter  of  Samuel  Brad- 
shaw  and  Annie  Bruppacher),  who 
was  born  July  20,  1879,  at  Virgen, 
she  being  a  young  widow  with  a 
baby  girl  (Ethel) .  This  wife  has 
borne  her  husband  ten  children, 
namely,  Lawrence,  Annie  Louise, 
Ellis,  Esther  May,  Rebecca,  Samuel 
S.,  Irving  B.,  Lois  Mary,  Anthony 
Calvin  and  Florelle.  Bro.  Earl  was 
ordained  an  Elder  Jan.  24,  1904,  by 
Leroy  W.  Bebee  and  later  ordained 
a  High  Priest  and  Bishop  in  1917 
and  set  apart  to  preside  over  the  Vir- 
gen Ward.  Bishop  Earl  is  a  farmer 
and  stock  raiser  by  avocation. 


ECKERSLEY,  Joseph,  third  presi- 
dent of  the  Wayne  Stake  of  Zion. 
(Continued  from  page  348,  volume 
1).  Bro.  Eckersley  continued  to 
labor  as  Stake  superintendent  of  Sun- 
day schools,  Stake  clerk  and  presi- 
dent of  the  112th  quorum  of  Seventy 
until  called  on  a  mission  to  Great 
Britain,  in  the  spring  of  1901.  He 
left  Salt  Lake  City,  April  12,  1901, 
and  visited  the  largest  cities  in  the 
United  States  en  route  to  Boston.  On 
his  arrival  in  Liverpool,  England,  he 
was  assigned  to  labor  for  a  few  weeks 
in  Burnley  and  Chorley,  and  during 
this  time  visited  his  mother,  brothers 
and  sisters  who  listened  attentively 
to  the  teaching  of  the  gospel.  He 
later  baptized  his  mother  and  other 
members  of  the  family.  On  the  ar- 
rival of  President  Francis  M.  Lyman 
in  Liverpool,  and  the  release  of 
President  Platte  D.  Lyman  as  presi- 
dent of  the  European  Mission,  Bro. 
Eckersley  was  called  by  the  former 
to  42  Islington,  Liverpool,  to  assist 
him,  and  was  assigned  to  the  work 
of  mission  clerk  and  emigration 
clerk,  and  to  take  charge  of  all  office 
work  and  preside  in  the  absence  of 
the  president.  During  his  labors  in 
this  capacity,  covering  a  period  of 
over  two  years,  a  great  improvement 
was  made  under  the  direction  of 
President  Francis  M.  Lyman  in  keep- 
ing the  records  and  accounts  of  the 
Mission.  He  was  appointed  to  visit 
the  conferences  and  before  he  was 
released  to  return  home,  June  30, 
1903,  he  was  privileged  to  attend 
conferences  and  preach  the  gospel  in 
all  parts  of  the  British  Mission. 
Shortly  after  returning  from  his  mis- 
sion, Nov.  9,  190  3,  he  was  ordained 
a  High  Priest  by  Mathias  F.  Cowley 
and  set  apart  to  act  as  second  coun- 
selor to  President  Willis  E.  Robison, 
in  the  Wayne  Stake  presidency.  May 
13,  1906,  he  was  called  to  be  first 
counselor  to  President  Gearsen  S. 
Bastian,  and  when  the  latter  was 
honorably  released  he  succeeded  him 
as  president  of  the  Wayne  Stake  of 


BIOGRAPHICAL   ENCYCLOPEDIA. 


S67 


Zion,  being  set  apart  by  Francis  M. 
Lyman,  Nov.  6,  1910.  He  still  con- 
tinues to  labor  in  this  calling.  Bro. 
Eckersley  has  held  many  positions  of 
trust  in  civil  life.  For  six  years  he 
was  county  superintendent  of  schools, 
for  four  years  he  served  as  county 
attorney,  and  was  State  senator  from 
the  Tenth  district,  representing 
Sevier,  Garfield,  Wayne  and  Piute 
counties  in  the  Tenth  and  Eleventh 
sessions  of  the  Utah  Legislature, 
1912-1916.  He  is  the  father  of  eight 
children,  namely,  Joseph  Smith, 
Alice  E.,  George  Teasdale,  James  W., 
Abraham  Cleworth,  D.  Hermine,  Ly- 
man Wilkinson  and  Hyrum  Wilkin- 
son. 

ENSIGN,  Marius,  Bishop  of  the 
Santa  Clara  Ward  (St.  George  Stake) 
Washington  county,  Utah,  was  born 
at    Hartford,    Connecticut,    Aug.    18, 


1821,  the  son  of  Sopher  Ensign  and 
Priscilla  Billings.  He  was  baptized 
in  1844,  emigrated  to  Utah  in  1849 
and  located  on  the  river  Jordan  in 
Salt  Lake  Valley.  In  1850  he  was 
called  to  accompany  Apostle  George 
A.  Smith  to  Little  Salt  Lake  Valley 
and  thus  became  one  of  the  founders 
of  Parowan.  Subsequently  he  was 
chosen  as  a  member  of  the  first  High 


Council  of  the  Parowan  Stake.  Again 
responding  to  call  he  settled  in  Santa 
Clara  in  1862,  together  with  his  wife, 
Eliza  Ann,  whom  he  married  March 
20,  1859.  She  was  the  daughter  of 
David  McKee  and  Mary  T.  McMuUin, 
who  was  born  Aug.  2  8,  1833,  in  But- 
ler county,  Pennsylvania.  In  1861 
(Sept.  20th)  Bro.  Ensign  married 
Rose  Ann  Horsley  (daughter  of  Rob- 
ert Horsley  and  Mary  Ann  Beckett), 
who  was  born  Dec.  25,  1839,  in  Wal- 
pole,  St.  Peters,  Norfolk,  England. 
In  1866-1869  Bro.  Ensign  filled  a 
mission  to  Great  Britain,  during 
which  time  he  presided  over  the 
Southampton  and  Liverpool  confer- 
ences. He  was  ordained  a  High 
Priest  in  1862  and  served  as  first 
counselor  to  Bishop  Edward  Bunker 
of  Santa  Clara.  In  1877  he  succeeded 
Edward  Bunker  as  Bishop  of  the 
Santa  Clara  Ward  and  held  that  posi- 
tion until  the  time  of  his  death, 
which  occurred  in  Santa  Clara,  Oct. 
14,  1884. 

ERICKSON,  August,  Bishop  of  the 
Salina  First  Ward  (Sevier  Stake), 
Sevier  county,  Utah,  was  born  Dec. 
30,  1872,  in  Tierp  parish,  Uppland, 
Sweden,  the  son  of  Erik  Erickson 
and  Johanna  Person.  Becoming  a 
convert  to  "Mormonism'  he  was  bap- 
tized March  16,  1890  ,by  A.  P.  Ander- 
son. Soon  afterwards  he  was  or- 
dained to  the  office  of  an  Elder  and 
called  to  labor  as  a  local  missionary 
in  his  native  land.  He  traveled 
thousands  of  miles  without  purse  and 
scrip  and  passed  through  many  trials 
and  persecutions  for  the  gospel's 
sake,  but  was  instrumental  in  mak- 
ing many  converts.  In  due  course  of 
time  he  emigrated  to  Utah  and  after 
residing  a  short  time  in  Salt  Lake 
City  he  located  in  Salina,  Sevier 
county,  Utah,  where  he  established 
himself  as  a  tailor,  having  learned 
that  trade  in  his  native  land.  As  a 
diligent  and  active  Church  worker 
he  held  many  positions  of  a  local 
nature  in  Salina.     Thus  he  presided 


368 


LATTER-DAY   SAINT 


over  the  Ward  Y.  M.  M.  I.  A.  and 
after  being  ordained  a  Seventy  he 
became  senior  president  of  the  107th 
quorum  of  Seventy.  In  1903-1905 
he  filled  a  mission  to  his  native  land 


and  presided  part  of  the  time  over 
the  Sundsvall  conference.  While 
laboring  in  that  part  of  Sweden  four 
of  the  Elders  were  arrested  for 
preaching  the  gospel  and  it  fell  to 
the  lot  of  Bro.  Erickson  to  defend 
them  in  the  police  court  and  in  the 
High  Lutheran  Ecclesiastical  As- 
sembly, which  he  did  in  such  a  man- 
ner that  the  persecutions  ended  and 
the  Elders  enjoyed  peace  for  many 
years.  After  his  return  home  Elder 
Erickson  was  ordained  a  High  Priest 
and  set  apart  to  act  as  first  counselor 
to  Bishop  Kelsey  W.  Bird  of  the 
Salina  First  Ward  and  in  June,  1916, 
he  was  ordained  a  Bishop  and  set 
apart  to  preside  over  said  Ward 
which  position  he  still  holds.  Bro. 
Erickson  is  at  present  engaged  in 
mercantile  business  and  in  farming. 
He  is  interested  in  two  stores  in 
Salina  and  one  store  in  Payson,  Utah 
county.  These  houses  of  business 
are  known  as  the  "Fair  Stores."  In 
1899  Bishop  Erickson  married  Eliza- 
beth Johanson   (daughter  of  John  A. 


Johanson  and  Johanna  Johanson), 
who  was  born  Sept.  24,  1878.  This 
marriage  has  been  blessed  with  two 
children. 

EVANS,  Reginald,  Bishop  of  the 
Kemmerer  Ward  (Woodruff  Stake), 
Wyoming,  was  born  March  13,  1879, 
at  Lye,  Worcestershire,  England,  the 
son  of  Emanuel  Evans  and  Betsy 
Hatton.  Becoming  a  convert  to  "Mor- 
monism"  he  was  baptized  November 
4,  1899,  by  Elder  Daniel  Clarke.  He 
emigrated  to  America  in  1901,  cross- 
ing the  Atlantic  in  the  steamship 
"New  England."  Later  he  located  at 
Kemmerer,  Wyoming;  he  was  or- 
dained an  Elder  Oct.  29,  1906,  by 
Archibald  McKinnon,  and  filled  a 
mission  to  Great  Britain  in  1907- 
1909,  laboring  in  the  Birmingham 
conference.  About  one  year  after  his 
return  from  that  mission  (in  Novem- 
ber, 1910)  he  was  chosen  as  presid- 
ing Elder  of  the  Kemmerer  branch 
which  position  he  held  until  April 
27,  1913,  when  he  was  ordained  a 
High    Priest    and     Bishop     and     set 


apart  to  preside  over  the  Kemmerer 
Ward  by  Apostle  Geo.  F.  Richards. 
In  1912  (June  5th)  he  married  Eliza- 
beth Parsons  of  Ogden,  Utah,  which 
marriage  has  been  blessed  with  two 


BIOGRAPHICAL  ENCYCLOPEDIA. 


369 


children,  namely,  Milton  Joseph  (born 
April  11,  1913)  and  Elizabeth  Emma 
(born  June  25,  1915). 

EVANS,  Taliesin  Thomas,  Bishop 
of  the  Sunnyside  Ward  (Carbon 
Stake),    Carbon    county,    Utah,    was 


born  April  21,  1871,  at  Abercanaid, 
Glamorganshire,  South  Wales,  the 
son  of  Isaac  Evans  and  Cathruze 
Thomas.  As  a  convert  to  "Mormon- 
ism"  he  was  baptized  March  3,  1883, 
by  David  T.  Evans  and  emigrated  to 
Utah  in  1888,  crossing  the  Atlantic 
in  the  ship  "Wisconsin."  After  re- 
siding in  Pleasant  Valley,  Emery 
county,  Utah,  he  returned  to  his 
native  land  as  a  missionary  in  18  91, 
having  been  ordained  a  Seventy  June 
6,  1891,  by  George  Reynolds.  After 
filling  a  two  years'  mission  he  re- 
turned to  Pleasant  Valley,  where  he 
acted  as  Sunday  school  superinten- 
dent and  Ward  chorister.  Later  he 
moved  to  Sunnyside,  Carbon  county, 
Utah,  where  he  was  chosen  as  Bishop 
of  the  Sunnyside  Ward,  being  or- 
dained to  that  position  by  Apostle 
Rudger  Clawson,  Sept.  2  4,  1916. 
In  January,  1895,  he  married  Emily 
Jane  Whimpey,  who  bore  him  nine 
children,  namely,  Oscar  W.,  Taliesin 


W.,  Vivian  Alice,  Isaac  W.,  Susannah 
Maud,  Ivor  W.,  Emily  Jane,  Lucile 
and  Pershing  W.  Bishop  Evans  has 
filled  many  positions  of  a  secular 
nature.  Thus  he  acted  as  school 
trustee  in  Winter  Quarters  for  four 
years;  served  on  the  board  of  the 
Carbon  county  high  school,  and  was 
a  member  of  the  committee  which 
selected  the  present  site  for  the  high 
school  building  at  Price,  Utah. 
Bishop  Evans  is  universally  known 
as  an  honest,  upright  citizen  and  a 
consistent  and  true  Latter-day  Saint. 

EYRE,  George  H.,  Bishop  of  Min- 
ersvilleWard  (Beaver'Stake),  Beaver 
county,  Utah,  was  born  April  22, 
1866,  at  Minersville,  Utah,  the  son 
of  George  Eyre  and  Rebecca  Hop- 
kins. He  was  baptized  in  1875  by 
Robert  Easton  and  ordained  a  Dea- 
con when  a  youth;  ordained  an  El- 
der by  James  G.  Bleak  Nov.  21,  1889; 
ordained  a  Seventy  by  J.  Golden  Kim- 
ball and  became  a  member  of  the 
12th  quorum  of  Seventy,  and  or- 
dained a  High  Priest  by  David  O.  Mc- 


Kay and  set  apart  as  first  counselor 
to  Bishop  Geo.  R.  Williams  in  1916. 
Prior  to  that  he  had  acted  as  assist- 
ant superintendent   of    the    Miners- 


Vol.  Ill,  No.  24. 


December,  1919. 


370 


LATTER-DAY   SAINT 


ville  Sunday  school  and  as  president 
of  the  12th  quorum  of  Seventy.  He 
also  filled  a  mission  to  New  Zealand 
and  Australia  in  1886-1889,  during 
which  time  he  acted  as  president  of 
the  Gisborne  and  Wairarapa  district. 
He  was  ordained  a  Bishop  April  12, 
1917,  by  David  O.  McKay  and  set 
apart  to  preside  over  the  Miners- 
ville  Ward,  which  position  he  still 
holds.  In  1885  (Aug.  16th)  he  mar- 
ried Emma  Walker  (daughter  of 
Solomon  Walker  and  Amanda  Grun- 
dy), who  was  born  October  28, 
1866,  in  Minersville,  Utah.  This  mar- 
riage has  been  blessed  with  nine 
children,  namely,  Althea  A.,  Idona, 
Augusta,  Clara  M.,  Alta,  Golden  W., 
Hilda,  Lola  and  Gladys. 

FARNSWORTH,  Philo  Taylor,  the 

first  Bishop  of  Beaver  (Beaver 
Stake),   Beaver    county,    Utah,    was 


born  Jan.  21,  1826,  at  Hock  Hocking, 
near  Burlington,  Ohio,  the  son  of 
Reuben  Parnsworth  and  Lucinda 
Kent.  He  was  baptized  in  1843  and 
emigrated  to  Salt  Lake  Valley  in 
1848,  having  charge  of  a  team  be- 
longing to  Franklin  D.  Richards  in 
crossing  the  plains.  He  settled  at 
Pleasant  Grove,  Utah  county,  Utah, 
about     1851,    and    soon    afterwards 


went  to  Fillmore  and  thence  to  Bea- 
ver in  the  latter  part  of  1856.  The 
following  year  (1857)  he  was  or- 
dained a  Bishop  and  set  apart  to  pre- 
side over  the  Beaver  Ward,  which 
position  he  held  until  1864.  Subse- 
quently, when  the  Beaver  Stake  of 
Zion  was  organized  in  1877,  he  was 
chosen  as  a  member  of  the  High 
Council.  He  also  acted  as  probate 
judge  of  Beaver  county  and  served 
as  a  member  of  the  Territorial  Legis- 
lature. Having  learned  the  Indian 
language,  he  rendered  at  different 
times  efficient  service  as  an  inter- 
preter for  the  Piute  Indians  who 
loved  and  respected  him  very  much. 
Bishop  Farnsworth  was  a  farmer  and 
stock  raiser  and  a  leader  among  men. 
He  died  at  Beaver  Aug.  5,  1887.  The 
Bishop  married  four  wives  as  fol- 
lows: Margaret  Yates  to  whom  he 
was  married  Oct.  29,  1848,  and  who 
was  the  mother  of  nine  children; 
Margaret  Adams,  whom  he  married 
Aug.  24,  1857,  and  who  become  the 
mother  of  seven  children;  Agnes  Ann 
Patterson,  whom  he  married  Dec.  10, 
1858,  and  who  bore  him  ten  chil- 
dren, and  Mary  Priscilla  Griffiths, 
whom  he  married  June  15,  1860,  and 
who  bore  him  four  children. 

FARNSWORTH,   Franklin  Dewey, 

second  Bishop  of  the  Beaver  West 
Ward  (Beaver  Stake),  Beaver  county, 
Utah,  was  born  Feb.  10,  1854,  at 
Fillmore,  Millard  county,  Utah,  the 
son  of  Philo  Taylor  Farnsworth  and 
Margaret  Yates.  He  moved  to  Bea- 
ver with  his  parents  when  quite 
young,  was  baptized  by  Samuel  D. 
White  when  about  eight  years  of  age 
and  was  ordained  a  Deacon  soon 
afterwards;  ordained  an  Elder  Sept. 
11,  1876,  by  Peter  O.  Hansen;  or- 
dained a  Seventy  soon  afterwards, 
and  ordained  a  High  Priest  June  25, 
1893,  by  Francis  M.  Lyman  and  set 
apart  to  act  as  a  High  Councilor  in 
the  Beaver  Stake.  He  was  ordained 
a  Bishop  July  19,  1908,  by  Francis 
M.   Lyman  and  set  apart  to  preside 


BIOGRAPHICAL  ENCYCLOPEDIA. 


371 


over  the  Beaver  West  Ward  which 
position  he  held  until  July,  1918. 
Early  in  life  he  acted  as  president 
of  the  Beaver  Y.  M.  M.  I.  A.  and  he 
also  acted  as  president  of  the  High 
Priests'  quorum  of  the  Beaver  Stake 
from  1902  to  1908.  Besides  the 
many  ecclesiastical  positions  held  by 
Bishop  Farnsworth  he  served  two 
terms  as  city  councilman  in  Beaver; 
he  also  served  two  terms  as  mayor, 
acted  as  county  assessor  and  served 
as  a  member  of  the  State  Legisla- 
ture one  term.  The  Bishop's  princi- 
pal avocations  are  those  of  farming 
and  stockraising.  In  1876  (Sept. 
11th)  Bro.  Farnsworth  married  Mel- 


i'  Burton     White      (daughter     of 

S._ael  Dennis  White  and  Mary  H. 
Burton),  a  sister  of  the  late  Bishop 
Robert  T.  Burton.  She  was  born 
July  31,  1858,  in  Cedar  City,  Utah, 
and  died  March  3,  1893,  after  giving 
birth  to  eight  children.  In  1894 
(June  6th)  Bishop  Farnsworth  mar- 
ried Mary  Ann  White  (daughter  of 
Samuel  O.  White  and  Mary  Ellen 
Woodhouse),  who  was  born  Aug.  9, 
1868,  at  Beaver.  She  bore  her  hus- 
band six  children  and  died  April  2  7, 
1918.  Following  are  the  names  of 
the  Bishop's  children  by  his  first 
wife:     Alice  W.,   Mary   E.,   Margaret 


L.,  Dewey,  Amelia,  Franklin  D.,  Bur- 
ton K.  and  Philo;  by  the  second 
wife:  Samuel  T.,  Mary  E.,  Frank  W., 
Norman  W.,  Reed  W.  and  Howard. 

FISHER,  Joseph  H.,  president  of 
the  High  Priests'  Quorum  of  the  Mil- 
lard Stake  and  a  resident  of  Meadow, 
Millard  county,  Utah,  was  born  Oct. 
18,  1856,  in  Fillmore,  Utah,  the  son 
of  James  Fisher  and  Hannah  Lees 
Stott.  He  was  baptized  Nov.  18, 
1865,  by  Daniel  Thompson;  ordained 
a  Deacon  by  John  Ashman  when  a 
boy;  ordained  an  Elder  March  14, 
1879,  by  William  H.  Stott;  ordained 
a  Seventy  Nov.  26,  1883,  by  Abraham 
H.  Cannon  and  subsequently  chosen 
as  a  president  of  the  42nd  quorum 
of  Seventy.  In  1897-1900  he  filled 
a  mission  to  the  Hawaiian  Islands, 
where  he  assisted  in  the  erection  of 
a  beautiful  church  building  at  Hilo 
(island  of  Hawaii)  which  was  dedi- 
cated by  President  Joseph  F.  Smith. 
Subsequently  he  labored  in  Honolulu 
and  still  later  at  Laie  where  he  built 
a  small  school  house,  and  a  furnace, 
covering  a  boiler,  which  furnished 
power  for  a  $24,000  pumping  plant. 
At  home,  Bro.  Fisher  has  been  very 
active  in  public  affairs.  He  acted  as 
the  first  president  of  Y.  M.  M.  I.  A, 
at  Meadow  and  served  as  an  officer 
in  the  same  organization  several 
times  afterwards.  He  also  served  as 
an  assistant  Sunday  school  superin- 
tendent. He  was  ordained  a  High 
Priest  Jan.  22,  1901,  by  Francis  M. 
Lyman  and  set  apart  as  first  coun- 
selor to  Bishop  Neil  M.  Stewart. 
Subsequently  he  served  as  first  coun- 
selor to  Bishop  John  A.  Beckstrand. 
He  also  served  as  president  of  the 
Meadow  town  board  about  three 
years,  served  two  terms  as  school 
trustee  and  had  charge  of  the  con- 
struction of  the  Meadow  town  water 
system.  In  1916  (Nov.  12th)  he  was 
set  apart  as  president  of  the  High 
Priests'  quorum  of  the  Millard  Stake. 
Bro.  Fisher  married  Elizabeth  E. 
Bennett  Dec.  12,  1879;  she  bore  him 


372 


LATTER-DAY   SAINT 


eight  children,  namely,  Zina  Eliza- 
beth, Martha  Hannah,  Mary  Emily, 
Joseph  Lees,  Albert  H.,  Angle  C, 
James  Clyde  and  Cecil  Neil.  By  his 
second  wife,  Albertine  S.  Beckstrand, 
whom  he  married  Dec.  6,  1883,  he 
had  two  children,  namely,  Ida  Sophia 
and  Asael  H. 

FERRIN,  Charles  Ether,  Bishop  of 
the  Pima  Ward  (St.  Joseph  Stake), 
Graham  county,  Arizona,  was  born 
March  6,  1881,  at  Pleasant  View, 
Weber  county,  Utah,  the  son  of  Jacob 
Samuel  Ferrin  and  Janetta  Ann  Mc- 
Bride.  He  was  baptized  when  eight 
years  old  by  Jacob  A.  Burns,  moved 
with  his  parents  to  Pima,  Arizona, 
about  1882  and  has  resided  in  Pima 
ever  since.  He  went  through  the 
grades  of  the  district  school  in  Pima 
and  finished  his  education  in  the 
Gila  Academy  at  Thatcher.  After 
being  ordained  successively  to  the 
offices  of  Deacon,  Teacher  and  Priest 
he  was  ordained  an  Elder  June  5, 
1903,  by  George  Romney  and  set 
apart  June  9,  1903,  by  Seymour  B. 
Young  for  a  mission  to  the  Southern 
States,  where  he  labored  two  years 
and  eight  months,  part  of  the  time  as 
president  of  the  Florida  conference. 
After  his  return  he  became  president 
of  the  Pima  Y.  M.  M.  I.  A.  Later 
he  served  as  first  counselor  in  the 
Stake  presidency  of  Y.  M.  M.  I.  A. 
He  was  ordained  a  Seventy  Dec.  6, 
1908,  by  Joseph  W.  McMurrin  and 
was  ordained  a  High  Priest  and 
Bishop  by  Stephen  L.  Richards  Feb. 
24,  1918,  and  set  apart  to  preside 
over  the  Pima  Ward  which  position 
he  still  holds.  In  1906  (March  6th) 
he  married  Bettie  Stinson  (daughter 
of  Joseph  P.  Stinson  and  Sarah 
June).  The  children  of  this  mar- 
riage are  the  following:  Melvin 
Verle,  Marion  Charles,  Ray  Ether, 
Idell,  Orrin  S.  and  Harold  Heber. 

FLAKE,  Osmer  Benms,  Stake 
superintendent  of  Sunday  schools  of 
the  Snowflake  Stake,  Navajo  county. 


Arizona,  was  born  March  6,  1868,  at 
Beaver,  Beaver  county,  Utah,  the  son 
of  Wm.  J.  Flake  and  Lucy  A.  White. 
He  was  baptized  by  his  father  in 
18  7  6,  and  was  ordained  a  Deacon 
and  subsequently  a  Priest.  He  moved 
to  Arizona  in  18  77  and  was  engaged 
as  a  stockman  in  early  life;  later  he 
served  as  a  clerk  in  a  store.  He  also 
served  as  the  first  clerk  of  court  in 
Navajo  county,  Arizona  (1S94-1897). 
In  1891  (March  11th)  he  married 
Elsie  A.  Owens  in  the  Manti  Temple, 
which  marriage  has  been  blessed 
with  six  children  (Ada,  Lucretia, 
George  M.,  Grace,  Lewis  and  Elsie). 
His  wife  died  March  25,  1908,  and  in 
1911  (Oct.  4th)  he  married  Ethel 
Ray  in  the  Salt  Lake  Temple.  Three 
children  are  the  issue  of  this  mar- 
riage, namely,  Lester  White,  Horace 
Henry  and  Veoma.  Bro.  Flake  was 
ordained  an  Elder  June  7,  1891,  by 
John  Hunt;  ordained  a  Seventy  Dec. 
15,  1897,  by  Geo.  Teasdale;  filled  a 
mission  to  the  Southern  States  in 
1897-1900,  laboring  part  of  his  time 
as  president  of  the  Mississippi  con- 
ference. His  mother  died  two  months 
before  he  returned  from  this  mission. 
In  1913  he  filled  a  short  mission  to 
South  Texas.  Both  his  missions 
were  very  successful.  At  home  Elder 
Flake  has  labored  as  a  Ward  clerk 
and  Sunday  school  superintendent, 
presided  over  a  Ward  Y.  M.  M.  I.  A. 
and  acted  as  Stake  Sunday  school 
superintendent  since  1913.  He  has 
served  as  a  forest  ranger  six  years 
and  was  elected  a  member  of  the 
Utah  Legislature  (House  of  Repre- 
sentatives) Nov.  7,  1916;  otherwise 
he  is  a  stockman  and  farmer  by  avo- 
cation. 

FLAM>I,  Henry  Joseph,  Bishop  of 
the  Rexburg  Second  Ward  (Fremont 
Stake),  Madison  county,  Idaho,  was 
born  July  14,  1870,  at  Logan,  Utah, 
the  son  of  Jacob  Henry  Flamm  and 
Helena  Bock.  He  was  baptized  when 
about  eight  years  old;  ordained  a 
Deacon  when  quite  young  and  later 


BIOGRAPHICAL   ENCYCLOPEDIA. 


373 


ordained  an  Elder.  Still  later  he 
was  ordained  a  High  Priest  and  set 
apart  as  a  counselor  to  Bishop  Thos. 
E.  Ricks  of  the  Rexburg  First  Ward. 
He  acted  in  that  position  for  fifteen 
years.  He  also  acted  as  second  coun- 
selor to  Bishop  John  E.  Pincock  in 
the  presidency  of  the  High  Priests' 
quorum.  In  1912  he  was  ordained  a 
Bishop  and  set  apart  to  preside  over 
the  Rexburg  Second  Ward,  succeed- 
ing James  M.  Cook.  Besides  being  a 
diligent  worker  in  the  Church  Bishop 
Flamm  has  filled  many  positions  of 
a  secular  nature,  having  served 
several  terms  as  a  city  councilman  at 
Rexburg.  In  1901  he  married  Lorena 
Eckersell,  who  was  born  Sept.  9, 
1871,  at  Wellsville,  Cache  county, 
Utah.  This  marriage  has  proven 
childless,  but  the  Bishop  and  his  wife 
took  two  children  whom  they  have 
raised  to  maturity  and  both  married. 
Bishop  Flamm  is  a  successful  farmer 
and  business  man. 

FORD,  William,  Bishop  of  Kan- 
arra  (Parowan  Stake),  Iron  county, 
Utah,  was  born  Oct.  5,  1838,  at 
Gravely,  England,  the  son  of  John 
Ford  and  Rebecca  Chandler.  Be- 
coming a  convert  to  "Mormonism" 
he  was  baptized  in  1855,  emigrated 
to  Utah  in  1854,  crossing  the  Atlantic 
in  the  ship  "Windermere"  which 
landed  at  New  Orleans.  Going  up  the 
Missouri  river,  a  number  of  the  com- 
pany died.  He  crossed  the  plains  in 
an  independent  company  and  while 
on  the  plains  he  himself  was  stricken 
with  severe  sickness,  but  was  re- 
stored through  the  administration  of 
the  Elders.  William  married  Mar- 
tha Mulliner,  June  28,  1869,  and 
after  his  arrival  in  the  Valley  he 
located  in  the  Seventeenth  Ward,  Salt 
Lake  City,  where  he  resided  until 
the  fall  of  18  55,  when  he  moved  to 
Centerville,  Davis  county,  where  he 
engaged  in  farming,  but  the  grass- 
hoppers destroyed  the  crops  by  which 
he,  with  the  rest  of  the  people,  suf- 
fered severely  the  following  year  for 


want  of  food.  He  participated  in  the 
Echo  Canyon  campaign  at  the  time 
of  the  Johnston  Army  trouble,  and 
during  the  general  move  in  1858  he 
went  as  far  south  as  Springvllle, 
Utah  county,  but  returned  with 
other  young  men  to  Centerville  to 
watch  the  crops,  being  instructed  to 
destroy  the  settlement  in  case  peace 
was  not  established.  In  1862  he 
went   to   the    Missouri    river    as    a 


Church  teamster  after  the  poor.  In 
1866  he  settled  in  Upper  Kanab,  but 
was  counseled  to  go  to  Long  Valley 
on  account  of  Indian  troubles.  In 
the  spring  of  1866,  when  the  settle- 
ments in  Long  Valley  were  broken 
up,  Bro.  Ford  moved  with  his  family 
to  Kanarra  and  during  the  follow- 
ing few  years  participated  in  a  num- 
ber of  Indian  expeditions.  From 
1888  to  1901  he  acted  as  Bishop  of 
Kanarra  and  died  in  Cedar  City  Dec. 
3,  1916. 

FORSBERG,  Charles  Eric,  Bishop 
of  the  33rd  Ward  (Liberty  Stake), 
Salt  Lake  county,  Utah,  was  born 
Jan.  4,  1871,  at  Horndall,  near  Falun, 
Sweden,  the  son  of  Johan  E.  Forsberg 
and  Gustafva  Elizabeth  Hedstrom. 
He  emigrated  from  Sweden  when 
seventeen  years  old,  arriving  in  New 


374 


LATTER-DAY   SAINT 


York  in  1888.  He  remained  in  Min- 
neapolis, Minnesota,  until  March, 
1890,  when  he  migrated  to  Salt  Lake 
City,  Utah.  Becoming  a  convert  to 
"Mormonism"  he  was  baptized  March 
29,  1893,  by  Nathaniel  V.  Jones,  or- 
dained a  Teacher  May  31,  1894,  by 
Arthur  Winter,  and  ordained  an 
Elder  March  13,  1896,  by  Samuel 
Holmes  in  the  22nd  Ward,  Salt  Lake 
City.  He  was  ordained  a  Seventy 
April  7,  1898,  and  filled  a  mission  to 
Sweden  in  1898-1900,  laboring  most 
of  the  time  as  president  of  the  Gote- 
borg  conference  in  Sweden.  After  his 
return  he  was  appointed  president 
of  the  Scandinavian  meetings  in  the 


Liberty  Stake,  which  position  he  held 
for  three  years,  until  March  21,  1909, 
when  he  was  ordained  a  High  Priest 
by  Arnold  H.  Schulthess  and  set 
apart  as  a  counselor  to  Bishop  R.  A. 
Brighton  of  the  33rd  Ward.  Prior 
to  this  he  had  acted  as  a  president  of 
the  sixteenth  quorum  of  Seventy.  He 
was  ordained  a  Bishop  by  Apostle 
George  Albert  Smith  Feb.  23,  1919, 
and  set  apart  to  preside  over  the 
33rd  Ward  of  the  Liberty  Stake. 
Bishop  Forsberg  was  the  first  of  his 
father's  family  who  joined  the 
true  Church,  his  father,  mother,  two 


brothers  and  two  sisters  being  bap- 
tized soon  afterwards.  In  1896  Bro, 
Forsberg  married  Anna  H.  Olson  in 
the  Salt  Lake  Temple.  One  daugh- 
ter (Edith)  and  two  sons  (Carl 
Elmer  and  Franklin  Sidney)  were 
the  issue  of  this  marriage.  His  wife 
died  Dec.  4,  1915,  and  in  1917  (June 
21st)  he  married  Sophronia  Nielsen 
(daughter  of  Peter  A.  Nielsen  and 
Olivia  Jensen).  Bishop  Forsberg  has 
been  employed  as  instructor  in  the 
University  of  Utah  since  1900  and  is 
at  present  occupying  the  position  of 
superintendent  of  buildings  and 
grounds  of  the  University  of  Utah. 

FORSYTH,  George  Joseph  Browett 
Holmes,  an  active  Elder  in  the  Tor- 
rey  Ward  (Wayne  Stake),  Wayne 
county,  Utah,  was  born  March  17, 
1855,  in  Salt  Lake  City,  Utah,  the 
son  of  Thomas  Forsyth  and  Mary 
Browett  Holmes.  He  was  baptized 
March  17,  1863,  by  Bi.shop  Edward 
Bunker;  ordained  a  Deacon,  a 
Teacher  and  Priest  successively  and 
ordained  a  Seventy  in  1885by  Alpheus 
Gifford.  Though  changing  residence 
a  number  of  times  he  has  been  very 
diligent  as  a  Church  worker.  In 
1884  (Oct.  7th)  he  married  Mary 
Ellen  Watts  (daughter  of  Benjamin 
Watts),  who  was  born  April  11, 
1859.  This  marriage  has  been  blessed 
with  but  one  child,  Lenora  Josephine 
(now  Mrs.  Jacobs).  Sister  Forsyth 
being  born  of  religious  parents  (her 
father  being  a  natural  Prophet),  has 
always  taken  an  active  part  in 
Church  affairs  and  now  acts  as  presi- 
dent of  the  Torrey  Ward  Relief 
Society. 

FORSYTH,  Jesse  Turner,  Bishop 
of  the  Newcastle  Ward  (Parowan 
Stake),  Iron  county,  Utah,  was  born 
Oct.  15,  1880,  at  Pinto,  Iron  county, 
Utah,  the  son  of  Neil  D.  Forsyth  and 
Sophia  E.  Harrison.  He  was  bap- 
tized when  about  eight  years  old  by 
his  father,  ordained  a  Deacon  when 
quite  young  and  afterwards  presided 


BIOGRAPHICAL  ENCYCLOPEDIA. 


375 


over  the  Deacon's  quorum  in  the 
Pinto  Ward.  Subsequently  he  was 
ordained  a  Teacher  and  in  November, 
1905,  he  was  ordained  an  Elder  by 
Walter  J.  Knell.  In  1905-1907  he 
filled  a  mission  to  the  Eastern  States, 
laboring  principally  in  the  West 
Pennsylvania  conference.     While  on 


this  mission  he  met,  converted  and 
baptized  a  girl  (who  afterwards  be- 
came his  wife),  together  with  her 
mother,  a  cousin  and  three  other 
ladies  of  Pittsburg.  Having  returned 
from  this  mission  he  settled  at  New- 
castle in  the  fall  of  1907  and  thus 
became  one  of  the  founders  of  that 
growing  town.  In  1914  Bro.  Forsyth 
was  ordained  a  High  Priest  and 
Bishop  by  George  F.  Richards  and 
set  apart  to  preside  over  the  New- 
castle Ward  which  was  organized  at 
that  time.  Prior  to  this  (June  2  2, 
1910)  he  married  Mary  Jamison, 
daughter  of  Miles  D.  Jamison  and 
Jane  Hall,  who  was  born  Dec.  18, 
1891,  in  Punxsutawney,  Pennsyl- 
vania. This  marriage  has  been 
blessed  with  four  children,  namely, 
Keith  E.,  Lee  H.,  Dean  E.  and  Iris. 
In  his  youth  Bishop  Forsyth  received 
a  good  education  and  took  a  two 
years  normal  course  in  the  B.  Y.  Uni- 
versity   at    Provo.      He   is   a   farmer 


and  stock  raiser  by  avocation  and  a 
hard  working  man. 

FORSYTH,  Thomas  R.,  a  promin- 
ent Elder  in  the  Toquerville  Ward 
(St.  George  Stake),  Washington 
county,  Utah,  was  born  Sept.  10, 
1813,  in  Roxburgshire,  Scotland,  the 
son  of  Thomas  Forsyth  and  Isabel 
Jackson.  In  April,  1839,  he  married 
Isabella  Donald  who  bore  him  eight 
children,  namely,  Thomas  R.,  Jean- 
ette,  George  James,  Isabella  Jane, 
Marimna,  Niel  Donald  and  Saville 
Delina.  In  1853  (August  20th)  he 
married  Mary  Browett,  who  bore  him 
seven  children,  namely,  George 
Joseph,  Mary,  Christena,  William  H., 
Agnes,  Eleanora  and  Benjamin  H. 
Bro.  Forsyth  emigrated  to  Utah  with 
his  family  in  1850,  crossing  the 
plains  in  Stephen  Markham's  com- 
pany which  arrived  in  Salt  Lake  City 
in  1850.  He  at  once  became  an 
active  pioneer  in  Salt  Lake  City  and 
other  places.  He  hauled  much  of  the 
lumber  used  in  the  construction  of 
the  large  Tabernacle  in  Salt  Lake 
City  and  other  important  buildings, 
being  an  efficient  saw  mill  man.  He 
was  an  honest  tithe  payer  and  be- 
came known  generally  for  his  hospi- 
tality. He  possessed  the  gift  of 
prophesy,  was  a  powerful  man  phy- 
sically and  quite  an  athlete,  so  much 
so  that  at  the  age  of  sixty  he  could 
leap  a  five  foot  fence.  His  whole 
soul  seemed  bent  on  laboring  for  the 
benefit  of  the  community  to  which  he 
belonged.  Changing  his  residence 
several  times  successively  he  became 
a  pioneer  of  Bellevue,  Toquerville, 
Cannonville,  Pine  Valley  and  other 
places.  At  Toquerville  he  owned  a 
saw  mill  and  a  ranch.  He  was  a 
member  of  the  Nauvoo  Legion,  as- 
sisted in  carrying  express  across  the 
plains  in  1857,  located  in  Utah's 
Dixie  in  1861,  moved  to  Pine  Valley 
in  1862  and  settled  on  Ash  Creek  in 
1863  and  at  Toquerville  in  1865. 
Bro.  Forsyth  died  in  1897,  aged  84 
years. 


376 


LATTER-DAY   SAINT 


FRANCIS,  Samuel,  a  Patriarch  in 
the  Alberta  Stake  of  Zion,  and  a  resi- 
dent of  Tabor,  Alta,  Canada,  was 
born  March  13,  1848,  at  Wednesbury, 
Staffordshire,  England,  the  son  of 
John  Francis  and  Rose  Hannah  Titt- 
ley.  He  was  baptized  April  26,  1857, 
by  John  Taylor  and  became  a  mem- 
ber of  the  West  Bromwich  Branch. 
A  year  or  two  later  he  became  a 
member  of  the  Darleston  Branch, 
where  meetings  were  held  in  his 
father's  house  for  about  eight  years. 
He  was  ordained  a  Priest  May  5, 
1864,  by  Wm.  Kendrick,  emigrated 
to  Utah  in  1866,  crossing  the  Atlantic 
in   the   ship     "Arkwright"     and     the 


plains  in  Capt.  Thompson's  train, 
which  arrived  in  Salt  Lake  City  Sept. 
28,  1866.  Looking  for  a  home,  he 
settled  at  Richfield,  Sevier  county, 
Oct.  19,  1866,  but  in  the  spring  of 
1867  was  forced  to  leave  that  place 
on  account  of  Indian  troubles.  After 
residing  temporarily  at  Gunnison  and 
Chicken  Creek  he  assisted  in  settling 
Levan,  Juab  county,  where  he  be- 
came a  Sunday  school  superinten- 
dent. In  1874  he  joined  the  United 
Order  and  in  the  same  year  (Sept. 
16,  1874)  he  was  ordained  an  Elder 
by  Abinadi  Pratt  and  married  Sarah 
Ellen   Gardner    in     the     Endowment 


House,  Salt  Lake  City.  This  mar- 
riage was  blessed  with  a  son,  George 
Samuel,  who  was  born  June  18,  1875, 
and  is  now  a  resident  of  Gunnison, 
Sanpete  county.  Bro.  Francis  moved 
to  Lake  Shore,  Utah  county,  in  1877 
and  married  Emma  A.  Anderson 
Sept.  16,  1880.  By  this  union  six 
children  were  born,  namely,  Nellie, 
Josephine,  Rose  Hannah,  Emma 
Sarah,  Samuel  John,  Edwin  Niels 
and  Etta  Florence.  While  residing 
at  Lake  Shore  he  acted  as  a  Ward 
teacher  and  was  throughout  an  active 
Church  member.  He  settled  at  Tabor, 
Canada,  in  1904,  was  ordained  a 
Seventy  May  11,  1904,  by  Joseph  W. 
McMurrin  and  subsequently  became 
a  president  of  the  151st  quorum  of 
Seventy.  He  was  ordained  a  Pat- 
riarch May  3,  1914,  by  Geo.  F.  Rich- 
ards at  Raymond,  Canada.  Bro. 
Francis  has  acted  as  a  Ward  teacher 
in  Tabor  since  the  Ward  was  first 
organized.  His  occupation  is  that 
of  a  farmer. 

FREDRICKSON,  John,  Bishop  of 
the  Vernon  Ward,  Tooele  Stake), 
Tooele  county,  Utah,  was  born  Dec. 
26,  1880,  at  Vernon.  Utah,  the  son 
of  Niels  Frederiksen  and  Mary  S. 
Nielsen.  Being  born  of  goodly  par- 
ents Brother  Fredrickson  was  raised 
in  the  fear  of  the  Lord  and  was  bap- 
tized when  about  eight  years  of  age 
and  later  ordained  to  the  Priesthood 
which  he  magnified  and  honored 
from  the  beginning.  He  received  a 
good  common  school  education  and 
commenced  Church  activities  as 
second  counselor  in  the  Ward  presi- 
dency of  Y.  M.  M.  I.  A.  at  the  age  of 
fourteen  years  and  a  short  time 
thereafter  became  president  of  said 
association.  In  I'd  01  he  went  on  a 
mission  to  Samoa,  where  he  labored 
nearly  four  years,  spending  most  of 
the  first  fifteen  months  in  building 
meeting  houses,  and  afterwards  pre- 
sided over  the  Savaii  conference, 
comprising  the  island  of  Savaii  (the 
largest  island  of  the  Samoan  group). 


BIOGRAPHICAL  ENCYCLOPEDIA. 


377 


Later  he  presided  over  the  Tutuila 
branch.  During  this  mission  he  ac- 
quired a  thorough  mastery  of  the 
Samoan  language.  After  his  return 
to  Utah  he  labored  for  ten  years  in 
the  superintendency  of  the  Vernon 
Sunday  school  and  in  December, 
1915,  he  was  ordained  a  Bishop  and 
set  apart  to  preside  over  the  Vernon 
Ward,  which  position  he  still  holds. 
Prior  to  that  he  had  labored  as  a 
Ward  teacher  since  he  was  a  mere 
boy.  His  main  avocation  in  life  has 
been  that  of  storekeeper  and  farmer. 
In  1907  (March  14th)  he  married 
Jennie  L.  Larsen,  who  has  borne  her 
husband  five  children,  namely,  Lau- 
rine,  Virginia,  Leslie  J.,  Woodruff 
E.  and  Harland. 

FRIDAL,     Knud    Hansen,    Junior, 

Bishop  of  the  Tremonton  Ward  (Bear 
River  Stake),  Box  Elder  county, 
Utah,    was    born    May    11,    1881,    in 


Bear  River  City,  Box  Elder  county, 
Utah,  the  son  of  Knud  H.  Fridal  and 
Mary  Hansen.  He  was  baptized  June 
5,  1889,  by  Peter  M.  Hansen  and 
afterwards  ordained  to  the  different 
offices  in  the  Aaronic  Priesthood.  In 
1904  (Nov.  5th)  he  was  ordained  an 
Elder  by  Lucius  A.  Snow,  and  he 
labored  as  clerk  of  the  Elwood  Ward 


for  a  number  of  years.  In  190fi- 
1909  he  filled  a  mission  to  Scandi- 
navia, laboring  in  the  Bergen  con- 
ference, Norway,  most  of  the  time  as 
secretary  of  the  conference  and  as 
leader  of  the  Bergen  branch  choir. 
After  his  return  home  he  became 
conductor  of  the  Elwood  military 
band  which  he  helped  to  organize  in 
April,  1909.  He  conducted  this  or- 
ganization for  six  years.  He  also 
acted  as  Ward  clerk,  was  a  member 
of  the  Stake  Y.  M.  M.  I.  A.  board  and 
an  officer  and  teacher  in  the  Tre- 
monton branch  Sunday  school.  He 
was  ordained  a  Seventy  June  2,  1912, 
by  Milton  H.  Welling  and  served  as 
president  of  the  153rd  quorum  of 
Seventy  for  a  short  time,  or  until 
Jan.  2,  1915,  when  he  was  ordained 
a  High  Priest  by  Milton  H.  Welling. 
When  the  Tremonton  Ward  was  or- 
ganized Nov.  30,  1914,  he  was  sus- 
tained as  second  counselor  to  Bishop 
Alvin  Keller  and  also  served  as  Ward 
clerk  until  Oct.  28,  1917,  when  he 
was  sustained  as  Bishop  of  the  Tre- 
monton Ward.  He  was  ordained  a 
Bishop  and  set  apart  to  his  position 
Nov.  17,  1917,  by  President  Heber 
J.  Grant.  Bishop  Fridal  is  a  farmer, 
but  is  particularly  known  for  his 
musical  ability;  he  was  a  member  of 
some  orchestra  or  brass  band  for 
twenty-one  years  prior  to  1916.  In 
1909  (Nov.  24th)  he  married  Clara 
Idumia  Hansen  (daughter  of  Peter 
M.  and  Anna  A.  Hansen),  who  was 
born  at  Bear  River  City,  Utah,  Oct. 
13,  1883.  This  marriage  has  been 
blessed  with  four  children,  namely, 
Knud  Hansen  (3rd),  Max  Peter, 
Hugh  John  and  Grant  Devere. 

FULLER,  Perry  Boyd,  second 
counselor  in  the  presidency  of  the 
Tintic  Stake  of  Zion  and  a  resident 
of  Silver  City,  Juab  county,  Utah, 
was  born  Nov.  23,  1876,  at  Elk 
Rapids,  Boone  county,  Iowa,  the  son 
of  Luburn  Livonia  Fuller  and  Min- 
erva Brown.  He  migrated  to  Utah 
in  1880,  was  baptized  May  13,  1900, 


378 


LATTER-DAY   SAINT 


by  Andrew  Madsen;  ordained  a  Dea- 
con  March   12,   1901,   and   an   Elder 
June  5,   1901,  by  William  A.  McCul- 
lough;    married    Zina    Wilkins   June 
12,   1901,  in  the  Salt  Lake  Temple; 
was  set  apart  as   first   counselor   in 
the  Knightsville  Ward  Y.  M.  M.  I.  A. 
Dec.   18,   1901;   set  apart  as  instruc- 
tor  of  a   Deacons'    quorum     Oct.     8, 
1902;   presided  over  the  Knightville 
Ward   Y.   M.   M.    L   A.   from   1904   to 
1908;     worked    as    second    assistant 
superintendent   of    the    Knightsville 
Ward  Sunday  school  and  was  secre- 
tary of  the   first   Religion   Class    in 
Knightsville;  ordained  a  High  Priest 
by  Hyrum  Lemmons  and  set  apart  as 
second    counselor     to     Bishop     John 
Roundy    Feb.    1,    1908;     ordained     a 
Bishop    Feb.    28,    1909,    by    Apostle 
John  Henry  Smith  and  set  apart  to 
preside  over  the  Knightsville  Ward. 
He  held  this  position   until  Oct.    20, 
1915,  when  he  left  for  a  mission  to 
the  Eastern  States,  during  which  he 
acted   as   president   of  the   Brooklyn 
conference.      He   returned    home    in 
September,    1917.      In    1918    (March 
31st)  he  was  set  apart  by  Hyrum  G. 
Smith  to  preside  as  Bishop  over  the 
Silver  City  Ward   which   position   he 
held    until    July    20,    1919,    when    he 
was  set  apart  as  second  counselor  to 
President  E.   Franklin   Birch   of  the 
Tintic  Stake,  which  position  he  still 
holds.     Bro.  Fuller  acted  as  county 
commissioner     of     Juab     county     in 
1914-1915  and  has  filled  many  other 
positions   within   the   gift  of   his   fel- 
low citizens.      His  marriage   to  Zina 
Wilkins   has   been    blessed    with   five 
children,   namely,    Livonia   W.,    Zina 
Naomi,  Jenna  Bert,  L.  Roy  and  Mary. 
Bro.    Fuller    has    held    positions    as 
foreman  and  superintendent  of  Colo. 
Beck  Tunnel,  Iron  Blossom  and  other 
mines. 

GARDNER,  James  ThrelfaU,  Bish- 
op of  the  American  Fork  First  Ward 
(Alpine  Stake),  Utah  county,  Utah, 
was  born  May  29,  1863,  at  American 
Fork,  the  son  of  James  Gardner  and 


Jane  ThrelfaU.  He  was  baptized 
when  about  eight  years  old,  was 
raised  in  American  Fork  and  re- 
ceived a  common  school  education. 
After  being  ordained  a  Priest,  he  be- 
came an  active  worker  in  the  Sun- 
day school  and  Y.  M.  M.  I.  A.  In  his 
early  youth  he  learned  the  shoe  and 
harness  business  and  has  been  en- 
gaged in  harness  making  most  of  his 
life.  He  worked  in  Salt  Lake  City 
and  later  moved  to  Provo,  working 
in  the  harness  business,  and  on  his 
return  to  American  Fork  in  1892  he 
took  charge  of  the  harness  depart- 
ment of  the  Chipman  Mercantile 
Company,  which  position  he  still 
holds.  When  only  21  years  of  age 
he  was  chosen  as  a  city  councilman 
in  American  Fork  and  served  four 
terms  in  that  capacity.  From  1905 
to  1911  he  served  as  mayor  of  Ameri- 
can Fork  and  in  1917  he  was  again 
elected  mayor  and  still  serves  in  that 
position.  He  also  served  the  unex- 
pired term  of  George  Cunningham  as 
a  member  of  the  American  Fork 
School  Board.  About  1884  he  was 
ordained  an  Elder  and  subsequently 
ordained  a  Seventy,  becoming  a  mem- 
ber of  the  67th  quorum  of  Seventy. 
When  the  American  Fork  Ward  was 
divided  into  four  Wards,  July  14, 
1901.  he  was  ordained  a  High  Priest 
by  George  Teasdale  and  set  apart  as 
second  counselor  to  Charles  G.  Pat- 
terson of  the  American  Fork  First 
Ward.  He  acted  in  that  position  until 
1903,  when  he  was  ordained  a  Bishop 
by  Apostle  Mathias  F.  Cowley  and 
set  apart  to  preside  over  the  Ameri- 
can Fork  First  Ward,  which  position 
he  still  holds.  Under  his  adminis- 
tration a  $11,000.00  meeting  house 
(a  fine  brick  building)  was  erected 
in  his  Ward.  In  1884  (Oct.  23rd), 
in  the  Logan  Temple,  Bishop  Gardner 
married  Ruth  Greenwood  (daughter 
of  Wm.  Greenwood  and  Alice  Sum- 
ner), who  was  born  June  21,  1862, 
and  died  Oct.  18,  1892.  Three  chil- 
dren, namely,  James  Marion,  Reed 
and   Thomas  William,   were  born  to 


BIOGRAPHICAL  ENCYCLOPEDIA. 


379 


them.  On  Dec.  12,  1894,  Bishop 
Gardner  married  Sarah  Jane  Hill  in 
the  Salt  Lake  Temple.  She  was  a 
daughter  of  Joseph  Hill  and  Sarah 
Crosby  and  was  born  July  21,  1869, 
at  Millville,  Cache  county,  Utah.  Four 
children  have  blessed  this  marriage, 
namely,  Frank  T.,  Robert  Glenn, 
Ruth  and  Richard  Hill. 

GARDNER,  William,  Bishop  and 
Patriarch,  and  a  resident  of  St. 
George,  Washington  county,  Utah, 
was  born  May  22,   184  6,  near  Bona- 


parte, Iowa,  the  son  of  Robert  Gard- 
ner and  Jane  McEwan.  Being  born 
during  the  time  of  the  exodus  of  the 
Saints  from  Nauvoo  he  crossed  the 
plains  as  an  infant  with  his  parents, 
arriving  in  Salt  Lake  Valley  Oct.  1, 
1847.  On  the  journey  William, 
when  only  six  months  old,  fell  out  of 
the  wagon,  the  wheels  of  which 
passed  over  his  little  body,  but,  mar- 
velous as  it  may  seem,  he  was  not 
hurt.  The  Gardner  family  lived  in 
Mill  Creek  until  18  62,  when  they 
settled  in  St.  George,  and  two  years 
later  (1864)  they  located  in  Pine 
Valley,  where  William  made  his 
home  until  1906  when  he  was  called 
to  work  in  the  St.  George  Temple. 
Bro.    Gardner  was   baptized   in   185  6 


by  Washington  Lemmon  in  Mill 
Creek;  was  ordained  an  Elder  in 
18  67  by  his  father,  and  ordained  a 
High  Priest  by  John  D.  T.  McAllister 
in  1880  and  set  apart  as  second  coun- 
selor to  Bishop  Frederick  W.  Jones 
of  the  Pine  Valley  Ward,  which  posi- 
tion he  held  until  1888,  when  he  was 
ordained  a  Bishop  by  John  W.  Taylor 
and  set  apart  to  preside  over  the 
Pine  Valley  Ward.  He  held  that  of- 
fice until  1893.  In  1884-1887  he 
filled  a  mission  to  New  Zealand, 
where  he  labored  most  successfully 
both  among  the  Maoris  and  the 
whites  and  organized  14  branches 
of  the  Church.  In  1893-1896  he 
filled  another  mission  to  New  Zea- 
land, during  which  he  acted  as  presi- 
dent of  the  Australasian  Mission.  He 
filled  a  third  mission  to  New  Zea- 
land in  1913-1916  when  he  presided 
over  the  New  Zealand  mission.  Thus 
he  filled  three  missions  to  that  part 
of  the  world  in  ten  years.  From  his 
earliest  youth  Elder  Gardner  has 
been  a  very  energetic  and  faithful 
Church  worker.  For  a  number  of 
years  he  acted  as  superintendent  of 
the  Pine  Valley  Sunday  school  and 
later  acted  as  second  assistant  super- 
intendent in  the  St.  George  Stake 
Sunday  school  organization.  For 
fourteen  years  he  acted  as  Stake 
superintendent  of  Religious  Classes, 
during  which  time  he  made  frequent 
visits  to  all  the  settlements  in  the 
St.  George  Stake.  Since  1897  he  has 
acted  as  a  High  Councilor  in  the  St. 
George  Stake.  He  was  ordained  a 
Patriarch  by  Anthony  W.  Ivins, 
March  17,  1918,  and  set  apart  as 
president  of  the  High  Priests' 
quorum  in  the  St.  George  Stake  in 
June,  1919.  In  1869  (Oct.  11th) 
Bro.  Gardner  married  Mary  Almeda 
Burgess  (daughter  of  Harrison  Bur- 
gess and  Amanda  Hammond),  who 
was  born  Feb.  8,  1851,  in  Salt  Lake 
City,  Utah,  and  became  the  mother 
of  two  children  (Effie  May  and 
Amanda  Jane);  she  died  in  Decem- 
ber,   1881.      In   October,    1871,    Bro. 


380 


LATTER-DAY   SAINT 


Gardner  married  Mary  Jane  Thomas 
(daughter  of  John  Thomas  and 
Mahalia  Mathews),  who  was  born  in 
Salt  Lake  City,  Utah,  Feb.  1,  1852. 
She  bore  her  husband  seven  children, 
namely,  Mahalia  J.,  William  Thomas, 
Milton  R.,  Mary  Marie,  Elizabeth, 
Giveneth  and  Robert  Centennial,  the 
last  named  being  the  one  hundredth 
grandchild  of  Bro.  Robert  Gardner, 
Wm.  Gardner's  father). 

GARFIELD,   Raphael,     Bishop     of 
the  Mona  Ward    (Juab  Stake),  Juab 


county,  Utah,  was  born  Nov.  24, 
1872,  at  Mona,  the  son  of  Henry 
Garfield  and  Martha  Yates.  He  was 
baptized  May  5,  1880,  by  John  M. 
Haws  and  soon  afterwards  ordained 
a  Deacon  and  later  a  Teacher.  He 
became  a  diligent  worker  in  the 
Mona  Ward  Sunday  school,  served  as 
assistant  superintendent,  and  was  an 
efficient  officer  in  the  Ward  Y.  M. 
M.  I.  A.  He  also  served  as  con- 
stable in  the  Mona  precinct  and  filled 
a  number  of  other  secular  offices.  In 
his  early  life  he  was,  like  Moses  and 
David  of  old,  a  shepherd  of  the 
flocks  and  has  been  a  successful 
stockman  and  farmer.  In  1901 
(March  3  0th)  he  was  ordained  an 
Elder  by  Charles  Sperry.     He  was  or- 


dained a  High  Priest  Oct.  29,  1904, 
by  Isaac  H.  Grace  and  set  apart  to 
act  as  second  counselor  to  Bishop 
Ephraim  Ellertson  of  Mona,  which 
position  he  held  until  Jan.  23,  1910,, 
when  he  was  ordained  a  Bishop  by 
Hyrum  M.  Smith  and  set  apart  to 
preside  over  the  Mona  Ward,  which 
position  he  still  holds.  In  1899 
(Sept.  28th)  he  married  Martha  M. 
Kay  (daughter  of  William  Kay  and 
Mary  Ann  Day),  who  was  born  Oct. 
26,  1872.  Bishop  Garfield's  main 
avocation  at  present  is  that  of  a 
farmer. 

GATES,  Emma  Lucy,  (now  Mrs. 
Bowen),  Utah's  greatest  singer,  was 
born  in  St.  George,  Washington  coun- 
ty, Utah,  the  daughter  of  Jacob  Gates 
and  Susa  Young.  She  was  baptized 
in  the  Pacific  ocean,  by  her  father, 
while  her  parents  were  filling  a  mis- 
sion to  Hawaii.  Showing  great  musi- 
cal talent,  she  went  to  Europe,  where 
she  entered  the  Royal  Conservatory  of 
Music  in  Berlin;  later  ^he  became  a 
pupil  of  the  celebrated  Madame 
Blanch  Correlli  of  that  city.     While 


specializing  in  vocal  training,  Emma 
Lucy  is  equally  gifted  in  instrumental 
music,    playing    both   the   piano   and 


BIOGRAPHICAL  ENCYCLOPEDIA. 


381 


violin,  in  either  of  which  branches  she 
might  have  excelled.  She  made  her 
debut  in  the  Royal  Opera  House,  Ber- 
lin, as  a  coloratura  soprano,  where 
she  sang  operas  on  her  repertoire  and 
then  went  to  Kassel,  Hessen-Nassau, 
as  leading  prima  donna,  where  she 
gained  a  still  larger  experience  in 
her  chosen  profession.  She  has  sung, 
both  in  grand  opera  and  concert  in 
Berne  (Switzerland),  Vienna  (Aus- 
tria), Wisbaden  and  other  cities  in 
Germany,  Ostend  (Belgium),  London 
and  many  other  cities  in  England, 
Wales  and  Scotland.  She  is  as  popu- 
lar in  Edinburgh  and  Glasgow  as  in 
Salt  Lake  City.  When  the  war  broke 
out  in  1914  she  returned  to  America, 
where  she  has  established  herself  as 
a  concert  favorite  in  all  the  great 
cities  of  the  United  States  and  has 
sung  in  grand  opera  in  New  York, 
Chicago  and  Newark  with  the  Ameri- 
can Singers  Society.  She  has  become 
one  of  the  most  popular  artists 
whose  tones  are  recorded  on  the 
phonograph  and  in  that  way  has  been 
heard  in  thousands  of  homes.  In 
rdl6  (June  30th)  she  became  the 
wife  of  Albert  E.  Bowen  of  Logan, 
Utah,  and  has  proved  that  she  is  a 
good  housekeeper,  as  well  as  a  great 
artist.  Notwithstanding  that  she  has 
gained  international  fame,  she  still 
retains  the  simple  faith  of  her  child- 
hood and  loves  her  home,  her  family 
and  her  religion  above  all  other 
things,  and  is  deeply  interested  in  the 
redemption  of  her  dead,  visiting  the 
Temples  faithfully  whenever  she  has 
the  opportunity.  She  too,  is  a  pio- 
neer, for  as  an  unknown  western 
girl  she  was  the  first  of  the  young 
sisters  of  the  Church  to  go  to  Europe 
for  a  musical  education  and  has  won 
her  way  in  the  crowded  art  centers 
of  the  Old  World  by  reason  of  her 
determination,  industry  and  genius 
and,  above  all,  through  her  faith  and 
devotion  to  the  gospel.  She  inherits 
from  her  father  a  wise,  tactful  man- 
ner, and  from  her  mother  much  of 
the  artistic  gifts  and  creative  powers 


which  characterized  their  father  and 
grandfather,  Brigham  Young.  Sis- 
ter Emma  Lucy  is  beloved  by  all  who 
know  her. 

GEORGESOX,  WiUiam,  Bishop  of 
Cedarville  Ward  (Oneida  Stake), 
Franklin  county,  Idaho,  was  born 
Oct.  21,  1866,  in  Richmond,  Cache 
county,  Utah,  the  son  of  Niels  Geor- 
geson       and       Johanna       Margrethe 


Kofoed.  He  was  baptized  about 
1875  by  Rasmus  Nielsen  and  or- 
dained a  Deacon  about  1878  at 
Weston,  Idaho,  where  he  lived  with 
his  father's  family  at  the  time.  He 
moved  to  Oxford,  Idaho,  in  1883  and 
was  ordained  a  Priest  about  1SS4  by 
Bishop  Robert  N.  Lewis  and  ap- 
pointed to  labor  as  a  Priest  and  act- 
ing Teacher  among  the  people;  he 
also  acted  as  second  counselor  in  the 
Ward  Y.  M.  M.  I.  A.,  was  ordained  a 
Seventy  Oct.  27,  1890,  by  James  W. 
Dawson,  and  became  a  member  of  the 
88th  Quorum  of  Seventy.  In  1891 
he  labored  as  a  missionary  stone  cut- 
ter on  the  Oneida  Stake  Academy. 
He  married  Annie  S.  Hanson  Sept. 
6,  1893.  She  is  the  daughter  of 
Henry  Hansen  and  Christina  Jorgen- 
sen.  Bro.  Georgeson  filled  a  mission 
to   Scandinavia  in   1S94-1896,    labor- 


382 


LATTER-DAY   SAINT 


ing  in  the  Copenhagen  conference. 
In  May,  1897,  he  was  sustained  as 
presiding  Elder  of  the  Weston  Creek 
branch  of  the  Weston  Ward,  which 
position  he  held  until  Aug.  7,  1902, 
when  he  was  chosen  as  Bishop,  the 
Weston  Creek  branch  being  then  or- 
ganized as  the  Cedarville  Ward.  He 
was  ordained  a  High  Priest  and 
Bishop  Nov.  2,  1902,  by  Mathias  F. 
Cowley  and  acted  in  that  office  until 
May  6,  1916,  when  he  was  honorably 
released.  Since  that  time  he  has 
acted  as  a  Ward  teacher  and  as  the 
genealogical  representative  of  the 
Cedarville  Ward. 

GIBB,  John  Lye,  a  Patriarch  in 
the  Alberta  Stake  of  Zion,  Canada, 
was    born    Sept.    16,    1848,    at   South 


Petherton,  Somersetshire,  England, 
the  son  of  William  Gibb  and  Isabella 
E.  Lye.  Becoming  a  convert  to 
"Mormonism"  he  was  baptized  June 
22,  1866,  by  Elder  Edwin  Frost; 
married  Sarah  Phillips  Silcox,  Oct. 
13,  1867,  at  Stow  Church,  Newport, 
England;  was  ordained  an  Elder  by 
Henry  Haynes  at  New  Tredeger, 
England,  in  1874,  and  emigrated  to 
Utah  in  1875,  crossing  the  Atlantic 
in  the  steamship  "Wyoming"  with  a 
company   of  Saints   in   charge   of  L. 


John  Nuttall.  Having  married  Han- 
nah Simmons  as  a  plural  wife  Jan. 
30,  1881,  he  was  arrested  and  con- 
victed of  unlawful  cohabitation  and 
served  a  term  in  the  Utah  peniten- 
tiary. For  many  years  he  "was  a  resi- 
dent of  Lehi,  Utah  county,  Utah, 
where  he  led  the  Ward  choir  for 
twenty-one  years  and  also  served  as 
a  member  of  the  district  school  board 
a  long  time.  Responding  to  a  call 
from  President  Lorenzo  Snow  he 
went  to  Alberta,  Canada,  and  settled 
at  Magrath,  where  he  has  taken  an 
active  part  in  the  building  up  of  that 
settlement.  For  a  number  of  years 
he  acted  as  the  village  overseer  and 
also  served  on  the  school  board.  For 
ten  years  he  led  the  Ward  choir  and 
is  at  the  present  time  a  member  of 
the  town  council.  Elder  Gibb  is  the 
father  of  twenty-four  children,  seven- 
teen of  whom  are  still  living.  He 
has  already  seventy-two  grandchil- 
dren. The  names  of  his  children  in 
the  order  of  their  ages  are  as  fol- 
lows: Isabella  E.  (now  Mrs.  J.  B. 
Merrill),  Wm.  H.,  Jezeel  (now  Mrs. 
A.  M.  Merkley),  John  J.,  Milton  H., 
Joseph  F.,  Sarah  Anne  (now  Mrs. 
F.  P.  Fisher),  Henry  S.,  Han- 
nah (now  Mrs.  T.  T.  Mendenhall), 
Mary  Athelia  (now  Mrs.  Dewey  S. 
Smith),  George,  David  F.,  Frederick 
L.,  Ada  L.,  Lynn  E.,  Emma  Lucy 
(now  Mrs.  Wm.  Dow),  and  Jessie. 
Bro.  Gibb  was  ordained  a  Patriarch 
May  3,  1914,  by  Apostle  David  O. 
McKay. 

GIBBS,    John    Henry,    one    of    the 

martyrs  of  the  Church,  was  born 
July  2  8,  1853  in  the  town  of  Haver- 
ford-West,  Pembrokeshire,  South 
Wales,  the  son  of  George  D.  and 
Ellen  Phillips  Gibbs.  He  was  bap- 
tized into  the  Church  of  Jesus  Christ 
of  Latter-day  Saints,  Aug.  28,  1860; 
ordained  a  Deacon  in  January,  18  62; 
emigrated  to  Utah  with  his  parents 
in  1866,  and  was  ordained  an  Elder 
in  March,  1871.  He  married  Louisa 
Obray,  daughter  of  Thomas  L.  Obray 


BIOGRAPHICAL  ENCYCLOPEDIA. 


383 


of  Paradise,  Nov.  2,  1874.  He  was 
secretary  of  the  Elders'  Quorum,  of 
Paradise,  for  several  years,  and  was 
president  of  the  Y.  M.  M.  I.  A.  in 
1879-1880.  He  commenced  teaching 
school  at  Richmond  in  the  winter  of 
1879-1880,  and  filled  that  position 
every  winter  until  called  to  fill  his 
mission  to  the  Southern  States.  He 
was  set  apart  Feb.  2  6,  1883,  left  his 
home  for  the  States  Feb.  23,  1883, 
and  departed  from  Salt  Lake  City  on 
the  27th  of  the  same  month.  He  re- 
ceived his  appointment  at  Chatta- 
nooga to  labor  in  the  West  Tennessee 
conference.  Having  arrived  in  com- 
pany with  Elder  Robert  Pearce  and 
Joshua  Hawks  at  Shady  Grove,  head- 
quarters of  the  conference,  March 
6th,  he  went  in  company  with  Elder 
Thomas  Hazen  Merrill  to  Humphreys 
county  to  open  up  a  new  field.  He 
also  traveled  in  '  this  district  with 
Elder  Robert  Pearce,  and  preached 
the  gospel  to  hundreds  of  people  who 
had  never  heard  it  before,  was  ap- 
pointed president  of  the  North  Ten- 
nessee conference,  to  succeed  Presi- 
dent E.  R.  Miles  in  May,  1884,  and 
was  occupying  that  position  at  the 
time  of  his  martyrdom.  Previous  to 
this  time  he  was  appointed  in  com- 
pany with  Elder  William  H.  Jones  to 
lecture  in  the  principal  cities  of  the 
Southern  States  on  the  historical, 
moral,  political  and  social  affairs  of 
the  Latter-day  Saints.  They  had 
good  success  in  this  calling.  He  was 
requested  by  the  presidency  of  the 
mission  to  come  back  into  the  con- 
ference to  arrange  some  matters  of 
importance  pertaining  to  the  Church, 
and  while  performing  this  last  duty, 
he  met  his  death.  While  Elders  John 
H.  Gibbs,  William  S.  Berry  and  Wil- 
liam H.  Jones  were  at  the  house  of 
James  Condor  on  Kane  Creek,  Lewis 
county,  Tennessee,  on  Sunday  morn- 
ing, Aug.  10,  1884,  for  the  purpose  of 
holding  religious  services,  a  body  of 
masked  men  rode  up  to  the  house 
and  fired  at  the  Elders,  instantly  kill- 
ing  Elders    Gibbs     and     Berry     and 


wounding  Mrs.  Condor.  Martin  Con- 
dor was  also  shot  and  killed,  and 
his  half-brother,  James  R.  Hudson, 
after  shooting  and  killing  one  of  the 
assasins,  met  the  same  fate.  Elder 
Jones,  seeing  that  the  only  possible 
chance  to  save  his  own  life  was  by 
running  to  the  woods,  fled,  followed 
and  fired  at  by  some  of  the  mob,  but 
escaped  unhurt.  The  bodies  of  El- 
ders Gibbs  and  Berry  were  buried 
but  were  subsequently  dis-interred 
and  brought  to  Salt  Lake  City.  The 
remains  of  Elder  Gibbs  were  taken 
to  Paradise,  Cache  county,  Utah, 
where  his  family  resided,  and  those 
of  Elder  Berry  to  Kanarra,  Iron 
county,  Utah,  the  home  of  that  Elder. 

GOULD,  Samuel,  a  member  of  the 
Mormon  Battalion,  was  born  Aug.  15, 
1778,  in  Litchfield  county,  Connecti- 
cut, the  son  of  Jacob  Gould  and 
Elizabeth  Green.  He  was  an  early 
convert  to  "Mormonism"  and  left  his 
first  family  for  the  gospel's  sake. 
Having  gathered  with  the  Saints  to 
Nauvoo,  Illinois,  he,  together  with 
his  co-religionists,  was  expelled 
from  his  home  in  that  city  and 
started  for  the  West.  On  his  arrival 
on  the  Missouri  river  he  enlisted  in 
the  Mormon  Battalion,  together  with 
his  oldest  son,  John,  and  started  for 
California,  but  after  traveling  as  far 
as  Santa  Fe,  New  Mexico,  he  was 
sent  with  the  sick  detachment  of  the 
Battalion  to  Pueblo,  where  he  spent 
the  winter  of  1846-1847,  assisting  in 
taking  care  of  the  sick.  He  arrived 
in  the  Valley  in  the  summer  of  18  47. 
Brother  Gould  is  supposed  to  have 
been  the  oldest  man  who  enlisted  in 
the  Mormon  Battalion.  He  was  a 
member  of  Parley  P.  Pratt's  party 
which  explored  Southern  California 
during  the  winter  of  1849-1850.  His 
wife,  Sally,  bore  him  seven  children, 
namely,  John,  Reuben,  Sylvester, 
James,  Maria,  Harriet  and  Jane.  In 
1851  (Jan.  1st)  he  married  Fanny 
Ward  Lester,  who  bore  him  four  chil- 
dren,  namely,   Jacob   B.,   Samuel   L., 


384 


LATTER-DAY   SAINT 


Susannah  W.  and  Emily  J.  S.  Later 
he  married  Cynthia  Wright  who  bore 
him  one  child.  He  moved  with  his 
family  to  Southern  Utah  in  18  61  and 
afterwards  made  a  trip  to  Michigan 
to  visit  his  first  family,  being  gone 
about  a  year.  After  residing  in 
Utah's  "Dixie"  five  or  six  years,  he 
located  at  Parowan,  where  he  had 
formerly  lived,  and  there  he  died 
Dec.  30,  1869. 

GRACE,  Isaac  Henry,  second  coun- 
selor in  the  Juab  Stake  presidency 
(Juab  county),  Utah,  was  born  Aug. 
9,   1857,  at  Nephi,  the  son  of  Isaac 


Grace  and  Elizabeth  Williams.  He 
was  baptized  when  about  eight  years 
old,  received  a  common  school  edu- 
cation, was  ordained  an  Elder  in 
August,  1871,  took  an  active  part  in 
Sunday  school  work  and  acted  as 
president  of  the  Ward  Y.  M.  M.  I.  A. 
In  1882  (Jan.  19th)  he  married 
Helen  Hudson.  He  was  ordained  a 
High  Priest  and  served  for  several 
years  as  a  member  of  the  High  Coun- 
cil of  the  Juab  Stake;  he  filled  a 
mission  to  Hawaii  in  1891-1894,  hav- 
ing charge  of  the  Laie  plantation 
part  of  the  time.  On  this  mission  he 
had  his  family  with  him.  After  his 
return    he   served    as    Sunday    school 


superintendent  at  Nephi,  being  the 
first  superintendent  in  the  Nephi  1st 
Ward  and  remained  a  member  of  the 
High  Council  until  he  was  chosen  as 
second  counselor  (afterwards  first 
counselor)  to  President  James  W. 
Paxman  in  the  Juab  Stake  presi- 
dency. He  remained  in  that  position 
until  a  new  president  was  installed. 
He  also  served  as  a  member  of  the 
Nephi  city  council  and  was  mayor  of 
the  city  for  five  years.  He  also 
served  two  years  as  county  commis- 
sioner and  county  superintendent  of 
schools  and  is  now  president  of  the 
school  board.  He  holds  a  diploma 
as  a  master  farmer  for  successful 
dry  farming,  being  the  owner  of  an 
extensive  farm  on  the  highlands  be- 
tween Nephi  and  Levan.  In  1919 
(May  11th)  he  was  chosen  as  second 
counselor  to  President  Thomas  D. 
Rees  which  position  he  still  holds. 
His  wife,  Helen,  has  borne  her  hus- 
band one  child,  namely,  Helen. 

GRANGER,  Walter,  Bishop  of  the 
St.  George,  Third  Ward  (St.  George 
Stake),  Washington  county,  Utah, 
was  born  Aug.  4,  1821,  in  the  city  of 
Edinburgh,  Scotland,  the  son  of 
Robert  Granger  and  Catherine  Mc- 
Donald. His  father  died  when  Wal- 
ter was  nine  years  old,  leaving  the 
mother  with  six  children,  namely, 
Peter,  Isabella,  Walter,  Alexander, 
Catherine  and  John.  When  Walter 
was  fifteen  years  old  he  left  Edin- 
burgh, going  to  Paisley,  Renfrew- 
shire, to  learn  the  trade  of  a  shawl 
weaver.  While  there,  during  the 
winter  of  1839-1840,  he  first  heard 
the  true  gospel  preached  by  Elders 
Samuel  Mulliner  and  Alexander 
Wright.  After  investigating,  he  be- 
came a  convert  to  "Mormonism"  and 
was  baptized  by  Alexander  Wright, 
April  15,  1840.  When  the  first 
branch  of  the  Church  was  organized 
in  Scotland,  May  9,  1840,  Walter  be- 
came a  member  of  that  branch 
(Paisley).  Soon  after  his  baptism  he 
began   to   bear   testimony   to    his   as- 


BIOGRAPHICAL  ENCYCLOPEDIA. 


385 


sociates  who  became  very  much  im- 
bittered  against  him.  He  also  be- 
came acquainted  with  Miss  Catherine 
Guthrie,  a  young  lady  who  had  joined 
the  Church  and  who,  like  himself, 
had  been  shamefully  abused  by  rela- 
tives and  others,  because  of  having 
embraced  "Mormonism."  The  two, 
thus  sympathizing  with  each  other, 
agreed  to  share  the  difficulties  of 
life  together  and  were  consequently 
married  March  11,  1841.  Soon  after- 
wards, Walter  was  ordained  a 
Teacher,  and  afterwards  an  Elder. 
He  performed  much  local  missionary 


labor  and  was  called  to  preside  over 
the  Paisley  branch,  which  position 
he  held  for  about  six  years,  until 
1855,  when  he  was  called  to  preside 
over  the  Glasgow  conference  which 
at  that  time  comprised  14  branches 
and  had  about  1,100  baptized  mem- 
bers. The  following  year  he  emi- 
grated to  America,  crossing  the  At- 
lantic in  the  ship  "Enoch  Train," 
and  from  Iowa  City  he  crossed  the 
plains  in  Capt.  Daniel  D.  McArthur's 
handcart  company,  which  arrived  in 
Salt  Lake  City  Sept.  26,  1856.  Taking 
the  advice  of  Church  leaders  Bro. 
Granger  left  the  city  for  the  country 
settlements,  for  the  purpose  of  mak- 
ing   a    home,    and     first     located     in 


Spanish  Fork,  Utah  county,  where  he 
commenced  farming.  In  the  fall  of 
1861  he  was  called  to  Utah's  Dixie 
to  raise  cotton,  and  thus  became  one 
of  the  founders  of  St.  George.  When 
that  city  in  1869  was  divided  into 
four  Wards,  Bro.  Granger  was  chosen 
as  counselor  to  Bishop  Daniel  D. 
McArthur  of  the  St.  George  Third 
Ward,  which  position  he  held  until 
he  was  ordained  a  Bishop  by  Apostle 
Erastus  Snow  and  set  apart  to  suc- 
ceed Bishop  McArthur  as  Bishop  of 
the  Ward.  Subsequently,  through 
the  changing  of  boundary  lines  of  the 
St.  George  Ward,  he  was  chosen  as 
Bishop  of  the  St.  George  Second 
Ward,  succeeding  Henry  Eyring,  who 
had  been  chosen  as  a  counselor  to 
the  Stake  president.  When  it  was 
decided  to  build  a  Temple  in  St. 
George  Bro.  Granger  was  appointed 
superintendent  of  grading  on  the 
Temple  block.  Later  he  was  called 
to  be  one  of  the  ordinance  workers 
in  the  Temple  and  labored  thus  about 
thirteen  years.  In  1892  he  moved  to 
Cedar  City  and  later  settled  at 
Enoch,  where  he  labored  as  superin- 
tendent of  the  Sunday  school.  He 
resided  at  this  place  until  the  day 
of  his  death  which  occurred  May  6, 
1904.  By  his  wife,  Catherine  Guth- 
rie, whom  he  married  in  1841,  he 
had  thirteen  childrert,  two  of  whom 
are  still  living.  He  subsequently 
yielded  obedience  to  the  higher  law 
of  marriage  by  taking  to  wife  Annie 
Kiel,  who  became  the  mother  of  three 
children,  and  during  the  anti-polyg- 
amy raid  he  was  arrested  and  con- 
victed and  served  a  term  in  the  Utah 
penitentiary  from  June  1,  1888,  to 
Dec.  1,  1888. 

GRAY,  John  Cruickshank,  third 
Bishop  of  Randolph  (Woodruff 
Stake),  Rich  county,  Utah,  was  born 
July  18,  1852,  in  the  parish  of 
Rathen,  Aberdeenshire,  Scotland,  the 
son  of  Wm.  Gray  and  Jane  Cruick- 
shank. He  was  baptized  March  26, 
18  76,    by     Wm.     McMillan     and     or- 


Vol.  Ill,  No.  25. 


January  3,  1920 


386 


LATTER-DAY   SAINT 


dained  a  Priest  in  18  7  6  by  Andrew 
Galloway,  and  presided  over  the  Glas- 
gow branch  three  years,  besides  do- 
ing considerable  work  as  a  local  mis- 


sionary. He  was  ordained  as  an 
Elder  in  18  79  by  Hugh  Findlay,  emi- 
grated to  Utah  in  1882  and  resided 
in  Salt  Lake  City  until  1886,  when  he 
became  a  permanent  settler  at  Ran- 
dolph. He  was  ordained  a  High 
Priest  Sept.  15,  1895,  by  John  U. 
Stucki  and  ordained  a  Bishop  May 
5,  1901,  by  Apostle  Owen  A.  Wood- 
ruff and  set  apart  to  preside  over  the 
Randolph  Ward.  Prior  to  this  he 
acted  as  president  of  the  Ward  Y. 
M.  M.  L  A.,  president  of  the  Second 
Quorum  of  Elders  in  the  Bear  Lake 
Stake  five  years  and  second  coun- 
selor to  Bishop  McKinnon.  He  also 
acted  as  school  trustee  one  term. 
After  serving  faithfully  as  Bishop  for 
seventeen  years,  he  was  honorably 
released  from  that  position  in  1916, 
and  soon  afterwards  chosen  as  presi- 
dent of  the  High  Priests'  quorum  in 
the  Woodruff  Stake.  In  1919  he  was 
also  chosen  as  a  member  of  the  High 
Council.  In  1876  (August  8th)  he 
married  Louise  Duthie  (daughter  of 
Andrew  Duthie  and  Louise  Brem- 
ner),  who  was  born  March  6,  1856, 
in  the  parish  of  Stricken,  Aberdeen- 
shire,  Scotland.      This  marriage  has 


been  blessed  with  ten  children, 
namely,  Louise  J.,  Mary,  John,  An- 
drew, Lucy,  James,  Flora  Belle, 
Rachel,  Lyman  Norman  and  Ruth. 
Bishop  Gray  is  a  farmer  and  stock- 
raiser  by  avocation,  but  was  for  many 
years  a  contractor  and  builder.  Dur- 
ing his  administration  as  Bishop  of 
Randolph  a  beautiful  Tabernacle,  a 
brick  building,  with  a  rock  basement, 
was  erected  in  Randolph,  at  a  cost 
of  about  $23,000  and  a  Relief  Society 
home  (also  a  brick  house)  at  a  cost 
of  $3,600. 

GU\X,  Frederick  Thomas,  second 
Bishop  of  Adamsville  (Beaver  Stake), 
Beaver  county,  Utah,  was  born  Feb. 
5,  1856,  in  Philadelphia,  Penn.,  the 
son  of  Thomas  Gunn  and  Ann  Hough- 
ton. He  emigrated  with  his  father's 
family  to  Utah  in  1860,  and  in  1863 
removed  to  Parowan,  Iron  county, 
Utah,  where  he  resided  several  years 
and  then  settled  at  Panguitch.  He 
finally  settled  at  Ac^msville  (in 
1867),  where  he  has  since  resided. 
Bishop  Gunn  was  baptized  in  1865 
by    John    R.    Robinson,    ordained    a 


Deacon  Nov.  6,  1870,  by  John  Harris, 
ordained  an  Elder  Sept.  26,  1875,  by 
Joseph  H.  Joseph,  and  ordained  a 
High  Priest  June  28,   1885,  by  John 


BIOGRAPHICAL   ENCYCLOPEDIA. 


387 


Henry  Smith,  after  which  he  served 
as  a  member  of  the  Beaver  Stake 
High  Council.  A  year  later  (July  7, 
188  6)  he  was  ordained  a  Bishop  and 
set  apart  to  preside  over  the  Adams- 
ville  Ward.  In  188  7-188  9  he  filled 
a  mission  to  the  Northwestern  States, 
laboring  principally  in  Iowa  and 
Kansas,  part  of  the  time  as  president 
of  the  Iowa  conference.  After  be- 
ing released  from  his  position  as 
Bishop  he  served  about  seven  years 
in  the  Beaver  Stake  High  Council. 
In  1880  (Nov.  25th)  he  married 
Sarah  Ann  Reese  (daughter  of  David 
E.  Reese  and  Elizabeth  Grimshaw), 
who  was  born  Sept.  30,  1863,  in  Eng- 
land. Nine  children  blessed  this 
marriage,  namely,  Thomas  W.,  Fred- 
rick H.,  Ada  E.,  Franklin  D.,  John 
A.,  Grace  A.,  Sarah  M.,  Henrietta  and 
Stanley  R.  For  several  years  Bro. 
Gunn  has  served  as  vice-president  of 
the  National  Bank  of  Beaver. 

HAIGHT,  Hector  Caleb,  a  Utah 
pioneer  of  1847,  was  born  Jan.  17, 
1810,  at  Windham,  Greene  county. 
New  York,  the  son  of  Caleb  Haight 
and  Keturah  Horton.  He  was  bap- 
tized by  Isaac  C.  Haight  in  1845  and 
arrived  in  Salt  Lake  Valley,  Sept.  22, 
1847,  having  crossed  the  plains  in 
Daniel  Spencer's  hundred.  In  1829 
he  married  Julia  Van  Orden  (daugh- 
ter of  Peter  Van  Orden  and  Mary 
Crocker), who  was  born  Jan.  19, 1811. 
Their  children  were  Mary  Adelia, 
born  in  January,  1830;  Hector,  born 
June  20,  1831;  Horton  David,  born 
June  20,  1832;  Caleb,  born  July  22, 
1834,  and  William  Van  Orden,  born 
Sept.  18,  1841.  Bro.  Haight  was  one 
of  the  first  settlers  of  Farmington 
and  Kaysville,  Utah.  In  1854  he 
married  Catherine  Weiler,  who  bore 
him  two  children,  and  in  1870  he 
married  Margaret  Stewart  (daugh- 
ter of  David  Stewart  and  Millie  Wil- 
son), who  was  born  March  27,  1850. 
Their  children  were  Duane  Miller 
(adopted),  Isaac,  Millie,  Mata  and 
Cora.      Bro.   Haight  filled  a  mission 


to  Scandinavia  in  1855-1858,  succeed- 
ing John  Van  Cott  in  the  presidency 


of  the  Scandinavian  Mission.  In 
Utah  he  became  extensively  known  as 
a  military  man  and  served  as  a  cap- 
tain of  infantry  in  the  Utah  militia. 
He  also  served  as  an  assessor  and 
collector,  sheriff  and  probate  judge 
in  Davis  county.  His  avocations  were 
those  of  farmer  and  stock  raiser.  He 
also  kept  a  hotel  at  Farmington, 
where  he  died  June  26,  1879. 

HAIGHT,  Julia  Van  Orden,  wife  of 
Hector  C.  Haight,  was  born  Jan.   19, 


388 


LATTER-DAY   SAINT 


1811,  the  daughter  of  Peter  Van  Or- 
den  and  Mary  Crocker.  She  was  mar- 
ried to  Hector  C.  Haight  in  182  9  and 
migrated  to  Utah  with  her  husband 
in  1847.  She  became  the  mother  of 
seven  children  and  died  in  May,  1869, 
at  Farmington,  Utah. 

HAIGHT,   Catherine  AVeiler,     wife 
of  Hector  C.  Haight,  was  the  daugh- 


ter of  Jacob  Weiler  (one  of  the  orig- 
inal Utah  pioneers  of  18  47).  In 
1854  she  became  the  wife  of  Hector 
C.  Haight,  to  whom  she  bore  two 
children.  Her  first  child,  Hector  W., 
was  born  July  28,  1855,  just  before 
her  husband  left  on  a  mission  to  Eu- 
rope, where  he  remained  for  three 
years.  After  his  return  she  gave 
birth  to  another  male  child.  She 
died  in  giving  birth  to  this  child  in 
1859.  The  child  also  died  and  both 
mother  and  child  were  buried  in  Salt 
Lake  City. 

HAIR,  Thomas  C,  president  of  the 
Netherlands  Mission  from  July  20, 
1913,  to  Dec.  31,  1913,  was  born 
Nov.  19,  1885,  at  Ephraim,  Sanpete 
county,  Utah,  the  son  of  Nicholas  C. 
Hair  and  Mary  E.  Haddom.  He  was 
baptized  Jan.  1,  1894,  by  Thos.  Wil- 
liams, was  ordained  to  the  different 


grades  of  the  Priesthood  and  or- 
dained a  Seventy  by  R.  W.  Eardley 
July  20,  1913,  at  Rotterdam,  Hol- 
land. He  filled  a  mission  to  the 
Netherlands  from  October,  1911,  to 
January,  1914,  acting  as  secretary 
of  the  mission  under  President  Eard- 
ley from  January,  1913,  to  July, 
1913,  after  which  he  presided  over 
the  mission  until  December  31,  1913, 
when  he  was  succeeded  by  Le  Grande 
Richards.  Since  his  early  boyhood 
Bro.  Hair  has  been  interested  in  re- 
ligious work,  and  has  served  as 
teacher  and  assistant  superintendent 
in  the  Waterloo  Sunday  school  for  a 
number  of  years.  He  also  presided 
over  the  Y.  M.  M.  I.  A.  in  said  Ward 
after  returning  from  his  mission,  and 
later  was  transferred  to  the  Y.  M. 
M.  I.  A.  Stake  Board  of  the  Granite 
Stake.  At  present  he  is  a  teacher  in 
the  Sunday  school  and  secretary  of 
a  Seventies  quorum.  Bro.  Hair's 
main  occupation  in  life  has  been  that 


of  a  bookkeeper  and  accountant.  He 
is  a  resident  of  Waterloo  Ward,  Salt 
Lake  county,  Utah. 

H.ALL,  Calvin,  Bishop  of  Washing- 
ton (St.  George  Stake),  Washington 
county,  Utah,  was  born  Aug.  6,  1864. 
at    Providence     Cache   county,    Utah 


BIOGRAPHICAL   ENCYCLOPEDIA. 


389 


the  son  of  Newton  D.  Hall  and  Sarah 
Jane  Bosenberk.  He  located  with  his 
parents  in  Washington  in  18  76  where 
he   from    his    early   youth    has   taken 


an  active  part  in  Church  and  secular 
affairs,  being  baptized  when  about 
eight  years  old.  He  was  ordained  a 
Deacon  when  quite  young;  ordained 
an  Elder  in  June,  1885,  and  a 
Seventy  by  Jacob  Gates  Jan.  24, 
1886.  In  1899-1901  he  filled  a  mis- 
sion to  the  Southwestern  States, 
laboring  in  Kansas  and  Missouri,  part 
of  the  time  as  president  of  the  St. 
Johns  conference.  During  the  latter 
part  of  his  mission  he  acted  as  as- 
sistant to  the  president  of  the  mis- 
sion. After  his  return  from  that 
mission  he  acted  as  superintendent 
of  the  Washington  Sunday  school 
from  1901  to  1908  and  took  an  active 
part  in  all  the  affairs  of  the  town. 
He  was  ordained  a  High  Priest  and 
Bishop  June  12,  1'908,  by  Francis 
M.  Lyman  and  set  apart  to  preside 
over  the  Washington  Ward,  which 
position  he  still  holds.  In  1885 
(June  2  6th)  he  married  Cenia  Iver- 
son  (daughter  of  Hans  Peter  Iver- 
son  and  Anna  D.  Nisson),  who  was 
born  Dec.  5,  1864,  at  Washington, 
Utah. 


HALLIDAY,  George,  a  successful 
missionary,  Bishop  and  Patriarch, 
was  born  April  17,  1823,  in  Trow- 
bridge, Wiltshire,  England,  the  son 
of  Stephen  Halliday  and  Jane  Watts. 
From  his  early  youth  he  was  relig- 
iously inclined  and  while  yet  very 
young  he  became  a  member  of  the 
Baptist  church,  in  which  he  took  an 
active  part,  especially  in  Sunday 
school  and  choir  work.  Frequently, 
when  only  seventeen  years  old,  he 
w^ent  into  the  country  and  took  the 
lead  in  Baptist  prayer  meetings.  At 
the  age  of  21  years  (April  1,  1844) 
he  married  Mary  Ann  Case,  a  very 
sedate,  religious  and  lovable  young 
lady.  Soon  after  his  marriage,  his 
older  brother,  John  Halliday,  came 
to  England  from  Nauvoo,  Illinois,  as 
a  "Mormon"  missionary.  He  soon 
convinced  his  brother  of  the  truth  of 
the  gospel  and  baptized  him  Nov.  10, 
18  44,  as  the  first  fruits  of  his  min- 
istry in  England.  In  1845  (Feb. 
16th)  George  Halliday  was  ordained 
a  Priest  by  his  brother,  John,  and 
immediately  commenced  his  labors  as 


a  local  missionary.  At  a  place  called 
Road,  in  Somersetshire,  he  bap- 
tized a  number  of  persons  who  were 
organized     into     a     branch     of     the 


390 


LATTER-DAY   SAINT 


Church.  He  was  ordained  an  Elder 
Aug.  12,  1845,  by  his  brother,  John, 
and  while  working  at  his  trade  as  a 
plasterer  he  traveled  and  preached 
on  Sundays  and  week  nights,  often 
going  as  far  as  ten  miles,  after  a 
hard  day's  work,  to  hold  meetings. 
During  this  time  his  wife  was  sick 
with  consumption  and  after  thirteen 
months  of  suffering  she  died  May  13, 
1845.  Meanwhile,  Elder  Halliday 
continued  his  missionary  work,  and 
on  Jan.  1,  1846,  he  was  appointed  to 
labor  as  a  traveling  Elder  in  the 
Cheltenham  conference  under  the 
presidency  of  Elder  John  Johnson. 
He  was  thus  employed  until  June  1, 
1847,  when  he  was  appointed  to 
labor  in  the  Birmingham  conference 
under  the  direction  of  Cyrus  H. 
Wheelock.  Here  he  had  great  suc- 
cess in  making  converts.  While 
traveling  in  the  Cheltenham  confer- 
ence he  became  acquainted  with  Miss 
Sarah  Jane  Kendall  (daughter  of 
Joseph  and  Elizabeth  Kendall), 
whom  he  married  Oct.  4,  1847.  In 
January,  1848,  he  was  appointed  to 
preside  over  the  Bristol  branch  and 
to  travel  in  the  South  Conference 
under  the  presidency  of  his  brother, 
John.  The  two  brothers  labored  to- 
gether in  the  greatest  harmony  and 
love  for  over  two  years,  or  until  John 
was  released  to  return  to  America. 
In  1850  George  Halliday  was  ap- 
pointed to  preside  over  the  South 
Conference;  subsequently  he  was  set 
apart  to  preside  as  pastor  over  the 
South,  Dorsetshire  and  Lands  End 
conferences.  He  spent  five  years 
preaching  the  gospel  in  that  part  of 
England  and  was  greatly  blessed  in 
his  labors,  as  hundreds  of  persons 
joined  the  Church.  The  Saints  en- 
joyed the  spirit  of  the  Lord  to  a  mar- 
velous extent  and  many  grand  and 
glorious  manifestations  of  the  power 
of  God  took  place.  One  instance  is 
recorded  by  Elder  Halliday  as  fol- 
lows: "One  Sunday  evening,  after 
preaching  to  a  crowded  house,  a  sis- 
ter   Ware    asked    me    to    go    to    her 


home  and  administer  to  her  son  who 
was  very  sick.  Her  home  being 
three  miles  away,  and  I  being  in  a 
state  of  perspiration  from  preaching, 
endeavored  to  make  an  excuse  for 
not  going  with  her,  but  she  plead  so 
earnestly  for  me  to  go  that  I  felt  im- 
pressed to  help  her,  so  I  took  my 
pocket  handkerchief  and  gave  it  to 
her,  telling  her  to  return  home  and 
place  the  handkerchief  upon  the  child 
and  pray.  She  took  the  handkerchief 
and  started  for  home,  nothing  doubt- 
ing. At  the  door  of  her  house  she 
was  met  by  members  of  the  family 
who  told  her  that  the  boy  was  dead. 
The  mother  replied  that  she  had 
Elder  Halliday's  handkerchief  with 
his  promise  that  the  Lord  would  heal 
her  child  and  she  was  going  to  do  as 
she  had  been  told.  Consequently  she 
went  upstairs  where  the  child  lay 
apparently  dead,  but  she  put  the 
handkerchief  over  him  and  prayed 
earnestly  to  the  Lord  to  restore  him 
to  life.  Her  prayer  was  answered, 
the  child  was  miraculously  healed 
and  the  next  day  was  able  to  go 
downstairs  and  eat  with  the  family. 
The  boy  got  well  and  subsequently 
came  to  Utah."  In  January,  1853, 
Elder  Halliday  was  released  from  his 
missionary  labors  in  England  with 
permission  to  emigrate  to  Utah.  He 
set  sail  from  Liverpool,  Feb.  5,  1853, 
in  the  ship  "Jersey,"  having  been  ap- 
pointed to  take  charge  of  a  company 
of  Saints  (314  souls).  Elder  Halli- 
day and  Captain  Day,  the  commander 
of  the  vessel,  became  very  intimate 
and  friendly  during  the  voyage,  so 
much  so  that  the  captain  promised 
to  give  Elder  Halliday  or  any  of  his 
friends  who  might  wish  to  cross  the 
ocean  in  the  future  a  free  passage. 
Elder  Halliday  crossed  the  plains  in 
wagons  together  with  his  wife,  Sarah, 
and  her  sister,  Prudence,  and  two 
children  (Joseph  W.  and  Vernee  L). 
The  company  arrived  in  Salt  Lake 
City,  Sept.  24,  1853.  Two  months 
later  (Nov.  17,  1853)  Elder  Halli- 
day's  wife,    Sarah,     and     her    sister, 


BIOGRAPHICAL   ENCYCLOPEDIA. 


391 


Prudence,  were  sealed  to  him  by 
President  Brigham  Young  in  Salt 
Lake  City.  In  February,  1854,  he 
was  ordained  a  Seventy  by  Elder 
Jedediah  M.  Grant  and  chosen  as  one 
of  the  presidents  of  the  37th  quorum 
of  Seventy.  In  April,  1854,  he  was 
called  by  President  Young  on  a  busi- 
ness and  preaching  mission  to  the 
States,  from  w-hich  he  returned  in 
September,  1854.  In  November, 
1855,  he  was  commissioned  by  Gov- 
ernor Brigham  Young  as  first  lieu- 
tenant of  Company  B  in  the  Regi- 
ment of  Invincible  (3rd  Regiment 
of  Infantry)  and  afterwards  he  was 
appointed  captain  of  the  same  com- 
pany. Theirs  was  the  first  battalion 
of  infantry  called  out  to  Echo  Can- 
yon in  1857.  On  this  expedition 
Elder  Halliday  was  appointed  com- 
missary of  the  whole  camp,  and  he 
was  highly  complimented  by  Presi- 
dent Young  upon  his  return  to  Salt 
Lake  City  for  his  efficiency  and  the 
way  he  kept  his  books  and  accounts. 
Early  in  the  spring  of  1858,  before 
the  Johnston  army  entered  the  City, 
Elder  Halliday  buried  a  lot  of  his 
effects  deep  in  the  earth,  and  then 
piled  dry  wood  in  each  room  of  his 
house,  preparatory  to  burning  up 
everything  on  short  notice  if  the  ap- 
proaching army  should  prove  hostile. 
He  sent  his  family  to  Spanish  Fork, 
Utah  county,  while  he  stayed  back 
with  others  to  guard  the  city.  Dur- 
ing this  temporary  exile  his  family 
was  obliged  to  live  in  a  cellar  where 
his  wife.  Prudence,  gave  birth  to  a 
son  (Leo).  During  her  sickness  she 
had  to  subsist  on  bread  and  water, 
but  soon  recovered  her  strength,  and 
all  returned  to  Salt  Lake  City.  In 
July,  1859,  Elder  Halliday  obtained 
his  naturalization  papers  as  a  citi- 
zen of  the  United  States,  and  in  1860 
he  was  called  on  a  mission  to  Eng- 
land. During  this  mission  he  first 
presided  over  the  South  conference, 
with  headquarters  in  Bristol,  and 
afterwards  labored  as  pastor  of  the 
South,  Wiltshire  and  Lands  End  con- 


ferences. He  also  visited  Ireland, 
w^here  he  held  meetings  in  Dublin, 
Belfast  and  other  places.  After  a 
four  years'  successful  mission  he  re- 
turned to  America  in  18  64,  crossing 
the  Atlantic  in  the  ship  "Hudson." 
As  Bro.  John  M.  Kay,  the  leader  of 
the  company,  was  sick,  the  responsi- 
bility of  taking  care  of  the  emigrat- 
ing Saints  through  the  States  fell  to 
the  lot  of  Bro.  Halliday  who  crossed 
the  plains  in  Capt.  Warren  Snow's 
company  which  arrived  in  Salt  Lake 
City,  Oct.  4,  18  64.  When  Bro.  Halli- 
day left  Salt  Lake  City  to  go  on  his 
mission  he  was  advised  to  take  with 
him  a  suit  of  Temple  clothes.  He 
could  not  understand  why  this  coun- 
sel was  given  him  as  he  should  not 
need  the  clothes  in  England,  but  on 
the  return  trip  he  learned  the  rea- 
son why,  for  on  the  2  6th  of  Septem- 
ber, 18  64,  John  M.  Kay  died  and 
Elder  Halliday's  Temple  clothes  were 
placed  on  Elder  Kay,  whose  remains 
were  interred  on  the  Little  Laramie 
river.  On  his  return  home  Elder 
Halliday  found  that  his  children  had 
grown  so  much  that  he  did  not  know 
any  of  them.  In  18  6  7  he  moved  his 
family  to  Pleasant  Grove,  Utah 
county,  and  soon  afterwards  he  was 
appointed  to  labor  as  a  home  mis- 
sionary in  that  part  of  the  country. 
In  1868  he  was  elected  alderman  of 
Pleasant  Grove  and,  in  March,  1870, 
he  was  appointed  chaplain  of  a  divi- 
sion of  the  Nauvoo  Legion  and  one 
of  General  Pace's  staff.  In  1871 
(Aug.  19th)  he  was  chosen  as  a  High 
Councilor  in  the  Utah  Stake  of  Zion 
and  in  August,  1872,  he  was  elected 
as  one  of  the  representatives  from 
Utah  county  to  the  Utah  Legislature. 
In  1873  he  was  chosen  as  a  coun- 
selor to  Bishop  John  Brown  of  Pleas- 
ant Grove  and  in  1875  (Aug.  1st) 
he  was  ordained  a  Bishop  by  Presi- 
dent Brigham  Young  and  appointed 
to  preside  at  Santaquin,  Utah  county. 
Not  being  able  to  sell  his  property 
in  Pleasant  Grove  he  left  his  wife. 
Prudence,    and    her    family     in     that 


392 


LATTER-DAY   SAINT 


town  and  took  Sarah  and  her  family 
to  Santaquin.  In  1887  he  and  his 
wife,  Sarah,  did  considerable  Temple 
work  in  the  Logan  Temple.  In  1888 
(May  18th)  he  was  arrested  at  Ogden 
on  a  charge  of  unlawful  cohabitation. 
He  was  subsequently  tried,  convicted 
and  sentenced  to  seventy-five  days' 
imprisonment  in  the  Utah  peniten- 
tiary. Thus  he  spent  the  time  from 
Oct.  19,  1888,  to  Jan.  9,  1889,  in 
prison.  In  January,  1889,  he  was 
called  away  from  Santaquin  to  pre- 
side as  Bishop  of  American  Fork. 
Complying  with  this  new  call,  he  ar- 
rived in  American  Fork,  Feb.  2,  1899, 
and  took  up  his  labors  there.  In 
May,  1891,  he  was  appointed  to  labor 
as  a  home  missionary  in  the  Utah 
Stake,  and  was  ordained  a  Patriarch 
Jan.  14,  1894,  by  Joseph  F.  Smith. 
Subsequently  he  visited  the  settle- 
ments in  the  Utah  Stake  and  gave 
208  Patriarchal  blessings.  Having 
sold  his  home  in  American  Fork,  he 
built  a  house  in  Santaquin  and  went 
there  to  live  in  July,  1895.  His  wife, 
Prudence,  died  Sept.  8,  1898,  at 
Pleasant  Grove,  and  Patriarch  Geo. 
Halliday  died  May  17,  1900,  at  his 
home  in  Santaquin,  Utah,  after  a 
most  eventful  career,  leaving  a  large 
family.  Following  are  the  names  of 
his  children  by  his  wife,  Sarah  Jane: 
John  Charles,  Joseph  Watts,  Vernee 
Lorenzo,  George  Franklin,  Willard 
H.  and  Serena  Elizabeth.  His  wife 
Prudence  bore  him  the  following 
children:  Florence  Edith,  Wealthy 
Ann,  Leo  Francis,  Clarissa  F.,  John 
R.,  Catherine  A.  and  Ernest  R. 

HALLIDAY,     Vemee     Lorenzo,     a 

Patriarch  in  the  Ensign  Stake,  was 
born  Feb.  10,  1852,  in  Bristol,  Eng- 
land, the  son  of  George  Halliday  and 
Sarah  Jane  Kendall.  His  father  was 
a  prominent  Elder  in  the  British  mis- 
sion, and  was  universally  known  for 
his  eloquence  and  reasoning  powers. 
Vernee  emigrated  with  his  father's 
family  to  Utah  in  1853  and  resided 
in   Salt   Lake   City   until   the   winter 


of  1864,  when  the  family  moved  to 
Pleasant  Grove,  Utah.  Here  Vernee 
received  a  common  school  education 
and  assisted  his  father  on  the  farm. 
In  1868  he  moved  to  Provo,  Utah 
county.  In  1871  (Nov.  13th)  he 
married  Rosetta  E.  Bunnel.  This  mar- 
riage has  been  blessed  with  seven  chil- 
namely,  Vernee  Wallace,  Eve,  Wil- 
lard Owen,  Sarah  Ellen,  Stephen 
Dean,  Dora  May  and  Carroll.  Bro. 
Halliday  was  ordained  an  Elder  by 
his  father  (who  had  been  ordained 
a  High  Priest  by  President  Brigham 
Young),     and     when    only     nineteen 


years  of  age  he  was  called  to  labor 
as  a  home  missionary  in  the  Utah 
Stake.  In  1874-1876  Vernee  filled 
a  mission  to  Great  Britain,  and  after 
his  return  he  was  set  apart  as  presi- 
dent of  the  First  Quorum  of  Elders 
in  the  Utah  Stake  of  Zion,  which  of- 
fice he  held  for  over  fifteen  years, 
and  in  1893  he  was  ordained  a  High 
Priest  by  Francis  M.  Lyman  and  set 
apart  as  a  member  of  the  High  Coun- 
cil of  the  Utah  Stake.  He  was  elected 
in  1876  a  member  and  chairman  of 
the  board  of  school  trustees  of  the 
Provo  school  district,  and  was  re- 
elected to  said  office  for  ten  con- 
secutive years.  In  1880  he  served 
as   enrolling   clerk   and    later    as    a 


BIOGRAPHICAL   ENCYCLOPEDIA. 


393 


minute  clerk  in  the  Utah  Legisla- 
ture. The  same  year  he  was  ap- 
pointed city  recorder  of  Provo  City, 
which  office  he  held  by  re-election 
for  years  and  was  subsequently 
elected  a  member  of  the  city  council 
of  Provo.  In  December,  1881,  he  re- 
ceived the  appointment  of  deputy 
county  clerk  in  and  for  Utah  county. 
Afterwards  he  was  regularly  elected 
to  that  office  for  twelve  years.  He 
gained  the  reputation  for  keeping 
the  best  records  in  any  of  the  coun- 
ties of  Utah.  In  December,  1884,  he 
was  appointed  chairman  of  a  com- 
mittee to  establish  free  reading 
rooms  in  Provo  City.  This  commit- 
tee in  six  weeks  opened  a  suitable 
room  for  said  purpose,  free  to  the 
public  on  voluntary  contributions. 
In  his  youth  Bro.  Halliday  learned 
the  trade  of  plastering  and  building, 
which  avocation  he  followed  for 
twenty  years.  In  January,  1895,  he 
moved  to  Salt  Lake  City,  where  he 
and  his  wife  have  been  the  managers 
of  the  Utah-Idaho  Viavi  Co.  for  over 
twenty-five  years.  In  1906  he  was 
chosen  as  second  counselor  in  the 
presidency  of  the  High  Priests' 
quorum  in  the  Ensign  Stake  and 
since  Aug.  11,  1912,  he  has  held  the 
position  of  first  counselor  in  said 
presidency.  Elder  Halliday  is  proud 
of  the  fact  that  he  has  a  great-grand- 
daughter in  her  fifth  year  and  a 
great-grandson,  ten  months  old,  while 
he  himself  is  only  in  his  6Sth  year. 
He  was  ordained  a  Patriarch  March 
21,  1920,  by  Heber  J.  Grant. 

HALLIDAY,  Rosetta  Eve,  wife  of 
Vernee  L.  Halliday,  was  born  March 
18,  1854,  in  Provo,  Utah  county, 
Utah,  the  daughter  of  David  Bunnell 
and  Sally  H.  Conrad.  In  1871  (Nov. 
13th)  she  married  Vernee  L.  Halli- 
day, and  is  the  honored  mother  of 
seven  children.  Sister  Halliday  took 
an  active  part  in  the  Primary  As- 
sociation and  Sunday  schools  in 
Provo.  Being  naturally  artistic  she 
excelled    in    needle    and    fancy    work 


to  the  extent  of  having  been  awarded 
the  gold  medal  and  seven  cash  prizes 
by  the  D.  A.  and  M.  Society,  at  the 
Territorial  Fair,  in  competition.  She 
was  the  first  teacher  in  needle  work 
and  art  in  the  public  schools  of 
Provo,  for  which  she  was  awarded  a 
diploma  by  President  George  H. 
Brimhall.  Later  she  moved  to  Salt 
Lake  City  with  her  husband  and 
family;  here  she  studied  obstetrics, 
obtained  her  certificate  from  the 
Board  of  Medical  Examiners  and  was 
very  successful  for  years  in  her  prac- 
tice. Of  late  her  life  has  been  de- 
voted to  genealogical  researches  and 
Temple  work.      She  has  spent  much 


time  and  cash  in  this  noble  work. 
Her  sacrificing  disposition  for  others 
is  most  marked;  she  always  has 
words  of  good  council  for  everybody 
and  is  full  of  kindness  and  sympathy, 
especially  among  the  poor  and  needy, 
where,  and  by  whom  her  charities 
are  best  known. 

HAMMOND,  John  Howard,  second 
counselor  in  the  presidency  of  the 
Young  Stake  of  Zion,  and  a  resident 
of  Mancos,  Colorado,  was  born  Nov. 
15,  1866,  in  Huntsville,  Weber 
county,  Utah,  the  son  of  Francis  A. 
Hammond    and    Alice    Howard.      He 


394 


LATTER-DAY   SAINT 


was  baptized  July  1,  1875,  by  Francis 
A.  Hammond,  ordained  a  Deacon 
April  1,  1888,  ordained  a  Teacher 
Aug.  12,  1883,  and  set  apart  to  pre- 
side over  a  Teachers'  quorum  and 
ordained  a  Priest  Oct.  26,  1884.  In 
1886  he  moved  to  the  San  Juan 
Stake  and  in  1890  (Nov.  2  7th)  he 
married  Lovina  Matilda  Elchor 
Smith,  who  bore  him  ten  children 
(five  boys  and  five  girls),  namely, 
Lydia  Alice,  Effie,  Piatt  Howard, 
Blanche,  Frank  Taylor,  Earl,  John 
Lloyd,  George  Reed,  Nina  and  Rose. 
All  these  are  still  living,  except  Nina, 
who  died  young.  Bro.  Hammond  was 
ordained  an  Elder  in  March,  1893, 
and  received  his  blessings  in  the 
Manti  Temple,  April,  18  93,  on  which 
occasion  also  his  two  oldest  children 
were  adopted  to  him  and  his  wife. 
In  1896-1898  he  filled  a  mission  to 
Great  Britain,  having  been  ordained 
a  Seventy  by  Seymour  B.  Young, 
April  3,  1896.  He  was  signally 
blessed  in  his  missionary  labors  and 
among  his  converts  were  five  of  his 
cousins.  He  also  baptized  seven 
other  converts.  After  his  return 
home  he  served  as  an  officer  in  the 
San  Juan  Stake  Y.  M.  M.  I.  A.,  and 
in  1898-1899  he  filled  a  mission  in 
the  San  Luis  Stake,  Colorado,  in  the 
interest  of  Y.  M.  M.  I.  A.  work.  While 
filling  this  mission  a  beautiful  bless- 
ing, uttered  by  Apostle  John  W.  Tay- 
lor in  relation  to  financial  matters 
was  signally  realized.  In  the  sum- 
mer of  1897,  while  camping  in  the 
mountains,  his  home  in  Mancos  was 
destroyed  by  fire.  Soon  afterwards 
his  left  leg  was  accidentally  broken 
a  second  time,  a  similar  accident 
having  happened  in  Huntsville  in 
1886.  Before  his  broken  limb  was 
strong  enough  for  him  to  walk  with- 
out the  aid  of  crutches  he  was  thrown 
from  a  horse,  on  which  occasion  his 
leg  was  broken  a  third  time.  This 
necessitated  a  surgical  operation 
which  left  him  lame  for  life.  On  an- 
other occasion,  prior  to  the  ones  re- 
lated,  he  was  thrown  from  a  horse 


and  both  his  arms  were  broken.  In 
1900  his  home  was  again  destroyed 
by  fire  and  three  of  his  children  nar- 
rowly escaped  being  burned  to  death. 
In  1904  (Nov.  27th)  Bro.  Hammond 
was  ordained  a  High  Priest  by  Wayne 
H.  Redd  and  set  apart  as  first  coun- 
selor to  Bishop  George  Halls  of  the 
Mancos  Ward.  He  labored  in  this 
capacity  until  May,  1911,  when 
Bishop  Halls  was  honorably  released 
as  Bishop,  and  soon  afterwards  Bro. 
Hammond  was  chosen  as  an  alternate 
member  of  the  San  Juan  Stake  High 
Council.  At  a  quarterly  Stake  con- 
ference held  at  Mancos,  May  23, 
1912,  the  San  Juan  Stake  was  divided 
and  the  eastern  part  organized  as 
the  Young  Stake.  On  this  occasion 
Bro.  Hammond  was  chosen  as  second 
counselor  to  David  Halls  in  the  Stake 
presidency  of  the  new  Stake.  He 
has  also  been  active  in  secular  af- 
fairs, having  filled  offices  as  justice 
of  the  peace,  constable,  etc.  While 
Elder  Hammond  was  absent  from 
home  in  May,  1919,  his  residence  in 
Mancos  was  again  destroyed  by  fire. 

HANSEN,  Christian  Valdemar,   an 

alternate  member  of  the  High  Coun- 
cil in  the  Fremont  Stake,  Idaho,  and 
a  resident  of  Rexburg,  Fremont 
county,  Idaho,  was  born  May  2  3, 
1870,  at  Swenstrup,  Sjaelland,  Den- 
mark, the  son  of  Hans  J.  Hansen 
and  Marie  Nielsen.  He  was  baptized 
Sept.  11,  1879,  by  Christian  A.  F. 
Orlob  and  confirmed  by  Andrew  Jen- 
son;  emigrated  to  America  with  his 
parents  in  1883,  crossing  the  Atlantic 
in  the  steamship  "Nevada,"  and 
located  in  Logan,  Utah.  Bro.  Han- 
sen's opportunities  for  education  in 
youth  were  limited,  but  he  learned 
early  in  life  to  earn  his  own  living, 
working  mostly  in  canyons  with 
teams,  hauling  lumber  and  wood. 
Later  he  took  up  painting  as  an  oc- 
cupation. He  was  ordained  a  Teacher 
by  Thos.  Morgan  in  1888  and  was 
appointed  to  preside  over  a  Teachers' 
quorum  in  the  Logan  4th  Ward.     In 


BIOGRAPHICAL   ENCYCLOPEDIA. 


395 


1893  he  was  chosen  as  secretary  of 
the  Logan  4th  Ward  Y.  M.  M.  I.  A. 
and  afterwards  acted  as  second  coun- 
selor   in    said    association.      He    was 


ordained  an  Elder  Dec.  18,  1893,  by 
James  C.  Johnson,  married  Olivia 
Nelson,  Dec.  20,  1893,  in  the  Logan 
Temple,  labored  as  a  home  mission- 
ary in  the  Cache  Stake  in  1894,  was 
appointed  a  Ward  teacher  in  1895, 
became  a  teacher  of  the  theological 
class  in  1898  and  was  also  appointed 
president  of  the  4th  Ward  Y.  M.  M. 
I.  A.;  afterwards  he  acted  as  a  coun- 
selor in  the  Y.  M.  M.  I.  A.  and  was 
treasurer  of  the  Ward  Sunday  school. 
He  became  a  member  of  the  Cache 
Stake  Y.  M.  M  .1.  A.  board  in  1906 
and  was  chosen  as  second  counselor 
in  the  presidency  of  the  2nd  Quorum 
of  Elders;  afterwards  he  became  first 
counselor.  In  the  spring  of  1908  he 
removed  with  his  family  from  Logan 
to  Independence,  Idaho,  where  he 
had  purchased  a  farm.  Here  he  acted 
as  first  assistant  superintendent  in 
the  Independence  Sunday  school  and 
in  1908  he  became  president  of  the 
Ward  Y.  M.  M.  I.  A.;  soon  afterwards 
he  was  sustained  as  superintendent 
of  the  Ward  Sunday  school.  In  1911 
he  was  chosen  as  Ward  clerk  at  Inde- 
pendence and  in  Id  11  was  appointed 


first  counselor  in  the  presidency  of 
the  Scandinavian  meetings  in  the 
Fremont  Stake.  He  was  ordained  a 
Seventy  Nov.  22,  1911,  by  Joseph 
W.  McMurrin.  In  1912  he  removed 
with  his  family  to  Idaho  Falls  to  fol- 
low the  trade  of  a  painter.  In  1913 
he  was  sustained  as  a  member  of  the 
Bingham  Stake  Sunday  School  Board 
and  he  held  that  position  till  he 
moved  to  Rexburg,  Idaho.  At  "a 
special  Seventies  meeting  held  Nov. 
7,  1913,  he  was  chosen  as  a  presi- 
dent in  the  84th  Quorum  of  Seventy 
and  soon  afterwards  called  to  labor 
as  a  home  missionary  in  the  Fremont 
Stake.  He  was  set  apart  as  superin- 
tendent of  the  Fremont  Stake  Sun- 
day schools  May  10,  1914,  and  or- 
dained a  High  Priest  March  18,  1917, 
by  James  E.  Talmage  and  set  apart 
as  an  alternate  member  of  the  High 
Council  in  the  Fremont  Stake  of 
Zion. 

HANSEN,  Lester  Laron,  the  first 
Bishop  of  the  Newdale  Ward  (Fre- 
mont Stake),  Madison  county,  Idaho, 


was  born  Aug.  19,  1883,  at  Collins- 
ton,  Box  Elder  county,  Utah,  the  son 
of  Christian  Hansen  and  Hansine  C. 
Hansen.      He   was   baptized   Nov.    1, 


396 


LATTER-DAY   SAINT 


1891,  by  James  C.  Hansen,  labored 
as  a  Sunday  school  teacher  for  many 
years,  moved  to  Newdale,  Idaho,  in 
April,  1913,  having  resided  in  Brig' 
ham  City,  Utah,  about  three  years, 
and  was  appointed  presiding  Elder 
of  the  Bowerman  Branch  July  18, 
1914.  The  Bowerman  Branch  later 
became  the  Newdale  Ward.  Bro. 
Hansen  was  ordained  a  Deacon  in 
Brigham  City  and  ordained  an  Elder 
by  Lucius  A.  Snow,  Nov.  3,  1904. 
Soon  afterwards  (Dec.  14,  1904)  he 
married  La  Titia  Hunsaker  (daugh- 
ter of  Allen  C.  Hunsaker  and  Evaline 
Gunn),  who  was  born  Jan.  19,  1882, 
at  Brigham  City.  She  has  borne  her 
husband  eight  children,  namely, 
Lavon,  Varda,  Audrey,  Ruth,  Alice, 
A.  C,  Loyal  and  Sybil.  Bro.  Han- 
sen filled  a  mission  to  Sweden  in 
1908-1910,  laboring  in  the  Skane 
conference.  Bro.  Hansen  was  or- 
dained a  High  Priest  and  Bishop  Dec. 
17,  1916,  by  Geo.  Albert  Smith  and 
set  apart  to  preside  over  the  Newdale 
Ward,  which  position  he  still  occu- 
pies. 

HANSON,  Alma,  the  first  Bishop 
of  the  Bates  Ward  (Teton  Stake), 
Teton  county,  Idaho,  was  born  Oct. 
3,  1874,  in  Hyrum,  Cache  county, 
Utah,  the  son  of  Hans  P.  Hanson  and 
Bertha  Carlson.  He  was  baptized 
when  eight  years  of  age  by  Andrew 
Allen.  A  few  years  later  he  was  or- 
dained a  Teacher  and  in  1902  he  was 
ordained  an  Elder  by  his  father.  In 
1902-1905  he  filled  a  mission  to  Ger- 
many, laboring  principally  in  Leipsic 
and  Berlin.  He  acted  as  president 
of  the  Hyrum  First  Ward  Y.  M.  M.  I. 
A.,  settled  in  the  Teton  Valley  in 
1905  and  the  following  year  (1906) 
located  in  that  part  of  said  valley 
which  is  now  included  in  the  Bates 
Ward.  He  taught  school  in  the  Teton 
Valley  eight  years,  acted  as  justice 
of  the  peace  two  years,  and  has  been 
county  treasurer  and  tax  collector  in 
Teton  Valley  since  1916.  He  is  also 
a  member  of  the  county  council  of 


defence.  In  1905  (Nov.  8th)  he  mar- 
ried Marie  Aslagsen  (daughter  of 
Mickael  Aslagsen  and  Anna  Nord), 
who  was  born  March  12,  1879,  in 
Stavanger,  Norway.  This  marriage 
has  been  blessed  with  six  children, 
namely.  Alma,  Lincoln,  Irene  V.,  Carl 
Edgar,  Gladys  and  June.  Bishop 
Hanson's  chief  avocations  in  life  have 
been  those  of  farmer  and  school 
teacher.  At  the  Stake  conference 
held  May  18,  1919  (having  moved  to 
Driggs),  he  was  released  as  Bishop 
of  the  Bates  Ward  and  sustained  as 
a  member  of  the  High  Council.  He 
is  now  serving  his  second  term  as 
county  treasurer  and  tax  collector, 
and  in  July,  1919,  he  was  chosen  to 
fill  a  vacancy  in  the  city  council  of 
Driggs. 

HARRIS,  Thomas  Dodd,  Bishop  of 
the  Kline  Ward  (Young  Stake),  La 
Plata  county,  Colorado,  was  born 
Nov.  30,  1867,  in  Harrisburg,  Wash- 
ington county,  Utah,  the  son  of  John 
Smith  Harris  and  Nancy  Aldridge. 
He  was  baptized  by  John  Carpenter 
at  Glendale,  Kane  county,  Utah, 
when  about  ten  years  old,  having 
moved  with  his  parents  to  Glendale 
when  only  two  years  of  age.  At  the 
age  of  thirteen  he  moved  with  his 
parents  to  St.  Johns,  Apache  county, 
Arizona,  where  he  took  an  active 
part  in  Church  affairs  from  his 
earliest  youth  and  was  ordained  a 
Deacon  and  afterwards  an  Elder  by 
David  K.  Udall.  In  1902  he  moved 
to  Burnham  (or  Kirtland)  in  New 
Mexico,  and  later  the  same  year 
located  as  one  of  the  first  settlers  at 
Kline,  La  Plata  county,  Colorado, 
where  he  took  a  most  active  part  in 
founding  that  settlement  and  labored 
intelligently  and  efficiently  as  a 
Church  worker.  Thus  he  acted  as 
assistant  superintendent  in  the  Ward 
Sundaj'  school  and  president  of  the 
Ward  Y.  M.  M.  I.  A.  In  August, 
1907,  he  was  ordained  a  High  Priest 
by  David  O.  McKay  and  set  apart  as 
second  counselor  to  Bishop  Henry  L. 


BIOGRAPHICAL   ENCYCLOPEDIA. 


397 


Butler  of  the  Kline  Ward,  which 
position  he  held  until  May  2  5,  1913, 
when  he  was  ordained  a  Bishop  by 
Apostle  George  F.  Richards  and  set 
apart  to  succeed  Bishop  Henry  L. 
Butler.  In  1897  (May  12th)  Bishop 
Harris  married  Bernice  Eaton 
(daughter  of  John  S.  Eaton  and 
Emma  Ann  Robbins),  who  was  born 
Feb.  18,  1873,  in  Scipio,  Millard 
county,  Utah.  This  union  has  been 
blessed  with  eight  children,  namely, 
John  Dodd,  Thomas  Eaton,  Bernice, 
David  Aldridge,  Emily  Ann,  Lloyd 
Smith,  Nancy  and  Nedra.  Bishop 
Harris  is  a  farmer  and  stock  raiser 
by  avocation  and  is  held  in  great  es- 
teem by  both  Saints  and  non-Mor- 
mons. 

HARBISON,  Bartholomew,  Bishop 
of  the  Ivins  Ward  (Idaho  Stake), 
Bannock  county,  Idaho,  was  born 
May  13,  1885,  at  Providence,  Cache 
county,  Utah,  the  son  of  Thomas 
John  Harrison  and  Hannah  Meriah 
Law.  He  was  baptized  May  14, 
1892,  by  Jake  Solinger  at  Provi- 
dence; ordained  a  Deacon  when  quite 
young;  ordained  an  Elder  Feb.  2  6, 
1906,  by  Walter  Hoge  at  Paris, 
Idaho;  ordained  a  Seventy  June  12, 
1910,  by  Joseph  W.  McMurrin,  and 
ordained  a  High  Priest  in  1915  by 
Orson  F.  Whitney  and  set  apart  as 
first  counselor  to  Bishop  D.  Albert 
Banks  of  the  Ivins  Ward.  When  the 
Idaho  Stake  was  organized  in  1916 
he  was  chosen  as  a  member  of  the 
High  Council  of  that  Stake,  and  on 
June  2,  1918,  he  was  ordained  a 
Bishop  by  Rudger  Clawson  and  set 
apart  to  preside  over  the  Ivins  Ward, 
a  position  which  he  still  occupies. 
Bro.  Harrison  has  always  been  an 
energetic  worker  in  the  Church,  be- 
ing engaged  in  Sunday  school  work 
at  Sharon  and  other  places.  He  has 
also  acted  as  president  of  a  Deacons' 
quorum  and  as  an  officer  in  the  Y. 
M.  M.  I.  A.  With  his  parents  he 
moved  to  Bear  Lake  Valley  in  1894, 
locating  in  the  Liberty  Ward      From 


here  he  moved  to  Georgetown,  where 
he  lived  for  six  years,  and  thence 
went  to  Sterritt  (now  Ivins)  in  1915. 
In  1907  (December  18th)  he  married 
Marinda  Martine  Larsen,  daughter 
of  Christian  and  Anna  Larsen,  the 
ceremony  being  performed  in  the 
Logan  Temple.  This  marriage  has 
been  blessed  with  four  children, 
namely,  Eveard,  Stanford,  Blanche 
and  Edris. 

HABT,  Alfred  Augustus,  third 
Bishop  of  Bloomington  (Bear  Lake 
Stake),  Bear  Lake  county,  Idaho, 
was  born  Oct.  9,  1871,  at  Blooming- 
ton,  Bear  Lake  county,  Idaho,  the 
son  of  James  H.  Hart  and  Sabina 
Scheib.  He  was  baptized  when  eight 
years  old  by  Peter  Greenhalgh;  or- 
dained successively  to  the  offices  of 


Deacon,  Elder,  Seventy  and  High 
Priest,  and  ordained  a  Bishop  in 
March,  1915,  by  Apostle  Geo.  F. 
Richards.  When  quite  young  he 
acted  as  president  of  a  Deacons' 
quorum,  secretary  of  an  Elders' 
quorum,  president  of  a  Ward  Y.  M. 
M.  I.  A.,  superintendent  of  a  Religion 
Class  and  a  teacher  in  the  Ward  Sun- 
day school.  In  1901-1903  he  filled 
a  mission  to  the  Northern  States, 
laboring  principally  in  W'isconsin, 
part  of  the  time  as  president  of  the 


398 


LATTER-DAY   SAINT 


Wisconsin  conference.  In  1905  (Oct. 
11th)  he  married  Sarah  C.  Patterson 
(daughter  of  Edward  M.  Patterson 
and  Sarah  Thompson),  who  was  born 
Oct.  23,  1885,  at  Bloomington,  Idaho. 
Six  children  (Sarah  Ruth,  Flora  S., 
Alfred  B.,  Philip  J.,  Eugene  A.,  and 
Edward  LeRoy  have  blessed  this  mar- 
riage. Bishop  Hart  received  a  good 
education  and  graduated  from  the 
Utah  Agricultural  College  with  the 
degree  of  B.  S.  He  taught  school  a 
number  of  years  and  acted  as  princi- 
pal of  the  Schools  at  Bloomington 
four  years  and  served  as  county 
superintendent  three  terms  (six 
years).  The  Bishop  is  also  engaged 
in  farming. 

HART,  John  William,  president  of 
the  Rigby  Stake,  Idaho,  was  born 
Nov.  14,  1866,  in  Ogden,  Weber 
county,  Utah,  the  son  of  John  Isaac 
Hart  and  Martha  Barton.  He  was 
baptized  Nov.  14,  1874,  by  his  father; 
ordained  successively  to  the  offices 
of  Teacher,  Elder,  Seventy  and  High 
Priest,  the  latter  ordination  under 
the  hands  of  Mathias  F.  Cowley;  on 
the  same  occasion  he  was  set  apart 
to  preside  over  the  Menan  Ward, 
which  position  he  held  until  1909, 
when  he  was  made  a  member  of  the 
High  Council  of  the  Rigby  Stake.  At 
a  conference  held  March  10,  1912, 
he  was  set  apart  as  president  of  the 
Rigby  Stake  by  Apostle  Heber  J. 
Grant.  When  quite  a  youth  Bro. 
Hart  acted  as  secretary  of  a  Teachers' 
quorum,  president  of  an  Elders' 
quorum,  secretary  and  later  presi- 
dent of  the  Y.  M.  M.  I.  A.  of  the 
West  Weber  Ward,  etc.  After  mov- 
ing to  Menan,  Idaho,  in  1895,  he  was 
chosen  as  superintendent  of  the 
Ward  Sunday  school  and  acted  in 
that  position  until  he  was  ordained  a 
Bishop.  In  1886-1887  he  filled  a 
mission  to  the  Southern  States,  labor- 
ing principally  in  Alabama  and  Ten- 
nesee.  In  a  secular  way  he  has  filled 
many  positions  of  honor  and  res- 
ponsibility.    Thus  he  acted  as  justice 


of  the  peace  in  the  West  Weber  pre- 
cinct, Utah,  four  years,  served  as  a 
representative  in  the  sixth  session  of 
the  Idaho  Legislature  and  as  a  mem- 
ber of  the  Eighth  session  of  the 
Idaho  senate  and  also  in  the  9th, 
10th,  12th  and  13th  sessions.  In  the 
last  two  sessions  he  acted  as  presi- 
dent of  the  senate.  In  1910  he  was 
acting  governor  of  Idaho  for  thirty 
days.  Bro.  Hart  also  served  as  secre- 
tary of  the  Board  of  Idaho  Academy 
for  ten  years;  was  a  member  of  the 
Republican  National  Committee,  be- 
ing elected  in  Chicago  in  1912  and 
re-elected  in  1916.  He  is  president 
of  the  Rigby  State  Bank,  director  of 
the  Farmers'  and  Merchants'  Bank 
of  Idaho  Falls,  president  of  the  Jef- 
ferson State  Bank  of  Menan,  vice- 
president  of  the  C.  A.  Smith  Mercan- 
tile Co.  at  Rigby  and  director  and 
general  superintendent  of  the  Wood 
Livestock  Company.  In  1885  (Dec. 
2nd)  President  Hart  married  Eliza- 
beth J.  Hogge  (daughter  of  Charles 
Hogge  and  Ann  Stanger),  who  was 
born  March  17,  1867,  at  Farmington, 
Davis  county,  Utah.  This  marriage 
has  been  blessed  with  thirteen  chil- 
dren, namely,  John  W.,  Elizabeth  E., 
Clarence,  Charles  O.,  Vera  A.,  George 
L.,  Martha,  Sarah  Z.,  Vida  L.,  David 
F.,  Cecil  E.,  Joseph  I.  and  Katherine. 

HART,  Samuel  Walter,  second 
Bishop  of  Raymond  Ward  (Mont- 
pelier  Stake),  Bear  Lake  county, 
Idaho,  was  born  Oct.  31,  1853,  in 
Devonshire,  England,  the  son  of 
James  Hart  and  Mary  Cape.  He  emi- 
grated to  Utah  with  his  father  and 
settled  first  in  Salt  Lake  City;  thence 
he  moved  to  Kaysville,  Davis  county, 
in  1869,  and  to  Woodruff,  Rich 
county,  in  1874.  He  located  per- 
manently in  Raymond,  Bear  Lake 
county,  Idaho,  in  1878.  Here  he 
acted  as  first  counselor  to  Bishop 
Niels  Peter  Larsen  from  Sept.  29, 
1895  to  October  3,  1900,  and  took 
charge  as  presiding  Elder  in  1900. 
He  was  ordained  a  Bishop  by  Rudger 


BIOGRAPHICAL   ENCYCLOPEDIA. 


399 


Clawson  and  set  apart  to  preside 
over  the  Raymond  Ward,  Feb.  28, 
1904.  In  1880  (Feb.  20th)  Bishop 
Hart  married  Martha  Raymond 
(daughter  of  Grandison  Raymond 
and  Celia  Hall),  who  was  born  June 
21,  1850,  at  Council  Bluffs,  Iowa. 
The  following  children  are  the  issue 
of  this  marriage:  Melvin  Ray,  born 
March  16,  1881;  Celia  Eva,  born 
July  2,  1883;  Mary  C,  born  Aug.  28, 
1887;  Selden  Raymond,  born  May 
17,  1890,  and  Henrietta,  born  May 
11,    1893. 

HARVEY,  Hugh  William,  Bishop 
of  the  Center  Ward  (Wasatch 
Stake),   Wasatch   county,    Utah,    was 


born  Feb.  15,  1868,  at  Heber  City, 
the  son  of  John  Harvey  and  Ann 
Cooper.  He  was  ordained  a  Deacon 
Dec.  17,  1882,  by  John  Harvey;  or- 
dained an  Elder  in  January,  18  91,  by 
Benjamin  Cluff;  ordained  a  Seventy 
May  2,  1898,  by  J.  Golden  Kimball, 
and  ordained  a  High  Priest  Feb.  10, 
1901,  by  F.  M.  Lyman  and  set  apart 
as  a  High  Councilor  in  the  Wasatch 
Stake.  In  his  younger  days  he  acted 
as  president  of  a  Deacons'  quorum, 
secretary  and  president  of  the  Ward 
Y.    M.    M     I.    A.,    superintendent    of 


Sunday  school,  and  was  an  active 
Ward  teacher.  In  1898-1900  he  filled 
a  mission  to  the  Northern  States, 
laboring  part  of  the  time  as  presi- 
dent of  the  Indiana  conference,  and 
president  of  a  branch  of  the  Church 
at  Indianapolis.  He  was  ordained  a 
Bishop  by  Joseph  F.  Smith  Feb.  1, 
1904,  and  set  apart  to  preside  over 
the  Center  Ward.  In  1894  (Feb. 
14th)  he  married  Arbelia  M.  Howe 
(daughter  of  Thos.  Howe  and  Mary 
Licklider),  who  was  born  July  2, 
1870,  at  Toms  Brook,  Virginia.  This 
marriage  has  been  blessed  with  six 
children,  whose  names  are:  Arbelia 
A.,  Hugh,  James  M.,  John  F.,  Eva 
M.  and  Rex  Winder.  Bro.  Harvey 
has  acted  as  cour-.ty  commissioner  of 
Wasatch  county  for  four  years,  state 
road  agent  for  two  years  and  filled 
other  positions  of  honor  and  res- 
ponsibility. His  main  avocations  are 
those  of  farmer  and  stock  raiser. 

HARVEY,  John,  first  counselor  in 
the  Bishopric  cf  the  Center  Ward 
(Wasatch  Stake),  Wasatch  county, 
Utah,  was  born  Dec.  12,  1816,  at 
Balleston,  Lanarkshire,  Scotland,  the 
son  of  Robert  Harvey  and  Ann  Mc- 
Donald. He  was  baptized  in  Novem- 
ber, 1840,  in  Adams  county,  Illinois. 
Having  emigrated  with  his  father's 
family  from  England  to  Quebec,  Can- 
ada, he  learned  the  trade  of  a  boats- 
man  and  was  employed  on  the  lakes, 
and  while  thus  engaged  he  found  his 
way  to  Illinois,  where  he  met  and 
married  Eliza  Everett  (a  Mormon 
girl)  March  31,  1841.  She  was  born 
July  12,  1814,  baptized  June  6, 
1835,  and  died  shortly  after  her  ar- 
rival in  Utah.  After  his  marriage 
Bro.  Harvey  cast  his  lot  with  the 
Saints  and  participated  with  them  in 
their  trials  and  persecutions  on  the 
frontiers  until  18  48,  when  he  emi- 
grated to  the  Valley,  crossing  the 
plains  in  President  Brigham  Young's 
company.  Bro  Harvey  took  an  active 
part  in  the  military  operations  dur- 
ing the  Johnston  Army  troubles  and 


400 


LATTER-DAY   SAINT 


moved  to  Provo,  Utah  county,  during 
the  time  of  the  move.  In  1861  he 
settled  in  Wasatch  county,  in  what  is 
now  Center  Ward.  He  took  an  active 
part  in  the  Black  Hawk  war  in  1866. 
In  1877  (July  15th)  he  was  ordained 
a  High  Priest  and  set  apart  as  first 
counselor  to  Bishop  Benjamin  Cluff 
(the  first  Bishop  of  the  Center 
Ward)  and  held  that  position  until 
1882.  In  1854  (July  23rd)  he  mar- 
ried Ann  Coope,  who  bore  him  six 
children.  His  first  wife  bore  him 
three  children.  Following  are  the 
names  of  his  children:  Alexander 
M.,  John  M.,  Margaret  Ann,  Janette 
A.,  Alice  Y.,  Rhoda  E.,  Francis  I., 
Richard  C.  and  Hugh  W.  Bro.  Har- 
vey went  back  to  meet  the  belated 
handcart  companies  in  1856,  acted  as 
a  choir  leader  in  the  Center  Ward 
from  1856  to  1886,  was  a  very  in- 
dustrious and  hard  working  man  and 
died  as  a  faithful  Latter-day  Saint 
at  Center  Ward,  July  4,  1887. 

HARVEY,  Ann  Coope,  wife  of 
John  Harvey,  was  born  April  13, 
1826,  at  Stockport,  Lancashire,  Eng- 
land, the  daughter  of  Richard  Coope 
and  Esther  Stafford.  She  was  bap- 
tized March  21,  1841,  by  John  Wood; 
emigrated  to  Utah  in  the  early 
fifties  and  was  married  to  John  Har- 
vey, July  23,  1854,  to  whom  she 
bore  six  children.  She  was  an  active 
worker  in  the  Ward  Primary  Associa- 
tion, and  acted  as  president  of  that 
association  from  1889  to  1900.  She 
also  served  as  a  counselor  and  secre- 
tary in  the  Ward  Relief  Society.  Sis- 
ter Harvey  died  April  8,  1910,  be- 
loved by  all  who  knew  her;  she  had 
been  a  most  diligent  and  faithful 
Church  worker  all  her  life  and  a  de- 
voted and  loving  wife  and  mother. 

HARVEY,  Richard  Coope,  second 
counselor  to  Wm.  Blake  of  the  Cen- 
ter Ward,  was  born  Oct.  5,  1865,  at 
Center  Creek,  Wasatch  county,  Utah, 
the  son  of  John  Harvey  and  Ann 
Coope.     He  was  baptized  when  about 


eight  years  of  age  and  subsequently 
ordained  to  the  Priesthood,  filled  a 
mission  to  the  Southern  States  in 
1890-1892,  laboring  principally  in 
Virginia,  where  he  acted  as  confer- 
ence president  one  and  a  half  years. 
At  home  he  acted  for  several  years 
as  superintendent  of  the  Ward  Sun- 


day school  and  president  of  the  Ward 
Y.  M.  M.  I.  A.  He  also  served  as 
constable  of  the  Center  precinct  one 
term.  In  1894  ((April  28th)  he 
was  ordained  a  High  Priest  and  set 
apart  as  second  counselor  to  Bishop 
Wm.  Blake,  which  position  he  held 
until  1900,  when  he  moved  to 
Alberta,  Canada,  locating  near  Ray- 
mond. 

HATCH,  George    Andrew,    Indian 

missionary  and  also  first  counselor  to 
Bishop  Edward  A.  Bagley  of  the 
Koosharem  Ward  (Sevier  Stake), 
Sevier  county,  Utah,  was  born  Dec. 
15,  1847,  on  Little  Pigeon  Creek, 
Pottawattamie  county.  Iowa,  the  son 
of  Isaac  Burres  Hatch  and  Mary 
Jane  Garlic.  He  came  to  Utah  with 
his  parents  in  18^9  and  located  in 
Payson,  Utah  county;  was  baptized 
in  May,  1859,  by  Charles  Hancock; 
ordained  a  Deacon  Nov.  2  9,  18  63,  by 
William  Whitehead;  ordained  an  El- 


BIOGRAPHICAL  ENCYCLOPEDIA. 


4U1 


der  in  February,  186  6;  removed  to 
Greenwich,  Piute  county,  in  1877; 
was  ordained  a  Seventy  Oct.  1,  1884, 
by  Hans  O.  Magleby  and  acted  as 
a  president  of  the  81st  quorum  of 
Seventy;  removed  to  Koosharem, 
Sevier  county,  Utah,  in  18  89;  was 
ordained  a  High  Priest  May  27,  1891, 
by  Apostle  Anthon  H.  Lund  and  set 
apart  as  first  counselor  to  Bishop  Ed- 
ward A.  Bagley,  which  position  he 
held  for  nearly  fourteen  years.  Pre- 
vious to  his  ordination  as  a  Seventy 
he  acted  for  many  years  as  a  Ward 
teacher  and  as  presiding  Elder  of  the 
Koosharem  Ward  for  six  months,  and 
was  also  superintendent  of  the  Ward 
Sunday  school.  Bro.  Hatch  served 
as  a  minute   man  during  the   Black 


Hawk  Indian  war  in  1865-1867.  On 
one  occasion  he,  together  with  others, 
followed  a  band  of  Indians  (who  had 
stolen  a  herd  of  cattle)  as  far  as 
Green  River.  In  the  battle  which 
ensued  the  brim  of  Bro.  Hatch's  hat 
was  pierced  by  a  bullet.  Returning 
from  this  expedition  the  boys  were 
three  days  without  food.  In  October, 
1899,  Bro.  Hatch  was  called  by  Apos- 
tle Francis  M.  Lyman  to  labor  as  an 
Indian  missionary  and  to  take  care 
of    the     Indians     in     Grass     Valley, 


Sevier  county,  Utah.  He  held  this 
presidency  till  his  death,  which  oc- 
curred March  25,  1910.  When  a 
number  of  Indians  in  1895  joined  the 
Koosharem  Sunday  school,  Bro. 
Hatch  was  appointed  to  serve  as  their 
teacher,  and  labored  in  that  capacity 
until  his  death. 

HATCH,  Lucy  Alice,  wife  of  Bishop 
Perry  O.   Hatch,   was  born  Nov.   17, 
1879,    in    Bountiful,    Davis    county, 
Utah,  the  daughter  of  Joseph  J.  Hol- 
brook  and  Alice  Cook.     She  was  bap- 
tized July   6,    1890,   and   received    a 
good    common    school    education     in 
her  native  town.      She  was  married 
to  Perry  O.  Hatch  April  20,  1898,  in 
the  Temple  at  Salt  Lake  City  and  re- 
sided in  the  town  of  her  birth  until 
1904,  when  she  moved  with  her  hus- 
band to  the  Big  Horn  country.  After 
residing  there  four  years,  the  family 
removed  to  Teton  Valley,  where  Sis- 
ter Hatch  became  identified  with  the 
Valview  Ward   in  the    Teton    Stake 
when  that  Ward  was  first  organized. 
Both   sacrament   meetings   and   Sun- 
day school  sessions  were  held  in  her 
home   until    a     meeting     house     was 
built.      She   labored   faithfully   as    a 
Sunday   school   teacher   and   as   first 
counselor  in  the  Ward  Relief  Society 
and    was   faithful     until     her     death 
which  occurred  Jan.  3,  1917.     Sister 
Hatch    was   the   mother   of   six   sons 
and   one   daughter.      Her   oldest   son 
is  now  (1919)  filling  a  mission  in  the 
Western  States. 

HATCH,  Thomas  Asa,  the  third 
Bishop  of  Hatch  (Idaho  Stake),  Ban- 
nock county,  Idaho,  was  born  April 
7,  18  60,  at  Bountiful,  Davis  county, 
Utah,  the  son  of  Ranson  Hatch  and 
Frances  E.  Atkinson.  He  was  bap- 
tized Oct.  15,  1873,  by  George  O. 
Noble.  Later  he  was  ordained  an 
Elder,  and  in  1898  ((August  6th) 
he  was  ordained  a  High  Priest  by 
Denmark  Jensen  and  set  apart  as  a 
High  Councilor  in  the  Bannock  Stake. 
Bro.  Hatch  had  settled  in  Hatch  in 


Vol.  Ill,  No.  26. 


January  10,  1920 


402 


LATTER-DAY   SAINT 


1884  and  in  1902  (July  23rd)  he 
was  chosen  as  first  counselor  to 
Bishop  Niels  J.  Hogan.  In  February, 
1917,  he  was  ordained  a  Bishop  by 
Hyrum  M.  Smith  and  set  apart  to 
preside  over  the  Hatch  Ward,  a  posi- 
tion which  he  still  occupies.  In  1899- 
1901  he  filled  a  mission  to  the 
Northwestern  States,  laboring  prin- 
cipally in  Idaho  and  Washington.  In 
1884  (July  10th)  he  married  Sarah 
Elizabeth  Parkin  (daughter  of  Wil- 
liam J.  Parkin  and  Eliza  Foulds), 
who  was  born  May  16,  1865,  at  Boun- 
tiful, Davis  county,  Utah.  Eight 
children  were  the  issue  of  this  mar- 
riage, namely,  Thomas  L.,  Eliza  F., 
John  L.,  Herman  P.,  Sarah  C,  Asa 
F.,  Wilder  A.  and  Elton  G.  Bishop 
Hatch's  avocation  has  been  princi- 
pally that  of  farming  and  stock  rais- 
ing. 

HAWS,    Jesse,    Bishop     of    Silver 
City     Ward     (Tintic     Stake),     Juab 
county,    Utah,    was   born    March    23, 
1889,   at  Provo,   Utah  county,    Utah, 
the    son    of   William    Wallace    Haws 
and  Julia  Rosella  McEwan.     He  was 
baptized  by  Leo  Fairbanks  July  31, 
1897.     The  family  moved  to  Knights- 
ville  in  1899  and  remained  there  for 
three  years.     They  then  returned  to 
Provo,  where  Jesse  attended  the  B. 
Y.     University     commercial     depart- 
ment,   during   the    winters   of    1905, 
1906  and  1907.     He  was  ordained  an 
Elder  Sept.   6,   1908,   by  Thomas  N. 
Taylor,   and   filled  a  mission  to   the 
Netherlands     from     1^08     to     1911, 
laboring   principally   in   the   Arnhem 
and   Rotterdam  conferences,   part  of 
the   time  in   Zealand   or   the   islands 
of  the  North  Sea.     Before  returning 
home  in  1911  he  made  an  extensive 
trip  through  continental  Europe  and 
also  visited   Great  Britain    and    the 
principal  cities  of  the  United  States. 
After  working  in  Provo  for  the  Provo 
Electric  Co.  as  an  electrician,  he  com- 
menced work  in  December,  1911,  for 
the  Knight  Investment  Co.  and  spent 
two  years    (1915   and   1916)    in  the 


employ  of  Jesse  Knight  at  Neck  City, 
Missouri,  in  the  mining  of  zinc  ore. 
In  March,  1918,  he  moved  to  Silver 
City  to  act  as  chief  clerk  of  the 
Knight  Investment  Co.,  Tintic  mines 
department.  He  was  chosen  as  first 
counselor  to  Bishop  Perry  B.  Fuller 
of  Silver  City,  March  31,  1918,  and 
set  apart  to  that  position  by  Apostle 
Joseph  F.  Smith,  Jr.,  April  21,  1918. 
He  held  that  position  until  July  20, 
1919,  when  he  was  ordained  a  Bishop 
by  Apostle  Rudger  Clawson  and  set 
apart  to  preside  over  the  Silver  City 
Ward.  In  1912  (Oct.  9th)  Bishop 
Haws  married  Belva  Goodman  in  the 
Salt  Lake  Temple.  Two  children 
have  blessed  this  marriage,  namely, 
Jesse  William,  born  Nov.  28,  1913, 
and  Elwood  Goodman,  born  June  12, 
1918. 

HEAPS,  William  Henry,  Bishop  of 
the  Teasdale  Ward  (Wayne  Stake), 
Wayne  county,   Utah,   was  born  Dec. 


14,  1858,  at  Swallowhill,  Yorkshire, 
England,  the  son  of  Henry  Heaps 
and  Susannah  Turner.  He  was  bap- 
tized Dec.  14,  18  66,  by  Henry  Heaps 
and  ordained  successively  to  the  of- 
fices of  Teacher,  Elder  and  Seventy. 
He  emigrated  to  Utah  in  1869  and 
settled  at  Panaca,  Nevada;  thence  he 


BIOGRAPHICAL  ENCYCLOPEDIA. 


403 


moved  in  1879  to  Escalante,  Utah, 
and  in  1896  became  a  permanent 
settler  of  Teasdale,  where  he  has 
been  engaged  in  farming  and  stock 
raising  ever  since.  In  1900  (May 
6th)  he  was  ordained  a  High  Priest 
by  Francis  M.  Lyman  and  set  apart 
to  act  as  second  counselor  to  Bishop 
George  S.  Coleman.  In  1903  he  was 
chosen  as  first  counselor  to  Bishop 
Heber  J.  Wilson  and  on  May  8,  1907, 
he  was  ordained  a  Bishop  by  Orson 
F.  Whitney  and  set  apart  to  preside 
over  the  Teasdale  Ward,  which  posi- 
tion he  still  holds.  Bishop  Heaps  has 
also  been  a  busy  man  in  secular  life, 
thus  he  served  as  county  commis- 
sioner one  term  and  was  state  road 
agent  for  three  years.  In  1882 
(April  13th)  he  married  Cynthia 
Jane  Adams  (daughter  of  David  B. 
Adams  and  Lydia  C.  Mann),  who  was 
born  Jan.  12,  1866,  at  Adamsville, 
Beaver  countj,  Utah.  This  marriage 
has  been  blessed  with  ten  children, 
namely,  William  Henry  junior,  Lydia 
C,  Lucy  E.,  Cynthia  May,  Lorenzo, 
David  Wilford,  Lawrence  T.,  Susan- 
nah, Marion  F.  and  Joseph  M. 

HEATON,   Jonathan     Bealby,     the 

third  Bishop  of  Alton  (Kanab  Stake), 
Kane  county,  Utah,  was  born  Oct. 
17,  1877,  at  Orderville,  Kane  county, 
Utah,  the  son  of  Jonathan  Heaton 
and  Amy  Hoyt.  He  was  baptized 
July  8,  1886,  by  Wm.  A.  Porter;  or- 
d'  d  a  Deacon  soon  afterwards;  or- 
Q-..^c:d  an  Elder  in  August,  1897; 
filled  a  mission  to  the  Southern 
States  in  1904-1906,  laboring  prin- 
cipally in  Florida,  where  he  presided 
as  conference  president  six  months; 
during  this  time  he  superintended 
the  building  of  a  new  meeting  house 
at  Jacksonville.  Soon  after  his  re- 
turn home,  he  was  chosen  to  act  as 
Bishop  of  the  Alton  Ward,  being  or- 
dained a  High  Priest  and  Bishop  Aug. 
26,  1907,  by  Francis  M.  Lyman. 
Bishop  Heaton  married  Emma  Rob- 
ertson (daughter  of  Thos.  Robertson 
and  Sarah  Ann  Cordingley)   Sept.   8, 


1897.  She  was  born  July  23,  1874, 
at  Orderville  and  has  borne  her  hus- 
band seven  children,  six  of  whom  are 


now  alive.  Bishop  Heaton's  main 
avocation  is  that  of  a  farmer  and 
stock  raiser. 

HENDERSON,  James  Newton,  the 

fifth  Bishop  of  the  Cannonvllle 
Ward  (Panguitch  Stake),  Garfield 
county,  Utah,  was  born  Feb.  18, 
1874,  at  Richville,  Morgan  county, 
Utah,  the  son  of  Wm.  J.  Henderson 
and  Alvira  Aurelia  Dickson.  When 
about  three  years  of  age  he  moved 
with  his  parents  to  Cannonville,  Iron 
(now  Garfield)  county,  Utah,  where 
he  was  raised  and  received  a  com- 
mon school  education.  Here  also  he 
was  baptized  when  about  eight  years 
old,  ordained  a  Deacon  and  acted  for 
some  time  as  president  of  a  Deacons' 
quorum.  In  1889  he  was  ordained 
an  Elder  and  acted  as  second  coun- 
selor in  the  third  quorum  of  Elders 
and  also  as  president  of  the  Ward 
Y.  M.  M.  I.  A.  In  December.  1889, 
he  was  ordained  a  High  Priest  by 
Mahonri  M.  Steele  and  set  apart  as 
second  counselor  to  Bishop  Wm.  W. 
Willis  of  Cannonville.  He  held  that 
position  until  Aug.  23,  1900,  when 
he  was  ordained  a  Bishop  by  Apostle 


404 


LATTER-DAY   SAINT 


Francis  M.  Lyman  and  set  apart  to 
preside  over  the  Cannonville  Ward, 
which  position  he  held  for  six  and  a 
half  years,    or   until    1907,    when   he 


Nauvoo,  Hancock  county,  Illinois,  the 
son  of  James  Henderson  and  Annie 
Harris.      His   mother   died     Dec.     3, 

1841,  and   his   father   died   Sept.    8, 

1842,  both  in  Nauvoo.  As  a  child  he 
suffered  under  the  persecutions 
against  the  Saints  in  Illinois  and 
came  West  with  the  Saints  after  the 
exodus,  living  with  his  relatives  and 
friends.  He  was  baptized  on  the 
frontiers  when  about  eight  years  old, 
came  to  Utah  in  1851  with  his  grand- 
father and  located  temporarily  in 
Kaysville  and  Salt  Lake  City,  where 
he  lived  until  in  the  early  60's  when 
he  moved  to  Richmond,  Cache  county, 
and  there  became  one  of  the  first 
settlers.  He  took  an  active  part  in 
the  settling  and  pioneering  of  Cache 
Valley  and  also  in  protecting  the  set- 
tlers there  against  Indian  depreda- 
tions. He  served  in  the  so-called 
Buchanan  war  during  the  winter  of 
1857-1858.  In  1862  (July  4th)  he 
married      Alvira      Aurelia      Dickson 

was  honorably  released.     In  1912  he     (daughter  of  Billa  Dickson  and  Mary 

moved  to  Panguitch  and  filled  a  mis-    Ann   Stoddard),   who   bore   her   hus- 

sion  to  the  Eastern  States  in  1912-    band   twelve   children,   namely,   Wil- 

1914,    laboring    thirteen    months    as 

president  of  the  Northwest  Virginia 

conference  and  later  ten  months  as 

president  of  the  West  Pennsylvania 

conference.     In  189  4   (Dec.  11th)  he 

married      Harriet      Ellen      Dunning 

(daughter  of  John  M.   Dunning  and 

Lydia   Talbot),   who   was   born   May 

16,  1878.     She  bore  her  husband  one 

child,  Lydia  A.,  and  died  in  childbed, 

Oct.  23,  1895.     In  the  spring  of  1900 

Bro.  Henderson  married  Cora  Evans 

(daughter  of  John     R.     Evans      and 

Mary  Williams),  who  was  born  Dec. 

24,    1876.      This   marriage   has   been 

blessed   with   six    children,     namely, 

Allie,    Nellie,    Wilma,    Mary,    Walter 

and  Shirley.     Bro.  Henderson's  chief 

avocations  in  life  have  been  those  of 

farming  and  sheepraising. 

HENDERSON,  Wm.  Jasper,  third  liam  Jasper,  Mary  Annie,  Alvira 
Bishop  of  the  Cannonville  Ward  Aurelia,  Laura  Jane,  James  Newton. 
(Panguitch  Stake),  Garfield  county,  Lucy,  George  Albert,  Frances  Eva- 
Utah,   was   born   June   26,    1840,    in  line,  Maggie  May,  Sarah  Marie,  Wal- 


BIOGRAPHICAL  ENCYCLOPEDIA. 


406 


lace  Dixon  and  Elda  Maud.  After 
his  marriage  he  settled  in  Kaysville 
again,  whence  he  made  a  journey  to 
the  Missouri  river  as  a  teamster  to 
gather  the  poor  to  Zion.  In  1864  he 
moved  to  Richville,  Morgan  county, 
Utah,  where  he  engaged  in  farming 
and  canyon  work.  In  18  74  he  moved 
with  his  family  to  Randolph,  Rich 
county,  Utah,  where  he  remained 
until  the  fall  of  1876,  when  (leaving 
his  family  temporarily  in  Richville) 
he  went  to  Clifton  (now  Cannon- 
ville).  Iron  (now  Garfield)  county, 
Utah,  where  he  made  a  new  home  to 
which  he  removed  his  family  in  the 
spring  of  the  following  year.  He 
helped  to  pioneer  and  build  up  that 
part  of  the  country.  In  1879,  soon 
after  the  Cannonville  Ward  was  or- 
ganized he  was  chosen  as  first  coun- 
selor to  Bishop  Jonathan  T.  Packer 
and  served  in  that  capacity  until 
1880  when  he  was  appointed  as  first 
counselor  to  Bishop  Ira  B.  Elmer.  In 
1884  he  was  ordained  a  Bishop  by 
Francis  M.  Lyman  and  set  apart  to 
preside  over  the  Cannonville  Ward, 
which  position  he  held  until  1891. 
In  1887  (March  2  6th)  he  yielded 
obedience  to  the  higher  law  of  mar- 
riage and  married  Lydia  Drucilla 
Johnson  (daughter  of  Seth  Johnson 
and  Martha  Stratton),  who  was  born 
April  29,  1870,  in  Hillsdale,  Iron 
(now  Garfield)  county,  Utah.  She 
bore  her  husband  nine  children, 
namely,  Lydia  Alvira,  Parley  Harris, 
Jennie,  Ernest,  LeRoy,  Martha,  Alice, 
Riley  and  Anthony.  In  1889  Bro. 
Henderson  filled  a  short  mission  to 
the  Northern  States,  laboring  prin- 
cipally in  Iowa  and  Nebraska.  In 
1912  he  was  called  to  labor  as  an 
ordinance  worker  in  the  St.  George 
Temple,  where  for  four  years  he 
labored  without  ever  being  absent  or 
late.  Owing  to  failing  health  he  was 
then  released  and  returned  to  Can- 
nonville, where  he  died  early  in  the 
morning  of  Sept.  22,  1919,  leaving 
a  large  posterity.  Bishop  Henderson 
devoted    nearly    his     entire     life     to 


Church  work  and  was  universally 
known  for  his  sympathy  and  kind- 
ness. Possessing  a  special  gift  of 
healing  he  was  untiring  in  his  devo- 
tion to  those  in  need  and  spent  much 
of  his  time  visiting  among  and  ad- 
ministering to  the  sick.  At  the  time 
of  his  demise  he  had  twenty-one 
children,  sixty-one  grandchildren  and 
forty  great-grandchildren. 

HENDRICKS,     Samuel     Walstein, 

Stake  clerk  of  the  Benson  Stake, 
Cache  county,  Utah,  was  born  Aug. 
7,  1872,  at  Richmond,  Cache  county, 
Utah,  the  son  of  Samuel  Allen  Hen- 
dricks and  Eliza  A.  Hendricks.  He 
was  baptized  by  Robert  Lewis  and 
ordained  successively  to  the  offices 
of  Teacher,  Priest  and  Elder.  He  re- 
ceived a  good  education,  attending 
the  B.  Y.  College  at  Logan  and  after- 
wards the  University  of  Deseret. 
After  finishing  his  education  he 
taught  school  about  six  years.  He 
was  ordained  a  Seventy  Dec.  10, 
1905,  by  J.  Golden  Kimball  and  was 
chosen  in  January,  1908,  as  one  of 
the  presidents  of  the  39th  quorum 
of  Seventy.  He  also  acted  as  secre- 
tary in  the  Ward  Y.  M.  M.  I.  A., 
secretary  of  Stake  Religion  Classes 
and  Stake  Y.  M.  M.  I.  A.  and  later 
as  Stake  superintendent  of  Y.  M.  M. 
I.  A.  In  May,  1906,  he  was  chosen 
and  set  apart  as  Stake  clerk  in  the 
Benson  Stake.  He  has  also  served 
as  city  recorder,  member  of  the  city 
council,  mayor  of  Richmond,  treas- 
urer of  Cache  county,  school  trustee, 
president  of  the  Commercial  Club  at 
Richmond  and  captain  of  Company 
B,  2nd  Infantry,  Utah  National  Guard, 
etc.  He  also  served  as  a  member  of 
the  Richmond  Public  Library  Board 
for  eight  years  and  all  during  the 
war  as  chairman  of  the  local  council 
of  defense.  In  1892  (Dec.  28th)  he 
married  Esther  Jane  Hyer  (daughter 
of  Christian  Hyer  and  Rozina  Shep- 
hard),  who  was  born  Sept.  27,  1871, 
at  Richmond.  Six  children  have 
blessed  this  marriage,  namely,  Wal- 


406 


LATTER-DAY   SAINT 


stein  H.,  Iris,  Bryan  H.,  Samuel  Al- 
len, Russel  H.  and  Virginia.  Elder 
Hendricks'  main  avocation  is  that  of 
a  farmer  and  at  present  he  serves  as 
postmaster  at  Richmond. 

HESLiOP,  George  Ammon,  sixth 
Bishop  of  West  Weber  Ward  (North 
Weber  Stake),  Weber  county,  Utah, 
was  born  Aug.  19,  1881,  at  West 
Weber,  the  son  of  George  Heslop  and 
Cynthia  Lois  Green.  He  was  bap- 
tized July  3,  1890,  by  William  Had- 
ley  and  raised  in  West  Weber.  After 
receiving  a  common  school  education 
he  attended  an  Academy  at  Ogden. 
He  was  ordained  a  Deacon  Jan.  19, 
18'96,  by  Archibald  McFarland  and 
acted  as  secretary  of  the  quorum; 
was  ordained  a  Teacher  Sept.  15, 
1897,  by  James  B.  Ririe;  ordained  a 
Priest  Sept.  17,  1899,  by  William 
England;  ordained  an  Elder  June 
23,  1909,  by  Ammon  Green  jun.;  or- 
dained a  Seventy,  July  9,  1901,  by 
Joseph  W.  McMurrin  and  became  a 
member  of  the  54th  quorum  of 
Seventy.  In  1901-1904  he  labored 
as  a  missionary  in  Colorado,  his  field 
of  labor  being  principally  Denver, 
New  Winsor,  Greeley  and  Cripple 
Creek,  Colorado,  and  afterwards 
Omaha  and  vicinity  in  Nebraska.  At 
home  Brother  Heslop  acted  as  Ward 
clerk  from  190  4  to  1910.  He  was 
ordained  a  High  Priest  by  James 
Wotherspoon  and  set  apart  as  first 
counselor  to  Bishop  George  W. 
Etherington  and  ordained  a  Bishop 
Feb.  13,  1916,  by  David  O.  McKay 
and  set  apart  to  preside  over  the 
West  Weber  Ward,  which  position  he 
still  holds.  In  1906  (Dec.  12th)  he 
married  Sarah  Elizabeth  Gibson 
(daughter  of  Jacob  Gibson  and  Mary 
Jardine),  who  was  born  Oct.  27, 
1883,  in  West  Weber,  Utah.  The 
children  of  this  marriage  are  the  fol- 
lowing: George  Ammon  junior,  Mary 
Belle,  Cleone,  Clifford  Jacob,  Cynthia 
Lois  and  Lavon.  Bishop  Heslop  is 
a  farmer  by  avocation,  but  has  done 
considerable   clerking   in   stores   and 


has  been  in  the  employ  of  the  Amal- 
gamated Sugar  Company  for  a  num- 
ber of  years. 

HESS,  John  Ivan,  second  coun- 
selor to  Bishop  James  H.  Robinson, 
of  Farmington,  Davis  county,  Utah, 
was  born  May  25,  1891,  at  Plymouth, 
Box  Elder  county,  Utah,  the  son  of 
John  Fred  Hess  and  Eleanor  Udy. 
He  was  baptized  by  Jonathan  D. 
Wood  when  eight  years  of  age;  was 
ordained  a  Deacon,  Priest  and  Elder 
successively;  was  ordained  a  High 
Priest  April  20,  1915,  by  Francis  M. 
Lyman  and  set  apart  as  second  coun- 
selor to  Bishop  James  H.  Robinson. 
In  1911-1913  he  filled  a  mission  to 
the    Central   States.      In    1914    (Jan. 


2  8th)    he   married    Elda     Maud     Ed- 


monds (daughter  of  Edward  Ed- 
monds and  Ellen  M.  Woolley),  which 
marriage  has  been  blessed  with  two 
children. 

HICKMAN,  Deseret  Nariam,  Bishop 
of  Torrey  Ward  (Wayne  Stake), 
Wayne  county,  Utah,  was  born  Aug. 
4,  1857,  at  West  Jordan,  Salt  Lake 
county,  Utah,  the  son  of  Wm.  Adams 
Hickman  and  Sarah  Meacham.  He 
was  baptized  in  18  64  and  ordained 
an  Elder  when  quite  young.  In  1878 
he  settled  in  Milford,  Millard  county. 


BIOGRAPHICAL   ENCYCLOPEDIA 


407 


Utah,  and  became  a  resident  of  Loa, 
Wayne  county,  Utah,  in  1903.  In 
1903  he  located  at  Grover  and  six 
years  later   (1909)   he  was  called  to 


Torrey  to  preside  as  Bishop,  being 
ordained  to  that  office  Oct.  24,  1909, 
by  Joseph  F.  Smith.  He  presided  in 
Torrey  until  1911,  when  he  moved 
back  to  Milford,  Millard  county,  Utah, 
but  returned  to  Torrey  in  1913  where 
he  then  resided  until  he  died,  Jan. 
16,  1919.  In  1876  (May  15th)  he 
married  Dorothy  Carrell  (daughter 
of  William  T.  Carrell  and  Dorothy 
Pectol),  who  was  born  Feb.  18,  1859, 
at  Fairfield,  Utah  county,  Utah. 
Nine  children  were  the  issue  of  this 
marriage,  namely,  Berley  Ann,  Wil- 
liam D.,  Dorothy  D.,  Sarah  M., 
George  N.,  Joseph  S.,  Don  F.,  Vivian 
and  Myrtle.  Throughout  his  entire 
life  Bro.  Hickman  was  an  energetic 
Church  worker  and  acted  as  a  High 
Councilor  in  the  Wayne  Stake  for 
some  time,  and  also  acted  as  superin- 
tendent of  the  Sunday  school  in 
Grover.  His  main  avocations  in  life 
were  those  of  farming  and  stock  rais- 
ing. Throughout  his  entire  life  Bro. 
Hickman  was  honest  to  the  degree 
of  severe  self-denial,  and  his  home 
sometimes   witnessed    real   want   be- 


cause he  would  never  buy  that  for 
w.hich  he  could  not  pay.  He  was 
benevolent  to  all,  regardless  of  race, 
color  or  social  condition.  At  the 
time  he  resided  in  Milford  that  place 
was  a  regular  town  of  tramps  who 
were  coming  and  going  all  the  time; 
there  were  good  tramps,  bad  tramps, 
clean  tramps  and  dirty  tramps,  but 
all  were  fed  indiscrimately  at  Bro. 
Hickman's  door.  If  he  heard  of  any 
one  in  need,  he  never  failed  to  render 
them  assistance. 

HIGGINBOTHAM,  Francis    David, 

Bishop  of  Wells  Ward  (Granite 
Stake),  Salt  Lake  county,  Utah,  was 
born  June  6,  18  69,  at  Harrisville, 
Weber  county,  Utah,  the  son  of 
Francis  David  Higginbotham  and 
Elizabeth  Ann  Rawson.  He  was  bap- 
tized July  22,  1878,  by  James  Barnes, 
ordained  an  Elder  May  6,  1889;  or- 
dained a  Seventy,  Dec.  11,  1910;  or- 
dained a  High  Priest  April  15,  1917, 
and  ordained  a  Bishop  June  27, 
191"9,  by  President  Heber  J.  Grant 
and  set  apart  to    preside    over    the 


Wells  Ward,  which  had  been  or- 
ganized June  22,  1919,  from  parts  of 
the  Waterloo,  Forest  Dale  and  Bur- 
ton Wards.      Brother   Higginbotham 


408 


LATTER-DAY   SAINT 


attended  school  until  he  was  four- 
teen years  old;  he  then  entered  the 
employ  of  the  Volker-Cannon  book 
store  at  Ogden,  but  was  soon  after- 
wards appointed  deputy  county  re- 
corder of  Weber  county  under  Frank 
J.  Cannon,  county  recorder.  He  also 
served  in  the  same  capacity  under 
the  late  Ben.  E.  Rich;  afterwards  he 
served  as  deputy  county  clerk  of 
Weber  county  and  as  deputy  clerk  of 
the  district  court  under  the  late 
David  Henry  Peery  at  Provo  and 
Ogden  and  also  served  one  term  as 
deputy  sheriff  of  Weber  county 
(1896-1897).  From  1904  to  1910  he 
was  engaged  in  the  construction  of 
railroads  and  canals  in  several  of  the 
Western  States  and  in  Canada;  dur- 
ing this  time  he  was  associated  with 
a  large  construction  company  in 
building  the  famous  Twin  Falls  Canal 
in  southern  Idaho,  also  in  a  large  ir- 
rigation project  for  the  Canadian 
Pacific  Railroad  company  in  South- 
ern Alberta,  Canada,  and  the  West- 
ern Pacific  Railroad  in  the  Feather 
RiverCanyon  in  California.  In  May, 
1911,  he  entered  the  employ  of  the 
late  John  E.  Dooly  of  Salt  Lake  City, 
and  since  Mr.  Dooly's  death  in  1911 
he  has  assisted  in  the  management 
of  the  many  interests  left  by  Mr. 
Dooly.  In  1889  (May  8th)  he  mar- 
ried Geneva  A.  Marsh,  daughter  of 
George  J.  Marsh  and  Jane  R.  An- 
drews (both  sturdy  pioneers).  This 
union  has  been  blessed  with  ten  chil- 
dren, five  boys  and  five  girls,  of 
which  number  the  following  are  liv- 
ing: Leon  Clifford,  David  Henry, 
Jane  Elizabeth,  Geneva  lone,  Daniel 
Heber,  William  Andrews  and  Mary. 

HIRSCHI,  David,  Bishop  of  Rock- 
ville  (St.  George  Stake),  Washing- 
ton county,  Utah,  was  born  Dec.  13, 
1870,  at  Rockville,  Utah,  the  son  of 
Gottlieb  Hirschi  and  Mary  Ann  Rupp. 
He  was  baptized  July  6,  1879,  by 
Charles  N.  Smith,  ordained  succes- 
sively    to     the     offices     of     Deacon, 


Teacher,  Priest  and  Elder,  the  latter 
ordination  by  Mathias  F.  Cowley, 
Nov.  21,  1902.  He  took  an  active 
part  in  both  Church  and  secular  af- 
fairs from  the  beginning  of  his  years 
and  acted  as  superintendent  of  the 
Sunday  school  and  president  of  the 
Y.  M.  M.  I.  A.  at  Rockville.  In  1902- 
1904  he  filled  a  mission  to  Switzer- 
land, acting  part  of  the  time  as 
president  of  the  St.  Gallen  and  Zurich 
conferences.  In  March,  1906,  he  was 
called  to  act  as  Bishop  of  Rockville 
and  was  ordained  a  High  Priest  and 
Bishop  Sept.  12,  1-906,  by  Hyrum  M. 
Smith.  Bishop  Hirschi  has  been  very 
active  in  developing  the  resources  of 
southern  Utah  and  has  filled  many 
positions  of  honor  and  responsibility. 
For  a  number  of  years  he  acted  as 
school  trustee  and  was  elected 
county  assessor  in  1918.  He  was 
one  of  the  directors  of  the  Bank  of 
St.  George  and  is  now  president  of 
the  State  Bank  of  Hurricane.  He  is 
also  a  member  of  the  Washington 
County  Board  of  Education.  Farm- 
ing and  stock  raising,  however,  have 
been  his  chief  avocations  in  life,  hav- 
ing both  sheep  and  cattle.  In  1890 
(Oct.  3rd)  Bishop  Hirschi  married 
Mary  Matilda  Petty  (daughter  of 
Joseph  H.  Petty  and  Alfaretta  M. 
Duzett),  who  was  born  Aug.  20,  1872, 
at  Rockville.  Following  are  the 
names  of  the  children  by  this  mar- 
riage: Claudius,  Margery,  Heber, 
Kenneth,  Susie,  David  Milo,  Wraph, 
Hugh,  Annona,  Junius,  Jennie,  Karl 
Albert,  Leora  and  Ora. 

HIRSCHI,  Gottlieb,  Bishop  of  Rock- 
ville (St.  George  Stake),  Washing- 
ton county,  Utah,  was  born  Jan.  16, 
1837,  at  Danbreson,  Switzerland,  and 
emigrated  to  Utah  in  1860.  He  set- 
tled in  Santa  Clara  in  1861  and 
moved  to  Rockville  in  1863.  In  1861 
(Sept.  14th)  he  married  Mary  Ann 
Rupp  (daughter  of  Christian  Rupp 
and  Susannah  Winkler),  who  was 
born  Jan.  12,  1838.  This  marriage 
was      blessed      with      ten      children, 


BIOGRAPHICAL   ENCYCLOPEDIA. 


409 


namely,  Albert,  Mary  Anna,  Joseph, 
Henry,  John,  David,  Samuel,  Daniel, 
Susannah  and  Eliza.  Bro.  Hirschi 
took  an  active  part  in  ecclesiastical  as 
well  as  civil  affairs  throughout  his 
life  and  was  a  faithful  and  consis- 
tent Church  member.  He  died  at  St. 
George,  Jan.  24,  1900. 

HOFF,  Henry  Herman,  first  coun- 
selor in  the  presidency  of  the  Mont- 
pelier  Stake,  Bear  Lake  county, 
Idaho,  was  born  March  16,  1849,  in 
Philadelphia,  Pennsylvania,  the  son 
of  John  Gottlieb  Hoff  and  Catherine 
Phitzenmaier.  His  mother  died  when 
he  was  ten  years  old,  and,  after  work- 
ing with  his  father,  he  started,  when 
twelve  years  of  age,  to  make  his  own 
living  by  learning  the  trade  of  a 
butcher  in  Philadelphia.  In  1868  he 
went  to  Chicago,  Illinois,  where  he 
remained  four  years  and  was  there 
during  the  great  fire  in  1871.  In 
1872  he  crossed  the  continent  to  San 
Francisco,  California,  but  started  on 
his  return  journey  to  the  east  a  few 
months  later.  On  the  way  he  stop- 
ped off  in  Utah  in  October,  1872,  to 
visit  two  brothers  in  Pleasant  Grove, 
Utah  county.  There  he  became  a 
convert  to  "Mormonism"  and  was 
baptized  in  May,  1873,  by  Thomas 
Woolley.  In  1875  (March  8th)  he 
married  Harriet  Bacon  (daughter  of 
Chauncey  Bacon  and  Celestia  Sisson), 
who  was  born  in  Salt  Lake  City  Dec. 
22,  1856.  In  April,  1875,  he  became 
a  permanent  settler  in  Georgetown, 
Bear  Lake  county,  Idaho,  where  he 
engaged  in  farming  and  stock  raising 
and  opened  a  butchering  business  in 
Montpelier  in  1882.  Having  been 
ordained  an  Elder  at  the  time  of  his 
marriage  he  took  an  active  part  in 
Church  matters,  especially  in  the  Y. 
M.  M.  I.  A.  He  was  ordained  a  High 
Priest  June  16,  190  6,  by  Joseph  R. 
Shepherd  and  set  apart  as  second 
counselor  to  Bishop  Alma  Hayes  of 
Georgetown.  He  held  that  position 
for  three  years,  or  until  1909,  when 
he  was  called  to  Montpelier  to  act  as 


Bishop  of  the  Montpelier  Second 
Ward,  which  was  organized  at  that 
time.  He  was  ordained  a  Bishop  by 
Rudger  Clawson  March  14,  1909.  At 
a  conference  held  Dec.  23,  1917,  he 
was  called  to  act  as  first  counselor 
to  President  Edward  C.  Rich  of  the 
Montpelier  Stake.  His  wife  died  July 
16,  1915,  in  Montpelier,  after  bear- 
ing him  seven  children,  namely, 
Beatrice  H.,  Henry  Herman,  jun.,  Ed- 
mund Charles,  Ernest  Pryor,  Celestia 
Geneve,  Myrtle  Deseret  and  Frank 
Emanuel.  Aside  from  his  ecclesias- 
tical activities  Bro.  Hoff  acted  as  jus- 
tice of  the  peace  at  Georgetown,  was 
chosen  as  regent  of  the  University  of 
Idaho  in  1903,  and  appointed  direc- 
tor of  the  Albion  Normal  School  of 
Idaho  in  1905.  He  also  held  the 
position  of  county  commissioner  of 
Bear  Lake  county  for  six  years,  was 
mayoi*  of  Montpelier  two  years,  direc- 
tor of  the  Pocatello  Technical  School 
and  trustee  of  the  Historical  Society 
of  Idaho.  At  present  he  is  a  member 
of  the  House  of  Representatives, 
State  of  Idaho  (15th  session),  and 
also  mayor  of  the  city  of  Montpelier. 

HOGx'\N,  Erik  Goudason  Midboen, 

one  of  the  first  Elders  sent  by  the 
Church  as  missionaries  to  Scandi- 
navia, was  born  June  23,  1802,  in 
Tins  Praestegjaeld,  Hallingdal,  Thele- 
marken,  Norway,  the  son  of  Goudy 
Hogan  and  Mergeth  Midboen.  He 
married  Holga  Nestby,  who  was  born 
Feb.  6,  1809,  in  Tins  Praestegjaeld, 
Norway.  She  subsequently  became 
the  mother  of  twelve  children  and 
died  in  Bountiful,  Utah,  Feb.  21, 
1884.  In  1837  Mr.  Hogan  emigrated 
to  America  in  order  to  improve  his 
financial  condition  and  settled  in  La 
Salle  county,  Illinois,  and  later  in 
Lee  county,  Iowa,  where  he  in  1842 
or  1843  became  a  convert  to  "Mor- 
monism" and  was  baptized  by  Good- 
mund  Haugaas.  He  came  west  with 
the  Saints  during  the  exodus  in  1846, 
and  after  spending  two  years  on  the 
frontiers   he   crossed   the    plains    in 


410 


LATTER-DAY    SAINT 


President  Brigham  Young's  company  President  Canute  Peterson.  From 
in  1848  and  settled  in  Bountiful,  this  mission  he  returned  to  Utah  in 
Davis  county,  Utah,  where  he  made  1855,  with  a  large  company  of  immi- 
grating Saints  which  crossed  the  At- 
lantic ocean  in  the  ship  "James 
Nesmith."  In  1858  Bro.  Hogan  mar- 
ried Ingeborg  Maria  Jensen,  and  in 
December,  18  62,  he  married  Hannah 
Nilson,  who  bore  him  five  children. 
Elder  Hogan  died  June  21,  1876,  at 
his  home  in  Bountiful,  as  a  faithful 
Latter-day  Saint. 


HORSFALL,  Ira  Owen,  Bishop  of 
the  9th  Ward  (Liberty  Stake),  Salt 
Lake  City.  Utah,  was  born  May  20, 
1885,  at  Oceanside,  Nassau  county. 
New  York,  the  son  of  Charles  G. 
Horsfall  and  Mary  B.  Pettit.  He  emi- 
grated with  his  parents  to  Utah  in 
1892  and  was  baptized  in  1896  by 
William  H.  Ingram;  ordained  a  Dea- 
con in  1900  by  Samuel  A.  Woolley; 
ordained  a  Teacher  in  1903  by  Mar- 
tin Ankarstrand  and  ordained  an  El- 
der in  1905  by  Fred  M.  Mickelsen. 
After  receiving  a  common  school  edu- 
cation he  studied  in  the  L.  D.  S.  Uni- 
versity, Salt  Lake  City,  graduated  in 
1905  and  three  years  later  (1908) 
graduated  from  the  University  of 
Utah.  In  the  fall  of  1911  he  com- 
menced teaching  mathematics  in  the 
L.  D.  S.  University  and  in  1914  was 
appointed  head  of  the  mathematical 
department,  a  position  which  he  still 
holds.  In  1908  he  left  home  for  a 
mission  to  Turkey,  where,  after  labor- 
ing as  president  of  the  branch  at 
Aleppo,  Asia  Minor,  the  Turkish  mis- 
sion was  closed,  and  he  was  trans- 
ferred to  Athens,  Greece,  where  he 
labored  six  months,  after  which  he 
travelled,  by  appointment,  for  three 
months  in  Palestine  and  Egypt.  In 
June,  1910,  he  arrived  in  England, 
where  he  labored  a  few  months  as 
secretary  of  the  London  conference 
and  as  superintendent  of  the  North 
London  Branch  Sunday  School. 
After  his  return  to  Utah  in  1911  he 
was  set  apart  as  assistant  superin- 
tendent  of   the     9th     Ward     Sunday 


his  home  until  the  time  of  his  death. 
In  crossing  the  ocean  with  his  family 
in  1837  he  buried  two  of  his  children 
and  another  one  died  while  crossing 
the  plains  in  1848.     In  1849  he  lost 


HoLGA  N.  Hogan 

another  child,  which  is  believed  to  be 
the  first  death  which  occurred  in 
Bountiful.  In  1853  he  was  called  on 
a  mission  to  Norway,  where  he 
labored    in    company    with    the    late 


BIOGRAPHICAL   ENCYCLOPEDIA. 


411 


school  and  appointed  supervisor  of 
the  lesser  Priesthood.  In  December, 
1911,  he  was  ordained  a  High  Priest 
by  James  E.  Talmage  and  set  apart 
as  first  counselor  to  Bishop  Albaroni 
H.   Woolley.      He  held   that   position 


until  March  9,  1913,  when  he  was  or- 
dained a  Bishop  by  Francis  M.  Lyman 
and  set  apart  to  preside  over  the  9th 
Ward.  This  position  he  still  holds. 
In  1913  (July  31st)  he  married  Nora 
Pendleton  (daughter  of  Andrew  J. 
Pendleton  junior  and  Elizabeth 
Cooper),  who  was  born  July  19, 
1890.  Two  children  have  blessed  this 
union,  namely,  Chester  Owen  and 
Warren  Pendleton. 

HOWARD,  John  Shelton,  the  first 
Bishop  of  Shelton  Ward  (Bingham 
Stake),  Bonneville  county,  Idaho, 
was  born  March  9,  185  4,  in  Birming- 
ham, England,  the  son  of  Joseph 
Howard  and  Anna  Shelton.  He  was 
baptized  by  his  father  in  May,  18  64, 
and  emigrated  with  his  parents  to 
America  in  1864,  crossing  the  At- 
lantic in  the  ship  "Hudson"  which 
sailed  from  London,  England,  June 
3,  1864.  After  traveling  by  railroad 
and  river  steamer  to  the  frontiers  he 
left    Wyoming,     Nebraska,     Aug.     2, 


1864,  and  crossed  the  plains  in  Capt. 
William  Hyde's  ox  train  which  ar- 
rived in  Salt  Lake  City  Oct.  26,  1864. 
In  1887-1889  he  labored  as  a  mis- 
sionary in  England,  principally  in  the 
Sheffield  and  later  the  Birmingham 
conference.  After  residing  a  number 
of  years  in  Bountiful,  Davis  county, 
Utah,  he  became  a  permanent  set- 
tler in  that  part  of  the  great  Snake 
River  valley  which  is  now  included  in 
Shelton  Ward  in  188  9.  Brother  How- 
ard was  ordained  an  Elder  when 
quite  young  and  subsequently  or- 
dained a  Seventy  by  John  L.  Leavitt. 
He  was  ordained  a  High  Priest  and 
Bishop  Aug.  19,  1892,  by  John  Henry 
Smith  and  set  apart  to  preside  over 
the  Shelton  Ward,  which  was  or- 
ganized at  that  time  and  named  in 
his  honor  (Shelton  being  one  of  his 
given  names).  While  a  resident  of 
South  Bountiful  he  acted  as  presi- 
dent of  the  Ward  Y.  M.  M.  I.  A.  and 
during  his  long  and  useful  career  in 
the  Church  he  has  filled  many  im- 
portant positions,  both  of  an  ecclesi- 
astical and  secular  nature.  In  1876 
(Sept.  11th)  he  married  Josephine 
Johnson  (daughter  of  John  Johnson 
and  Louisa  Svendsen),  who  was  born 
Feb.  4,  1860,  in  Copenhagen,  Den- 
mark. In  1884  (March  27th)  he  mar- 
ried Sarah  Ann  Downs  (daughter  of 
John  Downs  and  Mary  Cowley)  who 
was  born  March  4,  1866,  at  Browsby, 
Derbyshire,  England,  and  emigrated 
to  Utah  in  1883.  She  is  the  mother 
of  eleven  children,  namely,  Albert 
C,  John  H.,  Ella  M.,  Sarah  Olive, 
Joseph  William,  Franklin  D.,  Walter 
L.,  James  P.,  Carrie  M.,  Doris  and 
Glenn  E.  Bishop  Howard  is  a  farmer 
and  carpenter  by  occupation. 

HOWARD,  Samuel  Cyrus,  Bishop 
of  South  Bountiful  (South  Davis 
Stake),  Davis  county,  Utah,  was 
born  Sept.  28,  1878,  at  South  Boun- 
tiful, the  son  of  Samuel  Shelton 
Howard  and  Sarah  Ann  Taylor.  He 
was  baptized  Sept.  4,  1887,  by  Wil- 
liam Salter  and  raised  in  South  Boun- 


412 


LATTER-DAY   SAINT 


tiful,  where  he  also  received  a  com- 
mon school  education;  he  afterwards 
took  a  normal  course  in  the  Univer- 
sity of  Utah.  Prom  his  early  youth 
he  took  an  active  part  in  Church  af- 
fairs and  was  ordained  successively 
to  the  offices  of  Deacon,  Teacher, 
Priest  and  Elder.  He  was  ordained  a 
Seventy  July  10,  1900,  by  Joseph  W. 
McMurrin  and  filled  a  mission  to 
Great  Britain  in  1900-1902,  laboring 
in  the  Birmingham  conference.  He 
also  visited  continental  Europe.  Be- 
fore going  on  his  mission  he  acted  as 
secretary  of  the  Ward  Sunday  school, 
and  after  his  return  he  was  chosen 
as  second  assistant  superintendent  of 
the  same  Sunday  school.  Later  he 
was  appointed  assistant  Stake  super- 
intendent of  Religion  Classes  and 
first  counselor  in  the  Stake  presi- 
dency of  Y.  M.  M.  I.  A.,  having  pre- 
viously presided  over  the  Ward  Y. 
M.  M.  I.  A.  He  was  also  chosen  as  a 
president  of  the  74th  quorum  of 
Seventy.  After  acting  as  Ward  chor- 
ister for  eight  years,  he  was  ordained 
a  High  Priest  and  Bishop  by  Charles 
W.  Penrose,  July  11,  1915,  and  set 
apart  to  preside  over  the  South 
Bountiful  Ward,  which  office  he  still 
holds.  In  this  position  he  succeeded 
Bishop  Stearns  Hatch,  who  had  been 
called  into  the  new  Stake  presidency. 
Bishop  Howard  has  served  on  the 
board  of  education  and  occupied 
many  other  positions  of  honor  and 
responsibility.  He  has  been  engaged 
in  mercantile  business  from  his  early 
youth  and  is  now  a  successful  mer- 
chant. In  1903  (June  16th)  he  mar- 
ried Harriet  Malissa  Hatch  (daugh- 
ter of  John  E.  Hatch  and  Laura 
Ellis),  who  was  born  Aug.  17,  1880. 
The  children  of  this  marriage  are 
the  following:  Sylvia  Lavon,  Afton, 
Louise,  Ross  Hatch,  Nina  and  Vera. 

HOYT,  Timothy  Sabin,  a  member 
of  the  Mormon  Battalion,  was  born 
March  4,  1818,  at  Booneville,  Oneida 
county.  New  York,  the  son  of  James 
Hoyt  and   Beulah   Sabin.      Becoming 


a  convert  to  "Mormonism,"  he  was 
baptized  in  1839  and  migrated,  with 
his  father,  to  Illinois,  whence  he  was 
called  on  a  preaching  mission  to  the 
Eastern  States,  being  absent  on  that 
mission  when  Joseph  and  Hyrum 
Smith  were  martyred  in  1844.  He 
participated  in  the  exodus  of  the 
Saints  from  Illinois  and  on  the  jour- 
ney enlisted  as  a  private  in  Company 
A  of  the  Mormon  Battalion.  He 
marched  to  California  in  that  body 
and  suffered  many  privations.  He 
arrived  in  Great  Salt  Lake  Valley  in 
1848,  married  Elizabeth  L.  Sperry 
April  15,  1849,  in  Salt  Lake  City,  and 
after  residing  for  some  time  in  Mill 
Creek  he  moved  to  Nephi,  Juab 
county,  in  the  spring  of  1853.  Here 
he  resided  until  his  death.  He  was 
set  apart  as  a  president  of  the  49th 
quorum  of  Seventy  at  Nephi,  May 
18,  1857,  and  in  1869  he  was  or- 
dained a  High  Priest  and  set  apart  as 
a  High  Councilor  in  the  Juab  Stake 
of  Zion,  which  position  he  filled 
faithfully  until  his  demise,  which  oc- 
curred at  Nephi  Aug.  2,  1879.  He 
left  a  wife,  two  sons  and  four  daugh- 
ters to  mourn  his  loss.  Bro.  Hoyt 
had  been  a  diligent  Church  worker 
all  his  life  and  was  an  enthusiastic 
Temple  worker,  spending  much  of  his 
time  working  for  the  dead  in  the  St. 
George  Temple.  The  name  of  his 
children  are  as  follows:  Helen  J., 
Timothy,  Henry  H.,  Mary  E.,  Sarah 
A.  and  Olive  L.  They  all  survived 
him.  Bro.  Hoyt  was  a  farmer  by 
occupation. 

HUFFAKER,     Simpson    David,     a 

president  of  the  ninth  quorum  of 
Seventy,  and  a  resident  of  Salt  Lake 
City  and  South  Cottonwood,  Salt 
Lake  county,  Utah,  was  born  July  23, 
1812,  in  Wayne  county,  Kentucky, 
the  son  of  Jacob  Huffaker  and  Mar- 
garet Bodkin.  His  parents  were  the 
owners  of  a  farm  and  Simpson,  being 
a  natural  mechanic,  made  himself 
very  useful  repairing  machinery, 
farming   implements,   etc.      With   his 


BIOGRAPHICAL  ENCYCLOPEDIA. 


413 


parents  he  moved  to  Morgan  county, 
Illinois,  when  seventeen  years  old. 
In  183  6  (Feb.  2  6th)  he  married 
Susan  Green  Robinson  and  located 
later  in  Bureau  county,  Illinois,  where 
he  became  a  convert  to  "Mormonism" 
and  was  baptized  Sept.  25,  1842.  In 
the  spring  of  1845  he  moved  to  Nau- 
voo,  where  his  wife  died,  Sept.  20, 
1845,     leaving     him     five     children, 


namely,  Rozilla  (born  Jan.  24,  1837), 
Sarah  Melinda  (born  Feb.  19,  1839), 
Lewis  Albert  (born  March  19,  1841), 
Sidney  Elizabeth  (born  Jan.  22, 
1843)  and  Augusta  Jane  (born  Dec. 
19,  1844).  In  1846  (Jan.  18th)  Bro. 
Huffaker  married  Elizabeth  Melvina 
Richardson  (daughter  of  Stephen 
Richardson  and  Erepta  Wilder),  who 
was  born  May  28,  1829,  in  Coos 
county,  New  Hampshire.  She  joined 
the  Church  in  1833  and  afterwards 
gathered  to  Nauvoo,  Illinois,  with  the 
Saints.  Soon  after  his  second  mar- 
riage, Bro.  Huffaker  began  preparing 
for  the  long  trip  across  the  plains 
and  with  his  family  left  Nauvoo  in 
1846  during  the  general  exodus  of 
the  Saints.  He  spent  the  winter  of 
18  46-1847  at  Winter  Quarters  and 
crossed  the  plains  the  following  sum- 
mer in  Jedediah  M.  Grant's  company, 


which  arrived  in  Salt  Lake  City  Oct. 
6,  1847.  Brother  Huffaker  acted  as 
captain  of  ten  on  the  journey.  In  the 
latter  part  of  1849  he  went  to  Cali- 
fornia with  a  company  of  brethren  to 
work  in  the  gold  mines  and  returned 
to  Utah  Nov.  12,  1850.  In  1856  he 
was  ordained  a  Seventy  and  acted  as 
a  president  of  the  ninth  quorum  of 
Seventy.  He  also  acted  as  a  county 
commissioner  for  a  number  of  years. 
His  wife  Elizabeth  acted  as  treasurer 
of  the  Relief  Society  of  the  Seventh 
Ward;  subsequently  she  acted  as  first 
counselor,  and  later  as  president,  of 
that  association.  She  was  the  mother 
of  fifteen  children,  and  she  also 
reared  seven  others  besides  her  own. 
Following  are  the  names  of  her  chil- 
dren: David  Simpson  (born  Nov.  6, 
1847),  Melvina  Elizabeth    (born  Oct. 

17,  1849),  Harriet  Relief  (born  Aug. 

18,  1851),  Willard  Stephen  (born 
Nov.  4,  1852),  Susan  Erepta  (born 
Sept.  28,  1854),  Leonard  Thurston 
(born  June  5,  1856),  Lorenzo  and 
Lauriana  Wilhelmina,  twins,  (born 
March  29,  1858),  Lucy  Delaphine 
(born  June  24,  1860),  Welby  Rich- 
ardson (born  June  3,  18  62),  Howard 
Richardson  (born  May  28,  1864), 
Wilford  Dermont  (born  Oct.  31, 
18  65),  Ray  Elroy  (born  June  1, 
18  68),  EarlPerry  born  Aug.  5,  1870), 
and  Etta  B.  (born  Nov.  7,  1872). 
These  children  were  all  born  in  Utah. 
In  1853  (Sept.  28th)  Bro.  Huffaker 
married  Elizabeth  Ann  Brady  (daugh- 
ter of  Linzy  Brady),  who  was  born 
March  3,  1839,  and  became  the 
mother  of  eleven  children,  namely, 
Linzy  Brady  (born  March  19,  1854), 
Elizabeth  Vilate  (born  July  2,  1855), 
Frances  Matilda  (born  June  5,  1857), 
George  Marion  (born  April  11,  1859), 
William  Vasco  (born  Dec.  12,  1860), 
Simpson  Lionel  (born  Feb.  27,  1863), 
Aradine  Tranquilla  (born  June  30, 
1865),  Parley  (born  Jan.  26,  1868), 
Beatrice  (born  Oct.  7,  1869),  Mary 
Eva  (born  April  6,  1872)  and  Albert 
Franklin  (born  May  2,  1877).  In 
1856  (March  24th)  Brother  Huffaker 


414 


LATTER-DAY   SAINT 


married  Rhoda  Priscilla  Barnum 
(daughter  of  Henry  V.  Barnum  and 
Lauretta  Palmer),  who  was  born  Oct. 
3,  1834.  She  became  the  mother  of 
four  children,  namely,  Shelby  Ver- 
velin  (born  June  18,  1858),  Lauriana 
Eugenia  (born  March  15,  1861), 
Jacob  Herman  (born  June  8,  1863) 
and  Rhoda  Priscilla  (born  Dec.  30, 
1865).  Bro.  Huffaker  died  in  South 
Cottonwood  Oct.  25,  18  91,  univer- 
sally respected  and  faithful  to  his 
testimony  to  the  truth  of  the  gospel. 
His  second  wife,  Elizabeth  M.  Rich- 
ardson, died  April  26,  1911,  in  Salt 
Lake  City,  also  a  faithful  member  of 
the  Church,  and  his  fourth  wife 
(Rhoda  P.)  died  Dec.  30,  1865.  His 
third  wife,  Elizabeth  N.,  is  still  living. 

HUGHES,  David,  fifth  Bishop  of 
the  Samaria  Ward  (Malad  Stake), 
Oneida  county,  Idaho,  was  born 
March  24,  1873,  at  Samaria,  Idaho, 
the  son  of  Gomer  Hughes  and  Jane 


Roberts.  He  was  baptized  when 
eight  years  old  by  David  Bowen;  or- 
dained a  Deacon  when  a  boy;  or- 
dained an  Elder  July  9,  1895,  by 
Wm.  H.  Gibbs;  ordained  a  Seventy 
May  3,  1899,  by  Christian  D.  Fjeld- 
sted  and  ordained  a  High  Priest 
March  3,  1912,  and  set  apart  as  first 


counselor  to  Bishop  William  W.  Wil- 
liams, which  position  he  held  until 
1915,  when  he  was  chosen  as  first 
counselor  to  Bishop  Hyrum  Peter- 
son. He  was  ordained  a  Bishop 
July  27,  1914,  by  Jos.  F.  Smith  jun. 
and  set  apart  to  preside  over  the 
Samaria  Ward.  In  his  younger 
days  he  acted  as  a  counselor  in  the 
presidency  of  a  Deacons'  quorum, 
acted  for  years  as  a  Ward  teacher, 
filled  a  mission  to  the  Southern 
States  in  18'99-1901,  laboring  prin- 
cipally in  South  Carolina,  and  acted 
as  a  constable  in  the  Samaria  pre- 
cinct for  four  years.  In  1895  (July 
19th)  he  married  Elizabeth  Ann 
Thomas  (daughter  of  Charles  R. 
Thomas  and  Emmeline  Eliza  Wal- 
dron),  who  was  born  April  27,  1875, 
at  Samaria.  Nine  children  have 
blessed  this  marriage,  namely,  Eliza 
M.,  Ann,  Eunice,  Chester  R.,  Thomas 
R.,  Ida,  LaVenia,  Deloria  and  Jane 
R.  The  Bishop's  principal  avoca- 
tion is  that  of  farmer  and  sheep 
raiser. 

HULME,  George  Ezra,  the  fourth 
Bishop  of  Bennington  Ward  (Mont- 
pelier  Stake),  Bear  Lake  county, 
Idaho,  was  born  Oct.  11,  1887,  at 
Bloomington,  Idaho,  the  son  of  Wil- 
liam Hulme  and  Ann  Mariah  Briscoe. 
He  was  baptized  Oct.  11,  1895,  by 
Alma  Findlay  and  ordained  succes- 
sively to  the  offices  of  Deacon, 
Teacher,  Elder  and  Seventy,  the  lat- 
ter ordination  taking  place  in  1911 
under  the  hands  of  Seymour  B. 
Young.  In  1907-1910  he  filled  a  mis- 
sion to  the  Central  States,  laboring 
principally  in  the  State  of  Missouri. 
He  acted  as  assistant  superintendent 
of  the  Bloomington  Sunday  school 
and  president  of  the  Ward  Y.  M.  M. 
I.  A.  At  Bennington,  to  which  place 
he  removed  in  1914,  he  acted  as  first 
counselor  in  the  Y.  M.  M.  I.  A.  and 
as  superintendent  of  the  Ward  Sun- 
day school.  He  was  ordained  a  High 
Priest  and  Bishop  by  Rudger  Claw- 
son,  Dec.  23,  1917,  and  set  apart  to 


BIOGRAPHICAL   ENCYCLOPEDIA. 


415 


preside  over  the  Bennington  Ward, 
which  position  he  still  holds.  In 
1910  (June  8th)  he  married  Venice 
Louvinia  Dunford  (daughter  of 
James  L.  Dunford  and  Eliza  Jacob- 
son),  who  was  born  March  18,  1889, 
in  Bloomington,  Idaho. 

HUNSAKER,  Abraham,  the  first 
Bishop  of  Honeyville,  Box  Elder 
county,  Utah,  was  born  Nov.  29,  1812, 
in  Jonesborough,  Union  county,  Illi- 
nois, the  son  of  Jacob  Hunsaker  and 
Polly  Luce.     He  married  Eliza   Col- 


lings  Jan.  3,  1833.  They  heard  the 
gospel  in  the  vicinity  of  his  birth- 
place and  were  both  baptized  in  No- 
vember, 1840,  by  David  Evans.  When 
the  law  of  celestial  marriage  was 
first  whispered  to  him,  he  opposed  it, 
exclaiming,  "It  is  of  the  devil,"  but 
God  knew  his  heart  and  in  open  day 
a  messenger  from  heaven  with  three 
women  clothed  in  white  raiment 
stood  before  him  several  feet  from 
the  ground  and  addressed  him  thus, 
"You  never  can  receive  a  full  and 
complete  salvation  in  my  kingdom 
unless  your  garments  are  pure  and 
white  and  you  have  three  counselors 
like  me."  Thus  he  was  convinced 
that  the  principle  was  right  and  he 


subsequently  married  five  wives  (two 
of  whom  survived  him)  and  he  be- 
came the  father  of  fifty  children. 
Bro.  Hunsaker  passed  through  the 
persecutions  to  which  the  Saints  were 
exposed  in  Illinois,  and  accompanied 
the  exiles  as  far  as  the  Missouri 
river,  where  he  in  July,  1846,  en- 
listed in  the  Mormon  Battalion.  He 
endured  the  trying  march  across  the 
continent  without  a  murmur  and  was 
discharged  at  Los  Angeles,  California, 
one  year  after  enlistment.  Maiing 
his  way  to  the  Valley  he  reached  the 
present  site  of  Salt  Lake  City  less 
than  three  months  after  the  arrival 
of  the  pioneers  in  1847.  He  con- 
tinued his  march  eastward  through 
many  trials  and  dangers  and  found 
his  wife  Eliza  C.  near  Council  Bluffs, 
Iowa.  Next  season  (1848)  he  re- 
turned to  the  Valley  with  his  family. 
In  February,  1856,  the  Indians  mur- 
dered his  son  Lewis  at  the  south  end 
of  the  Utah  Lake.  The  manner  of 
the  boy's  death  was  never  known,  as 
his  remains  could  not  be  found.  At 
the  April  conference,  1856,  Bro.  Hun- 
saker was  called  to  settle  in  Carson 
Valley  (now  in  Nevada)  which  mis- 
sion he  filled  and  returned  in  time 
to  participate  in  the  Echo  Canyon 
expedition  in  the  fall  of  1857.  He 
resided  in  Brigham  City  several  years 
and  then  located  in  Honeyville,  where 
he  in  1877  was  chosen  as  Bishop.  He 
held  that  important  position  until  the 
time  of  his  death,  which  occurred 
Jan.  3,  1889,  he  being  76  years,  1 
month  and  5  days  old  when  he  died. 
The  following  was  published  in  the 
"Deseret  News"  at  the  time  of  his 
demise:  "It  is  said  that  every  past 
life  has  a  lesson  for  every  life  that  is 
left  behind,  and  this  seems  to  be 
more  than  verified  in  the  life  and 
death  of  this  noble  man  of  God,  the 
last  hours  of  whose  life  were  par- 
ticularly interesting.  His,  too,  was 
a  glorious  death,  because  of  the 
blessings  and  testimonies  of  a  faith- 
ful Patriarch  which  will  leave  an  im- 
pression   not     soon     forgotten.      His 


416 


LATTER-DAY   SAINT 


noble  deeds  and  his  great  heart  will 
doubtless  go  down  to  posterity.  Some 
hours  before  his  spirit  departed  he, 
Adam  like,  called  his  children  to- 
gether, laid  his  hands  upon  them,  one 
after  another,  to  the  number  of  62, 
and  he  gave  them  his  blessing;  yet  at 
this  time  his  sufferings  were  almost 
beyond  endurance,  and  it  seemed  as 
though  he  could  not  possible  rise 
again.  But  he  took  up  a  chair,  and 
exclaiming  that  God  had  given  him 
strenth  to  bless  his  family,  sat  up 
for  some  hours.  His  pain  presently 
ceased,  and  calling  his  sons  and 
daughters,  one  by  one,  he  asked  them 
if  they  did  not  want  a  blessing  from 
their  father  before  he  passed  from 
earth.  His  mind  was  exceedingly 
clear,  as  evidenced  by  his  bright 
memory,  and  there  was  strong  proof 
beyond  all  doubt  that  he  spoke  as 
the  Spirit  gave  him  utterance,  even 
the  Spirit  of  God,  as  all  could  testify. 
He  frequently  clapped  his  hands  with 
joy,  and  praised  God  for  having  re- 
vealed to  him  that  his  work  in  the 
Logan  Temple — which  was  consider- 
able— had  been  accepted;  that  his 
sons  would  hold  firmly  on  to  the  rod 
that  Lehi  saw,  and  so  give  him  and 
their  mothers  joy  in  the  eternal 
world.  He  was  also  the  grand- 
father of  12  4  children  and  the  great- 
grandfather of  34.  He  told  his  wife 
Elize  C,  whom  he  survived  but  two 
months  and  twenty  days,  that  their 
work  would  be  done  here  when  he 
had  made  one  more  trip  to  the  Logan 
Temple,  which  he  afterwards  accomp- 
lished. This  remark  was  made  a  few 
hours  before  her  death  and  he  added 
that  he  would  "soon  follow  her." 
She,  too,  lived  and  died  greatly  be- 
loved by  her  husband  and  numerous 
friends.  Bro.  Hunsaker  had  done 
much  in  the  interests  of  co-opera- 
tion. His  charity  was  unbounded;  he 
was  loved  by  all,  and  looked  up  to 
as  a  noble  man  whom  God  had  made 
great  through  his  humble  life.  He 
died  as  he  had  lived,  firm  as  a  rock 
in  the  faith." 


HUNSAKER,  John  L..,  Bishop  of 
the  Bothwell  Ward  (Bear  River 
Stake),  Box  Elder  county,  Utah,  was 
born  July  11,  18  64,  at  Brigham  City, 
Box  Elder  county,  Utah,  the  son  of 
Abraham  Hunsaker  and  Harriet 
Beckstead.  He  was  baptized  May  3, 
1874,  by  Frederick  J.  Graham;  or- 
dained a  Deacon  Oct.  30,  1877,  by 
Oliver  G.  Snow  and  set  apart  as 
president  of  a  Deacons'  quorum;  or- 
dained an  Elder  Oct.  1,  1883,  by  Oli- 
ver G.  Snow,  and  married  Celestia 
Catherine    Allen    in    the   Endowment 


House,  Salt  Lake  City,  Oct.  4,  1883. 
From  this  union  the  following  chil- 
dren were  born:  John  Albert,  Jude 
Lester,  Amy  Elnora,  Francis  Vivian 
and  Martha  Elmira.  Bro.  Hunsaker 
was  ordained  a  Seventy  Jan.  3,  1886, 
by  Wm.  E.  Hyde,  filled  a  mission  to 
the  Southern  States  in  18  89-18'dl, 
and  acted  as  one  of  the  presidents  of 
the  5th  quorum  of  Seventy  for  a 
number  of  years.  He  resided  at 
Honeyville,  Box  Elder  county,  until 
1893,  when  he  moved  with  his  family 
to  the  western  part  of  Bear  River 
Valley,  where  he  was  chosen  as  sup- 
erintendent of  the  Roweville  branch 
of  the  Bear  River  Ward  Sunday 
school,  which  position  he  held  for 
ten  years.     He  was  ordained  a  High 


BIOGRAPHICAL  ENCYCLOPEDIA 


417 


Priest  June  26,  1898,  by  Charles 
Kelley  and  set  apart  as  second  coun- 
selor to  Bishop  Joseph  M.  Stokes  of 
the  Bothwell  Ward.  He  afterwards 
served  as  first  counselor  and  held 
that  position  until  March  10,  1907, 
when  he  was  ordained  a  Bishop  by 
President  Joseph  F.  Smith  and  set 
apart  to  preside  over  the  Bothwell 
Ward.  In  1909  (April  11th)  he  was 
set  apart  as  an  alternate  High  Coun- 
cilor in  the  Bear  River  Stake  and 
afterwards  became  a  regular  High 
Councilor.  In  1913  (May  11th)  he 
was  again  called  to  preside  as  Bishop 
of  the  Bothwell  Ward  which  position 
he  still  holds.  Bishop  Hunsaker  is 
a  farmer  by  occupation,  has  served 
his  fellow-citizens  as  justice  of  the 
peace  and  held  many  other  civil  of- 
fices. 

HUNT,  John,  a  Patriarch  in  the 
Snowflake  Stake  of  Zion  and  a  resi- 
dent of  Snowflake,  Arizona,  was  born 
March  9,  1833,  near  Albion,  Edwards 
county,  Illinois,  the  son  of  Jefferson 
Hunt  and  Celia  Mounts.  He  was 
baptized  in  1844  by  his  father  and 
participated  in  the  exodus  from  Nau- 
voo  in  18  46,  and  when  his  father  en- 
listed in  the  Mormon  Battalion  at 
Council  Bluffs  and  took  part  of  his 
family  with  him,  John  as  one  of  the 
children  wintered  at  Pueblo,  Colo- 
rado, during  the  winter  of  1846- 
1847,  and  arrived  in  Great  Salt  Lake 
Valley  July  29,  1847.  That  same 
fall  he  accompanied  his  father  and 
a  few  others  to  California,  going 
after  provisions,  cattle,  seed  grain, 
etc.  They  lived  on  horseflesh  part 
of  the  journey.  Subsequently  John 
Hunt  became  one  of  the  first  set- 
tlers of  Provo  and  afterwards  be- 
came one  of  the  early  pioneer  set- 
tlers of  San  Bernardino,  Southern 
California.  He  carried  the  mail  from 
Los  Angeles  to  Salt  Lake  City  two 
years  (1856  and  1857).  In  1857 
(July  4th)  he  married  Lois  B.  Pratt, 
a  daughter  of  the  famous  missionary 
Addison  Pratt,  and  moved  to  Beaver, 


Utah,  in  1858.  He  served  as  sheriff 
of  Beaver  county  twelve  years  and 
also  acted  as  counselor  to  Bishop  M. 
L.  Shepherd.  For  several  years  he 
acted  as  a  captain  in  a  companj*  of 
Utah  militia.  In  1877  he  moved  to 
Sevoia,  now  Ramah,  in  New  Mexico, 
where  he  acted  as  a  presiding  Elder. 
He  was  called  to  Snowflake,  Arizona, 
by  Apostle  Erastus  Snow  in  Septem- 
ber, 1878,  to  act  as  Bishop,  to  which 
office  he  was  ordained  June  29,  1879, 
by  Wilford  Woodruff.  He  held  that 
position  till  Jan.  1,  1910,  having 
been  ordained  a  Patriarch  by  Rudger 
Clawson    in     November,     1909.      His 


wife  Lois  died  March  9,  1885.  On 
March  18,  1883,  he  married  Sarah 
Jane  Crosby  and  also  married  Hape- 
lona  Sanford,  March  19,  1887.  His 
wife  Lois  bore  him  eight  children 
(Ida,  May,  Anna,  Belle,  Lewis,  John 
A.,  Nettie  and  Lois).  His  wife  Sarah 
had  nine  children  (Martha,  Eva,  J. 
Taylor,  Sheldon  Ross,  Ita,  Sanford, 
Frances,  Georgia  and  Ambrose).  His 
children  were  all  living  in  1916  ex- 
cept Ida  who  died  April  26,  1915,  as 
the  wife  of  President  David  K.  Udall 
of  the  St.  Johns  Stake.  In  1916 
Bishop  Hunt  could  boast  of  66  grand- 
children and  32  great-grandchildren. 
His  son  Lewis  served  as  a  missionary 


Vol.  Ill,  No.  27 


.January  17,  1920 


41i 


LATTER-DAY   SAINT 


in  Great  Britain  in  1888-1890,  an- 
other son  (J.  Taylor)  filled  a  mis- 
sion in  the  Central  States  in  1911- 
1912,  and  a  third  son  (Sheldon  Ross) 
was  laboring  in  the  Central  States 
mission  in  1916.  Bishop  Hunt  died 
in  Snowflake,  June  1,  1917. 

HUNT,  John  Alexander,  jun.,  fifth 
Bishop  of  St.  Charles  (Bear  Lake 
Stake),  Bear  Lake  county,  Idaho, 
was  born  Aug.  3,  1866,  at  St.  Charles, 
the  son  of  John  A.  Hunt  and  Eliza- 
beth Tilt.      He  was  baptized  Aug.  3, 


1874,  by  John  Windley  and  soon 
afterwards  ordained  a  Deacon;  or- 
dained a  Priest  Jan.  28,  1885,  by 
his  father.  Bishop  John  A.  Hunt; 
ordained  an  Elder  April  21,  1895, 
by  Ola  Hokensen  and  ordained  a 
Seventy  Jan.  17,  1896,  by  Apostle 
John  Henry  Smith.  He  received  a 
good  common  school  education  and 
afterwards  studied  in  the  University 
of  Deseret,  from  which  institution 
he  was  graduated  June  13,  188  9.  He 
taught  school  in  Mill  Creek  and 
Grantsville,  Utah,  and  in  Paris  and 
St.  Charles,  Idaho,  upwards  of  ten 
years.  Bro.  Hunt  was  ordained  a 
High  Priest  Dec.  2,  1907,  by  Apostle 
Rudger  Clawson  and  set  apart  to  act 


as  second  counselor  to  Bishop  Ed- 
ward M.  Pugmire.  On  Jan.  11,  1914, 
he  was  chosen  as  first  counselor  to 
Bishop  Ola  Transtrom  and  on  March 
23,  1^18,  he  was  ordained  a  Bishop 
by  Joseph  F.  Smith,  jun.  and  set 
apart  to  preside  over  the  St.  Charles 
Ward.  Bro.  Hunt  has  taken  an  active 
part  in  Church  affairs  from  his 
early  youth,  being  born  and  reared 
as  a  "Mormon"  boy.  In  1896-1898 
he  filled  a  mission  to  Great  Britain, 
laboring  principally  in  the  Notting- 
ham conference.  In  1907  (April 
10th)  he  married  Mary  Ann  Morris 
(daughter  of  Joseph  Morris  and 
Emma  Nichols),  who  was  born  June 
28,  1868,  in  Fenton  Park,  Staffor- 
shire,  England.  Not  being  blessed 
with  children  of  their  own.  Bishop 
Hunt  and  his  wife  have  adopted  three 
children.  The  Bishop's  occupation  is 
that  of  a  farmer  and  stock  raiser. 

HUNTER,  John  Davidson,  a  vet- 
eran Elder  in  the  Holden  Ward  (Mil- 
lard Stake),  Millard  county,  Utah, 
was  born  May  19,  1842,  at  Clack- 
mannon,  Scotland,  the  son  of  Joseph 
Hunter  and  Elizabeth  Davidson.  He 
was  baptized  by  Eleazer  Edwards, 
emigrated  to  America  in  1849, 
crossed  the  Atlantic  in  the  ship  "Zet- 
land," remained  in  the  States  until 
1852  and  crossed  the  plains  in  Cap- 
tain Jason  Howell's  company.  The 
family  located  in  Cedar  City,  Iron 
county,  where  John  D.  was  baptized 
by  Eleazer  Edwards,  Aug.  27,  1854. 
After  residing  in  Cedar  City,  Utah, 
with  his  parents  John  D.  married 
Elizabeth  Bennett  Oct.  27,  1863,  at 
Fillmore,  Millard  county.  She  waS' 
the  daughter  of  John  Bennett  and 
Jane  Roberts  and  was  born  Aug.  25, 
1844,  in  North  Wales.  Bro.  Hunter 
became  a  permanent  resident  of  Hol- 
den in  1868,  and  was  in  his  younger 
days  a  hardy  frontiersman  and  In- 
dian fighter.  In  1861  he  made  a 
perilous  trip,  together  with  Jacob 
Hamblin  and  others,  to  Arizona  to 
recover  the  body  of  George  A.  Smith, 


BIOGRAPHICAL  ENCYCLOPEDIA. 


419 


I 


jun.  who  had  been  killed  by  Indians. 
In  1863  he  went  to  the  Missouri 
river  in  Samuel  White's  company  as 
a  Church  teamster  after  emigrants. 
In  1866-1867  he  acted  as  a  captain 
in  a  military  company  and  rendered 
efficient  aid  in  the  Black  Hawk  war. 
He  has  worked  much  in  the  Saint 
George  Temple  for  the  redemption  of 
his  progenitors.  He  is  a  farmer  and 
stock  raiser  and  leading  citizen.  Fol- 
lowing are  the  names  of  his  children: 
John  Edward,  Elizabeth  Jane,  Cath- 
erine, Joseph  B.,  Mary  Ann,  Benja- 
min, George  William,  Emma,  Lavinia 
and  James  Samuel.  In  1858,  at  the 
time  of  the  Johnston's  army  troubles 
Bro.  Hunter  took  part  in  the  White 
Mountain  mission  together  with  Jesse 
N.  Smith  of  Parowan. 

HUTCHINGS,  Stephen,  the  fourth 
Bishopof  Victor  Ward  (Teton  Stake), 
Teton  county,  Idaho,  was  born  April 
30,  1863,  at  Springville,  Utah  county, 
Utah,  the  son  of  Shepherd  Pierce 
Hutchings  and  Eliza  Ann  Pectol.  He 
was  baptized  Feb.  5,  1885,  by  James 
E.  Hall  and  confirmed  the  same  day 
by  Benjamin  T.  Blanchard;  was  or- 
dained an  Elder,-  Dec.  2  2,  1885,  by 
Nephi  Packard  and  married  in  the 
Logan  Temple  Jan.  6,  1886,  to  Tilitha 
E.  Kerswell  (daughter  of  William 
Kerswell  and  Sarah  Garlick),  who 
was  born  July  21,  1864,  at  Spring- 
ville, Utah.  She  bore  her  husband 
six  children,  namely,  Geneva  May, 
Talitha  Grace,  Reba,  Erma  Ann,  Leo 
Stephen  and  Ersal  Luzell.  Brother 
Hutchings  was  ordained  a  Seventy 
Dec.  8,  18  8  9,  by  Franklin  P.  Whit- 
more  and  labored  as  a  Ward  teacher 
for  twenty-one  years.  In  1913  he 
labored  as  a  missionary  in  Springville 
and  vicinity.  He  moved  to  Victor, 
Teton  county,  Idaho,  in  1914,  arriv- 
ing there  on  the  2nd  of  May.  He  was 
ordained  a  High  Priest  Dec.  2  6,  1915, 
by  William  R.  Durrant  and  set  apart 
as  second  counselor  to  Bishop  Joseph 
A.  Johnson,  which  position  he  held 
until  May  21,  1916,  when  he  was  or- 


dained a  Bishop  by  Apostle  Joseph  F. 
Smith,  jun.  and  set  apart  to  preside 
over  the  Victor  Ward,  which  position 
he  still  holds. 

HYDE,  Reman,  Bishop  of  Auburn 
Ward  (Star  Valley  Stake),  Lincoln 
county,  Wyoming,  was  born  Feb.  3, 
1855,  at  Kaysville,  Davis  county, 
Utah,  the  son  of  Rosel  Hyde  and 
Mary  Ann  Cowles.  He  was  baptized 
in  1864  by  William  Booth,  and  took 
an  active  part  in  Church  affairs.  In 
1874  he  left  his  home  in  Kaysville 
and  located  in  Fairview,  Oneida 
county,  Idaho,  where  he  labored 
faithfully  in  the  Ward  organizations 
until  1879,  when  he  was  called  to 
preside  over  the  Y.  M.  M.  I.  A.  He 
held  that  position  until  1884,  when 
he  was  ordained  a  High  Priest  and 
Bishop  by  Franklin  D.  Richards  and 
set  apart  to  preside  over  the  Fair- 
view  Ward.  He  served  in  that 
capacity  for  three  years  and  then 
moved  to  Star  Valley,  Wyoming,  in 
1888  where  he  acted  as  second  coun- 
selor to  Bishop  William  Corbridge  of 
Auburn.  In  1894  he  was  chosen  as 
Bishop  of  the  Auburn  Ward  and  held 
that  position  until  1913.  After  that 
he  was  chosen  as  an  alternate  mem- 
ber of  the  Star  Valley  High  Council, 
and  in  1917  he  was  set  apart  as 
president  of  the  High  Priests'  quorum 
of  the  Star  Valley  Stake.  In  June, 
1'919,  he  was  chosen  as  a  regular 
member  of  the  High  Council.  In 
18  7  8  he  married  Urmina  T.  Griffeth, 
daughter  of  Patison  Deloss  Griffeth 
and  Elizabeth  Carson,  who  was  born 
Jan.  12,  18  60,  at  Lehi,  and  who  bore 
her  husband  three  children,  namely, 
Heman,  born  April  14,  1879  (mar- 
ried Elizabeth  Ashdown),  William  A., 
born  May  4,  1881  (married  Lucy 
Wheelock)  and  Dora  E.,  born  August 
8,  1885   (married  Heber  C.  Porter). 

IVIE,  Calvert  Milton,  Bishop  of 
Aurora  Ward  (Sevier  Stake),  Sevier 
county,  Utah,  was  born  April  7,  18  69, 
at  Scipio,  Millard  county,  Utah,   the 


420 


LATTER-DAY   SAINT 


son  of  William  Franklin  Ivie  and 
Malinda  Jane  Young.  He  was  bap- 
tized when  eight  years  old  and  or- 
dained successively  to  the  office  of 
Deacon  and  Elder.  In  18  92  (Nov. 
25th)  he  married  Vilate  Durfee, 
daughter  of  Jabez  Durfee  and  Celes- 
tia  Curtis.  This  marriage  has  been 
blessed  with  ten  children,  namely, 
Milton,  Orrin,  Wilford  Byron,  Ray- 
mond, Elvada,  Otto  Verlin,  Tressy 
Lucile,  Golden  Levoy,  Virgil,  Alma 
Firl  and  Roxie  Birdella.  Bishop  Ivie 
was  ordained  a  Seventy  July  6,  1878, 
by  Seymour  B.  Young  and  filled  a 
mission  to  the  Eastern  States  in 
1898-1900,  laboring  principally  in 
Maryland,  Virginia  and  West  Vir- 
ginia. At  home  he  acted  as  superin- 
tendent of  the  Aurora  Sunday  school 
a  number  of  years  and  filled  many 
other  positions  of  responsibility. 
Thus  he  acted  as  Ward  clerk  many 
years  and  served  as  school  trustee 
four  terms  in  succession.  He  was  or- 
dained a  High  Priest  and  Bishop 
March  16,  1907,  by  Orson  F.  Whitney 
and  set  apart  to  preside  over  the 
Aurora  Ward,  succeeding  Christian 
Christensen.  Bishop  Ivie  is  a  farmer 
and  stock  raiser  by  avocation. 

JACKSOX,  Samuel,  Bishop  of  the 
Manassa  Ward,  of  the  San  Luis  Stake, 
Canejos  county,  Colorado,  was  born 
July  13,  1844,  in  Manchester,  Lan- 
cashire, England,  the  son  of  Benja- 
man  Jackson  and  Ann  Grimshaw.  At 
an  early  age  he  embraced  the  truth 
of  the  everlasting  gospel  together 
with  his  parents  and  other  members 
of  the  family.  He  emigrated  to  the 
United  States  with  his  parents  and 
a  large  company  of  Latter-day  Saints, 
crossing  the  Atlantic  in  the  old  sail- 
ing vessel  "Horizon,"  landing  at 
Boston,  and  safely  reaching  Iowa 
City  by  rail  July  8,  1856.  The  com- 
pany with  which  young  Samuel 
crossed  the  plains  under  the  direc- 
tion of  Captain  Edward  Martin  was 
outfitted  with  hand  carts  at  Florence, 
near  Omaha,  and  this  company  prob- 


ably suffered  as  many  hardships  and 
privations  during  their  journey  to 
Salt  Lake  City  as  any  of  the  many 
companies  which  made  this  hazardous 
trip  in  the  early  pioneer  days.  Sam- 
uel's older  brother,  Joseph,  died  as 
a  result  of  the  hardships  of  the  jur- 
ney  shortly  after  the  company  arrived 
in  Utah.  After  reaching  Utah,  the 
Jackson  family  soon  decided  to 
locate  at  Nephi  where  Samuel  spent 
many  of  his  boyhood  days  helping  to 
guard  the  homes  of  the  Saints  against 
the  Indian  attacks,  which  were  not 
uncommon  in  those  days.  In  the 
spring  and  summer  of  1863  he  made 
another  trip  to  the  Missouri  river 
with  ox  team  to  assist  in  the  trans- 
porting of  other  emigrants.  On  Dec. 
31,  1867,  he  married  Hannah  Jaques, 
by  whom  he  had  five  children, 
namely,  Samuel,  jun.,  William,  Ber- 
necia,  Lafayette  and  Mary  Hannah. 
By  a  plural  wife  (Martha  Ann  Jack- 
son) he  had  three  other  children 
(Vida,  Fannie  and  Jessie).  He  built 
a  home  at  Nephi  and  was  engaged  in 
freighting  and  agricultural  pursuits. 
On  Sept.  17,  1881,  he  entered  the 
missionary  field,  laboring  in  Tennes- 
see and  Alabama  where  he  made 
many  friends  and  converts,  being 
honorably  released  in  November, 
.1883.  He  was  ordained  a  High 
Priest  by  Joel  Grover  Dec.  2,  1885, 
and  was  set  apart  as  second  counselor 
to  Bishop  David  Udall  of  the  Nephi 
Second  Ward,  which  position  he  held 
with  honor  until  he  decided  to  make 
his  home  in  another  State,  when  he 
was  honorably  released  in  188  8.  Be- 
ing a  great  lover  of  the  western 
wilds  and  one  who  appreciated  a  big 
open  country,  he  moved  to  the  San 
Luis  Valley,  in  Colorado,  in  the 
spring  of  1888,  and  spent  a  year  tak- 
ing up  land  and  preparing  a  home  for 
his  family  who  followed  him  a  year 
later.  He  burned  the  first  kiln  of 
brick  made  in  the  vicinity  of  Man- 
assa, Colorado,  built  a  house  on  his 
ranch  on  the  San  Antonito  river,  east 
of  Manassa,  and  later  a  fine  residence 


BIOGRAPHICAL  ENCYCLOPEDIA. 


421 


in  the  town.  His  first  venture  in  the 
sheep  business  was  very  discourag- 
ing, but  with  the  assistance  of  his 
sons  he  persevered  until  the  Jackson 
flocks  became  widely  known  for  their 
superiority.  He  organized  the  Jack- 
son Investment  Company  of  which 
corporation  he  was  president  and  at 
the  time  of  his  death  was  vice  presi- 
dent of  the  Colonial  State  Bank  of 
Manassa,  Colorado,  which  position  he 
had  held  for  a  number  of  years.  He 
was  ordained  a  Bishop  of  the  Man- 
assa Ward  Feb.  16,  1896,  and  held 
this  position  until  May  6,  1917,  when 
he  was  honorably  released  on  account 
of  failing  health.  As  a  Bishop  he  was 
noted  for  his  conscientious  hard  work 
and  self-sacrifice.  He  was  especially 
kind  to  the  poor  and  always  en- 
couraged the  downcast  and  disheart- 
ened, always  seeking  the  development 
and  up-building  of  the  community. 
Honored  and  beloved  by  all,  he  died 
at  St.  George,  Utah  (where  he  had 
gone  hoping  to  benefit  his  health. 
May  3,  1919 

JACOBS,  Henry  Chariton,  a  Pat- 
riarch in  the  Church,  was  born 
March  22,  1846,  on  the  Chariton 
river  in  Iowa  (his  birthplace  sug- 
gesting his  name)  while  his  mother 
was  in  the  exodus  with  the  refugees 
from  Nauvoo.  His  father,  Henry  B. 
Jacobs,  who  was  born  in  Jefferson 
county.  New  York,  had  joined  the 
Church  in  183  2,  his  family  being 
among  the  first  to  accept  the  faith. 
His  mother  "(who  was  caring  for 
another  small  boy  at  the  time  Chari- 
ton was  born)  later  became  known 
as  one  of  President  Brigham  Young's 
wives  and  beloved  by  the  people  gen- 
erally. From  the  father's  side  Pat- 
riarch Jacobs  also  inherited  sturdi- 
ness  of  character  and  devotion  to  the 
cause  of  truth.  Chariton's  grand- 
father on  his  mother's  side,  William 
Huntington,  came  of  old  Revolution- 
ary stock,  and  he  could  trace  his  an- 
cestry back  to  Simon  Huntington, 
who  arrived  in    America    from    Eng- 


land in  162  0.  William  Huntington 
belonged  to  the  High  Council  at  Nau- 
voo, Illinois,  and  later  presided  over 
the  branch  of  the  Church  at  Mt.  Pis- 
gah,  Iowa.  At  Winter  Quarters  Mrs. 
Jacobs,  the  mother  of  Henry  Chari- 
ton, was  married  to  President  Brig- 
ham  Young,  and  came  to  Salt  Lake 
Valley  with  him  in  1848.  Here  she 
soon  achieved  prominence  as  a  leader 
and  as  a  wholesouled,  sympathetic 
worker  for  the  general  welfare,  be- 
ing president  of  the  Relief  Society 
of  the  whole  Church  for  a  number  of 
years.     She  lived  until  19  01  and  left 


behind  her  a  beautiful  example  of 
the  good  that  it  is  possible  for  a  de- 
voted cheerful  woman  to  accomplish. 
Henry  Chariton  came  to  Salt  Lake 
Valley  in  his  mother's  arms,  and  was 
reared  in  the  home  of  the  illustrious 
spiritual  leader  and  pioneer.  Presi- 
dent Brigham  Young,  as  one  of  his 
own  children.  Being  naturally  a  keen 
observer,  and  having  an  ideal  mother 
to  guide  him,  Chariton  became  im- 
bued with  the  ideal  home  atmosphere 
in  which  he  was  reared,  and  he  had 
indelibly  stamped  into  his  life  the 
lessons  of  breadth  of  mind,  honor, 
self  reliance,  thrift  and  devotion  to 
God.  He  received  frequent  recogni- 
tion,  too,   from   his   illustrious   step- 


422 


LATTER-DAY   SAINT 


father  and,  being  a  natural  lover  of 
adventure  and  travel,  made  several 
extensive  trips  with  President  Young. 
Important  among  these  early  activi- 
ties, was  the  mission  to  Fort  Limhi 
on  the  Salmon  river  (now  in  Idaho) 
in  1857,  at  a  time  when  there  were 
no  houses  between  Brigham  City  and 
Oregon.  At  this  time  Chariton  was 
but  eleven  years  old  and  the  impres- 
sions he  received  strengthened  his 
faith  for  life.  Five  years  later  (1862) 
he  crossed  the  plains  and  came  back 
with  a  company  of  "Mormon"  emi- 
grants led  by  Captain  Ansel  P.  Har- 
mon. Frequently,  too,  President 
Young  took  young  Chariton  to  St. 
George  and  other  distant  points  as  a 
teamster.  In  this  way  the  young  man 
became  well  and  favorably  known  to 
practically  all  of  the  leading  families 
of  Utah.  These  wonderful  experi- 
ences were  valuable  to  Chariton  and 
to  others,  for  the  boy  never  forgot  a 
name,  a  face,  an  impression,  or  an 
Important  event,  and  consequently 
he  could  to  the  time  of  his  death  give 
a  sketch  of  many  of  Utah's  leading 
families.  Perhaps,  no  resident  of 
Utah  was  better  acquainted  with  the 
early  history  of  this  State  than  was 
Henry  C.  Jacobs.  His  position  in 
President  Young's  family  gave  him 
first  hand  information  on  every 
phase  of  life,  for,  as  is  known  by  all, 
the  great  pioneer  was  not  only  a 
spiritual  leader,  but  was  the  leading 
figure  in  industrial,  educational  and 
governmental  affairs.  He,  too,  con- 
trolled and  directed  amusements  and 
miscellaneous  activities.  Therefore, 
young  Chariton  learned  every  essen- 
tial detail  in  the  various  lines  of 
community  development,  and  could 
give  the  names,  dates  and  important 
events  connected  with  the  progress 
of  the  Territory.  In  1867,  Bro.  Jacobs 
was  called  to  fill  a  mission  to  Great 
Britain,  where  he  labored  until  18  70, 
during  the  last  year  of  which  time 
he  presided  over  the  Scottish  mis- 
sion. Upon  his  return  home  he  was 
met  at  the  depot  by  President  Young, 


who  accompanied  him  home  and  said 
as  they  entered  the  home  of  the  wife 
and  mother,  "Zina,  here  is  your  son, 
a  better  man  than  when  he  went 
away."  Patriarch  Jacobs  was  bap- 
tized and  confirmed  a  member  of  the 
Church  by  Elder  Edmund  Ellsworth, 
March  22,  1854.  On  April  17,  1862, 
he  was  endowed,  being  ordained  an 
Elder  by  Bishop  Alonzo  H.  Raleigh, 
and  in  the  fall  of  the  same  year  was 
ordained  a  Seventy  in  the  Third 
Quorum  of  Seventy.  On  April  25, 
1873,  he  was  ordained  a  High  Priest 
by  Apostle  Orson  Pratt  and  became 
a  member  of  the  first  High  Council 
of  the  Sevier  Stake.  He  was  or- 
dained Bishop  of  the  Ogden  Fifth 
Ward  Dec.  24,  1909,  and  was  released 
May  5,  1914,  at  which  time  he  was 
ordained  a  Patriarch  by  David  O.  Mc- 
Kay. As  Bishop  Bro.  Jacobs  was 
known  as  a  loving  father  to  all  his 
people,  and  as  a  true  servant  of  God 
who  always  sought  divine  guidance. 
As  Patriarch  he  enjoyed  unusual 
spiritual  power.  Patriarch  Jacobs  was 
characterized  by  a  spirit  of  sunshine 
and  cheerfulness.  At  no  time  did  he 
admit  defeat,  and  never  did  he  have 
time  to  frown  and  talk  of  the  dark 
things  of  life.  This  characteristic, 
coupled  with  a  ready,  incisive,  yet  al- 
ways sensible  wit,  which  was  supple- 
mented by  a  sure  Insight  in  human 
nature,  made  him  a  friend  and  coun- 
selor to  thousands.  In  addition  to 
this,  system  and  order  were  a  part  of 
his  very  fiber.  Being  endowed  with 
these  splendid  qualities,  he  was  a 
natural  teacher  and  friend  of  boys 
and  girls,  and  was  admirably  fitted 
for  the  position  of  district  probation 
officer,  which  office  he  held  for  ten 
years  at  Ogden.  It  is  to  be  doubted 
if  any  man  in  Utah  has  done  more 
to  start  unfortunate  boys  and  girls 
toward  true  standards  of  manhood 
and  womanhood  than  did  Patriarch 
Jacobs,  through  his  labor  in  the 
juvenile  court.  Brother  Jacobs  lived 
in  Salt  Lake  City  until  1872,  when 
he  went  to  Sevier  county  and  there 


BIOGRAPHICAL   ENCYCLOPEDIA. 


42; 


I 


spent  five  years  as  a  farmer.  From 
1877  to  1884  he  worked  for  the  Utah 
and  Nevada  Railway  Company  under 
the  direction  of  William  W.  Riter, 
being  in  charge  of  the  construction 
and  operating  department  part  of 
the  time.  In  1884  he  became  man- 
ager of  the  Utah  Lime  and  Cement 
Company's  kiln,  but  remained  with 
them  but  a  short  time.  In  1889  he 
purchased  eight  hundred  acres  of 
land  in  Bear  River  valley,  but  after 
one  year  on  the  ranch  sold  his  pro- 
perty at  a  good  profit.  He  then  came 
to  Ogden  and  after  being  associated 
with  the  Boyle  Furniture  Company 
for  a  few  years  he  went  to  West 
Weber  in  1894  and  worked  as  a  very 
successful  farmer  until  1900,  when 
he  went  to  Idaho  and  Canada  in  re- 
sponse to  a  call,  and  assisted  in  the 
work  of  colonization.  He  returned 
to  West  Weber,  but  moved  to  Ogden 
in  October,  1904,  where  he  resided 
until  the  time  of  his  death,  which 
occurred  Oct.  14,  1915.  Henry  Chari- 
ton Jacobs  married  Susan  Stringham, 
eldest  child  of  Briant  Stringham  and 
Susan  Ashby,  April  23,  1871.  Mrs. 
Jacobs  died  suddenly,  Oct.  26,  1892, 
leaving  her  husband  and  five  small 
children,  two  children  having  pre- 
ceded her  to  the  grave.  In  1893 
(July  7th)  Bro.  Jacobs  married 
Emma  Rigby,  daughter  of  President 
William  F.  Rigby  of  the  Fremont 
Stake,  Idaho,  and  eight  children 
blessed  their  home.  Patriarch  Jacobs 
was  survived  by  thirteen  children. 
The  members  of  the  first  family  are 
Henry  C.  Jacobs,  jun.  (a  merchant 
in  Mount  Pleasant),  Zebulon  W. 
Jacobs  (a  practicing  attorney  in 
Cardston,  Canada),  Murray  K.  Jac- 
obs (a  fruit  grower  in  Riverdale, 
Utah),  Elsie  (now  Mrs.  Henniger  of 
Magrath,  Canada),  and  Briant  S. 
Jacobs  (a  school  teacher  and  fruit 
grower  in  Riverdale,  Utah).  The 
sons  and  daughters  of  the  second 
family  are:  Susan,  Mary,  Emma, 
Vilate,  Oa,  Heber  Grant,  Wm.  Rigby 
and  Joseph  Smith.     Bro.  Jacobs  was 


also  survived  by  his  wife  Emma  and 
a  sister,  Mrs.  Zina  Young  Card,  of 
Salt  Lake  City.  Patriarch  Jacobs  was 
not  only  a  worthy  citizen  and  an 
active  Church  worker,  but  was  an 
ideal  father.  His  family  is  pointed 
to  as  a  model  in  order,  love  and  ser- 
vice. The  noble  man's  last  words 
were  appropriately  addressed  to  his 
dear  family  when  he  urged  them  to 
cultivate  the  spirit  of  God  as  the 
greatest  of  all  gifts. 

JACOBSEN,  Jacob  Baltzer,  Bishop 
of  Manti  South  Ward  (South  Sanpete 
Stake),  Sanpete  county,  Utah,  was 
born  Feb.  25,  1868,  at  Milton,  Mor- 
gan county,  Utah,  the  son  of  Baltzer 
Jacobsen  and  Anna  Marie  Sorensen. 
In  1876  he  moved  with  his  parents 
to  Wisconsin,  where  he  was  baptized 
Oct.  5,  1884,  by  Lewis  Anderson. 
Soon  afterwards  he  was  ordained  a 
Priest  and  labored  as  a  local  travel- 
ing Elder,  doing  missionary  labor 
from  May  25,  1885,  to  April  21,  1886, 
in  Wisconsin.  He  was  then  ordained 
an  Elder  and  continued  his  mis- 
sionary labor  until  Dec.  31,  1886, 
when  he  returned  to  Utah  and  located 
in  Mill  Creek,  Salt  Lake  county. 
From  1888  to  1891  he  acted  as 
second  counselor  to  George  Saville  in 
the  presidency  of  the  13th  Quorum 
of  Elders  in  the  Salt  Lake  Stake.  He 
also  acted  as  superintendent  of  a 
Sunday  school  in  Mill  Creek  branch 
No.  1  about  two  years.  After  moving 
to  the  Eleventh  Ward,  Salt  Lake  City, 
he  was  called  to  act  as  a  special  Ward 
teacher  among  the  Scandinavians. 
He  moved  to  Manti,  Sanpete  county, 
in  1898,  where  he  served  as  secre- 
tary of  the  Manti  South  Ward  Sun- 
day school,  counselor  in  the  Ward  Y, 
M.  M.  I.  A.  and  second  counselor  in 
the  presidency  of  the  Tenth  Quorum 
of  Elders.  In  1900  (June  24th)  he 
was  called  to  preside  over  the  Elders' 
in  the  Manti  South  Ward.  In  Novem- 
ber, 1901,  he  was  called  to  labor  as 
a  Stake  aid  in  the  Y.  M.  M.  I.  A. 
work    and    in    February,    1902,    was 


424 


LATTER-DAY   SAINT 


chosen  as  second  counselor  in  the 
Stake  presidency  of  Y.  M.  M.  I.  A. 
He  was  ordained  a  High  Priest  Aug. 
9,  1903,  by  Lewis  Anderson  and  set 
apart  to  act  as  second  counselor  to 
Bishop  Lewis  C.  Kjaer,  which  posi- 
tion he  held  until  Feb.  6,  1915,  when 
he  was  ordained  a  Bishop  by  Anthon 
H.  Lund  and  set  apart  to  preside 
over  the  Manti  South  Ward,  which 
position  he  still  holds.  In  a  secular 
way  Bishop  Jacobsen  served  as  city 
trustee  from  July,  r903,  until  the 
consolidation  of  the  Manti  schools  in 
1916,  when  he  was  duly  elected  as  a 
member  of  the  Board  of  Education, 
and  he  is  now  president  of  said 
board.  From  1912  to  1916  he  served 
as  mayor  of  Manti  City.  Otherwise 
Bro.  Jacobsen  is  a  brick  manufac- 
turer by  occupation.  In  18  91  (Sept. 
2nd)  he  married  Inger  Anna  Gud- 
mundsen,  daughter  of  Niels  Peter 
and  Marie  Gummundsen,  who  was 
born  Nov.  5,  1870,  near  Silkeborg, 
Denmark.  She  bore  her  husband  one 
child  (Orson  B,)  and  died  Jan.  9, 
1893.  In  1895  (December  18th)  Bro. 
Jacobsen  married  Lena  Peterson 
(daughter  of  Peter  and  Anna  Ander- 
son), who  was  born  Nov.  24,  1867,  at 
Horsted,  Thisted  amt,  Denmark.  This 
wife  has  borne  her  husband  seven 
children,  namely,  Hazel  Mary,  Leah 
Anna,  Naomi  Lena,  Jacob  Baltzer, 
Geniel  Lilly,  Vilate  Helen  and  Thelma 
Eliza. 

JARDINE,  James  Beveridge,  first 
Bishop  of  Trenton  (Benson  Stake), 
Cache  county,  Utah,  was  born  Dec.  6, 
1860,  at  Wellsville,  Cache  county, 
Utah,  the  son  of  John  Jardine  and 
Agnes  Beveridge.  He  was  baptized 
June  1,  1869,  by  Robt.  Leatham;  or- 
dained a  Deacon  in  January,  1877, 
by  John  Jardine,  and  acted  as  presi- 
dent of  a  Deacons'  quorum,  presi- 
dent of  the  Ward  Y.  M.  M.  I.  A.  and 
secretary  and  superintendent  of  the 
Ward  Sunday  school.  He  moved  to 
Clarkston  with  his  parents  in  Feb- 
ruary,   1877,    and   resided   there   till 


1884,  when  he  was  called  to  Trenton 
to  preside;  later  he  returned  to 
Clarkston,  where  he  has  resided  ever 
since.  He  was  ordained  an  Elder 
Feb.  6,  1881,  by  John  Jardine;  or- 
dained a  High  Priest  Feb.  9,  1884, 
by  Chas.  O.  Card;  ordained  a  Bishop 
Feb.  9,  1884,  by  Chas.  O.  Card  and 
set  apart  to  preside  over  the  Trenton 
Ward.  He  filled  this  position  three 
years.  In  1889-1891  he  filled  a  mis- 
sion to  Great  Britain,  laboring  in 
Scotland  and  Ireland.  For  several 
years  he  acted  as  superintendent  of 
the  Clarkston  Sunday  school  and 
since  Aug.  18,  1891,  he  acted  as  first 


counselor  to  President  Roskelley  in 
the  Cache  Stake  High  Priests' 
quorum.  He  now  presides  over  the 
High  Priests  locally.  Bro.  Jardine  is 
a  farmer  by  occupation;  he  has 
served  his  fellow  citizens  as  justice 
of  the  peace  and  school  trustee,  presi- 
dent of  the  town  board,  etc.  By  his 
wife,  Annie  Stewart  Heggie,  whom 
he  married  Sept.  17,  1884,  in  the 
Logan  Temple,  he  has  had  nine  chil- 
dren,  four  sons  and  five  daughters. 

JARDINE,  John,  Bishop  of  Clarks- 
ton (Benson  Stake),  Cache  county, 
Utah,  was  born  Oct.  31,  1830,  at  Lan- 


BIOGRAPHICAL  ENCYCLOPEDIA. 


425 


arkshire,  Scotland,  the  son  of  Richard 
Jardine  and  Sarah  Wilson.  Becoming 
a  convert  to  "Mormonism,"  he  was 
baptized  January  29,  1849,  by  his 
brother,  James  Jardine;  ordained  a 
Teacher  and  labored  as  a  local  mis- 
sionary in  Scotland;  ordained  a  Priest 
April  9,  1851,  by  Robt.  L.  Campbell, 
and  appointed  to  preside  over  a 
branch  of  the  Church;  ordained  an 
Elder  July  23,  1851,  by  Jos.  Clem- 
ents; emigrated  to  Utah  in  1859, 
crossing  the  Atlantic  in  the  ship 
"Samuel  Curling"  and  the  plains  in 
Edward  Stevenson's  company;  or- 
dained a  High  Priest  and  Bishop  May 
20,  1877,  by  Franklin  D.  Richards. 
He  acted  as  Bishop  till  June  22,  1902, 
and  was  ordained  a  Patriarch  in 
August,  1902,  by  Apostle  Marriner 
W.  Merrill.  He  acted  as  temporary 
Bishop  at  Wellsville  in  1875-1876, 
while  Bishop  Wm.  H.  Maughan  filled 
a  mission.  Bishop  Jardine  died  at 
Clarkston,  August  8,  1903.  He  was 
twice  married,  his  first  wife,  Agnes 
Beveridge,  whom  he  married  Aug.  15, 
1851,  bore  him  nine  children,  four 
boys  and  five  girls;  he  married  his 
second  wife  (Elizabeth  Griffiths)  in 
July,  1884;  she  had  no  children. 

JENSEN,  Alma  Larsen,  Bishop  of 
the  Dayton  Ward  (Oneida  Stake), 
Franklin  county,  Idaho,  was  born 
July  4,  1864,  at  Mendon,  Cache 
county,  Utah,  the  son  of  Ole  Ander- 
son Jensen  and  Annie  Marie  Larsen. 
He  moved  with  his  parents  to  Clarks- 
ton when  an  infant  and  afterwards 
resided  successively  in  Newton,  Smith- 
field  and  Clarkston.  He  was  bap- 
tized July  9,  1872,  by  Simon  Smith; 
received  a  common  school  education; 
was  ordained  a  Priest  November  29, 
1877,  by  Bishop  John  Jardine.  He 
moved  to  Rigby,  Idaho,  in  1884,  and 
was  ordained  a  Seventy  May  18,  1885, 
by  Seymour  B.  Young,  and  acted  as 
second  assistant  superintendent  of 
Sunday  Schools  in  the  Bannock  Stake. 
In  1887  (Feb.  18th)  he  was  called 
and    set   apart    to    labor   as    a   home 


missionary  in  the  Bannock  Stake  and 
was  released  from  that  position  to 
act  as  second  assistant  of  the  Stake 
superintency  of  Sunday  schools.  In 
1886  (Oct.  27th)  he  married  Mary  B. 
Jardine  of  Clarkston  in  the  Logan 
Temple.  He  labored  as  a  home  mis- 
sionary in  the  Bannock  Stake  and 
acted  as  secretary  of  the  7th  quorum 
of  Seventy  for  nineteen  years.  In 
April,  1909,  he  moved  to  Dayton, 
where  his  wife  died  July  8,  1909.  On 
July  13,  1909,  he  was  ordained  a 
High  Priest  and  Bishop  by  Rudger 
Clawson  and  set  apart  to  preside  over 
the  Dayton  Ward,  succeeding  Stephen 
James  Callahan.  In  1910  (March 
23rd)  he  married  Eldina  Erickson, 
daughter  of  Bengt  Jenson  Erickson 
and  Anna  Sophia  Danielson  of  Bear 
River  City,  Utah.  By  his  first  wife 
Bro.  Jensen  had  five  children,  name- 
ly Anna  Maria,  Agnes,  Mary,  Sarah 
and  Alma.  His  second  wife  has  borne 
him  three  children,  namely,  Lavor, 
Reta  and  Phoebe,  all  born  in  Dayton. 

JENSEN,  James  Peter,  Bishop  of 
the  Sanford  Ward  (San  Luis  Stake), 
Conejos  county,  Colorado,  was  born 
April  5,  1873,  in  Fountain  Green, 
Sanpete  county,  Utah,  the  son  of 
Jens  Jensen  and  Katrine  Christine 
Miller.  He  was  baptized  May  4,  1882, 
by  C.  J.  Christiansen  at  Fountain 
Green,  and  accompanied  his  parents 
to  Colorado  in  188  2,  when  only  nine 
years  old.  At  Richfield,  where  the 
family  located,  he  took  an  active  part 
in  Church  matters  from  his  earliest 
youth.  He  was  ordained  a  Deacon 
and  acted  as  secretary,  counselor  and 
president  of  a  Deacons'  quorum;  was 
ordained  an  Elder  in  the  Manti  Tem- 
ple by  John  D.  T.  McAllister  and  or- 
dained a  Seventy  by  Francis  M.  Ly- 
man, Jan.  14,  1896,  and  set  apart  for 
a  mission  to  the  Southern  States, 
where  he  labored  3  2  months,  princi- 
pally in  Alabama.  Both  before  and 
after  filling  that  mission  he  was  a 
student  in  the  B.  Y.  Academy  at 
Provo,    Utah.      In    1901    he    filled    a 


426 


LATTER-DAY   SAINT 


special  mission  in  the  interest  of  Y. 
M.  M.  I.  A.  in  the  Bannock  Stake, 
Idaho.  From  his  earliest  youth  he 
was  a  diligent  Sunday  school  worker 
and  later  a  Religion  Class  teacher. 
He  was  ordained  a  High  Priest  April 
27,  1902,  by  Albert  R.  Smith  and  set 
apart  to  act  as  second  counselor  to 
Bishop  Coombs  in  Richfield,  Colo- 
rado, and  served  in  that  capacity  un- 
til December,  1905,  when  he  moved 
to  Sanford  and  there  acted  as  Ward 
clerk  and  president  of  the  Ward  Y. 
M.  M.  I.  A.  He  was  afterwards  chosen 
as  a  member  of  the  High  Council  and 
Stake  president  of  Y.  M.  M.  I.  A.  He 
was  ordained  a  Bishop  May  21,  1911, 
by  George  F.  Richards  and  set  apart 
to  preside  over  the  Sanford  Ward, 
which  position  he  still  holds.  In  1902 
(April  2nd)  he  married  Lettie  M.  Ste- 
vens, daughter  of  Walter  Stevens  and 
Marietta  Mace,  who  was  born  Sept. 
14,  1877.  This  marriage  has  been 
blessed  with  eight  children,  namely: 
Leila,  Marba,  Melva,  James  Stevens, 
Faye,  Walter  LeGrande,  Ardell  and 
Josephine.  Bishop  Jensen  is  a  farmer 
and  stockraiser  by  avocation  and  filled 
many  positions  of  honor  and  respon- 
sibility in  the  communities  where  he 
has  resided. 

JENSEN,  Martin  Marinus,  third 
Bishop  of  Mantua,  Box  Elder  county, 
Utah,  was  born  Dec.  8,  1858,  at  Bur- 
lington, Iowa,  the  son  of  Peter  Chris- 
tian Jensen  and  Annie  Christine  Pet- 
ersen. He  was  baptized  Aug.  28, 
1870,  by  Frederik  Christiansen;  con- 
firmed the  same  day  by  Hans  Peter 
Jensen;  ordained  an  Elder  in  1875; 
ordained  a  Seventy  in  1885;  ordained 
a  High  Priest  and  set  apart  as  a 
member  of  the  High  Council  of  the 
Box  Elder  Stake,  and  ordained  a 
Bishop  Dec.  6,  1908,  by  Apostle 
Francis  M.  Lyman,  which  position 
he  held  until  his  death  which  oc- 
curred Nov.  21,  1910.  In  1883-1885 
he  filled  a  mission  to  Denmark.  In 
1883  (March  29th)  he  married  Nico- 
line    Christine   Jensen    (daughter   of 


Peter  Jensen  and  Anna  Maria  Han- 
sen), who  was  born  Aug.  20,  1861, 
in  Brigham  City.  This  marriage  was 
blessed  with  nine  children,  namely, 
Cleopatra  L.,  Martin  M.  jun.,  Perci- 
val,  Leroy,  Orion  P.,  Arnold  R., 
Josie  D.,   Alston   M.,   Orville   M.   and 


Constance  C.  Bishop  Jensen  was  a 
farmer  and  sheep  raiser  by  avoca- 
tion; he  also  taught  school  for 
several  years  and  served  two  terms 
as  county  assessor  of  Box  Elder 
county. 

JEPSON,  James,  Jun.,  Bishop  of 
Virgen  City  (St.  George  Stake),  Wash- 
ington county,  Utah,  was  born  Oct. 
13,  1854,  at  Centerville,  Davis  coun- 
ty, Utah,  the  son  of  James  Jepson  and 
Eleanor  Nightingale.  In  1862  he 
moved  with  his  parents  to  Virgen, 
where  he  was  baptized  in  the  spring 
of  1863,  by  his  father.  After  first 
being  ordained  a  Deacon  and  a  Priest, 
he  was  ordained  an  Elder  in  1873  by 
Bishop  John  Parker.  He  was  or- 
dained a  High  Priest  Dec.  18,  1881, 
by  Henry  Eyring,  and  set  apart  as 
first  counselor  to  Bishop  John  Parker 
of  Virgen  City,  which  position  he  held 
until  January,  1883.  He  was  set 
apart  as  second  counselor  to  Bishop 
Leroy  W.  Beebe  of  Virgen  City  Ward, 
by   Apostle   F.    M.    Lyman,   Sept.    25, 


BIOGRAPHICAL  ENCYCLOPEDIA. 


427 


1902,  and  held  that  position  until 
Sept.  10,  1905,  when  he  was  set  apart 
as  first  counselor  to  Bishop  Samuel 
Isom  of  the  Virgen  Ward  (formerly 
Virgen  City  Ward).  He  was  ordained 
a  Bishop  and  set  apart  to  preside  over 
the  Virgen  Ward  Sept.  4,  19  07,  by 
Apostle  F.  M.  Lyman.  Bishop  Jep- 
son  has  also  held  many  positions  of 
responsibility  and  trust  of  a  secular 
nature.  Thus  he  was  president  of  the 
Hurricane  Canal  Company  for  seven 
years,  school  trustee  twenty  years, 
justice  of  the  peace  for  six  years, 
county  commissioner  two  years,  and 
president  of  the  Co-op.  Store  at  Vir- 
gen five  years.  In  1877  (Jan.  8th) 
he  married  Lucinda  Stratton  (daugh- 
ter of  Anthony  J.  Stratton  and  Mar- 
tha Jane  Lane),  who  was  born  Jan. 
12,  1856,  at  Cedar  City,  Utah.  She 
was  the  mother  of  eight  children, 
and  died  Feb.  19,  1894.  In  1902 
(Sept.  25th)  Bro.  Jepson  married 
Grace  Wright  Gibson  (daughter  of 
William  Wright  and  Lovinia  Norm- 
inton,  who  was  born  Jan.  29,  1875,  at 
Duncan,  Utah.  She  bore  him  six 
children.  Bishop  Jepson's  fourteen 
children  were  the  following:  James 
A.,  Martha,  Mary  E.,  Rosilpha,  Lucy, 
Lucinda,  Jesse  N.,  Artemisia,  Janues 
W.,  Leah,  Vilate,  Thomas  N.,  Wood- 
row  and  Lauretta.  Bishop  Jepson 
is  a  farmer  and  stockraiser,  and  has 
been  a  resident  of  Hurricane,  Wash- 
ington county,  Utah,  since  1910.  He 
was  president  of  the  board  of  trustees 
of  the  town  of  Hurricane  for  six 
years. 

JOHNSEN,  Erastus,  an  active  El- 
der and  missionary  of  the  Richmond 
Ward  (Benson  Stake),  Cache  county, 
Utah,  was  born  April  18,  1883,  in 
Richmond,  Utah,  the  son  of  Niels  Jo- 
hansen  and  Margaret  Rasmussen.  He 
was  baptized  Aug.  6,  1891,  by  Olonzo 
D.  Merrill,  ordained  successively  to 
positions  in  the  lesser  Priesthood  and 
took  an  active  part  in  local  Church 
matters  from  his  early  youth.  He 
was  ordained  an  Elder  April  6,  1908, 


by  James  L.  Burnham  and  filled  a 
mission    to    Scandinavia    in    1908    to 

1911,  laboring  in  the  Bergen  confer- 
ence, Norway,  part  of  the  time  as 
president  of  the  Aalesund  branch  and 
the  latter  part  as  president  of  the 
Bergen  conference.  During  his  mis- 
sion of  34  months  he  baptized  19  per- 
sons. After  his  return  home  he  re- 
sumed other  active  Church  duties. 
He  was  ordained  a  Seventy  March  3, 

1912,  by  Clarence  L.  Funk  and  was 
subsequently  chosen  as  first  coun- 
selor in  the  presidency  of  the  Scan- 
dinavian meetings  at  Richmond;  has 
also  taken  an  active  part  in  Mutual 


Improvement  work  and  is  at  present 
a  member  of  the  Y.  M.  M.  I.  A.  board 
of  the  Benson  Stake.  In  1912  (Oct. 
9th)  he  married  Nellie  Maria  Mer- 
rill, daughter  of  Apostle  Marriner  W. 
Merrill  and  Maria  Kingsbury,  which 
marriage  has  been  blessed  with  four 
children,  namely,  Adonia  M.,  Erma 
M.,  Orlo  M.  and  Erastus  C.  Bro. 
Johnsen  is  a  farmer  by  occupation 
and  is  a  most  active  and  useful  mem- 
ber of  the  Church  and  the  community 
at  large. 

JOHNSON,  Otto  Emmerick,  an  act- 
ive Elder  in  the  Oneida  Stake  and  a 
resident  of  Preston,  Franklin  county. 


428 


LATTER-DAY   SAINT 


Idaho,  was  born  June  4,  1855,  on  the 
island  of  Bornholm,  the  son  of  Niels 
Johnson  and  Anna  C.  Granlund.  His 
parents  had  migrated  from  Sweden 
to  Bornholm  about  five  years  pre- 
vious. Otto,  becoming  a  convert  to 
"Mormonism,"  was  baptized  when 
about  ten  years  of  age,  and  three 
years  later  (1867)  emigrated  to  Utah 
in  company  with  his  sister,  fifteen 
years  old,  crossing  the  Atlantic  ocean 
in  the  ship  "John  Bright"  and  was 
seven  weeks  on  the  ocean.  During 
the  voyage  they  encountered  heavy 
storm  and  ran  short  of  food  and 
water.  They  traveled  by  railroad  as 
far  as  Laramie,  whence  they  crossed 
the  mountains  in  Capt.  Chester  Love- 
land's  ox  train,  which  arrived  in  Salt 
Lake  City  Aug.  20,  1868.  After  his 
arrival  in  the  Valley  Bro.  Johnson 
worked  awhile  for  Lorenzo  D.  Young, 
near  Tooele,  and  for  other  farmers  in 
that  part  of  the  country,  and  later  he 
found  employment  with  a  number  of 
parties  in  Salt  Lake  City.  In  1875 
(Feb.  15th)  he  married  Annie  M. 
Jensen,  after  which  he  resided  suc- 
cessively in  Brigham  City  and  Snow- 
ville  (Utah),  Malad  (Idaho),  and 
Logan  (Utah).  In  1884  he  moved  to 
Preston,  Idaho,  where  he  still  resides. 
His  wife  has  borne  him  nine  sons  and 
three  daughters,  all  of  whom  are  liv- 
ing. Two  of  his  sons  have  already 
filled  foreign  missions  and  two  have 
lately  served  in  the  world's  war.  In 
his  earlier  years  Bro.  Johnson  worked 
as  a  cabinetmaker,  carpenter  and  mill- 
wright and  has  been  an  ardent  stu- 
dent of  music  from  his  youth.  Of 
late  years  he  has  made  farming  his 
principal  occupation.  In  different 
places  where  he  has  resided  he  has 
acted  as  choir  leader,  and  when  he 
first  arrived  at  Preston  he  was  called 
by  Bishop  Wm.  C.  Parkinson  to  con- 
duct a  choir  which  was  soon  after- 
wards organized.  Altogether  he  has 
been  actively  engaged  as  chorister  for 
about  forty  years,  part  of  the  time 
having  had  charge  of  the  Oneida  Stake 
choir.      He  also   taught  vocal  music 


in  the  Oneida  Stake  Academy  for 
two  years.  In  1907-1909  he  filled  a 
mission  to  Scandinavia,  laboring  in 
Norway,  where  he  conducted  the 
Christiania  branch  choir  with  great 
success.  This  choir,  which  consisted 
of  about  sixty  members,  was  and  is 
now  known  as  one  of  the  best  Latter- 
day  Saint  choirs  in  the  world,  outside 
of  the  Stakes  of  Zion.  The  excellent 
singing  by  this  choir  has  brought 
thousands  of  visitors  to  the  meetings 
in  Christiania  and  been  the  indirect 
means  of  making  many  converts  to 
"Mormonism."  Bro.  Johnson,  during 
this  mission,  also  worked  very  dili- 
gently otherwise  as  a  missionary  and 
baptized  twenty  persons;  he  also  con- 
firmed twenty-one  converts.  Return- 
ing home  in  1909,  Bro.  Johnson  had 
charge  of  a  company  of  Saints  and 
Elders  (fifty-six  souls)  who  crossed 
the  Atlantic  in  the  magnificent  steam- 
ship "Megantlc,"  which  arrived  in 
Montreal  July  30,  1909.  After  his  re- 
turn home  Elder  Johnson  was  called 
into  the  presidency  of  the  Scandi- 
navian organization  of  the  Oneida 
Stake  of  Zion,  which  position  he  occu- 
pied until  recently,  when  his  Ward 
duties  and  other  labors  rendered  it 
impracticable  for  him  to  hold  that 
position  any  longer.  Bro.  Johnson, 
since  his  earliest  youth,  has  always 
been  a  faithful  and  energetic  Church 
worker,  ever  willing  and  ready  to  re- 
spond to  any  duty  required  of  him  in 
a  Church  capacity  as  well  as  in 
secular  matters. 

JOHNSON,  Seth,  a  Patriarch  in  the 
Panguitch  Stake  of  Zion,  and  a  resi- 
dent of  Cannonville,  Garfield  county, 
Utah,  was  born  March  6,  1839,  at 
Carthage,  Hancock  county,  111.,  the 
son  of  Joel  H.  and  Annie  P.  Johnson. 
In  his  early  childhood  he  passed 
through  many  scenes  of  suffering  in 
common  with  so  many  other  Latter- 
day  Saints  at  that  time.  When  only 
four  years  of  age  he  was  with  the  rest 
of  his  father's  family  turned  out  of 
the    family    home    by    the    mob,    the 


BIOGRAPHICAL  ENCYCLOPEDIA. 


429 


home  being  burned  in  the  sight  of  its 
owners.  The  family  fled,  leaving 
bloody  footprints  behind  them  in  the 
snow.  Bro.  Johnson's  mother  died 
when  he  was  only  1  Vz  years  of  age. 
Seth  became  well  acquainted  with  the 
Prophet  Joseph,  who  married  his  aunt 
as  a  plural  wife.  The  family  was 
driven  from  place  to  place  in  Illinois 
until  May,  1848,  when  they  started 
for  the  Rocky  Mountains.  Seth  was 
baptized  on  the  journey  by  Jedediah 
M.  Grant  and  passed  through  all  the 
incidents  and  hardships  that  followed 
pioneer  life  in  the  Valley,  including 
the  experience  with  grasshoppers  and 
crickets  and  raids  by  the  red  men. 
He  accomanied  George  A.   Smith  on 


his  mission  to  Iron  county  in  1850- 
1851,  and  afterwards  took  part  in  the 
founding  of  Cedar  City  and  Summit 
in  Iron  county.  He  was  ordained  a 
Teacher  in  1856,  an  Elder  in  1857 
and  a  Seventy  in  1860.  In  1861  he 
drove  an  ox  team  across  the  plains  to 
the  Missouri  river  to  help  gather  the 
poor.  That  year  also  (Nov.  11,  1861), 
he  married  Miss  Lydia  Ann  Smith, 
daughter  of  Thomas  P.  and  Mary  D. 
Smith.  In  18  62  he  farmed  and  raised 
a  large  crop  of  grain.  As  early  as 
185  7  he  enlisted  in  the  territorial 
militia  and  served  in  the  same  for  37 


years.  He  helped  to  make  a  road  to 
the  Upper  Rio  Virgen  Valley,  southern 
Utah,  in  1859,  and  crossed  the  plains 
again  with  ox  teams  to  gather  the 
poor  in  1863.  In  1864  he  sold  out 
his  farm  at  Summit,  Iron  county,  and 
moved  south  to  Virgen  City.  In  Jan- 
uary, 1866,  he  was  a  member  of  an 
expedition  sent  out  against  savage  In- 
dians who  had  killed  two  men  and 
driven  off  a  large  number  of  horses, 
cattle  and  sheep.  On  this  expedition 
he  traveled  through  deep  snow  in 
very  cold  weather  and  had  a  number 
of  narrow  escapes  from  being  killed 
by  the  arrows  and  bullets  of  the 
savages.  In  June,  1866,  he  moved  to 
Toquerville,  where  he  lived  for  nearly 
six  years.  While  there  he  carried  the 
U.  S.  mail  for  a  term  of  four  years 
from  Cedar  City  to  St.  George,  and 
while  there  he  held  a  number  of  civil 
offices,  such  as  justice  of  the  peace, 
superintendent  of  district  schools  in 
Kane  county,  etc.  He  also  taught 
school  for  two  years.  In  1865  (Oct. 
8th)  he  married  Martha  Jane  Strat- 
ten.  During  the  years  1867,  1868 
and  1869,  he  participated  in  several 
expeditions  against  hostile  Indians. 
In  November,  1872,  he  moved  to 
Hillsdale,  on  the  Sevier  river,  in  Iron 
(now  Garfield)  county,  Utah.  There 
he  also  taught  school  for  a  number 
of  years.  When  the  Panguitch  Stake 
of  Zion  was  organized,  April  23, 
1877,  he  was  ordained  a  High  Priest 
by  Apostle  Orson  Pratt  and  set  apart 
as  a  High  Councilor  in  that  Stake. 
He  was  ordained  a  Bishop  by  Apostle 
Erastus  Snow,  Aug.  2,  1877,  and  set 
apart  to  preside  over  the  Hillsdale 
Ward.  During  the  following  39  years 
he  acted  either  as  a  High  Councilor 
or  a  Bishop  in  the  Panguitch  Stake 
and  also  did  some  home  missionary 
work.  Among  the  many  Church  and 
civil  offices  held  by  him  may  be  men- 
tioned that  he  served  as  superintend- 
ent of  Sunday  schools,  president  of 
Y.  M.  M.  I.  A.'s,  as  well  as  instructor 
in  Sunday  schools,  mutuals  and 
Priesthood   classes.      He  also   served 


430 


LATTER-DAY   SAINT 


as  registration  officer  and  justice  of 
the  peace.  In  1895  (Sept.  2nd)  he 
was  ordained  a  Patriarch  by  Apostle 
Francis  M.  Lyman.  For  more  than 
sixty  years  Bro.  Johnson  has  lived  on 
the  frontiers  and  assisted  to  build 
new  settlements  and  protect  them 
from  hostile  Indians.  He  is  the  father 
of  25  children,  22  of  whom  grew  to 
man  and  womanhood.  His  wife  Lydia 
Ann  bore  him  14  children,  namely, 
Mary  Julia,  Seth  Alvin,  George  Wash- 
ington, Lydia  Annie,  Joel  Hills,  Nephi, 
Sixtus  Ellis,  Seth,  Janet  Matilda, 
Susan  Sariah,  Saraphine,  Thomas 
Smith,  Emily  Selesta  and  Jessie.  His 
wife  Martha  Jane  was  the  mother  of 
eleven  children,  namely,  Martha  Ann, 
Lydia  Drucilla,  Jane,  Dora,  Anthony 
Sratton,  Lydia  Ann,  Mary  Rozilpha, 
Parley  Pratt,  Samuel  Smith,  Francis 
Marion  and  Joseph  Elmer. 

JONES,  Lewis  Daniel,  second  coun- 
selor in  the  presidency  of  the  Malad 
Stake  of  Zion,  was  born  June  28, 
1861,  at  Willard,  Box  Elder  county, 


Utah,  the  son  of  Lewis  W.  Jones  and 
Sarah  Williams.  He  was  baptized 
June  28,  1868,  at  Henderson  Creek, 
Oneida  county,  Idaho,  by  Lewis  W. 
Jones,    and    confirmed   the   following 


Sunday.  He  was  ordained  a  Deacon 
Dec.  14,  1875,  at  Spanish  Fork,  Utah, 
by  Jas.  Boyack,  and  ordained  an  El- 
der a  few  years  later.  He  was  or- 
dained a  Seventy  in  the  52nd  quorum 
by  Jesse  H.  Dredge,  April  2,  1884,  at 
Portage,  Utah,  and  was  set  apart  as 
one  of  the  council  of  that  quorum 
Feb.  12,  1888.  In  1880  (Aug.  31st) 
he  was  appointed  superintendent  of 
the  Pleasant  View  Sunday  school.  He 
was  ordained  a  High  Priest  and 
Bishop  June  13,  1897,  by  Apostle 
Francis  M.  Lyman  and  set  apart  to 
preside  over  the  Pleasant  View  Ward. 
In  1908  (Sept.  27th)  he  was  chosen 
as  second  counselor  in  the  Malad 
Stake  presidency.  Bro.  Jones  has 
always  been  an  energetic  and  faithful 
Church  worker;  he  taught  the  Indian 
school  at  Washakie,  Utah,  for  six 
years  (1892-1898),  and  also  taught 
in  other  schools  four  years,  being  in 
the  service  ten  years  in  all.  He  served 
as  a  member  of  the  Idaho  legislature 
two  terms  (1901-1902,  1907-1908), 
was  elected  a  member  of  the  senate 
first  and  afterwards  a  member  of  the 
house.  March  19,  1903,  he  was  ap- 
pointed a  member  of  the  insane  asy- 
lum board  by  Gov.  John  T.  Morrison. 
He  spent  the  season  1888-1889  as  a 
recorder  in  the  Logan  Temple.  In 
1882  (March  16th)  he  married  Bea- 
trice F.  Smith  (daughter  of  John 
Smith  and  Sophia  Fortune),  who  was 
born  Feb.  22,  1858,  at  Spanish  Fork, 
Utah  county,  Utah.  John  G.,  Sarah 
S.  and  Beatrice  S.  are  the  children  of 
this  marriage. 

JONES,     Lehi     Willard     Thomas, 

first  Bishop  of  Cedar  City  West 
Ward  (Parowan  Stake),  Iron  county, 
Utah,  was  born  Nov.  15,  1854,  in 
Cedar  City,  Utah,  the  son  of  Thomas 
Jones  and  Sage  Treharne.  He  was 
baptized  when  eight  years  old  and 
ordained  successively  to  the  offices 
of  Deacon,  Teacher,  Priest,  Elder  and 
Seventy,  the  latter  ordination  taking 
place  June  20,  1883.  In  1888-1889 
he  filled  a  mission  to  the  Southern 


BIOGRAPHICAL   ENCYCLOPEDIA. 


431 


States  and  returned  home  after  be- 
ing absent  eighteen  months,  on  ac- 
count of  ill  health.  He  was  ordained 
a  High  Priest  by  Francis  M.  Lyman 
in  March,  1892,  and  set  apart  as 
first  counselor  to  Bishop  Wm.  H. 
Corry.  This  position  he  held  until 
June  19,  1908,  when  he  was  chosen 
and  ordained  a  Bishop  by  Francis 
M.  Lyman  and  set  apart  to  preside 
over  the  Cedar  City  West  Ward.  Bro. 
Jones'  Church  activities  commenced 
in  his  youth,  when  he  acted  as  presi- 
dent of  a  Deacons'  quorum,  and  he 
also   figured   prominently   in   Sunday 


school  and  Y.  M.  M.  I.  A.  labor.  He 
has  also  held  a  number  of  civil  of- 
fices. Thus  he  acted  one  term  as 
mayor  of  Cedar  City,  served  as 
county  commissioner  two  terms  and 
as  city  councilman  several  terms.  In 
1878  (Feb.  13th)  he  married  Henri- 
etta Lunt  (daughter  of  Henry  Lunt 
and  Mary  Ann  Wilson),  who  was 
born  Nov.  12,  1858,  at  Cedar  City, 
Utah.  She  bore  her  husband  nine 
children,  namely,  Thomas  W.,  Kumen 
L.,  Henry  L.,  Henrietta  L.,  Ann  L., 
Lehi  M.,  Martha,  Erastus  L.  and 
William  L.  Bishop  Jones  is  a 
farmer  and  stock  raiser  by  avoca- 
tion and  has  done  considerable  work 
in  the  Manti  Temple. 


JONES,  3Iiles  Levanter,  first  Bishop 
of  the  Ogden  Seventh  Ward  (Ogden 
Stake),  Weber  county,  Utah,  was 
born  Oct.  31,  1866,  at  Ogden,  Utah, 
the  son  of  Miles  Hudson  Jones  and 
Ann  Elizabeth  Rollins.  He  was  bap- 
tized when  eight  years  old  and  or- 
dained successively  to  the  offices  of 
Deacon,  Priest,  Elder,  Seventy  and 
High  Priest.  When  ordained  to  the 
latter  office  he  was  set  apart  as  a 
High  Councilor  in  the  Ogden  Stake. 
He  also  acted  as  president  of  the  Y. 
M.  M.  I.  A.  and  as  assistant  superin- 
tendent of  the  Sunday  school  in  the 
Mound  Fort  Ward.  In  1905-1907  he 
filled  a  mission  to  Great  Britain, 
laboring  in  the  London  conference, 
part  of  the  time  as  president  of  the 
same.  He  was  ordained  a  Bishop  Nov. 
1,  1908,  by  Patriarch  John  Smith  and 
set  apart  to  preside  over  the  Ogden 
Seventh  Ward  which  was  then  organ- 
ized. Bishop  Jones  has  been  an  active 
citizen  and  has  filled  many  positions 
of  a  secular  nature,  besides  attending 
to  his  ecclesiastical  duties.  Thus  he 
served  two  terms  (188  6-1889)  as  city 
councilman  and  has  acted  on  the  city 
commission  of  Ogden  since  1915.  In 
1888  (Oct.  10th)  he  married  Isabella 
Chase  (daughter  of  Elisha  W.  Chase 
and  Harriet  Barker),  who  was  born 
May  12,  1868,  in  Ogden.  She  has 
borne  her  husband  eight  children, 
namely:  Harriet  Ann,  Raymond  M., 
Ezra  B.,  Olive  M.,  Marion,  Wilbur  C., 
Elizabeth  and  Lois.  Bishop  Jones  is 
at  present  manager  of  the  M.  L.  Jones 
Coal  &  Ice  Company  at  Ogden. 

JONES,  Thomas  William,  Bishop 
of  the  Paragoonah  Ward  (Parowan 
Stake),  Iron  county,  Utah,  was  born 
Jan.  24,  1872,  at  Greenville,  Beaver 
county,  Utah,  the  son  of  William  E. 
Jones  and  Sarah  Davis.  He  was  bap- 
tized Jan.  24,  1880,  by  his  father; 
ordained  a  Deacon  and  afterwards  an 
Elder;  acted  as  president  of  the  Para- 
goonah Ward  Y.  M.  M.  I.  A.;  ordained 
a  High  Priest  Sept.  25,  18  97,  by  Fran- 
cis M.  Lyman  and  set  apart  as  second 


432 


LATTER-DAY   SAINT 


counselor  to  Bishop  Stephen  S.  Bar- 
ton. He  served  in  that  capacity  until 
June  21,  1908,  when  he  was  ordained 
a  Bishop  by  Francis  M.  Lyman  and 


an  Elder  June  12,  1906,  by  Anthony 
W.  Ivins.  In  1907  (Oct.  2nd)  he 
married  Gorilla  Maria  Allred,  in  the 
Salt  Lake  Temple.  She  died  Feb.  8, 
1908,  of  pneumonia,  at  Dublan,  Mex- 
ico. In  1910  (Oct.  5th)  Bro.  Jones 
married  Edna  Payne  in  the  Salt  Lake 
Temple.  She  has  borne  her  husband 
four  children,  namely.  Gorilla,  Viva, 
Emma  and  Gleo.  Bro.  Jones  has  been 
an  active  Ghurch  worker  since  his 
earliest  youth.  Thus  he  has  labored 
as  a  Sunday  school  teacher,  a  Y.  M. 
M.  I.  A.  missionary,  and  as  a  coun- 
selor in  the  presidency  of  an  Elders' 
quorum  until  he  was  exiled  from 
Mexico  in  1912.  After  leaving  Mexico 
he  assisted  his  brethren  in  buying 
land  and  locating  Mexican  Latter-day 
Saint  refugees  in  Virden,  New  Mexico. 
He  was  ordained  a  High  Priest  and 
Bishop  Nov.  5,  1916,  by  Apostle  Hy- 
rum  M.  Smith  and  set  apart  to  preside 
over  the  Virden  Ward,  which  position 
he  still  holds.  At  present  he  is  fill- 
ing a  mission  for  the  Church  at  El 


set  apart  to  preside  over  the  Para- 
goonah  Ward,  which  position  he  still 
holds.  In  1892  (June  25th)  he  mar- 
ried Margaret  E.  Prothero  (daughter 
of  Jonathan  Prothero  and  Elizabeth 
Reese),  who  was  born  June  6,  1870, 
at  Paragoonah.  She  has  borne  her 
husband  six  children,  namely:  Mar- 
garet D.,  Sarah  E.,  Leona,  Lillias, 
Thomas  G.  and  J.  Howard.  Farming 
and  stock-raising  are  Bishop  Jones' 
principal  avocations.  At  present  he 
serves  as  a  member  of  the  Para- 
goonah town  board. 


JONES,  Willard  Edwin,  Bishop  of 
the  Virden  Ward  (St.  Joseph  Stake), 
Grant  county.  New  Mexico,  was  born 
Nov.  30,  1882,  in  Payson,  Utah  coun- 
ty, Utah,  the  son  of  Timothy  Jones 
and  Mary  Jane  Done.  He  was  bap- 
tized March  7,  1891,  by  Joseph  Rob- 
inson, moved  with  his  parents  and  Paso,  Texas,  being  set  apart  for  that 
family  to  Mexico  in  the  fall  of  1896,     mission  Sept.  6,  1919,  and  is  enjoying 


locating  in  Golonia  Dublan;  was  or 
dained  a  Deacon  in  October,  1897, 
and  advanced  through  other  steps  in 
the  Aaronic  Priesthood,   laboring  as 


his  labors. 

JORANSON      (Yorgason),     James, 

Bishop    of    Fountain    Green,    Sanpete 


Ward  teacher,  etc.     He  was  ordained    county,  Utah,  was  born  May  16,  1847, 


BIOGRAPHICAL  ENCYCLOPEDIA. 


433 


at  Malmo,  Malmohus  ISn,  Sweden, 
the  son  of  Soren  Joranson  and  Caro- 
line Jensen.  He  was  baptized  in 
1856  and  emigrated  to  Utah  in  1857 
with  his  parents,  locating  in  Moroni, 


Sanpete  county,  where  he  resided  un- 
til 1884,  when  he  moved  to  Fountain 
Green,  having  been  called  to  preside 
there  as  Bishop.  He  was  ordained  to 
that  position  in  1884,  by  Francis  M. 
Lyman,  and  held  the  position  until 
1891,  when  he  was  released,  and 
moved  to  California,  where  he  resided 
for  twenty-five  years,  mostly  at  Los 
Angeles.  While  a  resident  of  Utah 
he  was  principally  engaged  in  farm- 
ing and  sheep-raising.  Having  just 
returned  from  California,  he  died  at 
Fountain  Green  May  16,  1917.  Dur- 
in  his  life  he  married  six  wives, 
namely:  Christina  Johnson,  who  bore 
him  nine  children;  Frances  M.  Tilby, 
who  was  the  mother  of  five  children; 
Amy,  who  bore  him  three  children; 
Maria  Peterson,  who  became  the 
mother  of  two  children;  Hannah  01- 
sen,  who  bore  him  one  child,  and 
Catherine,  who  became  the  mother  of 
two  children.  Bishop  Joranson  filled 
two  missions  to  Sweden,  the  first  one 
in  1881-1883,  when  he  presided  over 
the  Sk§,ne  conference,  and  the  other 

Vol.  Ill,  No.  28. 


in  1886-1888,  when  he  presided  over 
the  Stockholm  conference. 

JORGENSEX,  Rasmus  G.,  second 
Bishop  of  the  Central  Ward  (Ban- 
nock Stake),  Bannock  county,  Idaho, 
was  born  April  8,  1863,  at  Aarhus, 
Denmark,  the  son  of  Jorgen  Just 
Jorgensen  and  Anna  Mette  Rasmus- 
sen.  He  emigrated  to  Utah  in  1884 
and  was  ordained  an  Elder  in  1886 
by  Rasmus  Christoffersen  at  Lynne, 
Weber  county,  Utah.  In  April,  1900, 
he  was  appointed  to  preside  over  the 
Lynne  East  Branch  and  in  1901  he 
was  ordained  a  High  Priest  by  Ma- 
thias  F.  Cowley,  and  chosen  as  first 
counselor  to  Bishop  Daniel  E.  Lloyd. 
He  served  in  that  capacity  until 
1903,  when  he  was  sustained  as  act- 
ing Bishop  of  the  Central  Ward;  and 
ordained  a  Bishop  Jan.  10,  1904,  by 
John  W.  Taylor.  After  living  in 
Ogden  from  1884  to  1898,  he  settled 
at  Central,  Idaho,  where  he  still  re- 
sides. In  1886  (April  28th)  he  mar- 
ried  Thora   P.    Jensen    (daughter   of 


Hans  H.  Jensen  and  Lise  Lechbant), 
who  was  born  Dec.  21,  1866,  on  Sjael- 
land,  Denmark.  This  marriage  has 
been  blessed  with  fourteen  children, 
namely,  Elbert  Erastus,  born  March 
2,  1887;  Jennie  Laura,  born  July  15, 
1888;    Anna   Teresa,    born     April     6, 

January  24,  1920 


434 


LATTER-DAY   SAINT 


1890 
1891 
1893 
1894 
1896 
1897 
1899 
1902 
1904 
1905 
1908, 
3,  19 


Pearl  Elize,  born  Sept.  10, 
Hans  Helbert,  born  May  22, 
Dora  Emelie  E.,  born  Dec.  4, 
Clara  Adela,    born   in   March, 

Arthur  Lorenzo,  born  June  2  5, 
Rosette  Arilla,  born  Dec.   19, 

Herman  Rastus,  born  Sept.  19, 

Lyla   Amanda,    born   April    7, 

Jessie    Just,    born     Nov.     2  6, 

Leo    Lyman,     born     Jan.     18, 

and  Howard  Chester,  born  Aug. 

10. 


KELLER,  James  Morgan,  fourth 
Bishop  of  the  Mink  Creek  Ward 
(Oneida  Stake),  Oneida  county,  Ida- 
ho, was  born  June  9,  1865,  at  Man- 
tua, Box  Elder  county,  Utah,  the  son 
of  James  M.  Keller  and  Karen  Mar- 
grethe  Valentine.  He  was  baptized 
July  17,  1877,  by  Bishop  Rasmus 
Rasmussen;     ordained    an    Elder    in 


navia,  laboring  in  the  Aalborg  confer- 
ence. In  1907-1909  he  filled  a  sec- 
ond mission  to  Scandinavia,  this  time 
laboring  in  Norway,  one  year  as  pres- 
ident of  the  Bergen  conference.  He 
moved  to  Mink  Creek  with  his  father 
in  1872  and  has  since  that  time  fol- 
lowed farming  and  stock-raising  as 
his  principal  avocations.  In  1883 
(Dec.  9th)  he  married  Mary  Ellen 
Baird,  who  was  born  Oct.  28,  1867,  in 
Brigham  City,  the  daughter  of  Alex- 
ander Baird  and  Sarah  Delacy.  This 
marriage  has  been  blessed  with  eleven 
children,  four  boys  and  seven  girls, 
of  whom  ten  are  still  alive. 

KENNEDY,  John,  Bishop  of  the 
Argyle  Ward  (Woodruff  Stake),  Rich 
county,  Utah,  was  born  Oct.  12,  1847, 
at  Kilmarnock,  Ayrshire,  Scotland, 
the  son  of  John  Kennedy  and  Eliza- 


1880  by  Andrew  A.  Bjorn;  ordained 
a  High  Priest  June  17,  1892,  by  An- 
thon  H.  Lund  and  set  apart  as  second 
counselor  to  Bishop  Rasmus  Rasmus- 
sen.  Later  he  acted  as  first  counselor 
to  Bishop  Rasmus  Rasmussen  jun., 
ordained  a  Bishop  Feb.  26,  1910, 
by  Heber  J.  Grant  and  set  apart  to 
preside  over  the  Mink  Creek  Ward, 
having  previously  served  eight  months 
as  acting  Bishop.  In  1889-1891  Bro. 
Keller   filled   a    mission    to    Scandi- 


beth  Black.  He  emigrated  to  Utah 
with  his  parents  in  1869  and  settled 
in  Almy,  Uinta  county,  Wyoming.  Af- 
ter being  ordained  an  Elder  (Jan.  22, 
1872),  he  married  Hannah  Simpson 
(daughter  of  Geo.  Simpson  and  Jane 
Sanders),  who  was  born  Oct.  20,  1866, 
at  Renfrewshire,  Scotland.  After  giv- 
ing birth  to  sixteen  children  (ten  boys 
and  six  girls),  his  wife  died  July  19, 
1902.    In  1907  (April  4th)  Bro.  Ken- 


BIOGRAPHICAL   ENCYCLOPEDIA. 


435 


nedy  married  Anna  Simpson,  a  widow 
with  ten  children,  who  was  born  June 
2,  1862,  the  daughter  of  John  Smith 
and  Jane  Loremer.  Bro.  Kennedy  was 
ordained  a  Bishop  Oct.  7,  1897,  by 
Heber  J.  Grant  and  set  apart  to  pre- 
side over  the  Argyle  Ward,  which 
position  he  held  until  1913,  when  the 
ArgyleWard  was  disorganized.  Bishop 
Kennedy  has  served  two  terms  as  a 
county  commissioner  and  three  years 
as  justice  of  the  peace.  His  chief  oc- 
cupations are  farming  and  stock  rais- 
ing, and  he  is  also  engaged  in  the 
sheep  business.  After  his  first  ar- 
rival in  Utah  he  labored  as  a  coal 
miner  at  Almy,  Wyoming. 

KEYSOR,  Guy  Messiah,  a  member 
of  the  Mormon  Battalion,  was  born 
Oct.  6,  1816,  at  Black  Rock,  Erie 
county.  New  York,  the  son  of  Henry 
Bearnard  Keysor  and  Elizabeth  Sco- 
vill.  His  father  was  of  German  des- 
cent, but  several  generations  back. 
Becoming  a  convert  to  "Mormonism," 
he  was  baptized  on  April  1,  1843,  and 
about  eighteen  months  afterwards  he 
traveled  2,000  miles  to  testify  to  the 
truth  of  the  gospel  to  his  relatives, 
on  which  mission  he  baptized  his 
mother.  He  was  in  Nauvoo,  Illinois,  as 
early  as  1844  and  helped  to  build  the 
Temple  there.  He  was  ordained  a 
Seventy  Dec.  25,  1844,  and  became  a 
member  of  the  13th  quorum  of  Sev- 
enty. The  following  year  he  partici- 
p  d  in  the  general  exodus  of  the 
I  ^..lus  from  Nauvoo.  Having  reached 
the  Missouri  river,  he  enlisted  in  the 
Mormon  Battalion  in  July,  184  6,  and 
marched  as  a  private  in  Company  B 
(Jesse  D.  Hunter,  captain)  to  San 
Diego,  California.  After  his  discharge 
he  marched  with  his  companions 
northward  along  the  coast  and  was 
employed  by  Mr.  Sutter  on  the  Amer- 
ican river  when  gold  was  discovered, 
early  in  1848.  He  remained  in  Cali- 
fornia until  18  50  when  he  made  his 
way  to  Utah.  For  many  years  he  was 
a  resident  of  Salt  Lake  City,  where 
he  followed  his  trade  as  a  carpenter 


and  builder  and  did  considerable  work 
in  connection  with  the  erection  of  the 
Salt  Lake  Temple.  In  1851  (Sept. 
1st)  he  married  Mary  Ann  Elvin,  who 
bore  him  two  children,  namely,  Guy 
Henry  and  Elizabeth  Mary.     His  wife 


died  Sept.  5,  1860.  Prior  to  that  he 
had  married  Ruth  Wyllie,  Sept.  19, 
1855,  and  Mary  Ann  George,  Feb.  27, 
1857.  About  the  year  1878  Bro.  Key- 
sor moved  to  Sevier  county,  Utah,  and 
became  a  resident  of  Richfield,  where 
he  spent  the  remainder  of  his  life, 
having  married  a  fourth  wife,  Ellen 
Diamond.  Bro.  Keysor  died  as  a  faith- 
ful Latter-day  Saint  in  Richfield,  Oct. 
3,  188  5.  In  one  of  his  recorded  tes- 
timonies he  writes:  "I  cannot  say,  as 
some  say,  that  I  left  everything  that 
was  near  and  dear  to  me  for  the  gos- 
pel's sake,  for  I  only  left  a  cold  and 
friendless  world,  and  when  I  em- 
braced the  gospel  I  obtained  every- 
thing that  was  near  and  dear  to  me, 
although  there  is  not  one  by  the  name 
of  Keysor  who  embraced  the  gospel 
except  mother  and  myself."  His  sec- 
ond wife,  Ruth,  died  March  25,  1891. 

KEYSOR,  Ruth  Wyllie,  wife  of  Guy 
Messiah  Keysor,  was  born  May  1, 
1830,  at  Johnson,  Lanarkshire,  Scot- 


436 


LATTER-DAY  SAINT 


land,  the  daughter  of  Oliver  Wyllie  Moroni,  Ephraim  Manassa  and  Ruth 
and  Mary  Ann  George.  Her  mother,  Susan  Independence.  Just  before 
together  with  her  children,  were  bap-  Johnston's  Army  arrived  in  the  Val- 
tized  early  in  January,  1847,  at  Glas-  ley  she,  like  many  others,  went  south 
^:MKVr  -r-.  *a^t  the  time  of  the  general  move)  as 

,  far   as   Salt   Creek    (Nephi).      Sister 

-^  —  -  -  Keysor    was    a    faithful    Latter-day 

Saint,  and  for  many  years  an  active 
member  of  the  Relief  Society  of  the 
8th  Ward,  Salt  Lake  City.  She  died 
in  Salt  Lake  City  March  25,  1891. 

KEYSOR,  AVilliam  George,  an  act- 
ive Elder  in  the  Church  and  a  resi- 
dent of  the  8th  Ward,  Salt  Lake  City, 
Utah,  was  born  Nov.  21,  1862,  in  Salt 
Lake  City,  the  son  of  Guy  Messiah 
Keysor  and  Ruth  Wyllie.  He  received 
a  common  school  education,  was 
raised  in  the  8th  Ward  and  baptized 
Feb.  5,  1878,  by  Joseph  McMurrin; 
he  was  ordained  successively  to  the 
offices  of  Deacon,  Elder  and  Seventy. 
Before  he  had  reached  the  age  of  21 

vears    he   made   adobes    and    built   a 
gow,  Scotland,  in  a  stream  where  they    ^^^^^       j^    ^ggg    ^^^^^.^j^    20th)    he 

had  to  break  the  ice  before  the  ordi-  jj^^rried  Sarah  Ann  Hawkins  in  the 
nance  could  be  performed.  The  fam-  ^ogan  Temple,  and  with  his  young 
ily  afterwards  moved  to  Manchester,  ^^..^^  ^^^^  possession  of  the  house  he 
England,  and  later  to  Liverpool, 
whence  they  sailed  for  America  on  a 
sailing  vessel.  On  the  voyage  Ruth 
took  sick,  and  when  about  three  days 
out  from  Liverpool,  according  to  her 
own  statement,  her  spirit  left  her 
body  and  visited  two  of  her  sisters 
who  had  been  left  in  England.  These 
two  sisters  desired  to  have  her  spirit 
remain  with  them,  but  she  refused  to 
stay,  telling  the  sisters  that  if  she  did 
so  her  body  would  be  thrown  over- 
board. The  next  morning  each  of  the 
two  sisters  set  out  in  search  of  the 
other,  in  order  to  recount  the  experi- 
ence of  the  night,  and  met  each  other 
on  the  way.  Sister  Ruth  and  her 
mother  crossed  the  plains  in  Captain 
Brown's  company  and  arrived  in  the 
Valley  Sept.  5,  1855.  She  became  the 
wife  of  Guy  Messiah  Keysor  of  Salt 
Lake  City  Sept.  19,  1885.  She  bore  had  erected  seven  years  before.  This 
her  husband  seven  children,  namely:  marriage  was  blessed  with  three  chil- 
Mary  Merselvia,  James  Barnard,  Wil-  dren,  namely,  Sarah  Ruth,  William 
liam  George,  Rebecca  Harriet,  Peter    Harold  and  Viola  May   (who  died  in 


BIOGRAPHICAL  ENCYCLOPEDIA. 


437 


infancy).  In  the  latter  part  of  1901 
Bro.  Keysor  was  called  on  a  mission 
to  the  Northern  States,  during  which 
time  he  labored  in  the  State  of  Wis- 
consin, principally  in  the  cities  of 
Milwaukee  and  Le  Crosse.  While 
thus  engaged  as  a  missionary  it  fell 
to  his  lot  to  perform  a  marriage  cere- 
mony which  made  a  Quaker  and  a 
Catholic  man  and  wife — something 
unusual,  indeed,  in  the  experience  of 
a  "Mormon"  Elder.  In  1913  (May 
19th)  Bro.  Keysor  was  ordained  a 
Seventy  by  John  H.  Vincent  and  at 
once  became  a  member  of  the  171st 
quorum  of  Seventy.  His  wife  died 
June  21,  1919,  in  Salt  Lake  City. 

KEYSOR,  Sarah  Ann,  wife  of  Wm. 
George  Keysor  and  daughter  of  John 
Bennett  Hawkins  and  Sarah  Moulton, 
was  born  Oct.  29,  1859,  in  Salt  Lake 


City,  Utah,  and  baptized  in  August, 
1871,  by  Howard  O.  Spencer.  Her 
mother's  family,  emigrating  from 
England,  crossed  the  Atlantic  in  the 
ship  "Horizon"  and  the  plains  in  Capt. 
James  G.  Willie's  handcart  company 
in  1856.  Her  father  was  one  of  the 
early  blacksmiths  in  Salt  Lake  City 
and  also  served  as  a  guard  in  Echo 
Canyon  before  Johnston's  army  came 


into  the  Valley.  The  family  resided 
in  the  14th  Ward,  Salt  Lake  City,  for 
nearly  twenty  years.  After  moving 
to  the  8th  Ward  (Salt  Lake  City) 
Sarah  Ann  became  a  member  of  the 
Relief  Society  in  that  Ward  April  4, 
1872,  at  the  age  of  13  years.  In 
1875  she  was  appointed  assistant  sec- 
retary of  that  society  and  in  January, 
1881,  was  chosen  as  secretary.  She 
also  served  as  organist  for  a  number 
of  years,  or  until  she  departed  this 
life,  always  taking  a  great  interest  in 
Church  work,  ever  ready  to  do  her 
full  duty  at  all  times.  In  1889  (March 
20th)  she  married  William  George 
Keysor  in  the  Logan  Temple.  She 
had  three  children  born  to  her,  one  of 
whom  died  in  infancy.  The  remaining 
two  are  Sarah  Ruth  and  William  Har- 
old; the  latter  married  Florence 
Maria  Evans  of  Union,  Salt  Lake 
county.  Sister  Keysor  departed  this 
life  June  21,  1919,  at  Salt  Lake  City, 
as  a  faithful  Latter-day  Saint.  At  the 
time  of  her  demise  she  had  two  living 
children  and  two  grand  children 
(William  Cloris  and  Sarah  Maria 
Keysor). 

ItlMBxlLL,  Heber  Chase,  Bishop  of 
Eden  (St.  Joseph  Stake),  Graham 
county,  Arizona,  was  born  July  11, 
1872,  at  Paris,  Bear  Lake  county, 
Idaho,  the  son  of  David  Patten  Kim- 
ball and  Caroline  Marian  Williams. 
He  moved  with  his  parents,  when 
four  years  old,  to  Arizona  and  lived 
on  the  Walafil  Indian  reservation  at 
Hockberry,  Arizona,  about  two  years 
and  then  moved  to  Jonesville,  Salt 
River  Valley,  and  later  to  the  San 
Pedro  Valley,  when  nine  years  old. 
Two  years  later  his  father  died  and 
at  the  age  of  twelve  years  Heber 
Chase  went  to  work  logging  with  an 
ox  team  at  a  saw  mill  in  the  Hauchua 
Mountains.  That  year  the  Indians 
were  on  the  war  path  and  on  one 
occasion  Heber  Chase  rode  75  miles 
on  a  lame  mule,  all  alone,  expecting 
every  moment  to  be  killed  by  the 
angry  natives.   He  went  to  Utah  when 


438 


LATTER-DAY   SAINT 


sixteen  years  old  and  later  to  Star 
Valley,  Wyoming.  He  returned  to 
Arizona  five  years  later.  At  the  age 
of  23   he  made  all    preparations    to 


marry,  but  not  being  quite  satisfied 
with  his  choice  he  sought  the  Lord 
in  secret  prayer,  desiring  to  put  a 
thousand  miles  between  him  and  his 
"girl"  if  she  were  not  the  one  to 
make  him  happy.  This  led  to  his  re- 
moval to  St.  David,  Cochise  county, 
Arizona,  where  he  met  Mary  Louisa 
Trejo,  whom  he  married  Sept.  14, 
1896,  at  Thatcher,  Arizona.  This 
marriage  was  blessed  with  five  chil- 
dren, namely,  Marianna,  Heber 
Chase,  jun.,  Buela  Codd,  Vera  Trejo 
and  Zena  Trejo.  His  wife  died  in  Salt 
Lake  City,  but  her  interment  took 
place  at  St.  David.  Bro.  Kimball 
married  Sarah  E.  Trejo  (a  sister  of 
his  first  wife)  Jan.  1,  1909,  who  has 
borne  her  husband  six  children, 
namely,  Emily,  Louisa,  Milton  Chase, 
David  Patten,  Agnes  and  Trejo  Q. 
Both  Brother  Kimball's  wives  were 
daughters  of  Meliton  Gonzalos  Trejo, 
a  noted  Spanish-speaking  missionary 
and  translator  of  the  Book  of  Mor- 
mon into  the  Spanish  language.  Bro. 
Kimball  filled  a  mission  to  the  South- 
ern States  in  1902-1905,  having  been 


ordained  a  Seventy  Feb.  3,  1902,  by 
Andrew  Kimball.  For  several  years 
Bro.  Kimball  resided  at  Layton,  Gra- 
ham county,  Arizona,  but  was  called 
from  there  to  act  as  Bishop  of  Eden. 
He  was  ordained  a  High  Priest  and 
Bishop  June  7,  1919,  by  Apostle 
James  E.  Talmage  having  already 
moved  with  his  family  to  the  Eden 
Ward. 

KIMBALL,    Quince    Knowlton,      a 

Bishop  of  the  Houston  (now  Widt- 
soe)  Ward  (Panguitch  Stake),  Gar- 
field county,  Utah,  was  born  Feb.  15, 
1867,  in  Salt  Lake  City,  Utah,  the 
son  of  David  Patten  Kimball  and 
Caroline  M.  Williams.  He  was  bap- 
tized when  eight  years  old  in  Salt 
Lake  City  and  about  that  time  ac- 
companied his  father's  family  to  Ari- 
zona, residing  first  at  Lehi,  Maricopa 
county,  and  thence  moved  to  Saint 
David,  on  the  San  Pedro  river,  in 
Cochise  county.  At  the  age  of  fifteen 
years,  through  the  death  of  his  father, 
he  shouldered  the  cares  of  making  a 
living  for  his  mother  and  six  of  her 
children,  and  never  shirked  that  re- 


sponsibility until  they  were  all  able 
to  take  care  of  themselves.  When 
eighteen  years  of  age  he  moved  to 
Thatcher,  Graham  county,  where  he 


BIOGRAPHICAL   ENCYCLOPEDIA. 


439 


engaged  in  farming  and  labored  as  a 
Ward  teacher.  He  was  also  ordained 
a  Seventy.  Later,  he  returned  to 
Utah  and  located  temporarily  in 
Logan,  Cache  county.  In  18  90  (April 
23rd)  he  married  Mary  Emily  Mer- 
rill, after  which  he  took  his  wife  and 
his  mother's  family  to  Wyoming, 
locating  in  Bedford,  Lower  Salt  River 
Valley.  There  he  acted  as  superin- 
tendent of  the  branch  Sunday  school 
and  later,  when  the  Ward  was  or- 
ganized, he  was  ordained  a  High 
Priest  by  John  Henry  Smith  and  set 
apart  as  first  counselor  to  Bishop 
John  Thatcher.  He  held  this  posi- 
tion four  years,  after  which  he  moved 
back  to  Cache  Valley,  locating  in  the 
Benson  Ward,  where  he  acted  as  a 
Ward  teacher;  he  also  worked  in  the 
Logan  Temple.  In  1904-1907  he 
filled  a  mission  to  the  Central  States, 
laboring  principally  in  Louisiana  and 
Kansas.  After  his  return  home  he 
served  as  a  home  missionary  in  the 
Benson  Stake,  but  moved  to  Winder, 
Garfield  county,  Utah,  in  1911  and 
became  practically  the  founder  of 
that  town.  There  he  acted  as  pre- 
siding Elder  of  the  branch  from  July 
30,  1911,  to  the  summer  of  1912.  He 
made  a  temporary  move  to  Cache 
Valley,  Utah,  with  a  part  of  his 
family,  but  returned  to  Winder  (now 
Widtsoe)  in  January,  1913,  and 
helped  to  build  an  amusement  hall 
and  construct  a  water  system  on  to 
the  townsite.  He  was  ordained  a 
Bishop  Nov.  22,  1914,  and  set  apart 
to  preside  over  the  Winder  (Widtsoe) 
Ward,  being  ordained  by  Apostle 
Heber  J.  Grant  at  Circleville.  He 
held  this  position  until  1917,  when 
he  was  honorably  released  because 
of  business  which  took  him  away 
from  home.  Bishop  Kimball  has 
served  as  senator  in  the  Utah  legisla- 
ture from  the  tenth  district  of  Utah, 
comprising  Sevier,  Wayne,  Piute  and 
Garfield  counties. 

KUTTERER,  John  George,  fourth 
Bishop  of  the  Lund  Ward   (Bannock 


Stake),  Bannock  county,  Idaho,  was 
born  July  2,  1879,  at  Ludvigshafen, 
Germany,  the  son  of  Conrad  Kutterer 
and  Elizabeth  Bugh.  He  was  bap- 
tized when  eight  years  old  by  Jacob 
Zollinger;  ordained  successively  to 
the  office  of  Deacon,  Teacher  and 
Priest  when  quite  young;  ordained 
an  Elder  in  1905  by  Thos.  Olive;  or- 
dained a  Seventy  in  1909,  by  E.  Le- 
roy  Harrison;  ordained  a  High  Priest 
Dec.  4,  1915,  by  Jos.  F.  Smith,  jun. 
and  set  apart  as  an  alternate  member 
of  the  High  Council  of  the  Bannock 
Stake;    sustained    as    Bishop    of    the 


Lund  Ward  Feb.  2  0,  r916,  and  or- 
dained a  Bishop  May  21,  1916,  by 
Heber  J.  Grant.  In  1910-1911  he 
filled  a  mission  to  the  Southern 
States,  laboring  principally  in  Ken- 
tucky. For  several  years  he  acted  as 
a  counselor  in  the  Ward  Y.  M.  M.  I. 
A.  and  also  as  a  Stake  officer,  was 
assistant  superintendent  of  the  Ward 
Sunday  school,  superintendent  of  the 
Ward  Religion  Class  and  aid  in  the 
Stake  Religion  Class  work.  In  1905 
(June  21st)  he  married  Annie  L. 
Peterson  (daughter  of  August  Peter- 
son and  Annie  C.  Isaacson),  who  was 
born  Feb.  8,  1885,  at  Ogden,  Utah. 
Three  children  are  the  issue  of  this 
marriage,   namely.    Ruby   A.,   Lucille 


440  LATTER-DAY   SAINT 

M.  and  Elda.  Bro.  Kutterer  came  to  afterwards  he  was  ordained  a  Dea- 
Utah  in  1887  and  lived  at  Providence,  con  and  appointed  to  preside  over 
Cache  Valley,  until  1898,  when  he  the  Deacons'  Quorum  of  the  Seventh 
settled  permanently  at  Lund,  Idaho.  Ward.  About  1866  he  was  ordained 
Farming  and  stock  raising  are  the  an  Elder  by  Elder  Elias  Smith  and 
principle  avocations  of  Bishop  Kut-  in  1867  he  began  his  missionary 
terer.  labor  in  the   Sunday   schools   in   be- 

half of  the  "Juvenile  Instructor"  and 
LAMBERT,  Richard  Greves  Can-  ^j^^  ^^.^ed  as  assistant  superinten- 
non,  a  Patriarch  in  the  Liberty  Stake  ^^^^^  j^  ^-^le  Seventh  Ward  Sunday 
of  Zion,  was  born  July  2,  1850,  in  school.  In  October,  1872,  Bro.  Lam- 
Salt  Lake  City,  Utah,  the  son  of  ^^^^^  together  with  others  (at  the 
Charles  Lambert  and  Mary  Alice  Can-  suggestion  of  Pres.  Brigham  Young 
non.  As  a  boy  he  took  part  in  the  ^nd  George  Q.  Cannon)  organized  a 
early  development  of  the  country  by  Young  Men's  Improvement  Society  in 
herding  cows  and  sheep,   driving  ox     ^^^  Seventh  Ward,  Salt  Lake  City,  of 

which  he  was  chosen  as  president 
and  John  E.  Callister  as  secretary. 
The  record  of  this  society  was  taken 
by  Angelo  Cram  to  Kanab  and  there 
accidentally  destroyed  by  fire.  In 
October,  1873,  Bro.  Lambert  was 
called  on  a  mission  to  the  Sandwich 
Islands,  and  when  the  late  Apostle 
Orson  Pratt  set  him  apart  for  that 
mission  he  blessed  him  with  a  won- 
derful prophetic  blessing  which  has 
since  been  fulfilled  to  the  very  letter. 
At  the  request  of  President  Brigham 
Young  Elder  Lambert  married  a 
wife  and  took  her  with  him  to  the 
islands.  His  choice  was  Mary  Ann 
Jenkins,  daughter  of  Bishop  Thomas 
Jenkins  and  Ann  Smith.  After  their 
arrival  on  the  islands  Bro.  Lambert 
worked  on  the  sugar  mill  at  the  Laie 
teams,  hauling  rocks  from  the  quar-  plantation,  assisting  in  making  ma- 
ries  and  wood  from  the  mountains;  terial  improvements.  While  thus 
he  helped  to  build  roads  and  bridges  employed  he  broke  wild  oxen  to  the 
and  at  an  early  day  expressed  a  de-  yoke,  trained  mules  to  the  plough, 
sire  to  learn  the  trade  of  a  black-  built  a  smoke  stack  and  ploughed 
smith  which  avocation  he  followed  with  twelve  yoke  of  oxen.  Besides 
for  some  time.  He  was  apprenticed  this  he  did  much  missionary  labor, 
to  the  "Deseret  News"  and  learned  traveling  extensively  on  all  of  the 
the  art  of  printing  and  was  almost  islands  of  the  group;  the  Hawaiian 
constantly  in  the  employ  of  that  firm  language  came  to  him  as  a  spiritual 
until  1907,  except  when  filling  mis-  gift.  He  was  also  especially  blessed 
sions.  Early  in  life,  under  his  with  the  gift  of  healing  and  was  an 
mother's  careful  training,  he  de-  instrument  of  bringing  many  natives 
veloped  a  religious  desire  and  became  into  the  Church,  among  them  being 
an  active  Church  worker,  having  the  first  Maori  convert  from  New 
been  baptized  July  14,  1859,  by  Zealand.  During  his  mission,  which 
Bishop  Jonathan  Pugmire,  jun.    Soon    lasted  until  1897,  he  was  instrumental 


BIOGRAPHICAL  ENCYCLOPEDIA. 


441 


in  bringing  back  into  the  Church 
many  of  those  who  had  strayed  away 
under  the  administration  of  Walter 
M.  Gibson.  Two  sons  were  born  to 
him  while  on  this  mission,  namely, 
Richard  J.  and  Thomas  J.  After  his 
return  from  that  mission  in  1887 
Bro.  Lambert  acted  as  business  agent 
and  assistant  manager  of  the  "Des- 
eret  News."  He  was  ordained  a 
Seventy  in  1873,  a  High  Priest  in 
1908  and  a  Patriarch  Oct.  20,  1919, 
by  Anthon  H.  Lund.  In  his  labors 
on  the  "Deseret  News"  and  as  a  mis- 
sionary Bro.  Lambert  visited  every 
Stake  of  Zion  and  almost  every  Ward 
in  the  Church.  He  organized  mutual 
improvement  associations  in  the  Ha- 
waiian mission  and  has  always  been 
interested  in  mutual  improvement 
work.  He  is  also  a  diligent  Sunday 
school  worker,  and  has  filled  many 
positions  of  a  secular  nature.  Thus 
he  served  in  the  Utah  Legislature  in 
1894  and  was  a  member  of  the  con- 
stitutional convention  in  1895.  The 
constitution  of  the  State  of  Utah  was 
compiled  and  published  under  his 
direction.  His  first  wife  bore  him 
two  sons  and  five  daughters,  namely, 
Richard  J.,  Thomas  J.,  Matie,  Eva, 
Pearl  and  Tessie.  His  second  wife 
Martha  C.  Hovey  (whom  he  married 
October  4,  1884)  bore  him  five  chil- 
dren, namely,  George  Hovey,  Hardy 
H.,  Joseph  H.,  Martha  H.  and  Karl  H. 

I/EE,  Samuel  Marion,  the  fifth 
Bishop  of  the  Clifton  Ward  (Oneida 
Stake),  Franklin  county,  Idaho,  was 
born  Nov.  22,  1875,  in  Panaca,  Lin- 
coln county,  Nevada,  the  son  of 
Samuel  M.  Lee  and  Margaret  Mc- 
Murrin.  His  mother  died  when  he 
was  nine  days  old  and  Samuel  was 
raised  by  his  grandparents,  Joseph 
McMurrin  and  Margaret  Laing,  of 
Salt  Lake  City.  At  the  age  of  eigh- 
teen Samuel  moved  to  Clifton,  Idaho, 
where  he  has  been  engaged  as  a 
farmer  and  stock  raiser  ever  since. 
He  was  baptized  March  4,  1884,  by 
Joseph  W.  McMurrin,  ordained  a  Dea- 


con March  31,  1889,  by  Isaac  Brock- 
bank  and  later  ordained  a  Teacher 
and  a  Priest.  He  was  ordained  an 
Elder  May  11,  IS'dG,  by  Mathias  F. 
Cowley;  ordained  a  Seventy  Nov.  9, 
1903,  by  John  Henry  Smith;  ordained 
a  High  Priest  June  11,  1911,  by  Tay- 
lor Nelson  and  set  apart  as  a  coun- 
selor to  Bishop  James  W.  Davis  of 
the  Clifton  Ward.  He  was  ordained 
a  Bishop  June  6,  1914,  by  George  F. 
Richards  and  set  apart  to  preside 
over  the  Clifton  Ward,  which  position 
he  still  holds.  Prior  to  this  he  acted 
as  a  counselor  of  the  Eighth  Quorum 
of  Elders,  was  assistant  superinten- 
dent of  Sunday  school  and  afterwards 
superintendent,  acted  as  treasurer  of 
the  Oneida  Irrigation  District  since 
190  9  and  as  school  trustee  during 
the  past  seven  years.  In  1896  (May 
13th)  he  married  Louisa  Bingham 
(daughter  of  Calvin  Bingham  and 
Rachel  Henderson),  who  was  born 
Jan.  1,  1898,  in  Clifton,  Idaho.  She 
bore  her  husband  six  children, 
namely,  Samuel  Perry,  Harold  Bing- 
ham, Clyde  Bingham,  Waldo  Bing- 
ham, Stella  Bingham  and  Verda 
Bingham. 

IjEIGH,  Henry,  Counselor  in  the 
Stake  presidency  of  the  Parowan 
Stake  and  a  resident  of  Cedar  City 
(Parowan  Stake),  Iron  county,  Utah, 
was  born  Dec.  31,  1843,  in  Llanelly, 
North  Wales,  the  son  of  Samuel  Leigh 
and  Ann  Davis.  He  emigrated  to 
America  with  his  father's  family 
early  in  18  49.  Landing  at  New  Or- 
leans they  proceeded  up  the  Missis- 
sippi and  Missouri  rivers  to  Council 
Bluffs,  Iowa.  While  on  the  way 
cholera  broke  out  and  the  mother 
and  baby  were  among  the  ones  who 
died  of  this  disease.  In  1852  the 
family  emigrated  to  Utah,  crossing 
the  plains  in  William  Morgan's  com- 
pany. On  the  journey  Henry  was 
baptized  in  the  Platte  river  by  Wil- 
liam Morgan.  The  family  settled  in 
Cedar  City  the  same  year.  Here 
Henry   was    ordained   a   Deacon   and 


442 


LATTER-DAY   SAINT 


took  an  active  part  in  Church  af- 
fairs. He  was  ordained  a  Seventy 
Aug.  19,  1879,  and  became  a  mem- 
ber of  the   63rd  quorum  of  Seventy. 


In  1873-1874  he  filled  a  mission  to 
Great  Britain,  presiding  over  the 
Liverpool  conference.  He  returned 
from  that  mission  early  on  account 
of  ill  health.  He  was  ordained  a 
High  Priest  June  24,  1896,  by  Fran- 
cis M.  Lyman  and  set  apart  as  second 
counselor  to  President  Uriah  T.  Jones 
of  the  Parowan  Stake.  Later  (March 
22,  1903)  he  was  promoted  to  the 
position  of  first  counselor.  Brother 
Leigh  has  also  been  very  active  in 
secular  affairs  and  has  held  many 
civil  offices.  Thus  he  served  one 
term  (being  elected  Nov.  8,  1892) 
as  mayor  of  Cedar  City;  served  for 
several  terms  in  the  city  council; 
acted  as  justice  of  the  peace,  city 
treasurer,  manager  of  the  Cedar  City 
Co-op,  president  of  the  Cedar  City 
Sheep  Association,  and  county  super- 
intendent of  district  schools  (being 
elected  to  that  position  Aug.  5,  188'9, 
Aug.  3,  1891,  and  Dec.  30,  1895). 
Otherwise  his  main  vocations  in  life 
have  been  those  of  farmer,  stock 
raiser  and  merchant.  In  1879  (May 
19th)  he  married  Amy  Elizabeth 
Webster    (daughter  of  Francis  Web- 


ster and  Ann  Elizabeth  Parsons), 
who  was  born  Sept.  28,  1856,  on  the 
Platte  river,  while  her  parents  were 
crossing  the  plains  in  Capt.  Edward 
Martin's  handcart  company.  She 
bore  her  husband  ten  children,  as 
follows:  Ann  E.,  Samuel  and  Francis 
W.  (twins),  Amy  J.,  Sophia,  Violet, 
Henry  W.,  Wiruiifred,  Wilford  and 
Zelma. 

LESUEUR,  James  Warren,  presi- 
dent of  the  Maricopa  Stake  of  Zion 
and  a  resident  of  Mesa,  Maricopa 
county,  Arizona,  was  born  May  31, 
1878,  at  Montpelier,  Bear  Lake 
county,  Idaho,  the  son  of  John  Tay- 
lor Lesueur  and  Geneva  Casto.  He 
was  blessed  as  a  baby  by  Apostle 
Charles  C.  Rich,  baptized  Oct.  7, 
1886,  by  Joseph  L.  Hales;  ordained 
a  Deacon  by  Bishop  Chas.  P.  Ander- 
son at  St.  Johns,  Arizona;  ordained 
an  Elder  June  7,  1896,  by  Wm.  H. 
Gibbons  and  ordained  a  Seventy  by 
Apostle  John  Henry  Smith  Jan.  21, 
1898,  on  which  date  also  he  was  set 
apart  for  a  mission  to  Great  Britain. 
While  abroad  he  labored  in  the  Leeds 


conference,  one  year  as  clerk  of  the 
conference.  He  was  then  trans- 
ferred to  the  Channel  Islands,  labor- 
ing  alone    on    the    island    of    Jersey 


BIOGRAPHICAL  ENCYCLOPEDIA. 


443 


and  later,  in  company  with  three 
other  Elders,  on  the  island  of  Guern- 
sey. While  laboring  on  these  islands 
he  succeeded  in  getting  thousands  of 
names  of  his  dead  relatives  with  a 
view  to  do  work  for  them  in  the  Tem- 
ple. Both  before  and  after  return- 
ing from  his  mission  in  the  spring  of 
1900  Bro.  Lesueur  commenced  a 
most  active  life  at  home  and  has  held 
the  following  positions:  Counselor 
to  a  president  of  a  Deacons'  quorum, 
librarian  of  a  Ward  Primary  Associa- 
tion, librarian  and  treasurer  of  the 
St.  Johns  Ward  Y.  M.  M.  I.  A.,  first 
counselor  in  the  St.  Johns  Ward  Y. 
M.  M.  I.  A.  in  1896-1897,  Stake 
secretary  (St.  Johns  Stake)  of  Sun- 
day schools  in  1896-1898,  home  mis- 
sionary in  189  6-18  97,  director  of  the 
Y.  M.  M.  I.  A.  Literary  League  (1896- 
1897),  Sunday  school  teacher  (1896- 
1898  and  1900-1912),  M.  I.  A.  Nor- 
mal missionary  to  the  B.  Y.  Academy 
at  Provo,  Utah  (1897),  Stake  clerk, 
historian  and  recorder  in  St.  Johns 
Stake  (1900-1903),  superintendent 
of  Religion  Classes  in  St.  Johns 
Ward  (1901),  teacher  in  Religion 
Class  (1903),  first  assistant  superin- 
tendent in  the  St.  Johns  Stake  Y.  M. 
M.  I.  A.  and  home  missionary  in  St. 
Johns  (1901-1902),  Religion  Class 
missionary  (1900-1901),  Stake  home 
missionary  (1901-1913,  Stake  super- 
intendent of  Y.  M.  M.  I.  A.  (1903- 
1906),  vice  president  of  the  Y.  M.  M. 
I.A.  Athletic  Club  (1902-1903), Ward 
teacher  in  St.  Johns  Ward  (1903- 
1906),  Ward  clerk  in  the  St.  Johns 
Ward  (1904-1906),  clerk  of  the  High 
Priests'  quorum  in  the  St.  Johns 
Stake  (1904-1906),  first  assistant 
superintendent  of  the  Y.  M.  M.  I.  A. 
of  the  Maricopa  Stake  (appointed 
Sept.  2,  1906),  superintendent  of  the 
Mesa  Ward  Sunday  school  (1907- 
1912),  chairman  of  an  amusement 
committee  in  the  Mesa  Ward  (1907), 
teacher  in  the  junior  class  of  the 
Mesa  Y.  M.  M.  I.  A.  and  in  the  Dea- 
cons' quorum  (1911),  principal  of 
the  Mesa  Ward   Religion  Class    (ap- 


pointed Jan.  29,  1911),  vice  presi- 
dent of  the  Mesa  Gymnasium  and 
Reading  Room  (appointed  Feb.  8, 
1911),  etc.  Bro.  Lesueur  was  or- 
dained a  High  Priest  Feb.  28,  1903, 
by  John  T.  Lesueur,  and  set  apart  as 
president  of  the  Maricopa  Stake 
March  10,  1912,  by  Apostle  Francis 
M.  Lyman,  which  position  he  still 
holds.  President  Lesueur  has  also 
held  many  positions  of  a  secular 
nature;  thus  he  acted  as  vice  presi- 
dent of  the  Mesa  Commercial  Club  in 
1910;  acted  as  school  trustee  in  1911- 
1913;  has  been  director  of  the  Inter- 
Mountain  Life  Insurance  Co.  since 
1912  and  director  of  the  Salt  River 
Valley  Bank  since  April,  1913;  was 
an  executive  member  of  the  Arizona 
State  Board  Anti-Saloon  League  in 
1913-1914,  and  a  member  of  the 
State  Temperance  Federation  Board 
of  Directors  in  1914-1916.  Early  in 
life  he  graduated  from  the  B.  Y.  A. 
Commercial  College  and  worked  as 
salesman  of  the  C.  M.  M.  I.  at  St. 
Johns,  superintendent  of  the  A.  C. 
M.  I.  at  St.  Johns,  salesman  of  the 
Lesueur-Gibbons  Company,  etc.  He 
has  also  been  honored  by  the  Gov- 
ernor of  Arizona  by  appointment  to 
serve  on  several  commissions.  At 
present  he  is  taking  a  most  active 
part  in  gathering  means  for  the 
building  of  a  Temple  at  Mesa,  Ari- 
zona. In  1902  (May  9th)  Bro.  Les- 
ueur married  Anna  Maria  Anderson 
(daughter  of  President  Charles  P. 
Anderson  of  the  St.  Johns  Stake  and 
Anna  L.  Anderson).  This  marriage 
has  been  blessed  with  seven  children, 
namely,  Leola,  Frank,  Charles,  Mar- 
lowe, Nelle  Josephine,  Nadeen,  Anna 
Louise  and  Margaret  Lenore. 

LiLOYD,  John  Lea,  fourth  Bishop 
of  Grace  Ward  (Bannock  Stake), 
Bannock  county,  Idaho,  was  born 
March  21,  1879,  in  Wellsville,  Cache 
county.  Utah,  the  son  of  Thomas  W. 
Lloyd  and  Elizabeth  Lea.  He  was 
baptized  April  7,  1887,  by  Richard 
Bransley;     ordained     successively     a 


444 


LATTER-DAY   SAINT 


Deacon,  Teacher  and  Priest;  ordained 
an  Elder  by  Walter  Jones,  March  11, 
1901;  ordained  a  Seventy  May  7, 
1908,  by  Rulon  S.  Wells,  and  or- 
dained a  High  Priest  Aug.  15,  1909, 
by  Anthony  W.  Ivins  and  set  apart 
as  a  member  of  the  High  Council  in 
the  Bannock  Stake,  which  position 
he  held  until  February,  1917,  when 
he  was  ordained  a  Bishop  by  Rudger 
Clawson  and  set  apart  to  preside 
over  the  Grace  Ward.  Bishop  Lloyd 
moved  to  St.  Anthony,  Idaho,  in  1900 
and  located  in  Grace,  Idaho,  in  1904. 
In  1913-1915  he  filled  a  mission  to 
the  Southern  States,  laboring  prin- 
cipally in  the  State  of  Ohio  and  pre- 
siding over  the  Ohio  conference  six 
months.  In  1901  (March  13th)  Bro. 
Lloyd  married  Hortense  Dover  Park 
(daughter  of  Isaac  H.  Park  and  Han- 
nah Dover),  who  was  born  Oct.  29, 
1882,  in  Salt  Lake  City,  Utah.  She 
has  borne  her  husband  five  children, 
namely,  John  Lyman,  Isaac  Joseph, 
Clinton,  Alton,  Clarence  Horace  and 
Hortence  (twins).  Bishop  Lloyd  is 
a  farmer  by  occupation  and  has  taken 
a  most  active  part  in  the  founding 
of  Grace,  which  partly  through  his 
efforts  and  untiring  zeal  has  become 
the  chief  settlement  and  business 
center  of  Gentile  Valley. 

LOVELAND,  Carlos  Heber,  fourth 
Bishop  of  Chesterfield  Ward  (Ban- 
nock Stake),  Bannock  county,  Idaho, 
was  born  Oct.  21,  1867,  at  Brigham 
City,  Box  Elder  county,  Utah,  the  son 
of  Heber  Chauncey  Loveland  and 
Columbia  Fillmore  Call.  He  was 
baptized  when  eight  years  old  by 
Bishop  Thos.  Harper;  ordained  a 
Deacon  soon  afterwards;  ordained 
an  Elder  Nov.  28,  1888,  by  Bishop 
Parley  P.  Willie,  ordained  a  Seventy 
March  7,  1892,  by  Abraham  H.  Can- 
non and  ordained  a  High  Priest  in 
1901  by  Apostle  Geo.  Teasdale  and 
set  apart  as  second  counselor  to 
Bishop  Judson  A.  Tolman;  he  held 
that  position  until  the  release  of 
Bishop  Tolman  in  1903.     He  was  or- 


dained a  Bishop  by  John  Henry 
Smith  May  12,  1907,  and  set  apart 
to  preside  over  the  Chesterfield  Ward. 
Bishop  Loveland  has  always  been  an 
active  Church  worker.  Thus  he 
acted  as  superintendent  of  the  Re- 
ligion Class  at  Chesterfield,  acted  as 
first  counselor  in  the  Chesterfield 
Ward  Y.  M.  M.  I.  A.,  and  filled  a  mis- 
sion to  the  Southern  States  in  1892- 
1894,  laboring  principally  in  Florida 


and  Alabama.  In  1888  (Nov.  28th) 
he  married  Elizabeth  Jones  Higgen- 
sen  (daughter  of  Wm.  T.  Higgensen 
and  Christina  Young),  who  was 
born  Nov.  9,  1866  at  Bountiful, 
Davis  county,  Utah.  After  giving 
birth  to  six  children  she  died  Feb. 
13,  1903.  Bishop  Loveland  married 
Emma  Hamilton  Feb.  6,  1907;  she 
was  the  daughter  of  Fred  Hamilton 
and  Elizabeth  Watkins  and  was  born 
Oct.  2,  1884,  at  Beaver,  Beaver 
county,  Utah.  She  is  the  mother  of 
one  child.  The  names  of  the  Bishop's 
children  are:  Chauncy  C,  Elizabeth 
R.,  Wm.  C,  Hattie,  Chester,  Colum- 
bia and  Hamilton.  Bishop  Loveland 
settled  at  Chesterfield  in  1882.  Elder 
Loveland  was  set  apart  as  a  High 
Councilor  in  the  Idaho  Stake  Dec.  3, 
1916,  and  was  released  as  Bishop  of 
the  Chesterfield  Ward,  Jan.  28,  1917. 


BIOGRAPHICAL  ENCYCLOPEDIA. 


445 


IX)WE,  Moroni  W.,  the  third 
Bishop  of  the  Grace  Ward  (Bannock 
Stake),  Bannock  county,  Idaho,  was 
bom  May  25,  1885,  in  Franklin, 
Oneida  (now  Franklin)  county,  Idaho, 
the  son  of  Thomas  G.  Lowe  and 
Mariah  Wilson.  He  was  baptized 
May  25,  1893,  by  Mark  Priest  and 
ordained  an  Elder  Nov.  4,  1905,  by 
Joseph  T.  Pond.  His  father  had  two 
wives  and  Moroni  W.  is  the  son  of 
the  second  wife.  His  mother  died 
Aug.  24,  1893,  when  the  boy  was 
only  eight  years  old.  In  1905  (Dec. 
13th)   he  married  Mary  Ann  Burton 


in  the  Logan  Temple.  This  marriage 
has  been  blessed  with  four  children 
(two  boys  and  two  girls),  namely, 
Elnora,  Harold  B.,  LaVerne  and 
Sherman.  His  daughter  Elnora  was 
thrown  from  a  wagon  July  31,  1907, 
which  accident  caused  her  death  Aug. 
12,  1907.  Bro.  Lowe  has  been  a 
diligent  Church  worker  from  his 
early  youth  and  took  a  prominent 
part  in  Sunday  school  work.  After 
laboring  for  some  time  as  second  as- 
sistant superintendent  of  the  Ward 
Sunday  school  and  as  a  teacher  of  the 
intermediate  class,  he  was  chosen  as 
superintendent  of  the  school  Jan.  27, 
1907,    which    position    he   held    until 


r914,  when  he  was  ordained  a  High 
Priest  and  Bishop  by  Apostle  David 
O.  McKay  and  set  apart  to  preside 
over  the  Grace  Ward,  which  position 
he  occupied  until  1917. 

LiUNDBERG,  Frederick,  Bishop  of 
Mammoth  Ward  (Tintic  Stake),  Utah 
county,  Utah,  was  born  April  26, 
1855,  at  Trollhaettan,  Sweden,  the 
son  of  Solomon  Lundberg  and  Chris- 
tina Person.  Together  with  his  par- 
ents he  emigrated  to  America  in 
18  66,  crossing  the  Atlantic  in  the 
ship  "Electric"  and  the  plains  in 
company  with  Elder  John  Van  Cott. 
He  was  baptized  Sept.  10,  18  66,  by 
his  father  at  Logan,  Cache  county, 
Utah.  When  still  quite  young  lie 
was  ordained  an  Elder,  and  when 
called  on  a  mission  to  Scandinavia  in 
1879  he  was  ordained  a  Seventy  by 
Apostle  Orson  Pratt.  After  his  re- 
turn from  that  mission,  in  which  he 
labored  in  the  Goteborg  conference, 
Sweden,  in  1881,  he  engaged  with 
James  H.  Martineau  as  a  surveyor, 
after  which  he  served  as  counter 
clerk  in  the  Second  Ward  Co-op  Store 
in  Logan  and  still  later  as  book- 
keeper with  the  firm  of  Lundberg 
and  Garff  of  Logan.  In  188  6  he 
joined  Joseph  Goddard  in  the  loan 
and  real  estate  business.  The  firm 
of  Goddard  and  Lundberg  subse- 
quently succeeded  the  firm  of  God- 
dard and  Frank.  In  1887  Bro.  Lund- 
berg was  appointed  notary  public  by 
Governor  Caleb  W.  West  and  after- 
wards re-commissioned  as  such  by 
Governor  Arthur  L.  Thomas.  In 
188  9  he  was  elected  justice  of  the 
peace  of  Logan.  In  1891-1893  he 
filled  a  second  mission  to  Scandi- 
navia, during  which  he  presided  part 
of  the  time  over  Sk§,ne  and  later  over 
the  Stockholm  conference,  Sweden. 
In  1893  May  19th)  he  married 
Martha  Berglin,  who  bore  her  hus- 
band one  son,  Lynne,  who  was  born 
April  2,  1894,  in  Logan.  Bro.  Lund- 
berg was  ordained  a  High  Priest  Oct. 
28,    1900,   by    President    James    W. 


446 


LATTER-DAY   SAINT 


Paxman  at  Eureka,  Utah,  and  set 
apart  as  first  counselor  to  Bishop 
George  Hales  of  the  Mammoth  Ward. 
He  held  that  position  until  March, 
1903,  when  he  was  ordained  a  Bishop 
by  Apostle  Rudger  Clawson  and  set 
apart  to  preside  over  the  Mammoth 
Ward,  which  position  he  held  until 
Dec.  15,  1905,  when  he  removed  to 
Ogden,  Utah,  at  which  place  his 
family  remained  while  he  went  to 
Garfield,  Salt  Lake  county,  where  he 
acted  as  presiding  Elder  from  1910 
to  1911.  In  October,  1919,  he  went 
to  Mammoth  to  restore  his  property. 
He  will  reside  temporarily  at  Mam- 
moth. 

LUNDGREN,       Waldemar       Oscar 

Bishop    of   the    Monroe   North   "Ward 


(Sevier  Stake),  Sevier  county,  Utah, 
was  born  March  4,  1892,  in  Salt  Lake 
City,  Utah,  the  son  of  Peter  M.  Lund- 
gren  and  Christine  Christensen.  He 
was  baptized  Aug.  6,  1900,  by  Joseph 
H.  Jenson,  ordained  a  Deacon  Dec. 
9,  1905,  by  Joseph  H.  Jenson,  or- 
dained a  Teacher  Dec.  5,  1908,  by 
Joseph  H.  Jenson,  ordained  a  Priest 
Feb.  21,  1910,  by  Joseph  F.  Ander- 
son, and  ordained  an  Elder  Dec.  8, 
1912,  by  Hyrum  S.  Washburn.  Bro. 
Lundgren  received  a  good  education 


and  taught  school  in  Glenwood, 
Sevier  county.  He  also  acted  as  Sun- 
day school  teacher  and  as  Ward  clerk 
from  1912  to  1917,  was  postmaster 
at  Monroe  from  1915  to  1918,  acted 
as  president  of  the  second  quorum 
of  Elders  in  the  Sevier  Stake  from 
1915  to  1917  and  was  ordained  a 
High  Priest  and  Bishop  by  James  E. 
Talmage  Sept.  22,  1917,  and  set 
apart  to  preside  over  the  Monroe 
North  Ward.  In  1916  (June  7th) 
he  married  Savannah  Anderson  (a 
daughter  of  Andrew  Anderson  and 
Sophia  Scimmin),  who  was  born 
March  14,  1894,  at  Monroe,  Sevier 
county,  Utah.  The  Bishop's  only 
child  is  Judith,  born  Feb.  26,  1918. 
Bishop  Lundgren  is  a  farmer  by 
avocation. 

LUNT,  Henry,  Bishop  and  Pat- 
riarch, was  born  July  20,  1824,  at 
Mickley  Hall,  Cheshire,  England,  the 
son  of  Randle  Lunt  and  Ann  Owen. 
He  was  baptized  Oct.  6,  1849,  by 
Jeter  Clinton  at  Birmtngham,  Eng- 
land, having  previously  been  con- 
verted to  "Mormonism."  Soon  after 
his  baptism  he  was  ordained  an  Elder 
by  Jeter  Clinton,  emigrated  to  Utah 
in  1850,  leaving  England  January 
10th  and  arriving  in  Salt  Lake  City 
August  2  8th  of  that  year.  Soon 
after  his  arrival  in  the  Valley  he  was 
ordained  a  Seventy  by  Joseph  Young 
and  on  Dec.  7,  1850,  he  left  Salt  Lake 
City  in  George  A.  Smith's  company 
for  Iron  county,  arriving  on  Center 
Creek  Jan.  13,  1851,  and  thus  be- 
came one  of  the  founders  of  Paro- 
wan.  In  October,  1851,  he  was 
called  by  Prest.  Geo.  A.  Smith  to 
take  a  company  of  Saints  and  settle 
on  Coal  Creek.  For  that  purpose  he 
left  Parowan  Nov.  10,  1851,  and  ar- 
rived the  next  day  on  the  present 
site  of  Cedar  City  which  he  thus  as- 
sisted in  founding.  Later  he  was 
called  to  act  as  presiding  Elder  of 
that  settlement,  succeeding  Matthew 
Curruthers  in  that  position.  In  May, 
1852,  he  was  ordained  a  High  Priest 


BIOGRAPHICAL   ENCYCLOPEDIA. 


447 


by  George  A.  Smith  and  set  apart  to 
act  as  second  counselor  to  John  C. 
L.  Smith,  president  of  the  Parowan 
Stake   of   Zion.      At   a    general    con- 


ference of  the  Church  held  in  Salt 
Lake  City  in  18  54  he  was  called  on  a 
mission  to  Great  Britain  and  left  Salt 
Lake  City  July  7,  1854,  traveling  in 
company  with  Erastus  Snow  and 
Orson  Spencer  across  the  plains.  Re- 
turning from  Europe  in  1857,  Elder 
Lunt  had  charge  of  a  company  of 
Scandinavian  Saints.  When  the 
Cedar  Stake  of  Zion  was  disorganized 
July  29,  1859,  Bro.  Lunt  was  or- 
dained a  Bishop  by  Geo.  A.  Smith 
and  set  apart  to  preside  over  the 
Cedar  City  Ward.  He  was  ordained  a 
Patriarch  Dec.  19,  1874,  by  Geo.  A. 
Smith.  About  1878  he  was  released 
from  his  position  as  Bishop  of  Cedar 
City  and  soon  afterwards  set  apart  as 
second  counselor  to  Wm.  H.  Dame, 
president  of  the  Parowan  Stake. 
Subsequently  he  was  chosen  as  first 
counselor  to  President  Dame  to  fill 
a  vacancy  caused  by  the  removal  of 
Jesse  N.  Smith  to  Arizona.  In  April, 
1884,  he  was  set  apart  a  second  time 
to  act  as  Bishop  of  Cedar  City 
by  President  John  Taylor,  and  in 
February,  188  6,  he  went  to  England 
on  another  mission,  accompanied  by 


his  wife  Ellen.  They  returned  eight 
months  later.  In  1887  (Nov.  26th) 
Bro.  Lunt  left  Cedar  City,  owing  to 
the  anti-polygamy  prosecutions,  to- 
gether with  his  wife  Sarah  Ann  and 
four  sons,  and  traveled  by  team 
through  southern  Utah,  Arizona  and 
New  Mexico;  they  finally  arrived  at 
Colonia  Pacheco,  Chihuahua,  Mexico, 
Jan.  29,  1890.  Here  he  spent  the  re- 
mainder of  his  days  as  an  exile,  en- 
deavoring to  make  a  home  for  him- 
self and  family  in  that  country,  where 
he  was  not  subject  to  arrest  and  im- 
prisonment on  account  of  his  family 
relations.  Patriarch  Lunt  died  at 
Pacheco,  Mexico,  Jan.  22,  1902,  leav- 
ing a  large  family.  He  was  one  of 
the  faithful  and  strong  men  of  the 
Church,  having  devoted  his  entire 
life  to  benefit  mankind  and  improve 
the  conditions  of  the  world  so  far  as 
his  influence  could  reach.  He  was 
universally  beloved  by  all  who  knew 
him. 

LUNT,  Henry  Whittaker,  Bishop  of 
Cedar  City  (Parowan  Stake),  Iron 
county,    Utah,     was     born     Jan.     25, 


1863,  at  Cedar  City,  the  son  of  Henry 
Lunt  and  Mary  Ann  Wilson.  He  was 
baptized  June  18,  1872,  by  Samuel 
Barnhurst    and    soon   afterwards    or- 


448 


LATTER-DAY   SAINT 


dained  to  the  Priesthood.  He  filled 
a  mission  to  Great  Britain  in  1892- 
1894  and  presided  over  the  Liver- 
pool conference.  For  several  years 
he  acted  as  president  of  the  63rd 
quorum  of  Seventy  and  afterwards 
as  a  High  Councilor.  In  his  youth 
he  also  presided  over  the  Cedar  City 
Y.  M.  M.  I.  A.  and  was  assistant  Sun- 
day school  superintendent.  He  acted 
as  Bishop  of  the  Cedar  City  Ward 
from  1902  to  1908,  when  he  was 
chosen  as  Bishop  of  the  Cedar  City 
East  Ward.  He  held  this  position 
until  1911  and  was  chosen  as  a  mem- 
ber of  the  High  Council  March  18, 
1917.  Bishop  Lunt  has  also  been 
very  active  in  secular  affairs.  Thus 
he  acted  as  State  senator  from  the 
11th  Senatorial  District  from  1911 
to  1913;  was  county  commissioner 
from  1914  to  1918  and  was  re-elected 
in  1918  for  two  years,  acting  as 
chairman  of  the  board.  He  served  as 
mayor  of  Cedar  City  one  term  and 
as  a  member  of  the  city  council  three 
terms.  He  has  been  president  of 
the  Iron  County  Telephone  Company 
since  1'908;  is  now  vice  president  of 
the  Iron  Commercial  Bank  at  Cedar 
City  (organized  in  1917)  and  been 
a  director  in  the  Cedar  Mercantile 
and  Live  Stock  Company  since  1911. 
In  1884  (Dec.  10th)  he  married 
Rosalia  Hunter  (daughter  of  George 
Hunter  and  Mary  Mulr),  who  was 
born  Feb.  25,  1866,  in  Cedar  City. 
The  issue  of  this  marriage  are  ten 
children  (all  living),  namely,  Henry 
H.,  George  H.,  Raymond  H.,  Wallace 
H.,  Mary  Ellen  H.,  Corris  H.,  lona 
H.,  Anthon  H.,  Willard  H.,  and 
Olive  H. 

liUNT,  Henry  Hunter,  Bishop  of 
Cedar  City  East  Ward  (Parowan 
Stake),  Iron  county,  Utah,  was  born 
Nov.  24,  1885,  in  Cedar  City,  the  son 
of  Henry  W.  Lunt  and  Rosalia  Hun- 
ter. He  was  baptized  Nov.  24,  1893, 
by  William  W.  Lunt;  ordained  suc- 
cessively to  the  offices  of  Deacon, 
Teacher     and     Priest;      ordained     a 


Seventy  in  1909  by  Joseph  W.  Mc- 
Murrin;  acted  as  second  assistant  in 
the  Parowan  Stake  Sunday  school  or- 
ganization; was  secretary  of  the 
local  Sunday  school  and  also  assist- 
ant superintendent;  was  ordained  a 
High  Priest  by  Francis  M.  Lyman  In 
June,  1910,  and  set  apart  as  a  mem- 
ber of  the  Parowan  Stake  High  Coun- 
cil. In  1913  he  was  chosen  as  first 
counselor  to  Bishop  Solon  J.  Foster, 
and  was  ordained  a  Bishop  Sept.  2  4, 
1916,  by  Francis  M.  Lyman  and  set 
apart  to  preside  over  the  Cedar  City 
East  Ward.  Brother  Lunt  has  served 
as     a     city     councilman     two     terms 


(1913-1917).  His  main  occupation 
in  life  has  been  that  of  a  merchant, 
and  he  is  at  present  manager  of  the 
Cedar  City  M.  C.  and  Live  Stock  com- 
pany. In  1911  (Oct.  5th)  Bishop 
Lunt  married  Jeanette  Corry  (daugh- 
ter of  William  H.  Corry  and  Eliza- 
beth Parry),  who  was  born  April  25, 
1885.  She  has  borne  her  husband 
three  children,  namely,  Henry  C, 
Marian  and  Richard. 

>L\CFARLANE,      Isaac      Chancey, 

Bishop  of  the  St.  George  East  Ward 
(St.  George  Stake),  Washington 
county,  Utah,  was  born  Nov.  3,  1855, 
in  Cedar  City,  Iron  county,  Utah,  the 


BIOGRAPHICAL  ENCYCLOPEDIA. 


449 


son  of  John  Macfarlane  and  Ann  veyed  a  canal  to  bring  Cottonwood 
Chatterley.  He  came  to  St.  George  Creek  into  St.  George,  a  distance  of 
with  his  parents  in  1868,  when  only  18  miles.  He  surveyed  the  Enter- 
twelve  years   old,   and   was   baptized    prise   Canal   and   Reservoir   and   the 

Hurricane  Canal;  he  also  estimated 
the  cost  of  construction  of  and  laid 
out  the  Price  Bench  Canal,  and  in 
fact  surveyed  all  canals  of  importance 
in  Southern  Utah.  In  1878  (Jan. 
9th)  Bishop  Macfarlane  married  Hep- 
zibah  Smith,  who  bore  her  husband 
five  children,  namely,  Ellen,  Char- 
lotte Ann,  Delia  Maud,  Isaac  Chan- 
cey,  jun.  and  Hepzibah.  His  wife 
died  March  6,  1891,  and  on  March 
16,  18  92,  he  married  Christina  For- 
sythe.  Three  children  are  the  issue 
of  this  marriage,  namely,  Christina, 
Laree  and  Donald  Chatterley. 


MANNING,    Margaret     Ruth     W., 

president  of  the  Bear  River  Stake  Re- 
lief Societies,  was  born  Sept.  30,  1869 
at  Farmington,  Davis  county,  Utah, 
the  daughter  of  James  D.  Wilcox  and 
Anna  Maria  Robinson.  She  was  bap- 
tized Sept.  30,  1877,  by  Alley  S.  Rose, 
was  married  to  David  E.  Manning  in 


by  William  Fawcett  June  3,  1869. 
His  father  was  called  to  lead  the  St. 
George  choir,  succeeding  Charles  J. 
Thomas.  Isaac  was  ordained  suc- 
cessively a  Deacon,  Priest,  Elder, 
Seventy,  High  Priest  and  Bishop.  He 
acted  as  president  of  the  Y.  M.  M.  I. 
A.  in  the  St.  George  Second  Ward, 
was  an  officer  in  the  Ward  Sunday 
school  and  acted  as  a  High  Councilor 
in  the  St.  George  Stake,  etc.  He  was 
ordained  a  Bishop  by  Mathias  F. 
Cowley  and  set  apart  to  preside  over 
the  St.  George  East  Ward  when  that 
Ward  was  first  organized  Dec.  15, 
1902.  This  position  he  still  occupies. 
Bishop  Macfarlane  has  served  in  the 
St.  George  city  council,  acted  as 
mayor  of  St.  George  two  terms, 
served  as  county  surveyor  from  188  6 
to  1909  and  since  1915  he  has  acted 
as  road  supervisor.  After  serving  as 
county  commissioner  he  acted  on  the 
State  Land  Board  for  four  years. 
He  surveyed  the  La  Verkin  Canal 
and  the  Washington  Field  Canal 
(now  the  St.  George  and  Washington 
Canal)  and  superintended  the  con- 
struction of  the  same.     Next  he  sur- 


the  Logan  Temple  April  11,  1888, 
moved  with  her  husband  from  Farm- 
ington to  Bear  River  Valley  in  1889 
and    settled    on   a   homestead   before 


Vol.  Ill,  No.  29. 


January  31,   1920 


450 


LATTER-DAY  SAINT 


the  completion  of  the  Bear  River 
Canal  which  since  made  that  valley  so 
prosperous.  The  family  resided  on 
their  homestead  until  1818,  when 
they  moved  to  Garland  City,  Box  El- 
der county,  Utah,  their  present  home. 
In  1908  Sister  Manning  was  chosen  as 
secretary  of  the  Bear  River  Stake  Re- 
lief Societies,  and  in  1912  (Jan.  11th) 
she  was  set  apart  as  president  of  the 
Relief  Societies  of  that  Stake,  a  posi- 
tion she  still  occupies.  Sister  Man- 
ning has  borne  her  husband  eleven 
children,  namely:  David  Henry  (who 
has  filled  a  mission  to  California), 
Alissa  (who  graduated  from  the  B. 
Y.  College  in  1912  and  now  acts  as 
first  counselor  in  the  Bear  River 
Stake  Primary  Association),  Leroy 
Wilcox  (who  enlisted  in  the  U.  S. 
army  in  1917  and  did  service  with  the 
91st  Division  at  Camp  Lewis  and 
Camp  Merritt),  Ruth  M.  Bott  (who 
graduated  from  high  school  in  1917), 
Rulon  Hollist  (who  is  now  filling  a 
mission  to  New  Zealand),  Victor  Eu- 
gene, Julia,  Oleen  Marion,  Margaret, 
Lavera  Alice  and  Helen  Esther. 

MANNING,  Wmiam  Henry,  Ward 
clerk  in  the  Slaterville  Ward  (North 
Weber  Stake),  Weber  county,  Utah, 
was  born  Nov.  6,  1848,  at  Bedmin- 
ster,  Bristol,  Somersetshire,  England, 
the  son  of  John  Russel  Manning  and 
Sarah  Tucker.  Becoming  a  convert 
to  "Mormonism,"  he  was  baptized 
June  6,  1861,  by  Lucius  N.  Scoville; 
ordained  a  Deacon  in  September, 
1872,  by  Edwin  W.  Smout;  ordained 
an  Elder  June  9,  1873,  by  William  J. 
Smith;    ordained  a  Seventy  Jan.   27, 

1884,  by  Noah  L.  Shurtliff;  married 
Emma  Hudman  June  9,  1873;  was 
set  apart  as  one  of  the  presidents  of 
the  60th  quorum  of  Seventy  June  21, 

1885,  and  ordained  a  High  Priest 
Nov.  24,  1900,  by  Charles  Welch.  He 
was  called  to  labor  as  a  Ward  teacher 
in  September,  1874,  and  appointed 
assistant  superintendent  of  the  Slater- 
ville Sunday  school  in  1868.  Since 
that  time  he  has  labored  in  almost 


every  position  in  the  Ward,  including 
that  of  superintendent  of  Religion 
Class,  superintendent  of  Sunday  school, 
president  of  Y.  M.  M.  I.  A.,  etc.  Bro. 
Manning  emigrated  to  America  In 
1856,  crossing  the  Atlantic  in  the  ship 
"Columbia,"  which  arrived  in  New 
York  Jan.  1,  1857.  He  resided  In 
Glen  Cove,  Long  Island,  New  York, 
until  June  15,  1861,  when  he  jour- 
neyed to  Florence,  Nebraska,  and 
thence  crossed  the  plains  in  Captain 
Joseph  Home's  company  which  ar- 
rived in  Salt  Lake  City  Sept.  13,  1861. 
He  located  in  Weber  county  and  has 
been  a  resident  of  Slaterville  since 
September,    18  63.      Bro.   Manning  is 


by  occupation  a  farmer,  but  has  also 
taught  school.  He  has  acted  as  clerk, 
of  the  Slaterville  Ward  since  July  1, 
1877.  The  names  of  Bro.  Manning's 
children  are  as  follows:  Emma  So- 
phia, Edith  Ann,  Clarence  Alvln, 
Amelia  Ellen,  Ephraim  William  and 
Nephi  Heber. 

MARSDEX,  Lucius  Nelson,  presi- 
dent of  the  Parowan  Stake,  Iron  coun- 
ty, Utah,  was  born  Oct.  11,  1862,  at 
Parowan,  Utah,  the  son  of  William 
Marsden  and  Sarah  Scovil.  He  was 
baptized  Dec.  4,  1871,  by  Wm.  Holly- 


BIOGRAPHICAL  ENCYCLOPEDIA. 


451 


oak;  ordained  an  Elder  Dec.  13,  1877,  draft  board.  He  was  manager  of  the 
t)y  Wm.  Nixon;  ordained  a  Seventy  Parowan  Equitable  Co-operative  As- 
Oct.  23,  1887,  by  Jacob  Gates,  and  or-  sociation  for  ten  years,  was  one  of 
dained  a  High  Priest  April  17,  1909,    the  promoters   of  the  Bank  of   Iron 

County  at  Parowan,  and  after  having 
served  as  cashier  for  a  year  he  was 
chosen  as  president  of  the  institution 
in  1910,  a  position  which  he  still 
holds.  In  1886  (Jan.  6th)  he  mar- 
ried Mary  Matheson  (daughter  of 
David  Matheson  and  Mary  Craig), 
who  was  born  Oct,  13,  1865,  in  Dun- 
dee, Scotland.  Eight  children  are  the 
issue  of  this  marriage,  namely,  Wil- 
liam, Mary  E.,  Florence  E.,  Dean, 
L.  Nelson,  Albert  M.,  Glenna  and 
Milo  S. 


MAUGHAN,  Charles  Nibley,  fifth 
Bishop  of  Wellsville  (Hyrum  Stake), 
Cache  county,  Utah,  was  born  May 
2,  1875,  at  Wellsville,  the  son  of  Wm. 
H.  Maughan  and  Margaret  Nibley.  He 
was  baptized  June  1,  1884,  by  his 
father;  was  ordained  a  Deacon  and 
afterwards  a  Teacher  and  acted  for 
some  time  as  the  president  of  a  Dea- 
cons' quorum.  He  was  ordained  an 
Elder  in  June,  1899,  by  Wm.  H. 
Maughan   and   a   Seventy    June     21, 


and  was  set  apart  as  an  alternate 
member  of  the  High  Council.  In  1898 
he  filled  a  mission  to  the  Southern 
States,  returning  early  because  of 
sickness.  He  acted  as  first  assistant 
to  the  Sunday  school  superintendent 
in  the  Parowan  Ward  for  a  short 
time,  and  on  Sept.  19,  1909,  he  was 
chosen  and  set  apart  as  president  of 
the  Parowan  Stake  of  Zion.  He  held 
that  position  until  Sept.  24,  1916, 
when  he  was  honorably  released. 
During  his  administration  President 
Marsden  organized  two  Wards  in  the 
Parowan  Stake,  one  at  Enoch  and  the 
other  at  New  Castle,  and  also  organ- 
ized a  branch  of  the  Church  at  Buck- 
horn  Springs.  He  was  also  instru- 
mental in  the  erection  of  Ward  chap- 
els at  Enoch,  Summit  and  Parowan. 
Among  the  civil  offices  held  by  Bro. 
Marsden  may  be  mentioned  that  he 
served  as  city  councilman  in  Parowan 
ten  years;  acted  as  mayor  two  years; 
member  of  the  district  school  board 
ten  years;  member  of  the  county 
board  of  education  two  years,  etc. 
During  the  world  war  period  he 
served   as   a   member   of   the    county 


1899,  by  Heber  J.  Grant;  filled  a 
mission  to  the  Northern  States  in 
1899-1901,  laboring  principally  in 
St.   Louis,   Missouri,   where  he  acted 


452 


LATTER-DAY   SAINT 


as  clerk  of  the  Missouri  conference. 
At  home  he  has  taken  an  active  part 
in  the  Sunday  school  and  Y.  M.  M. 
I.  A.  work,  and  also  as  instructor  in 
the  28th  quorum  of  Seventy.  He 
taught  school  about  three  years  and 
spent  two  years  at  La  Grande,  Ore- 
gon, and  while  residing  there  tem- 
porarily acted  as  assistant  superin- 
tendent of  the  Ward  Sunday  school. 
He  was  ordained  a  High  Priest  and 
Bishop  April  23,  1916,  by  Orson  F. 
Whitney  and  set  apart  to  preside 
over  the  Wellsville  Ward.  In  1910 
(Dec.  6th)  he  married  Bertha  Pop- 
pleton  (daughter  of  Wm.  S.  Popple- 
ton  and  Celia  Riggs),  who  was  born 
June  18,  1890,  at  Wellsville.  Two 
children  (Paulina  and  Virgil)  have 
blessed  this  marriage. 

MAYNES,  John  Alexander,  one  of 

the  missionaries  who  died  in  the  mis- 
sion field  abroad,  was  born  in  Hull, 
Yorkshire,  England,  Oct.  28,  1859, 
the  son  of  John  A.  Maynes  and  Jane 
Watson.  He  was  baptized  when  a 
boy  in  the  Lambeth  branch  of  the 
London  conference.  At  the  age  of  20 
he  emigrated  to  America,  leaving  his 
parents  in  London,  and  made  his 
home  in  Salt  Lake  City,  residing  in 
the  20th  Ward  at  the  residence  of  his 
sister,  Mrs.  John  H.  Burrows.  He 
took  an  active  part  in  Church  affairs 
from  the  beginning  and  also  became 
universally  known  in  business  circles. 
For  many  years  he  was  employed  in 
Z.  C.  M.  I.,  where  he  had  charge  of 
the  retail  jewelry  department;  after- 
wards he  went  into  business  himself 
and  originated  the  lace  establishment 
of  Maynes,  Wells,  Schofield  Co.  of 
Salt  Lake  City.  Subsequently  he  be- 
came a  traveling  salesman,  in  which 
capacity  he  made  many  friends  in 
the  cities  and  towns  of  Utah.  In  the 
year  1901  he  entered  the  employ  of 
J.  H.  Leyson,  as  a  jewelry  salesman, 
and  later  became  manager  of  Mr. 
Leyson's  large  establishment  in  Butte, 
Montana.  Two  years  later  this  busi- 
ness   was    absorbed    by    the    Leyson, 


Pearsall  Co.  in  Salt  Lake  City  and 
Bro.  Maynes  then  became  assistant 
manager,  which  position  he  held  until 
1913,  when  he  resigned  to  go  on  a 
mission  to  England,  together  with  his 
wife  who  also  had  been  called  by  the 
Church  authorities  to  the  same  mis- 
sion. Arriving  in  Liverpool,  Aug.  6, 
1913,  they  were  assigned  to  the 
Birmingham  conference  and  com- 
menced their  labors  in  the  Northamp- 
ton branch.  Five  months  later  Bro. 
Maynes  was  called  to  preside  over  the 
Birmingham  conference,  where  he 
continued  nearly  a  year;  then  he  was 
transferred  to  the  presidency  of  the 


London  conference,  succeeding  Presi- 
dent Stewart  Eccles  who  had  suddenly 
died  at  his  post..  Bro.  and  Sister 
Maynes  spent  the  remainder  of  their 
mission  in  the  London  conference,  but 
owing  to  the  great  war  in  which  Eng- 
land was  then  engaged  and  the  con- 
sequent scarcity  of  new  missionaries 
from  Zion,  it  was  not  deemed  expedi- 
ent to  release  them  at  the  end  of  two 
years,  and  President  Hyrum  M.  Smith, 
of  the  European  mission,  desired 
them  to  continue  longer  at  their  post, 
until  such  time  as  they  could  better 
be  spared  to  return  home.  This  de- 
sire was  cheerfully  complied  with, 
and  while  thus  laboring,  and  by  ap- 


BIOGRAPHICAL   ENCYCLOPEDIA. 


453 


pointment  of  the  mission  president, 
they  went  on  a  short  visit  to  Hull,  the 
birthplace  of  Bro.  Maynes,  to  attend 
conference.  By  an  unexpected  decree 
of  Providence  this  proved  to  be  the 
end  of  Bro.  Maynes'  earthly  mission, 
for  after  an  illness  of  only  three  days 
he  died  from  an  acute  attack  of  pleu- 
risy, in  the  presence  of  his  grief- 
stricken  wife  and  daughter,  Dorothy, 
Oct.  14,  1915.  Thus  ended  a  noble 
life.  Bro.  Maynes  had  filled  an  hon- 
orable mission  and  received  his  re- 
lease from  heaven,  where  his  name 
will  be  inscribed  amongst  those  noble 
martyrs  who  have  died  for  the  glor- 
ious cause  of  Christ.  During  his  life- 
time he  had  been  ordained  to  the 
several  grades  of  the  Priesthood  and 
at  the  time  of  his  death  he  was  a 
missionary  member  of  the  13th  quo- 
rum of  Seventy.  Brother  Maynes  was 
a  great  lover  of  music  and  had  been 
for  many  years  a  member  of  the 
Tabernacle  choir,  also  of  the  21st  and 
20th  Ward  choirs  and  a  worker  in  the 
Sunday  school  and  Mutual  Improve- 
ment Associations,  and  an  active 
block  teacher  in  the  20th  Ward.  His 
sudden  death  caused  great  sadness 
throughout  the  British  mission  and 
memorial  services  were  held  both  in 
Birmingham  and  London.  His  body 
was  embalmed,  and,  like  that  of  his 
brother  Joseph,  who  had  suddenly 
died  in  the  same  mission  but  three 
years  previously,  was  brought  home 
to  Salt  Lake  City  for  burial.  Impres- 
sive funeral  services  were  held  in  the 
20th  Ward  chapel  on  Sunday,  Nov.  7, 
1915. 

MAYNES,  Selina  Jane,  wife  of  John 
Alexander  Maynes,  was  born  July  29, 
1861,  at  Chippenham,  Wiltshire,  Eng- 
land, the  daughter  of  James  Sabine 
and  Jane  Holder.  She  emigrated  to 
Utah  with  her  parents  in  1868,  travel- 
ing with  an  ox  train  from  Fort  Ben- 
ton, and  located  in  the  20th  Ward, 
Salt  Lake  City,  where  she  became 
active  as  a  Sunday  school  teacher  and 
secretary  of  Y.  L.  M.  I.  A.     She  was 


baptized  by  Elder  Mark  Lindsey  in 
July,  1873.  In  1882  (March  16th) 
she  was  married  to  John  A.  Maynes, 
to  whom  she  bore  seven  children,  five 
of  whom  are  living.  Accompanying 
her  husband  as  a  missionary  to  Great 
Britain  she  left  home  July  15,  1913, 


arriving  in  Liverpool,  England,  Aug. 
6,  1913.  She  labored  first  at  North- 
ampton in  the  Birmingham  confer- 
ance,  where  her  husband  presided, 
and  afterwards  at  Birmingham,  her 
husband  being  president  of  that  con- 
ference. They  then  went  to  London, 
where  her  husband  had  been  called  to 
preside  over  the  conference.  She  took 
charge  of  the  conference  house,  and 
did  misisonary  work,  together  with 
the  other  missionaries,  until  the 
death  of  her  husband  which  occurred 
at  Hull,  England,  Oct.  14,  1915.  She 
was  then  released,  and,  with  her 
daughter  Dorothy,  accompanied  the 
remains  of  her  husband  home,  arriv- 
ing in  Salt  Lake  City  Nov.  5,  1915. 
Sister  Maynes  is  now  identified  with 
the  Church  activities  at  home,  filling 
the  position  of  a  visiting  teacher  in 
the  20th  Ward  Relief  society.  Sister 
Maynes  bore  her  husband  seven  chil- 
dren, namely,  John  A.,  Albert  J., 
Edith   L.,    Ernest    E.,    Leo    Joseph, 


454 


LATTER-DAY   SAINT 


Fredrick  W.  and  Dorothy.     Ernest  E. 
and  Leo  Joseph  died  in  infancy. 

MAYNES,  Joseph  Watson,  one  of 
the  Elders  of  the  Church  who  died  in 
the  missionary  field,  was  born  Aug. 
26,  1856,  in  Hull,  Yorkshire,  Eng- 
land, the  son  of  John  Alexander 
Maynes  and  Jane  Watson.  His  par- 
ents moved  to  London  in  18  62,  where 
Joseph  joined  the  Church  in  1873,  at 
seventeen  years  of  age,  commencing  a 
very  active  career  as  a  minister  of  the 
gospel,  assisting  the  Elders  in  the 
branch  in  which  he  lived,  and  acting 
as  a  local  missionary.     He  came  to 


Utah  in  1881,  settling  in  Salt  Lake 
City.  On  Dec.  13,  1883,  he  married 
Emily  Elizabeth  Keep;  they  had  a 
family  of  eight  children,  namely,  Jo- 
seph W.,  Richard  J.,  Alfred  S.,  Charles 
W.,  Emily  J.,  John  K.,  James  A.  and 
Ivy  E.  Bro.  Maynes  was  ordained  a 
Seventy  May  14,  1894,  by  Rulon  S. 
Wells,  and  later  became  a  president 
of  the  4th  quorum  of  Seventy.  For 
many  years  Bro.  Maynes  was  a  most 
active  and  energetic  worker  in  the 
21st  Ward  Sunday  school,  he  having 
lived  in  that  Ward  from  the  time  of 
his  marriage  until  1899,  when  he 
moved  to  Waterloo.  He  was  an  em- 
ployee of  Z.  C.  M.  I.  for  eleven  years, 
leaving  there  to  enter  business  with 


the  Maynes,  Wells,  Schofield  Co.; 
afterwards  he  returned  to  Z.  C.  M.  I. 
and  was  employed  there  until  June, 
1910,  when  he  left  to  go  on  a  mission 
to  Great  Britain.  He  was  appointed 
to  labor  in  the  Bristol  conference  at 
Pontypridd,  South  Wales,  and  was 
afterwards  transferred  to  Gloucester, 
where  he  presided  over  the  Gloucester 
and  Cheltenham  branches.  On  Sun- 
day morning,  June  9,  1912,  while  in 
the  full  discharge  of  his  missionary 
duties,  he  and  his  companion  were  on 
their  way  to  Cheltenham  on  their 
bicycles,  to  conduct  Sunday  school; 
the  tire  on  Bro.  Maynes'  bicycle  punc- 
tured and  the  two  Elders  stopped  to 
repair  it,  but  as  they  found  it  was  a 
bad  puncture.  Elder  Maynes  sug- 
gested that  his  companion  go  on  and 
start  Sunday  school  on  time  and  he 
would  follow  as  soon  as  possible. 
These  were  his  last  words,  as  he  fell 
to  the  ground  without  uttering  an- 
other sound,  and  expired  before  his 
companion  could  summon  aid.  His 
remains  were  brought  to  Salt  Lake 
City  and  buried  in  the  family  lot  in 
the  City  cemetery  June  30,  1912. 

MAYNES,  Emily  Keep,  wife  of  Jo- 
seph W.  Maynes,  was  born  March  23, 
1860,  in  London,  England,  the  daugh- 
ter of  Richard  Keep  and  Susanna 
Brown.  Becoming  a  convert  to  "Mor- 
monism,"  she  was  baptized  in  the 
year  1870  and  emigrated  to  Utah  in 
company  with  her  sister  Louise,  in 
1882.  Soon  after  her  arrival  in  Salt 
Lake  City  she  married  Joseph  W. 
Maynes  and  later  became  the  mother 
of  eight  children  (six  sons  and  two 
daughters),  namely,  Joseph  W.,  Rich- 
ard J.,  Alfred  S.,  John  K.,  James  A., 
Charles  W.,  Emily  J.  and  Ivy  E.  Her 
husband  was  called  on  a  mission  to 
England  in  June,  1910,  and  while 
laboring  faithfully  was  stricken  with 
sickness  and  died  June  9,  1912.  Sis- 
ter Maynes  bore  her  great  loss  with 
commendable  resignation  and  suc- 
ceeded in  keeping  her  family  together. 
She  was  a  woman  of  great  faith  and 


BIOGRAPHICAL  ENCYCLOPEDIA. 


465 


led  a  most  exemplary  life.  After  the 
death  of  her  husband  Sister  Maynes 
devoted  almost  her  entire  time  to  the 
work  of  the  Church,  in  the  service  of 
which  her  husband  had  given  up  his 


life.  She  was  particularly  devoted  to 
the  Relief  Society,  being  president  of 
that  organization  in  the  Waterloo 
Ward  (Granite  Stake)  for  several 
years.  Upon  the  division  of  the 
Waterloo  Ward,  in  1919,  she  was 
honorably  released  from  her  position 
as  president  of  the  Relief  Society  and, 
being  then  a  member  of  the  newly 
created  Wells  Ward,  she  became  an 
active  worker  in  the  genealogical 
society  of  that  Ward  until  overtaken 
by  her  last  illness.  After  a  serious 
operation  had  been  performed  upon 
her  at  the  L.  D.  S.  hospital  in  the 
hope  of  saving  her  life,  she  finally 
succumbed  Jan.  31,  1920.  She  died 
firm  in  the  faith  of  the  gospel  and 
confident  of  a  glorious  resurrection. 

McMULlLIN,  Brigham  Young,  Bish- 
op of  Leeds  (St.  George  Stake), 
Washington  county,  Utah,  was  born 
March  29,  1851,  in  Salt  Lake  City, 
Utah,  the  son  of  Willard  G.  McMullin 
and  Martha  Richards.  He  was  baptized 
by  his  father  when  about  eight  years 
old,  settled  at  Harrisburg  in  the  fall 


of  1862,  and  settled  permanently  at 
Leeds  in  1878.  He  was  ordained  a 
Deacon  July  6,  1873,  by  Orson  B. 
Adams;  ordained  an  Elder  Jan.  11, 
1877,  by  Alonzo  H.  Raleigh  in  the 
St.  George  Temple;  ordained  a  High 
Priest  in  March,  1878,  by  Henry 
Eyring,  of  the  St.  George  Stake  presi- 
dency, and  served  as  a  counselor  to 
Bishop  George  H.  Crosby,  of  Leeds, 
from  1877  to  1885.  Prior  to  this, 
from  1876  to  1877,  he  acted  as  super- 
intendent of  the  Harrisburg  Sunday 
school,  served  as  constable  at  Leeds 
a  long  time  and  acted  as  president  of 
the  Leeds  Water  Company  about 
thirty-five  years.  He  was  chosen  and 
sustained  as  Bishop  of  the  Leeds 
Ward  early  in  1885  and  ordained 
about  a  year  later.  He  acted  as  Bishop 
of  Leeds  until  1912.  In  1877  (Jan. 
11th)  he  married  Ada  Parker  (daugh- 
ter of  Robert  Parker  and  Ann  Hart- 
ley), who  was  born  May  29,  1855,  in 
Preston,  Lancashire,  England.  This 
marriage  has  been  blessed  with  thir- 
teen children,  namely:    Martha,  Clar- 


ence B.,  Anna,  Ada,  Willard  G.,  Rob- 
ert P.,  Ethel,  Clifford  H.,  Leona,  Alice 
L.,  Max,  Laurence  and  Clyde. 

McMULIilN,  Ira  Spaulding,  a  High 
Priest  and  resident  of  Leeds,  Wash- 


456 


LATTER-DAY   SAINT 


ington  county,  Utah,  was  born  Sept. 
5,  1852,  at  North  Weber,  Weber 
county,  Utah,  the  son  of  Willard  G. 
McMullin  and  Martha  Richards.  He 
was  baptized  Sept.  16,  1860,  by  his 
father;  ordained  an  Elder  Nov.  14, 
1874,  by  E.  K.  Fuller;  married  Helen 
Elizabeth  Leany  in  Salt  Lake  City 
Dec.  7,  1874;  ordained  a  Seventy 
March  5,  1877,  by  Samuel  Gifford, 
and  ordained  a  High  Priest  March  11, 
1900,  by  Francis  M.  Lyman.  He 
filled  a  mission  in  the  Northern  States 
in  1898-1899.  At  home  he  has  held 
the  offices  of  justice  of  the  peace  and 
post  master  at  Leeds.  Otherwise  he 
is  a  mason  and  farmer  by  occupation. 
He  is  the  father  of  seven  children, 
namely:  Martha  May,  Elizabeth 
Scarce,  Albert,  Helen  Maud,  Marietta, 
Ira  Edward  and  Karl  Alfred. 

MEEKS,  William,  Bishop  of  the 
ThurberWard  (Wayne  Stake),  Wayne 
county,  Utah,  was  born  Feb.  18,  1848, 
in  Pottawattamie  county,  Iowa,  the 
son  of  William  Meeks  and  Mary  Eliz- 
abeth Rhodes.  His  great  great  grand- 
father was  William  Meeks,  who  with 
his  wife  Sarah  came  to  America  in 
the  "Mayflower"  in  1620.  Bro.  Meeks 
moved  with  his  parents  to  Spencer 
county,  Indiana,  whence  the  family 
migrated  to  Utah  in  1852,  crossing 
the  plains  in  Captain  Nisonger's  com- 
pany. With  his  parents  he  lived  suc- 
cessively in  Springville  (Utah  coun- 
ty), Nephi  (Juab  county).  Fort  Sup- 
ply (Green  River  county),  Provo 
(Utah  county),  and  St.  George  and 
Pine  Valley  (Washington  county), 
Utah.  He  was  baptized  June  4,  1865, 
ordained  a  Deacon  by  James  G. 
Bleak;  ordained  a  Teacher  by  Elias 
H.  Blackburn,  and  ordained  an  Elder 
in  1867  by  William  H.  Cluff.  In  1871 
he  married  Sarah  Gardner  (daughter 
of  Robert  Gardner  and  Jane  Mc- 
Cune),  who  was  born  Nov  28,  1848, 
in  Salt  Lake  City,  Utah.  She  bore 
her  husband  ten  children,  namely, 
William  Gardner,  James  Edgar,  Rob- 
ert   Arthur,    Archibald,    Mary    Jane, 


Sarah  Elizabeth,  Dora,  Reuben  Henry, 
Leonard  and  Phylis  Estelle.  Brother 
Meeks,  when  a  youth,  made  a  trip  to 
the  Missouri  River  as  a  Church  team- 
ster in  Daniel  D.  McArthur's  company 
from  St.  George.  He  also  served  In 
the  Black  Hawk  war  under  Capt. 
James  Andrus  of  St.  George,  and  later 
helped  to  build  all  the  reservoirs  in 
Wayne  county.  In  July,  1880,  he 
moved  to  Wayne  Stake  and  located  at 
Thurber,  where  he  acted  as  Bishop 
from  Aug.  31,  1880,  to  Nov.  25,  1895, 
having  been  ordained  a  High  Priest 


in  June,  1882.  At  the  beginning  of 
the  world's  war  he  was  chosen  as 
president  of  the  Red  Cross  organ- 
ization of  Wayne  county,  and  he  has 
acted  as  postmaster  of  Thurber  for 
thirteen  years.  Bishop  Meeks  is  a 
farmer  and  stock-raiser  by  avocation. 

MELLOR,  Archie  Myron,  Bishop  of 
Fayette  (South  Sanpete  Stake),  San- 
pete county,  Utah,  was  born  Dec.  24, 
1886,  at  Fayette,  Utah,  the  son  of 
John  C.  Mellor  and  Eva  C.  Dack.  He 
was  baptized  Aug.  1,  1895,  by  James 
Mellor  jun.,  ordained  a  Deacon  Feb. 
1,  1903,  by  James  A.  Hill;  ordained 
an  Elder  Jan.  8,  1912,  by  Peter 
Christiansen,  and  ordained  a  High 
Priest  and  Bishop  Oct.   31,   1914,  by 


BIOGRAPHICAL  ENCYCLOPEDIA. 


457 


Anthon  H.  Lund  and  set  apart  to  pre- 
side over  the  Fayette  Ward,  which 
position  he  still  holds.  From  his  early- 
youth  Bishop  Mellor  has  been  an  en- 
ergetic Church  worker.  He  acted  as 
president  of  the  Fayette  Ward  Y.  M. 
M.  I.  A.  from  1913  to  1914.  After 
receiving  a  common  school  education 
in  Fayette,  he  studied  three  years  at 
the  B.  Y.  University  at  Provo.  As 
chairman  of  the  Amusement  Hall 
committee  at  Fayette,  he  directed  the 
erection  of  the  Amusement  Hall  at 
Fayette  at  a  cost  of  $3,000.  He  is 
now  president  of  the  Amusement  Hall 
Company,  president  of  the  Fayette 
Canal  Company,  director  and  treas- 
urer of  the  Fayette  Irrigation  Com- 
pany and  director  of  the  Gunnison 
Valley  Bank.  His  principal  avoca- 
tions of  life  are  those  of  farming  and 
stock-raising.  In  1912  (Jan.  17th) 
he  married  Elvira  Peterson  (daugh- 
ter of  Per  Peterson  and  Dorthea 
Harmon),  who  was  born  Feb.  2  6, 
1892,  and  bore  her  husband  two  chil- 
dren, namely,  Myron  W.  and  Helen. 

MILiLEB,    Arnold    Daniel,    junior, 

Bishop  of  Parker  Ward  (Yellowstone 
Stake),  Fremont  county,  Idaho,  was 
born  Oct.  23,  1874,  at  St.  George, 
Washington  county,  Utah.  When 
eight  years  of  age  he  moved  with  his 
parents  to  Farmington,  Davis  county, 
Utah,  where  he  resided  until  Septem- 
ber, 1884,  when  he  removed  to  the 
Egin  bench  (later  known  as  Parker). 
As  a  boy  he  grew  up  in  this  new 
country,  assisting  in  pioneer  labor, 
and  passing  through  all  kinds  of  hard- 
ships incident  to  pioneer  life.  He  was 
ordained  a  Deacon,  and  afterwards  a 
Teacher  and  still  later  a  Priest.  Hav- 
ing received  an  ordinary  school  edu- 
cation, he  attended  the  B.  Y.  Academy 
at  Provo,  Utah,  three  years,  and  filled 
a  mission  to  the  Northwestern  States 
in  1897-1899.  After  his  return  from 
that  mission  he  took  an  active  part  in 
Sunday  school  and  Y.  M.  M.  I.  A. 
work,  presiding  eight  years  over  the 
Y.  M.  M.  I.  A.  at  Parker.     Since  his 


boyhood  days  he  has  had  implicit 
faith  in  the  possibilities  of  the  Egin 
bench,  and  has  followed  farming  and 
stock-raising,  investing  freely  in  real 
estate  and  live  stock.  He  has  taken 
a  leading  part  in  the  construction  of 
the  canal  which  has  made  the  Egin 
bench  famous,  and  he  has  also  been 
active  in  the  social  and  political  de- 
velopment of  the  country;  at  present 
he  is  serving  a  term  as  a  commis- 
sioner of  Fremont  county,  and  is  also 


a  director  of  one  of  the  banks  at  St. 
Anthony.  He  has  acted  as  Bishop  of 
the  Parker  Ward  since  Jan.  10,  1909. 
In  1897  (Dec.  1st)  he  married  Miss 
Effie  Secrist,  which  marriage  has 
been  blessed  with  five  children, 
namely,  Vernessa,  Eunice,  Florence, 
Effie  Myrle  and  Arnold  Woodruff. 

MITCHELL,    Fredrick    Ewin,    the 

second  Bishop  of  the  Clinton  Ward 
(Weber  Stake),  Davis  county,  Utah, 
was  born  August  17,  1881,  at  River- 
dale,  Weber  county,  Utah,  the  son  of 
James  Mitchell  and  Maren  Jensen. 
He  was  baptized  Oct.  24,  1889,  by 
John  C.  Child;  ordained  a  Deacon 
Jan.  12,  1896,  by  Antone  C.  Christen- 
sen;  ordained  a  Teacher  Dec.  17, 
1898,  by  Orlando  D.  Hadlock;  or- 
dained an  Elder  March  11,  1900,  by 
Samuel  P.  Owen;  ordained  a  Seventy 


458 


LATTER-DAY   SAINT 


by  J.  Golden  Kimball;  ordained  a 
High  Priest  Dec.  25,  1910,  by  Charles 
F.  Middleton  and  set  apart  to  act  as 
second  counselor  to  Bishop  Orlando 
D.  Hadlock,  which  position  he  held 
until  March  7,  1915,  when  he  was  or- 
dained a  Bishop  by  President  Joseph 
F.  Smith  and  set  apart  to  preside  over 
the  Clinton  Ward,  which  position  he 
still  holds.  In  1902-1904  Bishop 
Mitchell  filled  a  mission  to  Scandi- 
navia, laboring  in  the  Aalborg  and 
Aarhus  conferences,  Denmark,  At 
home  he  has  presided  over  a  Dea- 
cons' quorum,  served  as  a  counselor 
in  the  Ward  Y.  M.  M.  I.  A.  and  as 
assistant  superintendent  of  the  Ward 
Sunday  school.  In  1904  (Nov.  16th) 
he  married  Ethel  P.  Steed,  daughter 
of  Thomas  J.  Steed  and  Susanna 
Davis,  who  was  born  April  6,  1883, 
in  Farmington,  Davis  county,  Utah, 
and  who  has  borne  her  nusband  six 
children,  namely:  Frederick  Ewin, 
Norma  A.,  Frank  E.,  Max  E.,  Phyllis 
J.  and  Thomas  J. 

MITCHELL,  William  Cook,  Bishop 
of  Parowan  (Parowan  Stake),  Iron 
county,  Utah,  was  born  April  13, 
1835,  in  Liverpool,  England,  the  son 
of  William  Cook  Mitchell  and  Eliza 
Ridsdale.  He  emigrated  to  America 
in  1841,  crossing  the  Atlantic  in  the 
ship  "Tyrian"  which  sailed  from 
Liverpool  to  New  Orleans  with  204 
Saints  under  the  direction  of  Joseph 
Fielding,  bound  for  Nauvoo,  Illinois. 
Bro.  Mitchell  passed  through  the 
persecutions  of  the  Saints  in  Illinois 
and,  together  with  other  exiles, 
crossed  the  Mississippi  river  May  11, 
1846,  for  the  west.  He  arrived  at 
Council  Bluffs,  July  1,  1846,  accom- 
panied Bishop  George  Miller's  com- 
pany to  the  Pawnee  village  and  re- 
turned to  Winter  Quarters  in  the  fall 
of  1846.  Soon  afterwards  his  father 
was  called  on  a  mission  to  Great 
Britain  and  William  C.  accompanied 
him.  They  arrived  in  Liverpool 
April  11,  1847.  His  father  having 
filled  an  honorable  mission  they  sailed 


from  Liverpool  Jan.  29,  1849,  on 
board  the  ship  "Zetland"  and  arrived 
in  Salt  Lake  City  Oct.  27,  1849.  In 
December,  1850,  William  C.  Mitchell, 
responding  to  call,  left  Salt  Lake 
City  for  Center  Creek,  in  Little  Salt 
Lake  Valley,  where  he  arrived,  to- 
gether with  the  rest  of  the  pioneers 
of  Parowan  Jan.  13,  1851.  Here  he 
was  ordained  an  Elder  by  John  C.  L. 
Smith  in  May,  1852.  At  the  April 
conference,  held  in  Salt  Lake  City, 
in  1855,  he  was  called  on  a  mission 
to  the  Indians  at  the  Las  Vegas  (now 
in  Nevada).  To  fill  this  mission  he 
left  Parowan  May  29,  1855,  and  re- 
turned in  March,  1857.     He  was  or- 


dained a  Seventy  by  Silas  S.  Smith 
in  March,  18  65,  and  became  a  mem- 
ber of  the  63rd  quorum  of  Seventy. 
He  was  ordained  a  High  Priest  by 
Geo.  A.  Smith  and  set  apart  as  a 
High  Councilor  in  the  Parowan  Stake 
March  14,  1869.  Subsequently  he 
was  ordained  a  Bishop  by  President 
Wm.  H.  Dame  and  set  apart  to  pre- 
side over  the  Parowan  First  Ward, 
which  position  he  held  until  June, 
1885,  when  the  two  Parowan  Wards 
were  consolidated  into  one,  after 
which  Brother  Mitchell  went  back 
into  the  High  Council.  Bro.  Mitchell 
married  Mary  Ann  Holmes,  a  daugh- 


BIOGRAPHICAL  ENCYCLOPEDIA. 


459 


ter  of  Cornelius  Holmes  and  Eliza 
Abby.  Seven  children  blessed  this 
marriage,  namely,  William  C,  Eliza 
Ann,  Mary  Ann,  Sarah  R.,  James  W., 
William  C.  and  Mabel,  Later  Bro. 
Mitchell  married  Augusta  Phearson, 
who  bore  her  husband  five  children, 
namely,  Walter  C,  Ellen  A.,  Henry 
A.,  Maud  A.  and  George  A.  Brother 
Mitchell  also  married  Hulda  Dalton, 
who  bore  him  one  child  (Joseph 
Clayton),  and  still  later  he  married 
Sarah  C.  Dalton.  Bishop  Mitchell 
died  May  22,  1911,  in  Parowan. 

MITCHELL,  Walter  Collins,  Bish- 
op of  Parowan  (Parowan  Stake), 
Iron  county,  Utah,  was  born  March 
27,    1869,    at    Parowan,    the    son    of 


William  Cook  Mitchell  and  Augusta 
Phearson.  He  was  baptized  Aug.  12, 
1877,  by  Smith  D.  Rogers;  ordained 
a  Deacon  May  2  9,  1882,  by  his 
father;  ordained  an  Elder  by  Morgan 
Richards;  ordained  a  Seventy  April 
8,  1893,  by  John  Henry  Smith  and 
set  apart  for  a  mission  to  the  South- 
ern States,  laboring  principally  in 
Alabama  and  Mississippi.  He  re- 
turned home  April  10,  1895.  In 
1903  he  filled  a  short  mission  to  Ore- 
gon in  the  interest  of  Y.  M.  M.  I.  A. 
and  also  spent  a  few  months  in  the 


same  capacity  in  the  Jordan  Stake. 
In  1904-1905  he  filled  a  mission  to 
the  Northern  States,  laboring  prin- 
cipally in  Michigan  and  Indiana.  At 
home  he  also  acted  as  an  officer  in 
the  Ward  Y.  M.  M.  I.  A.  and  was 
Stake  superintendent  of  Religion 
Classes.  He  was  ordained  a  High 
Priest  and  Bishop  by  Francis  M.  Ly- 
man Sept.  19,  1909,  and  set  apart  to 
preside  over  the  Parowan  Ward, 
which  position  he  held  until  March 
26,  1912.  In  1916  he  was  chosen 
as  a  member  of  the  High  Council.  He 
served  as  county  treasurer  in  1896- 
1897,  served  in  the  city  council  two 
terms  and  was  elected  a  member  of 
the  school  board  in  19 Id  for  four 
years.  In  18»9  (April  10th)  he 
married  Mary  S.  Orton  (daughter  of 
Sydney  Orton  and  Selena  Butt),  who 
was  born  Dec.  1,  1871,  in  Parowan. 
She  bore  her  husband  eleven  chil- 
dren, namely,  W.  Scott,  Frank  C, 
Sylvia,  Merril  O.,  Eva,  Walter  C, 
Ray  O.,  Elmer  O.,  Ralph  O.,  Norma 
and  Itha. 

MONSON,  Peter,  third  Bishop  of 
Goshen  Ward  (Shelley  Stake),  Bing- 
ham county,  Idaho,  was  born  May 
26,  18  63,  at  Korsor,  Denmark,  the 
son  of  Karl  H.  Monson  and  Karen 
Hendricksen.  He  was  baptized  Sept. 
6,  1879,  by  Christopher  S.  Winge;  or- 
dained successively  to  the  offices  of 
Deacon,  Elder  and  Seventy,  and  or- 
dained a  High  Priest  Oct.  18,  1914, 
by  Joseph  H.  Dye,  and  ordained  a 
Bishop  Oct.  21,  1915,  by  James  E. 
Talmage,  and  set  apart  to  preside 
over  the  Goshen  Ward,  which  posi- 
tion he  still  holds.  Bro.  Monson 
emigrated  to  Utah  in  1879  and  settled 
in  Hyrum,  Cache  county,  Utah.  Thence 
he  moved  to  Goshen,  Idaho,  in  1898, 
where  he  acted  as  Sunday  school  su- 
perintendent for  nine  years  and  as  a 
counselor  in  the  Y.  M.  M.  I.  A.;  he 
also  acted  as  chairman  of  the  local 
amusement  committee.  In  1885  (Dec. 
2nd)  he  married  Helma  Winge,  daugh- 
ter   of    Christopher    S.    Winge    and 


460 


LATTER-DAY   SAINT 


Marie  Salverson,  who  was  born  Aug. 
16,  1864,  in  Hyrum,  Utah,  and  bore 
her  husband  three  children,  namely, 
Vita  E.,  Cora  M.  and  Pearl  C.     Bishop 


Monson  is  a  farmer  by  avocation  and 
a  practical  citizen.  He  has  served 
seven  years  as  a  director  in  the  Snake 
River  Valley  Irrigation  District. 

MOORE,  Joseph  Webber,  Bishop  of 
Bennington,  Bear  Lake  county,  Idaho, 
was  born  June  1,  1833,  at  Pomfret, 
Chautauqua  county.  New  York,  the 
son  of  Ethan  Allen  Moore  and  Sarah 
Webber.  His  parents  became  identi- 
fied with  the  Latter-day  Saints  in  the 
early  "thirties"  and  Joseph  was  bap- 
tized in  1841  when  eight  years  old. 
The  family  moved  to  Kirtland,  Ohio, 
and  went  west  in  the  so-called  Kirt- 
land Camp  in  1838.  Bro.  Moore  be- 
came acquainted  with  the  Prophet 
Joseph  Smith  when  a  boy  and  was 
present  at  the  meeting  held  at  Nau- 
voo,  Aug.  8,  1844,  when  Brigham 
Young,  in  the  eyes  of  many,  seemed 
transformed  into  the  likeness  of  the 
Prophet  Joseph.  Crossing  the  plains 
in  1849,  Bishop  Moore  made  his  first 
home  at  Tooele  Valley,  Utah,  and  in 
the  winter  of  1850  he  located  on 
Battle  Creek,  Utah  county,  and  thus 


became  one  of  the  pioneers  of  Pleas- 
ant Grove,  where  he  helped  to  erect 
the  first  log  house.  He  was  enrolled 
as  a  minute  man  and  served  during 
all  the  Indian  troubles  in  the  early 
days.  Late  in  life  he  received  a  pen- 
sion as  a  reward  for  his  services  in 
the  Walker  war.  He  was  one  of  the 
guards  who  accompanied  Gov.  Brig- 
ham  Young  on  his  first  visit  to  San- 
pete Valley.  In  1855  he  married 
Hannah  Young,  who  bore  him  twelve 
children,  six  of  whom  have  passed  to 
the  other  side;  the  ones  still  living 
are  Anna  Perkins,  Emmeline  Huff, 
William,  Malona  Oliver,  Amy  Allred 
and  Ephraim.  About  1864  he  moved 
to  Idaho  and  assisted  in  building  St. 
Charles  and  Paris  in  Bear  Like  Val- 
ley. When  the  United  Order  was  in- 
troduced in  those  Wards,  he  put  his 
property  into  the  order,  as  a  result  of 
which  he  later  moved  to  Bennington 
to  make  a  home.  He  acted  as  Bishop 
of  that  place  from  1871  to  1880.  Dis- 
liking the  long  winters  of  the  Bear 
Lake  Valley,  he  moved  southward  in 
1880  and  settled  at  Lawrence,  Emery 
county,  Utah.     At  this  place  he  pros- 


pered  for  several  years  and  built  a 
good  home,  but  alkali  took  possession 
of  his  farm  until  he  was  induced  to 
move   again   in    188  9,    and    he    then 


BIOGRAPHICAL  ENCYCLOPEDIA. 


461 


settled  at  Moab,  Grand  county,  Utah, 
where  he  secured  a  piece  of  fertile 
land  and  lived  quietly  the  rest  of  his 
days.  Here  he  died  July  24,  1914. 
Bro.  Moore  was  a  man  of  kind  dis- 
position, a  lover  of  peace  and  a  most 
faithful  Latter-day  Saint.  He  loved 
Utah  and  her  people  and  always  took 
an  active  part  in  public  affairs. 

MORRELL,  William  Henry,  fifth 
Bishop  of  Loa  Ward  (Wayne  Stake), 
Wayne  county,  Utah,  is  the  son  of 
William  Wilson  Morrell  and  Julia  Ja- 
cobs, and  was  born  at  Kamas,  Sum- 
mit county,  Utah,  Nov.  27,  1866.  He 
was  baptized  by  Christian  Larsen,  at 


Kamas,  Utah,  and  was  ordained  suc- 
cessively to  the  offices  of  Deacon, 
Priest  and  Elder.  His  boyhood  days 
were  spent  upon  the  farm,  assisting 
in  the  pioneer  work  in  which  his  par- 
ents took  an  active  part.  In  1877  he 
moved  with  his  parents  to  Fremont 
Valley,  then  a  part  of  the  Sevier 
Stake  of  Zion,  when  he  was  ten  years 
of  age,  and  commenced  work  at  an 
early  age  helping  his  father,  the  lat- 
ter being  one  of  the  first  settlers  and 
respected  pioneers  of  Fremont  Val- 
ley. In  early  life  he  engaged  in 
Church  activities  and  has  been  con- 
stant and  faithful  in  the  many  years 


of  service  he  has  given  to  the  Church. 
In  188  6   (Dec.  15th)   he  married  Re- 
becca R.  Duncan  (daughter  of  Chap- 
man Duncan  and  Rosannah  Taylor), 
who    was    born    Sept.    13,    1867,    at 
Washington,      Washington      county, 
Utah.     Six  children  were  the  issue  of 
their  marriage,  namely,  Lettie,  Wil- 
liam Chapman,   Emily  R.,  Eldon  P., 
Nolan  Elijah  and  Stanley.     Mrs.  Mor- 
rell died  at  Loa,  Utah,  March  1,  1910, 
honored  and  beloved  by  all.     While 
living    in    the    Fremont    Ward    Bro. 
Morrell   prospered   as   a   farmer   and 
stock-raiser.     In  1897-1898  he  filled 
an  honorable  mission  as  a  preacher 
of  the  gospel  in  the  Southern  States. 
He  was  set  apart  to  labor  as  second 
counselor  to  Bishop  Hans  M.  Hansen 
of  the  Fremont  Ward,  having  before 
been  ordained  a  High  Priest  in  1893; 
he  continued  in  this  calling  until  he 
was    called    on    a   mission.      He    was 
chosen  to  be  Bishop  of  Loa  Ward  and 
was  ordained  and   set  apart  to  that 
position  by  Apostle  George  Teasdale 
Aug.  7,  1899.     After  selling  his  prop- 
erty  in   Fremont   he   moved   to   Loa, 
where  he  has  resided  ever  since.     He 
was  honorably  released  as  Bishop  of 
Loa  Ward  when  he  was  called  on  his 
second  mission  to  preach  the  gospel 
in  1908.     He  was  an  energetic  mis- 
sionary in  the  Northern  States,  labor- 
ing in  Chicago,  Illinois,  most  of  the 
time    during    1908-1909.      After    re- 
turning from  his  second  mission,  he 
was  chosen  and  set  apart  as  a  regular 
member  of  the  High  Council  by  Pres- 
ident Joseph  F.  Smith,  Oct.  24,  1909, 
which  position  he  holds  at  the  pres- 
ent   time.      He    has    labored    as    the 
Stake  superintendent  of  the  Y.  M.  M. 
I.  A.  and  in  other  callings,  and  has 
always  been  a  diligent  worker.    Fol- 
lowing the  death  of  his  wife,  April  5, 
1911,  he  married  Ann  Louise  Mathis 
(a   widow),    the   daughter   of   James 
Pace    (of    Mormon    Battalion    fame) 
and    Margaret    Callahan.      She    was 
born  April  3,  1868,  in  New  Harmony, 
Washington  county,  Utah.     Her  chil- 
dren by  a  former  husband  are  Hazel, 


462 


LATTER-DAY   SAINT 


George,  Marguerite,  Elda,  Karl  Mathis, 
Beatrice  and  Preston  Taylor.  Bishop 
Morrell  has  held  many  positions  of 
civil  trust,  from  constable  to  State 
and  county  road  supervisor,  and  has 
taken  an  active  part  in  all  progressive 
movements  of  a  civil  and  ecclesiasti- 
cal nature.  His  motto  has  been  that 
industry  and  perseverance,  inspired 
by  faith  that  enables  a  man  to  serve 
God  and  keep  His  commandments, 
leads  to  ultimate  success  and  happi- 
ness. 

MORRIS,  Hiram  Bowles,  a  Pat- 
riarch in  the  Maricopa  Stake  of  Zion 
and  a  resident  of  Mesa,  Maricopa 
county,   Arizona,   was   born  Dec.    23, 


■'-K./ 


1821,  in  Bourbon  county,  Kentucky, 
the  son  of  Thomas  Morris  and  Sophia 
Talbot.  Elder  Francis  D.  Pomeroy 
of  Mesa,  writes  the  following  sketch 
of  the  life  of  Patriarch  Morris:  "Hir- 
am Bowles  Morris  was  third  in  a  fam- 
ily of  seven  children.  When  about 
four  years  of  age  his  parents  moved 
to  Illinois,  then  a  frontier  country, 
settling  on  a  farm  several  miles  from 
the  town  of  Quincy.  Here  he  grew  to 
manhood's  estate,  laboring  on  his 
father's  farm,  and  having  but  little 
schooling.  He  also  learned  the  cooper 
trade,  in  which  he  became  an  ex- 
pert, especially  in  the  construction 
of  buckets  and  tubs,  for  which  there 


was  great  demand.  In  the  spring  of 
18  44  he  made  a  trip  to  Nauvoo,  Illi- 
nois, and  was  introduced  to  the 
Prophet  Joseph  Smith.  Shaking 
hands,  the  Prophet  asked  him  if  he 
was  a  'Mormon.'  'No  sir,'  was  the 
reply.  'But  you  will  be,'  said  the 
Prophet,  laying  his  hand  on  his 
shoulder.  Mr.  Morris  declared  he 
felt  as  though  an  electric  shock  had 
passed  through  him.  In  1849,  when 
27  years  of  age,  the  California  'gold 
fever  wave'  struck  the  community 
where  he  lived  and  a  party  of  ten 
or  twelve  young  men,  including 
Hiram  B.  Morris,  organized  and 
equipped  themselves  for  a  trip  across 
the  plains  to  the  'gold  diggings.'  The 
company  followed  the  route  of  the 
original  pioneers,  passing  through 
northern  Utah,  and  pitched  their 
camp  on  the  Humboldt  river,  where 
they  did  their  first  placer  mining. 
From  a  small  crevice,  Hiram  B. 
Morris  obtained  over  $500.00  in  gold. 
They  remained  here  about  one  week, 
and  then  followed  the  'lure  of  gold' 
into  the  more  renowned  gold  fields 
of  California.  Mr.  Morris  placer 
mined  on  the  American  and  the  Sac- 
ramento rivers  and  their  tributaries 
for  about  two  years,  accumulating 
several  thousand  dollars  in  gold  dust 
panned  by  his  own  hands.  These 
were  rough  days,  among  rough  men. 
The  following  incident  illustrates  the 
character  of  Mr.  Morris:  A  young 
college  tenderfoot  named  Jeff  Neth- 
erton,  arrived  in  the  camp  and  partly 
by  his  superior  air,  became  the  butt 
of  the  other  men,  whose  'jibes'  be- 
came more  and  more  violent,  until 
one  evening  a  mob  determined  on  a 
more  serious  line  of  manhandling,  to 
begin  with  'ding-busting'  the  young 
man.  Hiram  B.  Morris  decided  that 
the  affair  had  gone  far  enough,  and 
stepping  between  the  man  and  the 
crowd,  he  protested.  'What  have  you 
to  do  with  it,'  they  asked.  'Every- 
thing,' said  he,  and  stripping  his 
coat,  and  telling  the  young  man  to 
'stay  behind  him'  he  prepared  to  de- 


BIOGRAPHICAL  ENCYCLOPEDIA. 


463 


fend  him  with  all  the  strength  of  his 
splendid  young  manhood.  Seeing 
that  he  meant  business,  wiser  coun- 
sel finally  prevailed,  and  the  man  es- 
caped, but  he  never  forgot  the  cour- 
age and  bravery  of  the  young  man 
who  saved  him  from  the  brutality  of 
the  mob.  In  returning  to  the  States, 
via  Panama  and  crossing  the  isthmus 
on  a  'burro  train,'  he  carried  his  gold 
dust  in  canvass  bags,  stored  away  in 
an  old-fashioned  carpet  bag,  which 
he  never  allowed  out  of  his  sight. 
There  were  four  in  his  party  and 
they  had  only  one  coat,  which  was 
worn  in  turns  at  the  table,  as  the 
table  rules  required  a  coat.  On 
reaching  port  in  New  York  they  were 
surrounded  by  cab  men  who,  recog- 
nizing them  as  miners  from  Cali- 
fornia, determined  to  get  them  and 


he  did  to  such  good  purpose  that  in 
October,  1861,  Mr.  Morris  was  bap- 
tized and  had  no  desire  to  continue 
his  journey.  They  now  had  one  child, 
Laura  Elizabeth,  whose  birth  oc- 
curred April  20,  1854,  near  Quincy, 
Illinois.  They  had  lost  one  child 
(William  Edwin)  who  was  born  Aug. 
18,  1857,  and  had  died  on  the  plains 
May  29,  1860.  In  March,  1862,  Bro. 
Morris  was  ordained  an  Elder  by  Dr. 
Samuel  L.  Sprague;  and  in  the  fall  of 
18  62  he  with  his  family  migrated  to 
southern  Utah,  settling  at  Rockville, 
Kane  county,  where  Hiram  Bowles 
Morris  jun.  was  born.  Bro.  Morris 
was  ordained  a  High  Priest  in  1864, 
by  Edw.  Duzett.  He  owned  and  oper- 
ated two  small  farms,  one  near  Rock- 
ville and  one  near  Springdale,  also 
a  fruit  orchard  in  Rockville.     He  also 


their  'swag.'     Whereupon  Mr.  Morris    engaged  in  the  cooper  trade  and  sup 


pulled   an   old   revolver   and    waving 
them   aside   led   his   friends   through 
these  thugs  to  safety.     He  proceeded 
to  his  home  at  Quincy,  Illinois,  and 
on  the  8th  day  of  August,   1852,  he 
married   Eleanor   Crawford   Roberts, 
the   daughter   of    Adenijah    Roberts 
and  Elizabeth    Crawford.      He    pur- 
chased  all   of   their    household    and 
kitchen    furniture    and    supplies    for 
starting    housekeeping     with      'gold 
weighed  out  in  dust.'     In  the  fall  of 
185  9,  his  wife  Eleanor  had  been  con- 
verted to  'Mormonism'  and  was  bap- 
tized into  the  Church;  but  he  had  be- 
come somewhat  prejudiced,  owing  to 
treatment   accorded    one   of   his    sis- 
ters, by  a   Mormon,'  who  after  marry- 
ing her  had  gone  off  and  left  her.    In 
the  spring  of  1860,  they  started  west, 
in  Capt.  Walling's  company.     His  in- 
tention was  to   go  on  to  California, 
while  his  wife's  continual  prayer  was 
that  they  would  get  no  farther  than 
Salt  Lake  City,  Utah.     Arriving  there 
in   August,    1860,   they   had     to     lay 
over,  being  out  of  supplies,  and  Mr. 
Morris  went  to  work  immediately  for 
Bishop  Archibald  Gardener.  The  wife 
begged   Bro.   Gardener    to    persuade 
her  husband  to  go  no  farther,  which 


plied  the  community  with  much  need- 
ed buckets,  tubs  and    barrels.     For 
twelve  years  he  was  scout  master  in 
the  Indian  troubles   which  periodic- 
ally broke  out  in  southern  Utah.     He 
had   many   narrow   escapes   and   try- 
ing  experiences.      At     one    time    he 
went  out  on  a    scouting    expedition 
with  six  men,  expecting  to  be  back 
inside  of  24  hours,  but  his  party  was 
led  into  a  trap   by  the  wily   savage 
and  surrounded,   in  a    box    canyon; 
and   while  they   were   able   to   fight 
off  the  Indians  they  were  hemmed  in 
for   eighteen   days,   but  were   finally 
rescued  by  soldiers  in  a  starved  con- 
dition.    Eleanor  Rebecca,  born  May 
14,   1866;   Eliza  Roberts,  born  April 
10,   1870,   and  Sophia  Isadora,   born 
April   10,   1873,    were    additions    to 
Bro.  Morris'  family.  Not  being  satis- 
fied  with   their   'hemmed   in'    condi- 
tion  at   Rockville,    Bro.     Morris,     in 
company   with   George     Staples    and 
Frank  Rappleye,  a  son-in-law,  made 
a  trip  to  Mesa,  Arizona,  in  the  spring 
of   1882,   and   liked   the   country    so 
well  that  he  purchased  a  farm.     Re- 
turning to  Utah,  as  soon,  as  possible, 
Bro.  Morris  disposed  of  his  property 
there  and  in  January,  1883,  he  start- 


464 


LATTER-DAY   SAINT 


ed  with  his  family  for  his  new  home, 
having  an  outfit  of  four  wagons,  five 
teams,  twenty-five  head  of  loose 
horses  and  fifty  head  of  cattle.  He 
was  accompanied  by  William  Brund- 
age  and  family,  William  B.  Lang  and 
family,  Paul  Huber  and  family,  Chas. 
Slaughter  and  son,  Hyrum  Smith, 
Joseph  Hearshy  and  James  Wilkins. 
At  St.  George  the  company  was  or- 
ganized by  Apostle  Erastus  Snow, 
with  Hiram  Morris  as  captain  and 
William  G.  Brundage  as  chaplain. 
Bro.  Morris  promised  his  companions 
that  if  they  would  sing  a  hymn  and 
have  prayers  each  evening,  and  be 
faithful,  they  would  have  no  serious 
trouble  but  would  reach  their  desti- 
nation in  safety,  which  was  fulfilled. 
They  arrived  in  Mesa,  March  3,  1883. 
Bro.  Morris  purchased  property  in 
Mesa  City,  on  which  he  built  his 
home  and  farmed  his  land.  He  also 
did  some  freighting  and  arranged  for 
selling  produce  in  the  mining  camps 
surrounding.  He  was  ordained  a 
Patriarch  in  the  Maricopa  Stake,    in 

1907,  by  John  Henry  Smith,  and 
took  great  pleasure  in  blessing  the 
people.  In  October,  1907,  Bro.  Mor- 
ris contracted  gangrene  in  his  left 
foot,  and  to  prevent  death  as  a  re- 
sult, it  was  decided  to  amputate  his 
limb.  Although  he  was  8  6  years  of 
age,  it  was  thought  that  owing  to  the 
clean  life  he  had  led  (being  a  strict 
observer  of  the  Word  of  Wisdom,  and 
in  perfect  health)  that  he  could 
stand  the  ordeal.  The  operation  was 
successful — the  wound  healed  nicely 
— but  the  shock  was  more  than  his 
nerves  could  stand,  and  after  much 
suffering   he  passed   away   Jan.     21, 

1908,  aged  86  years  and  29  days. 
Bro.  Morris  possessed  the  love  and 
respect  of  all  who  knew  him  and  he 
died  a  faithful  Latter-day  Saint." 

MORRISON,  John  Alfred,  the  sec- 
ond Bishop  of  Preston  First  Ward 
(Oneida  Stake),  Franklin  county, 
Idaho,  was  born  March  28,  1880,  at 
Franklin,   Idaho,   the   son   of  Joseph 


Morrison  and  Lucy  Ann  Henson.  He 
was  baptized  in  1891  by  JamesPacker; 
ordained  a  Deacon  soon  afterwards; 
ordained  a  Seventy  Oct.  10,  1900,  by 
Jonathan  G.  Kimball;  ordained  a 
High  Priest  in  June,  1913,  by  James 
E.  Talmage  and  set  apart  to  act  as 
Bishop  of  the  Preston  First  Ward, 
which  position  he  held  until  May, 
1914,  when  he  left  Preston  to  take  a 
course  at  the  University  of  Idaho,  but 
returned  soon  afterwards  as  a  county 
agricultural  agent,  in  which  the  Fed- 
eral department  of  the  university  and 
the  county  commissioners  were  co- 
operating. Bro.  Morrison  held  this 
position  four  and  one-half  years.  In 
1919  he  served  as  agriculturist  for 
the  Wyoming  Sugar  Company.  He 
took  a  normal  course  in  the  Albion 
State  Normal  School  in  Idaho,  and  in 
the  B.  Y.  College  at  Logan,  Utah. 
He  graduated  from  the  Utah  Agricul- 
tural College  with  the  degree  of  B.  S., 
taught  in  the  Oneida  Stake  Academy 
five  years  and  in  the  district  school 
about  four  years.  In  1900-1902  he 
filled  a  mission  to  the  Eastern  States, 
laboring  in  the  West  Virginian  con- 
ference, part  of  the  time  as  president. 
In  1907  (Sept.  11th)  he  married  Anna 
Dorthea  Miller  (daughter  of  Nicholai 
C.  Miller  and  Anna  Nelson),  who  was 
born  Sept.  18,  1885,  in  Logan,  Utah. 
She  became  the  mother  of  six  chil- 
dren, namely,  Zoe  M.,  Luy,  Miller 
Oliver,  Anna,  John  A.  and  Preston. 

MORTENSEN,  Hans  Jorgen,  Bish- 
op of  Parowan  (Parowan  Stake),  Iron 
county,  Utah,  was  born  Dec.  4,  1881, 
at  Parowan,  the  son  of  Hans  J.  Mor- 
tensen  and  Jane  Elizabeth  Holyoak. 
He  was  baptized  Dec.  4,  1889,  by  his 
father;  ordained  a  Deacon  in  1895, 
by  Charles  Adams;  ordained  an  Elder 
July  1,  1906,  by  William  C.  Mitchell; 
ordained  a  Seventy  March  17,  1907, 
by  George  F.  Richards;  filled  a  mis- 
sion to  Scandinavia  in  1910-1912, 
laboring  in  the  Bergen  conference, 
Norway;  labored  as  a  Stake  aid  in 
the   Y.    M.    M.    I.    A.,   Ward    superin- 


BIOGRAPHICAL  ENCYCLOPEDIA. 


465 


tendent  of  Sunday  schools  one  and  a 
half  years,  and  Stake  superintendent 
of  Sunday  schools  two  years.  From 
1913  to  1915  he  served  as  a  member 


of  the  Parowan  city  council  and  has 
acted  as  superintendent  of  the  Paro- 
wan M.  and  M.  Company  since  1914. 
In  1916  (Sept.  2  4th)  he  was  ordained 
a  High  Priest  and  Bishop  by  Francis 
M.  Lyman  and  set  apart  to  preside 
over  the  Parowan  Ward,  which  posi- 
tion he  still  occupies.  Bishop  Mor- 
tensen  is  a  merchant  and  farmer.  In 
1907  (June  7th)  he  married  Cora 
Lemon  (daughter  of  Isaac  Lemon  and 
Inez  Hyatt),  who  was  born  July  29, 
1881,  at  Parowan.  Four  children 
have  been  born  to  the  Bishop  and  his 
wife,  namely,  Thelda,  Inez,  Lester 
and  Helen. 

MUNNS,  Charles,  Bishop  of  the 
Garland  Ward  (Bear  River  Stake), 
Box  Elder  county,  Utah,  was  born 
March  24,  1859,  at  Orwell,  Cam- 
bridgeshire, England,  the  son  of 
James  Munns  and  Elizabeth  Collis. 
His  parents  became  converts  to  "Mor- 
monism"  and  moved  to  Leeds,  York- 
shire, where  Charles  was  baptized 
Oct.  25,  1868,  by  John  Jacklin,  and 
later  (March  4,  1874)  was  ordained 
a  Deacon  by  William  Sunderland.    He 


worked  faithfully  as  president  of  the 
Deacons'  quorum  in  the  Leeds  branch 
until  Sept.  10,  1876,  when  he  was  or- 
dained a  Priest  by  Elder  E.  W.  Clark. 
Soon  afterwards  he  emigrated  to 
Utah,  crossing  the  Atlantic  in  the 
steamship  "Wyoming"  and  arrived  in 
SaltLakeCity  Oct.  3,  1876.  He  found 
a  temporary  home  in  the  family  of 
President  John  Taylor.  Charles  later 
found  employment  in  the  Flagstaff 
Smelters  at  Sandy  and  earned  means, 
by  the  help  of  his  brother,  George  C. 
Munns,  to  bring  his  father's  family  to 
Utah.  They  arrived  Nov.  7,  1877,  and 
settled  at  Lehi,  Utah  county.  Here 
Charles  was  ordained  an  Elder  Jan. 
12,  1882,  by  Abel  J.  Evans.     In  1884 


(May  1st)  he  married  Annie  M.  Aus- 
tin (daughter  of  John  and  Emma 
Austin  of  Lehi),  who  bore  her  hus- 
band nine  children,  namely:  Lettie 
Jane,  Grace  Emma,  Archie  Austin, 
John  C,  Alice,  Frank  William, 
Charles  J.,  Annie  and  Clara.  Brother 
Munns  was  ordained  a  Seventy  Nov. 
10,  1889,  by  William  Gurney  and  be- 
came a  member  of  the  127th  quorum 
of  Seventy.  He  filled  a  mission  to 
Great  Britain  in  1899-1902.  In  1902 
he  located  with  his  family  in  Bear 
River   Valley   and   resided   for   three 


Vol.  Ill,  No.  30. 


February  7,  1920 


466 


LATTER-DAY   SAINT 


years  in  Elwood  where  he  was  fore- 
man on  one  of  the  largest  sugar  beet 
farms.  He  then  moved  to  Garland 
where  he  acted  as  foreman  of  the  so- 
called  "North  Farm,"  belonging  to 
the  Sugar  Company,  for  three  years. 
He  was  then  advanced  to  his  present 
postion,  taking  charge  of  reclamation 
work  for  the  sugar  factory.  In  1910 
(Nov.  19th)  he  was  ordained  a  High 
Priest  and  set  apart  as  an  alternate 
High  Councilor  in  the  Bear  River 
Stake.  Later  he  became  a  regular 
member  of  the  High  Council,  and 
held  that  position  until  Nov.  18,  1917, 
when  he  was  ordained  a  Bishop  by 
Apostle  Rudger  Clawson  and  set 
apart  to  preside  over  the  Garland 
Ward.  This  responsible  position  he 
still  holds. 

NAIjDER,  Francis  Henry,  second 
counselor  in  the  presidency  of  the 
North  Davis  Stake,  was  born  Dec.  22, 
1874,     at     Kaysville     (now     Layton, 


Davis  county,  Utah),  the  son  of  Wm. 
N.  Nalder  and  Emma  Evans.  He  was 
baptized  in  1882  by  Wm.  Payne;  or- 
dained an  Elder  Nov.  25,  1896,  by 
Adolph  Madson;  ordained  a  Seventy 
and  set  apart  for  a  mission  Dec.  2, 
1896,  by  Heber  J.  Grant;  ordained  a 
High  Priest  Dec.  21,  1907,  by  Rudger 
Clawson,  and  ordained  a  Bishop  Oct. 


5,  1909,  by  Geo.  F.  Richards,  and 
finally  set  apart  as  second  counselor 
to  President  Henry  H.  Blood  of  the 
North  Davis  Stake  June  20,  1915,  by 
Charles  W.  Penrose.  When  quite 
young  Bro.  Nalder  acted  as  a  presi- 
dent of  the  First  Deacons'  quorum 
and  later  as  a  president  in  the  Teach- 
ers' quorum  in  the  Layton  Ward.  He 
also  acted  as  secretary  of  the  136th 
quorum  of  Seventy,  was  second  as- 
sistant superintendent  of  the  Layton 
Ward  Sunday  school  (1899-1900), 
first  counselor  in  the  Syracuse  Ward 
Y.  M.  M.  I.  A.  from  1900  to  1907, 
after  which  he  was  chosen  as  second 
counselor  to  Bishop  David  Cook  of 
Syracuse.  In  1896  (Nov.  25th)  he 
married  Eliza  Watt  (daughter  of  Geo. 
D.  Watt  and  Sarah  A.  Harter),  who 
has  borne  her  husband  nine  children. 
In  1896  (Dec.  3rd)  he  left  for  a  mis- 
sion to  the  Northern  States,  from 
which  he  returned  March  29,  1899. 
During  part  of  this  time  he  pre- 
sided over  the  Missouri  conference. 

NASH,  Isaac  Bartlett,  Patriarch  In 
the  Oneida  Stake,  Oneida  county, 
Idaho,  was  born  June  14,  1824,  in 
Kidwelly,  Carmarthanshire,  North 
Wales,  the  son  of  David  Davies  Nash 
and  Mary  Nash.  Becoming  a  convert 
to  "Mormonism,"  he  was  baptized 
when  still  a  youth;  was  ordained  to 
the  Priesthood  and  labored  as  a  local 
Elder  in  Wales.  He  emigrated  to 
America  in  1849,  crossing  the  Atlan- 
tic ocean  in  the  ship  "Buena  Vista," 
which  sailed  from  Liverpool  Feb.  25, 
1849,  with  a  company  of  Saints  under 
the  direction  of  Dan  Jones.  The 
company  landed  at  New  Orleans, 
whence  the  emigrants  traveled  up  the 
Mississippi  river  to  St.  Louis,  Mo. 
The  morning  after  they  landed  at  St. 
Louis,  21  persons  were  buried  who 
had  died  with  cholera.  Altogether  64 
died  on  the  way  up  the  river  to  Coun- 
cil Bluffs.  The  remnant  of  the  emi- 
grants arrived  in  Salt  Lake  Valley  In 
the  fall  of  that  year.  In  1852  (June 
24th)  Bro.  Nash  married  Hester  El- 


BIOGRAPHICAL  ENCYCLOPEDIA. 


467 


vira  Pool,  who  was  born  May  10, 
1826,  the  daughter  of  John  Pool  and 
Mary  Cramer,  and  had  emigrated  to 
America  in  1850.  Bro.  Nash  was  or- 
dained a  Seventy  Jan.  18,  1850,  and 
became  a  member  of  the  70th  quorum 
of  Seventy.  In  1850  and  1851  he 
acted  as  assistant  choir  leader  in  the 
old  bowery  in  Salt  Lake  City.  In 
1853  he  went  to  California  to  engage 
in  mining,  but  returned  to  Utah  in 
the  fall  of  1855  and  located  in  the 
7th  Ward,  Salt  Lake  City,  where  he 
practiced  blacksmithing.  Joining  the 
State  militia,  he  served  in  the  Echo 
Canyon  war  in  1857  and  went  south 
as   far   as   Provo    in   the    "move"    in 


1858.  In  1859  he  went  to  the  States 
with  the  children  who  had  been 
spared  alive  in  the  Mountain  Mead- 
ows' massacre.  He  stayed  in  St. 
Louis,  Mo.,  until  1864,  and  then  re- 
turned to  the  mountains  and  settled 
in  Franklin,  Idaho,  where  he  acted 
as  choir  leader  for  33  years  and  as 
superintendent  of  the  Franklin  Ward 
Sunday  school  for  a  long  time;  after- 
wards he  acted  as  assistant  Stake 
superintendent  of  Sunday  schools  in 
the  Oneida  Stake.  In  1867  (Nov. 
8th)  he  married  Martha  Howland 
daughter    of    Henry    Howland    and 


Martha  G.  Case),  who  was  bom  Dec. 
18,  1851,  in  Flag  Town,  Illinois.  She 
bore  her  husband  eleven  children, 
eight  of  whom  are  now  (1920)  liv- 
ing. Bro.  Nash  was  ordained  a  High 
Priest  April  21,  1872,  by  John  Biggs, 
and  a  Patriarch  Aug.  29,  1897,  by 
George  Teasdale.  He  was  one  of 
nature's  noblemen,  pure  and  unsul- 
lied in  heart  and  guileless  as  a  child. 
He  was  a  great  lover  of  humanity 
and  lived  to  benefit  and  bless  all 
with  whom  he  came  in  contact.  He 
was  zealous  and  diligent  in  all  of  his 
walks  in  life,  and  while  passing 
through  trials  and  adversity  his  faith 
in  the  gospel  never  wavered  or  fal- 
tered. The  result  of  his  labors  in 
Sabbath  school  and  choir  work  are 
now  recognized  wherever  there  is  a 
branch  of  the  Church  from  Canada 
on  the  north  to  Mexico  on  the  south. 
He  was  a  great  lover  of  children  and 
possessed  the  gift,  of  winning  their 
hearts.  He  was  also  a  great  lover  of 
flowers  and  took  great  pride  in  bav- 
in the  best  and  latest  varieties  of 
flowers  which  he  offered  on  friend- 
ship's shrine  on  all  occasions.  To  a 
marked  degree  he  possessed  the  gift 
of  healing  and  was  often  seen  at  the 
bedside  of  the  sick  and  afflicted.  He 
was  true  and  loyal  to  his  friends  and 
his  remarkable  hospitality  was  uni- 
versally known;  yet  he  failed  in  ac- 
cumulating much  of  this  world's 
goods.  Physically  he  knew  no  fear, 
was  impetuous  and  spoke  quickly, 
but  forgiving  as  a  child.  In  his 
trade  as  a  blacksmith  he  exhibited 
great  skill.  He  was  devoted  to  his 
family,  as  well  as  to  the  community 
at  large,  and  was  successful  in  pro- 
viding wholesome  amusement  and 
pleasures  for  both  old  and  young. 
While  in  St.  Louis  Bro.  Nash  and  his 
wife  adopted  three  children,  but  only 
one  of  them  lived  to  testify  to  the 
kindness  of  their  foster  parents.  This 
one,  however,  said  that  if  there  was 
any  difference  in  the  treatment  be- 
stowed, it  was  in  favor  of  the  child 
of  adoption,  rather  than  their  own. 


468 


LATTER-DAY  SAINT 


Patriarch  Nash  died  Aug.  9,  190  7,  in 
Franklin,  Idaho.  At  his  funeral  the 
casket  was  carried  by  his  fellow  High 
Priests  and  preceded  by  the  Sabbath 
school  children  he  had  so  loved  in 
life  and  who  still  love  and  revere  his 
memory. 

NEBEKER,  John.  The  following 
additional  historical  data  on  the 
Nebekers  were  furnish  by  Mrs.  Maud 
Nebeker  Thompson  of  New  York  City: 
The  Nebekers  descended  from  Hanse 
Nebeker,  the  first  and  only  Nebeker 
of  whom  there  is  any  record  who 
came  to  America.  Tradition  says  he 
was  a  political  refugee  from  Ger- 
many, a  baron  by  title.  He  settled  in 
Delaware,  a  few  miles  south  of  Wil- 
mington, on  the  "Uplands,"  now 
called  Newport,  where  William  Penn 
first  landed  Oct.  30,  1755.  He  mar- 
ried Mary  or  Maria  Stilley,  daughter 
of  Jonathan  Stilley  and  Magdalene 
Vandevee,  who  were  married  April 
17,  1735.  John,  their  eldest  child, 
served  in  Col.  Thomas  Duff's  regi- 
ment from  Delaware  in  the  Revolu- 
tionary war.  His  wife  was  Mary 
Senex,  daughter  of  Brewer  Senex,  a 
colonist  from  Sweden  and  founder  of 
the  "Old  Swedish  Church"  in  Wil- 
mington, Delaware,  which  was  built 
in  1699.  George  Nebeker,  the  eldest 
child  of  John  and  Mary  Senex  Nebe- 
ker, married  Susannah  Meredith, 
daughter  of  Samuel  Meredith  and 
Mary  Bowman.  Samuel  Meredith 
served  in  the  Revolutionary  war  as  a 
drummer  boy  with  his  father.  George 
and  Susannah  Meredith  Nebeker  were 
the  parents  of  John,  Henry,  Peter, 
Lewis  and  George  Nebeker,  who 
(with  the  exception  of  Lewis)  were 
Utah  pioneers  of  1847.  Lewis  came 
to  Utah  a  few  years  later.  The 
Nebeker  family  is  indebted  to  Wil- 
liam G.  Nebeker,  of  Salt  Lake  City, 
Utah,  for  the  above  valuable  in- 
formation. (Compare  with  page  176.) 

NEFF,  Ann  Eliza  Benedict,  presi- 
dent   of    the    Relief    Society    of    the 


East  Mill  Creek  (Granite  Stake),  Salt 
Lake  county,  Utah,  was  born  Feb.  8, 
1845,  in  Canaan,  Litchfield  county. 
Conn.,  the  daughter  of  Joshua  N. 
Benedict  and  Fidelia  Moses.  She 
came  to  Utah  with  her  parents  when 
a  young  girl,  where  she  was  baptized 
in  18  55  by  Elder  Miner  G.  Atwood. 
She  arrived  in  Salt  Lake  Valley  on 
September  10,  1861,  and  located  in 
East  Mill  Creek,  where  she  still  re- 
sides. In  December,  1876,  she  was 
chosen  by  Sister  Eliza  R.  Snow  to  act 
as  president  of  the  East  Mill  Creek 
Relief  Society,  having  previously  held 


the  office  of  president  of  the  Re- 
trenchment Society  of  East  (Mill  Creek 
for  three  years.  This  was  before 
East  Mill  Creek  became  a  separate 
Ward.  When  the  Ward  was  organ- 
ized, in  1877,  Sister  Neff  was  chosen 
as  president  of  the  Ward  Relief  So- 
ciety, which  position  she  held  until 
March  4,  1919,  serving  in  that  posi- 
tion for  nearly  forty-three  years. 
Sister  Neff  is  known  as  a  most  re- 
markable woman,  whose  history 
scarcely  has  an  equal  in  the  whole 
Church.  She  has  labored  most  faith- 
fullly  and  unselfishly  for  the  up- 
building of  the  kingdom  of  God,  un- 
tiring in  all  good  works,  caring  for 
the  sick  and  ministering  to  the  wants 


BIOGRAPHICAL  ENCYCLOPEDIA 


469 


of  the  needy.  Being  especially  gifted 
in  various  ways,  she  has  by  example 
as  well  as  precept  taught  the  ways 
of  salvation  to  her  associates  in  life. 
The  has  chosen  for  her  motto  in  life, 
"The  only  way  to  have  a  friend  is  to 
be  one,"  and  she  has  been  true  to 
this  motto  until  her  friends  are  legion 
and  she  is  still  young  both  in  mind 
and  spirit.  Sisters  Lydia  Roper  Os- 
guthorpe  and  Sarah  Eliott  Skidmore 
acted  as  counselors  to  Sister  Neff 
for  thirty-six  years,  after  which  Sis- 
ters Eliza  H.  Neff  and  Sarah  J. 
Capson  acted  as  her  counselors.  At 
the  death  of  Eliza  H.  Neff,  Barbara 
J.  Debenham  was  chosen  as  counselor 
to  Pres.  Neff.  Sister  Amelia  King 
acted  as  secretary  to  Sister  Neff  for 
many  years. 

NELSON,   Christian    Theodor,     an 

active  Elder  in  the  Redmond  Ward 
(Sevier  Stake),  Sevier  county,  Utah, 
was  born  April  18,  1860,  at  Egeberg, 
Ugilt  parish,  Hjorring  amt,  Den- 
mark, the  son  of  Jacob  C.  Nielsen 
and  Johanna  Gudmundsen.  Becom- 
ing a  convert  to  "Mormonism"  he 
was  baptized  in  1871  by  Michael 
Hansen  and  emigrated  with  his  par- 
ents to  Utah  in  18  72  and  settled  in 
Ephraim,  Sanpete  county.  In  187  6 
he  located  in  Redmond  where  he  has 
resided  ever  since.  Having  first 
been  ordained  a  Deacon  and  a  Priest, 
he  was  ordained  an  Elder  March  15, 
1883,  and  a  Seventy  Nov.  2,  1884,  by 
Jens  F.  Mortensen.  In  1897-1899 
he  filled  a  mission  to  Scandinavia, 
laboring  first  in  Copenhagen  and 
afterwards  in  the  Aarhus  conference. 
At  home  he  has  acted  as  first  assist- 
ant and  later  as  superintendent  for 
eleven  years  of  the  Redmond  Sunday 
school  and  also  as  first  counselor  and 
president  of  the  Ward  Y.  M.  M.  I  .A. 
for  a  number  of  years.  From  1899 
to  1917  he  labored  as  a  home  mis- 
sionary in  the  Sevier  Stake.  Among 
the  many  secular  offices  which  he 
has  held  may  be  mentioned  that  he 
acted  as  justice  of  the  peace  in  Red- 


mond three  years,  was  town  council- 
man for  fourteen  years,  and  was 
clerk  of  the  school  board  from  1899 
to  1911.     He  has  acted  as  secretary 


of  the  Redmond  Spring  Irrigation 
Company  since  1900.  In  1907  (Oct. 
19th)  he  was  set  apart  as  a  president 
of  the  107th  quorum  of  Seventy,  and 
he  was  ordained  a  High  Priest  Juno 
27,  1915.  In  1883  (March  15th)  he 
married  Annie  N.  Christensen  (daugh- 
ter of  Niels  L.  Christensen  and  Caro- 
lina Nelson),  who  was  born  April  30, 
18  66,  in  Richfield,  Utah.  This  mar- 
riage has  been  blessed  with  seven 
children,  namely,  Franklin  T.,  Mary 
Ann,  Eulalie,  Katie  J.,  Annie  Grace, 
Carrie  Cleona  and  Afton  L. 

NELSON,  Rasmus  Peter,  first 
counselor  to  Bishop  John  Alphonzo 
Berry  of  Wardboro  (Montpelier 
Stake),  Bear  Lake  county,  Idaho,  was 
born  Jan.  4,  1882,  at  St.  Charles, 
Bear  Lake  county,  Idaho,  the  son 
of  Rasmus  Peter  Nielsen  and  Wil- 
helmine  Sanna  Andersted.  His  father 
died  when  the  boy  was  six  years  old. 
He  received  an  ordinary  education  in 
St.  Charles  and  afterwards  studied  at 
the  Fielding  Academy  at  Paris  three 
years.  He  was  ordained  successively 
to  the  offices  of  Deacon  and  Priest 


470 


LATTER-DAY   SAINT 


and  presided  over  the  Deacons' 
quorum  at  St.  Charles.  He  was  or- 
dained an  Elder  by  Wm.  Budge,  or- 
dained a  Seventy  by  Edward  T.  Pat- 
terson, acted  as  a  counselor  in  the 
St.  Charles  Y.  M.  M.  I.  A.,  and  later 
as  president  of  the  Wardboro  Y.  M. 
M.  I.  A.,  having  moved  to  Wardboro 
in  the  spring  of  1909.  Some  time 
ago  he  was  ordained  a  High  Priest 
and  set  apart  as  second  counselor  to 
Bishop  John  A.  Berry  of  the  Ward- 
boro Ward,  and  later  he  was  pro- 
moted to  the  position  of  first  coun- 
selor. In  1905  (April  5th)  Bro. 
Nelson  married  Ann  Greenwood 
Keetch  (a  daughter  of  Charles  G. 
Keetch),  who  was  born  In  St.  Charles, 
June  9,  1875,  and  who  became  the 
mother  of  five  children  as  follows: 
Rasmus  K.,  Rozena  Ann,  Mercy 
Elizabeth,  Aaron  Gustave  and  Zera 
George.  Brother  Nelson  is  a  farmer 
by  avocation. 

NIELSEN,  Adolph  Mosiah,  Pat- 
riarch and  president  of  the  High 
Priests'  quorum  In  the  Shelley  Stake 
and  a  resident  of  Shelley  (Bingham 
county,  Idaho),  was  born  June  10, 
1848,  in  Christiania,  Norway,  the 
son  of  Ole  Nielsen  and  Karen  Olds- 
datter.  His  mother  was  one  of  the 
first  converts  to  "Mormonism"  in 
Norway.  She  taught  her  son  the 
true  gospel  in  his  early  youth,  but, 
like  many  other  young  boys,  he  was 
not  in  a  hurry  to  embrace  it,  until 
the  Lord  In  a  remarkable  dream 
showed  him  the  necessity  of  being 
baptized.  In  his  dream  he  thought 
he  was  in  a  most  beautiful  hall 
where  his  mother  and  many  other 
Saints  were  enjoying  themselves, 
while  he  stood  by  the  door,  not  being 
allowed  to  participate.  Then  he 
thought  the  Savior  appeared  in  the 
hall  as  a  most  beautiful  personage 
and  spoke  to  the  people  in  a  mild 
way,  though  with  a  clear  voice,  com- 
mending them  for  their  faithfulness 
on  earth  while  passing  through  much 
tribulation.      Soon   a   messenger   ap- 


proached Bro.  Nielsen  and  told  him 
to  hurry  down  to  the  earth  where  he 
should  find  some  one  to  baptize  him. 
After  that  he  attended  meetings  fre- 
quently with  his  mother.  In  1869 
(Oct.  19th)  he  married  Mathea  Han- 
sen Mork  and  on  Jan.  10,  1870,  both 
he  and  his  wife  were  baptized  by 
Niels  Isaksen  and  confirmed  by 
Christian  D.  Fjeldsted.  After  his 
baptism  he  was  ordained  a  Priest  and 
called  to  labor  as  a  local  missionary. 
In  June,  1871,  he  emigrated  to  Am- 
erica, and  after  residing  temporarily 
in  Michigan  he  arrived  In  Salt  Lake 
City  in  October,  1873.  There  he 
worked  two  summers  for  President 
Daniel  H.  Wells.     He  moved  to  Hy- 


rum,  Cache  county,  in  the  fall  of 
1875  and  followed  railroad  contract- 
ing until  he  was  sent  on  a  mission 
to  Scandinavia  in  1891.  On  this  mis- 
sion he  labored  seven  months  In 
Copenhagen,  Denmark,  and  the  rest 
of  the  time  in  Christiania  and  Ber- 
gen, Norway.  In  18  98  he  settled  in 
Goshen,  Idaho,  where  he  organized 
a  Sunday  school  and  was  called  to 
act  as  presiding  Elder  of  the  branch, 
which  position  he  held  until  1904, 
when  he  was  ordained  a  High  Priest 
by  Apostle  John  W.  Taylor  and  set 
apart  as  a  member  of  the  High  Coun- 


BIOGRAPHICAL  ENCYCLOPEDIA. 


471 


cil  in  the  Blackfoot  Stake.  In  1905- 
1907  he  filled  another  mission  to 
Scandinavia,  presiding  over  the  Ber- 
gen conference.  In  1914,  when  the 
Blackfoot  Stake  was  divided  and  the 
Shelley  Stake  organized,  he  was  set 
apart  as  president  of  the  High 
Priests'  quorum  of  the  new  Stake. 
In  1915-1917  he  filled  a  third  mis- 
sion to  Norway,  presiding  for  eight 
months  over  the  Bergen  and  eighteen 
months  over  the  Christiania  confer- 
ence. In  1918  (May  19th)  he  was 
ordained  a  Patriarch  by  Apostle 
Richard  R.  Lyman.  Bro.  Nielsen's 
first  wife  died  Nov.  19,  1907,  after 
his  return  from  his  second  mission. 
She  had  borne  her  husband  eight 
children  of  whom  seven  are  still  liv- 
ing and  all  married.  In  1908  (Aug. 
19th)  Bro.  Nielsen  married  Olufine 
J.  Olsen  from  Bergen,  Norway.  She 
is  the  mother  of  four  children.  Pat- 
riarch Nielsen  is  a  farmer  by  avoca- 
tion, a  highly  respected  citizen  of 
Idaho  and  a  faithful  and  energetic 
Latter-day  Saint. 

NIELSON,  Edgar  Odland,  third 
Bishop  of  Cleveland  Ward  (Bannock 
Stake),  Bannock  county,  Idaho,  was 
born  June  29,  1882,  in  Brigham 
City,  Utah,  the  son  of  Niels  H.  Niel- 
son  and  Bodel  Hanson.  He  was  bap- 
tized July  3,  1890,  by  James  Larson; 
ordained  a  Deacon  Dec.  31,  1895,  by 
Ernest  F.  Hale;  ordained  a  Priest 
Nov.  4,  1900,  by  James  Larson;  or- 
dained an  Elder  Nov.  15,  1902,  by 
Wm.  H.  Mendenhall;  ordained  a 
High  Priest  May  12,  1912,  by  Lewis 
S.  Pond  and  set  apart  as  second 
counselor  to  Bishop  Henry  Larson, 
and  ordained  a  Bishop  Nov.  17,  1917, 
by  "Hyrum  M.  Smith  and  set  apart  to 
preside  over  the  Cleveland  Ward. 
Being  born  and  raised  in  the  Church, 
Bishop  Nielson  became  a  diligent 
Church  worker  from  the  beginning  of 
his  life  and  took  an  active  part  in 
the  Cleveland  Sunday  school,  of 
which  he  was  superintendent  five 
years.     He  also  acted  as  Ward  clerk 


eleven  years.  In  1904  (Dec.  7th)  he 
married  Catherine  Ann  Bevins  (the 
daughter  of  Joseph  H.  Bevins  and 
Catherine  Panshot),  who  was  born 
Nov.  2  0,  1885,  at  Hooper,  Weber 
county,  Utah.  This  marriage  has 
been  blessed  with  seven  children, 
namely,  Delbert  H.,  Erma  C,  Leland 
N.,  Delia  B.,  Verl  J.,  Harvey  C.  and 
Donna. 

NIELSEN,  Peter,  a  prominent  El- 
der  and   colonizer,   was   born   March 

23,  1824,  in  Poulsker,  Bornholm, 
Denmark,  the  son  of  Niels  Jensen 
and  Gjertrud  Kirstine  Pedersen.  Be- 
coming a  convert  to  "Mormonism" 
he  was  baptized  in  Copenhagen,  Den- 
mark, June  17,  1854,  and  soon  be- 
came a  diligent  and  successful 
worker  in  the  Church.  He  was  or- 
dained a  Deacon  Aug.  14,  1854;  or- 
dained a  Priest  Jan.  8,  1855,  by  Carl 
Widerborg,  and  ordained  an  Elder 
April  15,  1855,  by  Jens  Jensen.  In 
January,  1855,  he  was  sent  out  to 
labor  as  a  local  missionary  In  the 
Lolland  conference  and  in  1857  his 
field  of  labor  was  changed  to  the 
Fredericia  conference,  where  he  made 
his  headquarters  at  Veile.  In  1858 
(Feb.  9th)  he  was  appointed  to  pre- 
side over  the  Fredericia  conference, 
which  position  he  held  until  March 

24,  1861,  when  he  was  released  to 
emigrate  to  Zion.  In  1850  (March 
7th)  he  married  Marie  Fredericka 
Poseman,  who  bore  her  husband  one 
son  (Frihoff  Godfred).  Emigrating 
to  America  he  left  Copenhagen  with 
his  family,  crossing  the  Atlantic  in 
the  sailing  vessel  "Monarch  of  the 
Sea"  which  sailed  from  Liverpool, 
May  16,  18  61,  and  arrived  in  New 
York,  June  19,  1861.  He  crossed  the 
plains  in  Samuel  A.  Woolley's  inde- 
pendent company  of  fifty  wagons, 
which  arrived  in  Salt  Lake  City,  Sept. 
22,  1861.  Bro.  Nielsen  acted  as  cap- 
tain of  ten  on  that  journey.  In  the 
spring  of  18  62  he  moved  to  Morgan 
county,  locating  at  Peterson.  There 
he   was   ordained   a   Seventy   Jan.    7, 


472 


LATTER-DAY   SAINT 


1863,  by  Thomas  C.  Armstrong  and 
also  acted  as  a  Bishops'  counselor,  a 
home  missionary,  etc.,  besides  filling 
a  number  of  secular  offices.  In  Oc- 
tober, 1878,  he  was  called  on  a 
colonization  mission  to  Arizona,  ar- 
riving at  Sunset,  on  the  Little  Colo- 
rado river,  Jan.  7,  1879.  In  1881 
(Feb.  27th)  he  was  ordained  a  High 
Priest  by  Brigham  Young  junior  and 
chosen  as  a  member  of  the  High 
Council  in  the  Little  Colorado  Stake 
and  as  Stake  superintendent  of  Sun- 
day schools.  At  a  conference  held  at 
St.  Joseph  May  28,  1882,  he  was 
called  to  go  as  a  missionary,  with 
his  family,  to  Savoia,  New  Mexico, 
where  he  assisted  in  founding  the 
settlement  of  Navajo  (the  present 
Ramah).  Here  he  acted  as  superin- 
tendent of  the  Ward  Sunday  school. 
In  February,  1885,  he  left  Ramah 
with  a  part  of  his  family  (having 
yielded  obedience  to  the  law  of  plural 
marriage)  and  located  at  Colonia 
Juarez,  Chihuahua,  Mexico,  where  he 
took  an  active  part  in  the  founding 
of  that  settlement.  He  continued  a 
faithful  and  conscientious  worker 
for  the  Church,  to  which  he  devoted 
the  ability  and  energy  of  nearly  his 
entire  life,  and  died  as  a  highly  re- 
spected and  beloved  Elder  in  the 
Church  at  Colonia  Juarez,  Mexico, 
Jan.  23,  18  8  6.  His  second  wife  was 
Hulda  Francisca  Lassen,  whom  he 
married  March  8,  1862.  She  was 
born  Jan.  25,  1840,  in  Russia,  and 
bore  her  husband  five  children  (two 
sons  and  three  daughters),  namely, 
Peter  Erastus,  John  Thomas,  Mary 
Elizabeth,  Alberta  Francisca  and 
Agnes.  In  1875  (Oct.  25th)  Brother 
Nielsen  married  Ann  Boot  Bond, 
who  was  born  June  15,  1834,  at  Bul- 
well,  Nottingham,  England,  and  who 
bore  her  husband  one  child,  a  daugh- 
ter, named  Huldah  Esther. 

NIELSON,  Fi-iho£f  Godfred,  pre- 
siding Elder  in  the  Bluewater  Ward 
(St.  Johns  Stake),  Velencia  county, 
New  Mexico,  was  born  May  3,   1851, 


in  Copenhagen,  Denmark,  the  son  of 
Peter  Nielsen  and  Marie  Fredericka 
Poseman.  He  emigrated  with  his 
parents  to  America  in  1861,  crossing 
the  ocean  in  the  ship  "Monarch  of 
the  Sea"  and  the  plains  in  Captain 
Samuel  W.  Woolley's  independent 
company,  which  arrived  in  Salt  Lake 
City  Sept.  22,  1861.  In  1862  he  re- 
moved to  Morgan  county,  Utah,  and 
was  ordained  an  Elder  by  Elias  Smith 
in  Salt  Lake  City  May  9,  1870.  At 
Peterson,  Morgan  county,  he  acted  as 
Ward  teacher,  Sunday  school  super- 
intendent and  also  as  a  home  mis- 
sionary and  State  superintendent  of 
Sunday  schools.  In  a  secular  way  he 
acted  as  justice  of  the  peace  and 
taught  school  for  two  seasons.  Be- 
ing called  on  a  colonization  mission 
to  Arizona,  he  left  Salt  Lake  City 
Feb.  2,  1876,  together  with  Lot 
Smith  and  others,  and  settled  on  the 
Little  Colorado  river,  where  he  be- 
came one  of  the  founders  of  Sunset, 
about  three  miles  east  of  Winslow, 
Arizona.  Here  he  acted  as  secretary 
and  treasurer  of  the  Sunset  United 
Order  Company,  school  teacher.  Ward 
teacher,  Sunday  school  superinten- 
dent, etc.  When  the  Little  Colorado 
Stake  was  organized,  Jan.  27,  1878, 
he  was  chosen  as  Stake  superinten- 
dent of  Sunday  schools.  Stake  clerk 
and  home  missionary.  When  the 
Sunset  colony  was  broken  up  in  the 
summer  of  1884  he  moved  to  Ramah, 
New  Mexico,  where  he  acted  as  Ward 
teacher,  superintendent  of  Sunday 
school,  home  missionary  and  teacher 
in  the  district  school.  He  was  or- 
dained a  Seventy  by  John  Morgan, 
Sept.  6,  1891,  and  became  a  presi- 
dent of  the  104th  quorum  of  Seventy. 
In  1894  he  bought  real  estate  in  the 
Bluewater  country,  where  a  branch 
of  the  Church  was  later  organized, 
and  where  he  located  with  a  part  of 
his  family.  In  18  99-1901  he  filled  a 
mission  to  the  Northern  States,  labor- 
ing principally  in  the  Southern  Illi- 
nois conference  and  in  St.  Louis,  Mis- 
souri.    In  1906  (May  27th)  when  the 


BIOGRAPHICAL  ENCYCLOPEDIA. 


473 


Saints  in  the  Bluewater  country  were 
organized  as  a  Ward,  he  was  ordained 
a  High  Priest  by  Rudger  Clawson  and 
set  apart  as  first  counselor  to  Bishop 
Collins  R.  Hakes  jun.  In  1917  he  was 
set  apart  as  an  alternate  High  Coun- 
cilor in  the  St.  Johns  Stake  and  upon 
the  removal  of  Bishop  Lesueur  from 
the  Bluewater  Ward  in  July,  1918, 
Brother  Nielson  was  called  to  act  as 
presiding  Elder.  He  also  acted  as 
Ward  clerk  and  held  both  these  posi- 
tions until  June,  1919,  when  he 
moved  back  to  Ramah.  For  a  num- 
ber of  years  he  served  as  postmaster 
at  Ramah  and  later  as  assistant  post- 
master at  Bluewater,  New  Mexico. 
When  not  engaged  in  clerical  pur- 
suits he  has  followed  the  occupation 
of  a  farmer  and  gardener.  In  1877 
(Oct.  20th)  he  married  Emma  Wait- 
still  Mecham,  who  bore  her  husband 
nine  children,  namely,  Frihoff  Brig- 
ham,  Emma  Pearl,  Joseph  Fredrick, 
Mary  Elizabeth,  Vera,  Maida  Vilate, 
Josephine,  Zelmagee  and  Frihoff 
Peter.  In  1887  (Feb.  3rd)  he  mar- 
ried Mary  Ellen  Everett,  who  has 
borne  him  five  children,  namely, 
Floyd  Schyler,  George  Edward,  Fri- 
hoff Ellis,  Rachel  and  Huldah  Ruth. 

NLELSON,  Frihoff  Peter,  presiding 
Elder  of  the  Bluewater  Ward  (St. 
Johns  Stake),  Valencia  county.  New 
Mexico,  was  born  March  22,  1896,  at 
Ramah,  McKinley  county.  New  Mex- 
ico, the  son  of  Frihoff  Godfred  Niel- 
son and  Emma  W.  Mecham.  He  was 
baptized  June  8,  1904,  by  his  father, 
ordained  a  Deacon  Jan.  6,  1907,  by 
Ernest  A.  Tietjen;  ordained  a  Teacher 
July  16,  1911,  by  Bishop  Collins  R. 
Hakes  junior;  ordained  a  Priest  Oct. 
4,  1914,  by  Frihoff  G.  Nielson,  and 
ordained  an  Elder  April  25,  1916,  by 
Frihoff  G.  Nielson.  After  receiving 
a  common  school  education  at  Blue- 
water,  New  Mexico,  he  attended  high 
school  at  the  St.  Johns  Stake  Acad- 
emy in  Arizona.  He  presided  over  a 
Deacons'  quorum  at  Bluewater  in 
1913-1914  and  was  president  of  the 


Y.  M.  M.  I.  A.  of  the  Bluewater  Ward 
three  years  In  1914  (Oct.  29th)  he 
married  Marie  Cluff,  which  marriage 
has  been  blessed  with  one  child  (Wil- 
lis Frihoff  Nielson).  In  June,  1919, 
he  succeeded  his  father,   Frihoff  G. 


Nielson,  as  presiding  Elder  of  the 
Bluewater  Ward,  being  then  only 
twenty-three  years  old.  He  also  acted 
as  secretary  of  the  Y.  M.  M.  I.  A.  at 
Bluewater  for  several  years.  Other- 
wise his  occupation  is  that  of  a  far- 
mer and  stock  raiser. 

OKELBERRY,  William  Paul,  third 
Bishop  of  Goshen  Ward  (Tintic 
Stake),  Utah  county,  Utah,  was  born 
Oct.  15,  1876,  at  Goshen,  the  son 
of  Peter  Okelberry  and  Catherine 
Morgan.  He  was  baptized  when 
eight  years  of  age  by  his  father;  or- 
dained successively  to  the  offices  of 
Deacon,  Priest,  Elder  and  Seventy. 
The  last  ordination  he  received 
under  the  hands  of  Rulon  S.  Wells, 
Sept.  6,  1899.  He  was  ordained  a 
High  Priest  and  Bishop  in  April, 
1907,  by  Apostle  Francis  M.  Lyman 
and  set  apart  to  preside  over  the 
Goshen  Ward.  Prior  to  this  he  had 
acted  as  first  assistant  Sunday  school 
superintendent  of  the  Goshen  Sun- 
day  school   for   seven   years,   and   in 


474 


LATTER-DAY   SAINT 


1899-ldOl  he  filled  a  mission  to  been  State  and  government  sheep  in- 
California.  In  190  6  (Nov.  28th)  he  spector,  county  commissioner,  etc. 
married  Meriel  Emma  Nelson,  daugh-  From  1911  to  1913  he  served  as  first 
ter  of  Peter  Nelson  and  Emma  Nel-  counselor  to  Bishop  Ephraim  Das- 
son),  who  was  born  April  1,  1882,  at  trup  of  the  Loa  Ward  and  in   1913 


Goshen.  Two  children  have  blessed 
this  marriage.  Bishop  Okelberry  is 
a  farmer  and  stock  raiser  and  also 
a  merchant. 

OKERLUND,  George  William,  first 
counselor  in  the  Stake  presidency  of 
the  Wayne  Stake  and  a  resident  of 
Loa,  Wayme  county,  Utah,  was  born 
Nov.  9,  18  64,  at  Mount  Pleasant,  San- 
pete county,  Utah,  the  son  of  Ole 
Okerlund  and  Bengta  Carlson.  He 
was  baptized  in  1872  and  was  or- 
dained successively  to  the  offices  of 
Deacon,  Teacher,  Priest,  Elder,  Sev- 
enty and  High  Priest.  He  received 
the  latter  ordination  in  1906  under 
the  hands  of  Francis  M.  Lyman  who 
also  set  him  apart  as  a  High  Coun- 
selor in  the  Wayne  Stake.  Prior  to 
this  he  acted  as  the  first  president  of 
the  Loa  Y.  M.  M.  I.  A.  and  in  1901- 
1903  he  filled  a  mission  to  Scandi- 
navia, laboring  principally  in  the 
Stockholm  conference,  Sweden,  and 
presided  over  the  Gotland  and  Vess- 
ter§,s  branches.  In  civil  matters  he 
has  acted  as  president  of  the  Wayne 
County   Wool    Growers'    Association, 


(April  27th)  he  was  ordained  a 
Bishop  by  Joseph  F.  Smith  junior  and 
set  apart  to  preside  over  the  Loa 
Ward  which  position  he  held  until 
May  14,  1916,  when  he  was  chosen 
as  first  counselor  to  President  Joseph 
Eckersley  of  the  Wayne  Stake.  In 
1890  (May  14th)  he  married  Eliza 
Ann  Hunt  (daughter  of  Thomas  H. 
Hunt  and  Hannah  Moon),  who  was 
born  April  2,  1868,  at  Monroe,  Sevier 
county,  Utah.  Seven  children  have 
blessed  this  marriage,  namely,  Ivan 
G.,  Ruth,  Alberta,  Dalton  Hunt,  Lorin 
Clair,  Esther  and  Melvin  H.  In  1915 
(Oct.  7th)  he  married  Eliza  Ann  Lar- 
sen  (daughter  of  Hans  C.  and  Mette 
Marie  Larsen),  who  was  born  June 
4,  1885,  at  Marion,  Summit  county, 
Utah. 

OKERLUND,  Ole,  a  faithful  Elder 
in  the  Church,  was  born  Sept.  16, 
1829,  in  Malmohus  lin,  Sweden,  the 
son  of  Jeppe  and  Elsa  Olson.  Be- 
coming a  convert  to  "Mormonism"  he 
emigrated  to  Utah  with  his  family 
in  1861  and  located  in  Mount  Pleas- 


BIOGRAPHICAL  ENCYCLOPEDIA. 


475 


ant,  Sanpete  county,  Utah.  Later  he 
became  one  of  the  founders  of  Salina, 
Sevier  county,  Utah,  but  was  forced 
to  leave  his  home  there  on  account 
of  Indian  troubles.  After  that  he 
located  at  Scipio,  Millard  county, 
and  later  at  Loa,  Wayne  county,  re- 
siding in  the  latter  place  until  he 
died  in  April,  1905,  as  a  faithful 
member  of  the  Church. 

OliDROYD,  Andrew,  Bishop  of 
Glenwood  (Sevier  Stake),  Sevier 
county,  Utah,  was  born  Feb.  5,  1873, 
at  Fountain  Green,  Sanpete  county, 
Utah,  the  son  of  Archibald  T.  Old- 
royd   and   Mary  Anderson.      He  was 


baptized  May  2  9,  1881,  by  Isaac  W. 
Pierce,  ordained  successively  to  the 
offices  of  Deacon,  Teacher,  Elder  and 
Seventy,  the  latter  ordination  taking 
place  in  1899  under  the  hands  of 
Rudger  Clawson,  and  he  became  a 
member  of  the  3  6th  quorum  of 
Seventy.  He  was  ordained  a  High 
Priest  March  22,  1914,  by  Hyrum  G. 
Smith  and  set  apart  as  a  counselor 
to  Bishop  Bell.  Prior  to  this  he  had 
served  as  a  counselor  in  the  Ward 
Y.  M.  M.  I.  A.  and  filled  a  mission  to 
New  Zealand  in  1899-1903.  There 
he  labored   in  the   Hauraki   district, 


acting  as  president  two  years.  He 
also  presided  six  months  over  the 
Waiapu  conference.  Among  the 
secular  positions  held  by  Bishop  Old- 
royd  may  be  mentioned  that  he 
served  as  a  member  of  the  school 
board  of  education  of  Sevier  county 
and  director  of  the  Glenwood-Venice 
Canal  Company.  Otherwise  he  is  a 
farmer  by  avocation.  In  1908  (June 
24th)  he  married  Celia  C.  Sorenson 
(daughter  of  Erastus  Sorenson  and 
Annie  Rasmussen),  who  was  born 
April  25,  1890,  in  Koosharem,  Sevier 
county,  Utah.  Four  children  were 
born  as  the  issue  of  this  marriage, 
namely,  Jennie,  Wanda,  Roland  A. 
and  Berdean  E.  Bro.  Oldroyd  was 
ordained  a  Bishop  Dec.  20,  1914,  by 
George  F.  Richards  and  set  apart  to 
preside  over  the  Glenwood  Ward, 
which  position  he  still  holds. 

OLDROYD,  Archibald,  Bishop  of 
Lyman  Ward  (Wayne  Stake),  Wayne 
county,  Utah,  was  born  Oct.  19,  1866, 
at  Glenwood,  Sevier  county,  Utah, 
the  son  of  Archibald  Todd  Oldroyd 
and  Mary  Anderson.  He  was  bap- 
tized June  13,  1876,  by  Thomas  Bell 
and  ordained  a  Teacher  Jan.  3,  1878, 
by  George  Powell.  Subsequently  he 
was  ordained  a  Priest  and  an  Elder. 
He  located  in  Lyman  in  1890,  was 
ordained  a  High  Priest  Nov.  26,  1894, 
by  Francis  M.  Lyman  and  set  apart 
to  act  as  a  High  Councilor  in  the 
Wayne  Stake.  Subsequently  he  was 
chosen  as  second  counselor  to  Bishop 
Peter  J.  Christensen  at  Lyman.  After- 
wards he  acted  as  first  counselor  to 
Bishop  Joshua  H.  Cook  and  later  oc- 
cupied the  same  position  to  George 
A.  Chappell.  He  was  ordained  a 
Bishop  Dec.  24,  1912,  and  set  apart 
to  preside  over  the  Lyman  Ward, 
which  position  he  still  occupies. 
Prior  to  this  he  acted  as  superinten- 
dent of  the  Ward  Sunday  school  and 
also  as  president  of  the  Ward  Y.  M. 
M.  I.  A.  In  1890  (April  24th)  he 
married  Theda  J.  Buchanan   (daugh- 


476 


LATTER-DAY   SAINT 


ter  of  Archibald  W.  Buchanan  and 
Amelia  Whiting),  who  was  born  Dec. 
29,  1867,  in  Manti,  Utah.  Following 
are  the  names  of  the  children  by  this 
marriage:  Hazel,  Edwin,  Helen, 
Willis,  Venita,  Lavell,  Lucille  and 
Janice. 

OLSEN,  Louis  Christian,  Bishop  of 
Sterling  Ward  (South  Sanpete  Stake), 
Sanpete  county,  Utah,  was  born  July 
28,  1866,  at  Ephraim,  Sanpete 
county,  Utah,  the  son  of  Jens  Olsen 
and  Anna  Kirstine  Nielsen.  He  was 
baptized  when  eight  years  old  by 
Johan  G.  Jorgensen;  ordained  a  Dea- 
con when  twelve  years  old;  ordained 
an  Elder  in  January,  1890,  by  Wil- 
liam T.  Reed,  and  later  ordained  a 
Seventy.  He  filled  a  mission  to  the 
Southern  States  in  1895-1897,  labor- 
ing principally  in  Kentucky  and  West 
Virginia.  He  located  in  Manti  in 
1876  and  in  1910  was  called  to  Ster- 
ling to  preside  as  Bishop,  being  or- 
dained a  High  Priest  and  Bishop  Nov. 
12,  1910,  by  Anthon  H.  Lund.  This 
position  he  still  holds.  In  18  90 
(January  22nd)  he  married  Phoebe 
Mackey  (daughter  of  John  Mackey 
and  Susan  Parsons),  who  was  born 
April  30,  18  69,  at  Manti,  Utah.  She 
has  borne  her  husband  nine  children, 
namely,  Louis  E.,  Frank  E.,  Ann, 
Ora,  Henry  J.,  Ada,  Erma,  Eldred  L. 
and  Mont  E.  Bishop  Olsen  was  for- 
merly engaged  in  mercantile  busi- 
ness, but  his  principal  avocations  are 
those  of  farmer  and  stock  raiser. 

OLSON,  John  Nils,  an  active  pio- 
neer and  missionary,  was  born  Sept. 
22,  1850,  in  Vidtskofle,  Christian- 
stad  l§.n,  Sweden,  the  son  of  John  N. 
P.  Olson  and  Margretha  Nilson.  To- 
gether with  his  father's  family  he 
was  converted  to  "Mormonism"  and 
baptized  July  12,  1865,  by  P.  Pehr- 
son;  he  emigrated  to  Utah  in  1866, 
crossing  the  Atlantic  in  the  ship 
"Kenilworth"  and  the  plains  in  Capt. 
Joseph  S.  Rawlins'  company.  His 
mother     died     while     crossing     the 


plains,  and  the  rest  of  the  family 
located  temporarily  in  Salt  Lake  City 
and  later  in  Kaysville,  Davis  county, 
where  John  N.  worked  on  the  Utah 
Central  Railroad  in  1869.  In  1877 
he  married  Harriet  Irene  Ranck 
(daughter  of  Peter  Ranck  and  Ann 
Lemmon),  which  marriage  was 
blessed  with  nine  children,  namely, 
John  Lester,  Luke  A.,  Earl,  Eva, 
Edna,  Vivian,  Irene,  Newel  B.  and 
Ivin  R.  After  his  marriage  Bro.  Ol- 
son engaged  in  sheep  business  and 
settled  in  West  Jordan,  Salt  Lake 
county,  where  he  became  the  first 
man  to  bale  hay  to  take  to  market 
in  Salt  Lake  City.  After  a  success- 
ful experience  in  that  line  many 
others  followed  his  example.  While 
in  the  sheep  business  he  made  the 
first  shipment  of  live  mutton  from 
Milford,  Beaver  county,  to  Salt  Lake 
City  over  the  Utah  Southern  Rail- 
road. In  1881-1883  he  filled  a  mis- 
sion to  Scandinavia,  laboring  in  the 
SkS,ne  conference,  Sweden,  part  of 
the  time  as  president  of  the  Chris- 
tianstad  branch.  In  1914  he  changed 
his  residence  from  West  Jordan  to 
Garfield  and  three  years  later  (1917) 
he  moved  to  Salt  Lake  City,  where 
he  still  resides.  Bro.  Olson  was  or- 
dained an  Elder  March  12,  1877,  by 
John  A.  Egbert,  a  Seventy  Oct.  2, 
1881,  by  Samuel  Bateman  and  a  High 
Priest  March  29,  1913,  by  Hyrum 
Goff. 

OPENSHAW,  Jonathan  E.,  senior 
president  of  the  2  4th  quorum  of 
Seventy  and  a  resident  of  the  Six- 
teenth Ward,  Salt  Lake  City,  Utah, 
was  born  April  17,  1859,  at  Swinton, 
Lancashire,  England,  the  son  of  Job 
Openshaw  and  Nancy  Bestwick.  He 
was  baptized  in  April,  1871,  by 
Daniel  Stones;  ordained  an  Elder  in 
May,  1873,  by  Joseph  Burch;  emi- 
grated to  Utah  in  1874  and  settled 
in  the  Sixteenth  Ward,  Salt  Lake 
City,  where  he  has  been  an  active 
member  ever  since.  He  was  ordained 
a   Seventy   in    1878     by     Joseph     W. 


I 


BIOGRAPHICAL  ENCYCLOPEDIA. 


477 


Summerhays,  acted  as  superinten- 
dent of  a  Sunday  school  about  five 
years;  served  as  second  and  first 
counselor  and  later  as  president  of 
the  Ward  Y.  M.  M.  I.  A.;  was  for 
several  years  a  home  missionary  in 
the  Salt  Lake  Stake  and  became  a 
president  of  the  24th  quorum  of 
Seventy  in  1884,  having  previously 
acted  as  secretary  of  the  quorum.  In 
November,  1917,  he  was  appointed 
Stake  superintendent  of  religion 
classes  in  the  Salt  Lake  Stake.  Al- 
though only  receiving  a  common 
school  education  in  his  youth,  Bro. 
Openshaw  added  to  his  education  by 


taking  a  night  school  business  course 
and  thus,  aided  by  private  instruc- 
tion, learned  the  banking  business. 
After  serving  as  cashier  in  several 
country  banks,  he  is  at  the  present 
writing  a  teller  in  the  Utah  State 
National  Bank.  In  1881  (Dec.  8th) 
he  married  Bessie  Lees  (daughter  of 
John  Lees  and  Martha  Needham), 
who  was  born  Dec.  13,  1863,  in  Salt 
Lake  City  and  has  borne  her  hus- 
band ten  children,  namely,  Martha, 
Jonathan  E.,  Clarence,  Edna,  Adel- 
bert  W.,  Melvin,  Ida  A.,  Frank  M., 
Florence  and  Glen. 


OTTLEY,  Sidney  James,  Bishop  of 
Banida  Ward  (Oneida  Stake),  Frank- 
lin county,  Idaho,  was  born  Sept.  2, 
1890,  at  Murray,  Salt  Lake  county, 
Utah,  the  son  of  Edward  Ottley  and 
Thirza  Timbers.  He  was  baptized 
Aug.  6,  1899,  by  John  G.  Labrum 
and  ordained  an  Elder  April  1,  1^12, 
by  Bishop  Wm.  B.  Erickson.  In 
1912-1916  he  filled  a  mission  to  New 
Zealand,  laboring  in  the  Hawkes  Bay 
and  Wairarapa  conferences.  After 
his  return  from  that  mission  he  lo- 
cated in  Banida,  the  place  of  his 
present  residence,  where  he  took  an 
active  part  in  both  ecclesiastical  and 
secular  affairs.  He  was  ordained  a 
High  Priest  and  Bishop  by  Joseph  F. 
Smith  junior  Sept.  8,  1918,  and  set 
apart  to  preside  over  the  Banida 
Ward,  which  position  he  still  holds. 
In  January,  1917,  he  married  Alice 
Warren  (daughter  of  Ephraim  J. 
and  Elizabeth  Strange),  who  was 
born  Nov.  10,  1894.  This  marriage 
has  been  blessed  with  two  children 
(Warren  Sidney  and  Glen  Eldon). 
Bishop  Ottley  is  a  farmer  and  stock 
raiser  by  avocation,  and  is  known  as 
an  energetic  and  useful  citizen. 
Among  his  many  activities  in  the 
Church  we  may  mention  that  he  has 
acted  as  Ward  teacher,  Sunday  school 
teacher,  officer  in  the  local  Y.  M.  M. 
I.  A.,  member  of  the  Ward  amuse- 
ment committee,  scout  master,  etc. 

PACE,  Henry  Alexander,  Bishop  of 

Harmony  (Parowan  Stake),  Wash- 
ington county,  Utah,  was  born  April 
2  2,  1877,  at  Harmony.  Utah,  the  son 
of  Harvey  A.  Pace  and  Susan  E. 
Keel.  He  was  raised  in  Harmony 
and  obtained  part  of  his  education  in 
Cedar  City,  was  baptized  April  22, 
1885,  by  his  father,  ordained  a  Dea- 
con when  a  youth  and  ordained  a 
Seventy  June  6,  1898,  by  Abraham 
O.  Woodruff  and  set  apart  for  a  mis- 
sion to  the  Northern  States,  laboring 
principally  in  Missouri.  He  returned 
in  December,  1900,  and  soon  after- 
wards   became    a     diligent     Sunday 


478 


LATTER-DAY   SAINT 


school  worker.  After  acting  for  some 
time  as  assistant  superintendent  he 
became  superintendent  of  the  Har- 
mony Sunday  school,  and  also  acted 


as  president  of  the  Ward  Y.  M.  M.  I. 
A.  He  was  ordained  a  High  Priest 
and  Bishop  March  24,  1912,  by  Apos- 
tle James  E.  Talmage,  and  set  apart 
to  preside  over  the  Harmony  Ward, 
succeeding  Gotlieb  Smutz,  who  re- 
signed. Bishop  Pace  is  a  successful 
farmer  and  stock  raiser  and  one  of 
the  most  enterprising  citizens  in 
Southern  Utah.  He  is  also  the  owner 
of  several  of  the  best  farms  in  that 
part  of  the  country.  Since  his  ear- 
liest youth  Bishop  Pace  has  taken 
an  active  part  in  ecclesiastical  as 
well  as  civil  affairs.  In  1904  (May 
25th)  Bishop  Pace  married  Abbie 
Hammond,  daughter  of  Joseph  Ham- 
mond of  St.  George.  The  children  by 
this  marriage  are  Pearl,  Leslie  Alex- 
ander, Anthon  H.  and  Preston  Levi. 

PACKER,  Ossin  lyeonidas,  Bishop 
of  the  Preston  First  Ward  (Oneida 
Stake),  Franklin  county,  Idaho,  was 
born  Dec.  10,  1861,  in  Franklin, 
Idaho,  the  son  of  James  Packer  and 
Polly  Mecham.  He  was  baptized 
when  a  boy  by  Joseph  Dunckley;  or- 
dained an   Elder   by  Nephi   Comish; 


ordained  a  Seventy  by  William 
Woodward;  ordained  a  High  Priest 
in  1903  by  George  C.  Parkinson,  and 
set  apart  as  first  counselor  to  Bishop 
Henry  T.  Rogers  of  the  Preston  First 
Ward.  Later  he  acted  as  first  coun- 
selor to  Bishop  John  O.  Morrison, 
and  still  later  as  first  counselor  to 
Bishop  Henry  J.  Bodily.  He  was  or- 
dained a  Bishop  June  9,  1918,  by 
David  O.  McKay  and  set  apart  to 
preside  over  the  Preston  First  Ward, 
which  position  he  now  holds.  Bro. 
Packer  acted  as  treasurer  of  the 
Oneida  Stake  Sunday  School  Board 
four  years  and  was  counselor  in  the 
Ward  Y.  M.  M.  I.  A.  to  two  presi- 
dents and  later  counselor  in  the 
Stake  Y.  M.  M.  I.  A.  to  two  Stake 
presidents.  He  moved  to  Marys- 
ville,  Idaho,  in  March,  1895,  but  re- 
turned to  Cache  Valley,  Utah,  in  the 
fall  and  settled  permanently  at  Pres- 
ton, where  his  main  occupation  has 
been  that  of  a  farmer  and  stock 
raiser.  He  has  served  two  terms  as 
justice  of  peace  in  Preston  precinct. 
In  1887-1889  he  filled  a  mission  to 


the  Northern  States,  laboring  prin- 
cipally In  Illinois  and  Indiana,  part 
of  the  time  as  president  of  the  In- 
diana conference.     In  1885  (Jan  Ist) 


BIOGRAPHICAL  ENCYCLOPEDIA. 


479 


he  married  Annie  Smart  Parkinson 
(daughter  of  Samuel  R.  Parkinson 
and  Charlotte  Smart),  who  was  born 
Oct.  15,  1867,  in  Franklin,  Idaho. 
She  has  borne  her  husband  twelve 
children,  namely,  Leonidas  P.,  Sam- 
uel P.,  Clyde  P.,  Anna  P.,  Edna  P., 
Grant,  Eva  P.,  Ora  P.,  Sameda  P., 
Lee  P.,  James  Lyman  and  Joseph  P. 

PALMER,  James  Isaac,  Bishop  of 
the  Hubbard  Ward  (St.  Joseph 
Stake),  Graham  county,  Arizona,  was 
born  Oct.  26,  1873,  at  Bloomington, 
Bear  Lake  county,  Idaho,  the  son 
of  Journal  Palmer  and  Orlena  Wel- 
ker.  He  was  baptized  Nov.  24,  VdOl, 
by  Martin  R.  Kempton  and  ordained 
a  Deacon  at  Bloomington  where  he 
was  raised  and  schooled.  In  1892 
he  accompanied  his  uncle  Isaac  Pal- 
mer to  Arizona  and  settled  in  Hub- 
bard about  1898.  Here  he  served  as 
a  teacher  and  afterward  as  first  as- 
sistant superintendent  of  the  Ward 
Sunday  school  and  as  president  of 
the  Ward  Y.  M.  M.  I.  A.  He  was  or- 
dained an  Elder  Oct.  21,  1908.  by 
John  F.  Nash  and  ordained  a  High 
Priest  Nov.  15,  1914,  by  Charles  M. 
Layton  and  set  apart  as  second  coun- 
selor to  Bishop  Jonathan  A.  Allen  of 
Hubbard,  which  position  he  held  un- 
til Nov.  25,  1916,  when  he  was  or- 
dained a  Bishop  by  Hyrum  M.  Smith 
and  set  apart  to  preside  over  the 
Hubbard  Ward,  succeeding  Bishop 
Allen,  which  position  he  still  holds. 
In  1901  (Sept.  12th)  Bishop  Palmer 
married  Hila  Ella  Beals  (daughter 
of  John  S.  Beals  and  Elizabeth  Fran- 
ces Dyer),  who  was  born  July  11, 
1880,  in  Tennessee.  The  children  by 
this  marriage  are  the  following: 
Elizabeth  Orlena,  Glenn,  Journal 
Vaughn,  John  Wm.,  Hila  Lenore  and 
Donna.  Bishop  Palmer  is  a  farmer 
by  avocation  and  has  succeeded  in 
endearing  himself  to  his  neighbors 
and  the  members  of  his  Ward  gen- 
erally. 


PARK,  James  Pollock,  a  member 
of  the  Mormon  Battalion,  was  born 
Dec.  21,  1821,  in  the  town  of  Cam- 
buslang,  near  Glasgow,  Scotland,  the 
son  of  Andrew  Park.  He  emigrated 
to  Canada  and,  becoming  a  convert 
to  "Mormonism"  in  the  winter  of 
1844,  he  went  to  Nauvoo,  Illinois,  the 
following  summer  (1845).  There  he 
was  ordained  an  Elder  and  sent  on  a 
mission  to  Canada.  He  was  with  the 
Saints  during  the  exodus  from  Nau- 
voo and  shared  in  the  trials  and  per- 
secutions which  they  endured.  Hav- 
ing arrived  on  the  Missouri  river  he 
enlisted  as  a  member  of  the  Mormon 


Battalion  in  July,  1846,  and  marched 
as  a  private  in  Company  B  to  Cali- 
fornia. After  his  discharge  from  the 
government  service  he  remained  for 
a  short  time  in  California,  but  went 
to  Great  Salt  Lake  Valley  in  1848 
and  located  in  Mill  Creek.  Here  he 
married  Agnes  Findley  (in  Salt  Lake 
City),  by  whom  he  had  four  children, 
namely,  Agnes  Jane,  James  F.,  An- 
drew F.  and  Jeanette  F.  Afterwards 
he  married  Sarah  Ann  Pymm,  who 
bore  him  four  children,  namely, 
Merian,  John,  Henry  and  Seth.  Be- 
ing called  on  a  mission  to  the  British 
Isles,  he  left  home  in  September, 
1852,  and  was  absent  a  little  over  five 


480 


LATTER-DAY   SAINT 


years,  preaching  the  gospel  in  Eng- 
land, Scotland  and  Wales.  He  re- 
turned home  in  1857  as  leader  of  a 
company  of  emigrants  who  crossed 
the  Atlantic  in  the  ship  "George 
Washington."  In  1868  he  located 
with  his  family  in  Fairfield,  Utah 
county,  Utah,  where  he  resided  until 
the  time  of  his  death,  which  occurred 
Dec,  30,  1889,  after  a  long  and  pain- 
ful Illness  of  rheumatism.  Bro.  Park 
was  known  as  a  good  speaker  and  a 
successful  missionary.  He  was  a  pres- 
ident of  the  61st  quorum  of  Seventy 
in  Mill  Creek.  Throughout  his  ex- 
treme affliction  his  faith  was  never 
once  shaken,  for  he  had  an  abiding 
testimony  concerning  the  truth  of  the 
gospel  of  Christ  to  which  he  was 
singularly  attached.  He  departed  this 
life  with  a  full  assurance  of  a  great 
and  glorious  resurrection. 

PARK,  Andrew  Findley,  Counselor 
to  Bishop  Richard  Dutson  of  the 
Perry   Ward    (Rigby   Stake),   Jeffer- 


son county,  Idaho,  was  born  Nov.  2, 
1861,  in  Mill  Creek,  Salt  Lake  county, 
Utah,  the  son  of  James  P.  Park  and 
Agnes  Findley.  He  moved  with  his 
parents  to  Fairfield,  Utah  county,  in 
1868.  Here  Andrew  was  educated  in 
the    common    schools,    was    baptized 


and  ordained  a  Deacon  and  after- 
wards an  Elder.  He  took  an  active 
part  in  the  branch  Sunday  school  as 
secretary  and  assistant  superintend- 
ent and  superintendent  from  Jan.  13, 
1892,  to  Dec.  31,  1899.  He  was  also 
active  in  the  Ward  Y.  M.  M.  I.  A.  In 
1903  Bro.  Park  was  ordained  a  High 
Priest  and  set  apart  as  presiding  El- 
der of  the  Fairfield  branch,  which  po- 
sition he  held  until  1909,  when  he 
moved  to  Idaho  and  located  in  the 
Perry  Ward,  Fremont  (now  Jeffer- 
son) county,  Idaho,  where  he  took  an 
active  part  in  ecclesiastical  affairs 
and  served  as  superintendent  of  the 
Perry  Sunday  school  for  several 
years.  In  1918  he  was  chosen  as  sec- 
ond counselor  to  Bishop  Richard  Dut- 
son of  the  Perry  Ward,  which  position 
he  still  holds.  Bro.  Park  has  also 
taken  an  active  part  in  civil  affairs; 
thus  he  acted  for  several  years  as 
justice  of  the  peace  at  Fairfield.  In 
1884  (Dec.  22nd)  he  married  Annie 
Young  (daughter  of  Josias  R.  Young 
and  Elizabeth  Cennevie),  who  was 
born  March  23,  1863  in  Fairfield, 
Utah,  and  who  bore  her  husband  ten 
children,  namely:  Alfred  Henry, 
Lorin  Andrew,  Elizabeth  Esther, 
Leonard  Grover,  Vernal  George,  Clar- 
ence William,  Archie  Robert,  Leah 
Agnes,  Cora  Marie  and  Eva  Ann.  His 
wife  died  Jan.  12,  1919,  of  influenza, 
together  with  her  youngest  son, 
Archie  Robert. 

PARKER,  Joseph  William,  Bishop 
of  the  Joseph  Ward  (Sevier  Stake), 
Sevier  county,  Utah,  was  born  Nov. 
19,  1864,  at  Heber,  Wasatch  county, 
Utah,  the  son  of  Joseph  F.  Parker  and 
Mary  E.  Ross.  He  was  baptized  when 
about  eight  years  old;  ordained  a 
Deacon  July  8,  1882,  by  Niels  L.  Mar- 
sing;  ordained  an  Elder  Feb.  8,  1885, 
by  Gideon  A.  Murdock;  ordained  a 
Seventy  Feb.  22,  1895,  by  Edward 
Stevenson,  and  ordained  a  High 
Priest  and  Bishop  June  28,  1919,  by 
Anthony  W.  Ivins,  and  set  apart  to 
preside  over  the  Joseph  Ward,  which 


BIOGRAPHICAL   ENCYCLOPEDIA. 


481 


position  he  still  holds.  Prior  to  his 
becoming  a  Bishop  he  was  a  diligent 
Church  worker  and  acted  as  presi- 
dent   of    the   Ward    Y.    M.    M.    I.    A., 


assistant  superintendent  of  Sunday 
schools,  Ward  clerk  and  a  president 
of  the  41st  quorum  of  Seventy.  In 
1895-1897  he  filled  a  mission  to  the 
Southern  States,  laboring  principally 
in  South  Carolina.  He  also  labored 
as  a  home  missionary  in  Sevier  Stake 
from  1914  until  set  apart  as  Bishop. 
During  the  winter  of  1914-1915  he 
labored  as  special  missionary  in  Mon- 
roe, Sevier  county,  Utah.  In  1885 
(Nov.  4th)  he  married  Margaret  Jane 
Neil  (daughter  of  Tipton  S.  Neil  and 
Margaret  Jane  Beard),  who  was  born 
April  27,  1868,  in  Highland,  Doni- 
phan county,  Kansas.  She  became  the 
mother  of  fourteen  children,  and  died 
May  22,  1911.  In  1914  (June  10th) 
Bishop  Parker  married  Oleana  M.  Ol- 
sen  Dalton,  a  widow  (daughter  of 
Olof  Olsen  and  Mary  Larsen),  who 
was  born  June  5,  1882,  at  Richfield, 
Sevier  county,  Utah.  The  names  of 
his  children  by  his  first  wife  are  Mar- 
garet I.,  Joseph  and  Josiah  (twins), 
Elbert,  Myrtle,  Leonard  N.,  Irvin  S., 
Maurine,  Clayton,  Mae  I.,  Alton  E., 
Madaline    and    Melba    Alburn    Neil. 


The  children  by  his  second  wife  are 
Mary,  Olena  and  Olive. 

PARTRIDGE,  Frank  Harvey,  Bishop 
of  Fillmore  (Millard  Stake),  Millard 
county,  Utah,  was  born  Aug.  12,  1875, 
at  Fillmore,  the  son  of  Edward  Part- 
ridge and  Elizabeth  Buxton.  He  was 
baptized  in  1883  by  Christian  Ander- 
son; ordained  a  Deacon  and  after- 
wards an  Elder;  ordained  a  Seventy 
Dec.  29,  1906,  by  Francis  M.  Lyman, 
and  a  High  Priest  and  Bishop  Dec. 
30,  1906,  by  Apostle  Francis  M.  Ly- 
man. Previous  to  this  he  had  acted 
as  president  of  an  Elders'  quorum. 
He  served  as  Bishop  until  October, 
1909,  and  in  1912  he  was  chosen  as  a 
member  of  the  High  Council  of  the 
Millard  Stake,  a  position  which  he 
still  holds.  He  also  served  as  first 
assistant  Stake  superintendent  of 
Sunday  schools  of  the  Millard  Stake 
during  the  years  1917  and  1918. 
Bishop  Partridge  has  also  been  active 
in  secular  affairs.  He  acted  as  justice 
of  the  peace  in  1917-1918  and  as  city 
treasurer  from  1918  to  1919.  In 
1898    (Oct.  26th)   he  married  Savilla 


Adell  Melville  (daughter  of  Brigham 
Melville  and  Savilla  Bishop),  who 
was  born  Oct.  8,  1880,  at  Fillmore. 
After  bearing  her  husband  two  chil- 


Vol.  Ill,  No.  31. 


February  14,  1920 


482 


LATTER-DAY   SAINT 


dren  (Savilla  and  Dell  Fenton),  she 
died  on  Jan.  10,  1906.  In  1908 
(April  1st)  Bishop  Partridge  married 
Harriet  A.  Whicker  (daughter  of 
Isaac  Whicker  and  Elizabeth  Star- 
ley),  who  was  born  Jan.  18,  1885. 
She  became  the  mother  of  five  chil- 
dren, namely:  Agnes,  Eldon  E.,  Ron- 
ald R.,  Orvil  and  Carroll. 

PASSEY,  Fredrick  William,  fourth 
Bishop  of  Lanark  Ward  (Bear  Lake 
Stake),  Bear  Lake  county,  Idaho,  was 
born  Nov.  1,  1875,  in  Paris,  Bear 
Lake  county,  Idaho,  the  son  of  John 
Parley  Passey  and  Elizabeth  Clifton. 
He  was  baptized  in  1884  by  Robert 
Price,  ordained  a  Deacon,  Teacher, 
Priest  and  Elder  in  succession  and 
acted  for  a  time  as  president  of  a 
Deacons'  and  later  of  a  Teachers' 
quorum.  He  was  ordained  a  Seventy 
June  24,  1897,  by  George  Reynolds, 
and  filled  a  mission  to  the  Northern 
States  in  1897-1899,  laboring  princi- 
pally in  the  North  Indiana  conference. 
He  was  ordained  a  Bishop  Sept.  12, 
1908,  by  Hyrum  M.  Smith  and  set 
apart  to  preside  over  the  Lanark 
Ward.  Prior  to  that  Brother  Passey 
had  acted  as  assistant  superintendent 
of  the  Lanark  Sunday  school  for  a 
number  of  years  and  had  also  acted 
as  a  school  trustee  and  a  clerk  of  the 
school  board  and  otherwise  taken  an 
active  part  in  ecclesiastical  and  secu- 
lar affairs.  He  is  a  farmer  and  stock- 
raiser  by  avocation.  In  1899  (Sept. 
27th)  he  married  Julia  Ann  Beck 
(daughter  of  Anders  Beck  and  Sophia 
Hansen),  who  was  born  Sept.  11, 
1873,  in  Paris,  Idaho.  This  marriage 
has  been  blessed  with  seven  children, 
namely.  Earl  F.,  Newell  B.,  Milford 
L.,  Ella,  Anders  J.,  William  Warren 
and  Lois. 

PECTOL.,EphraimPortman,  Bishop 
of  Torrey  Ward  ( Wayne  Stake ) ,  Wayne 
county,  Utah,  was  born  May  16,  1875, 
at  Glenwood,  Sevier  county,  Utah,  the 
son  of  George  Peter  Pectol  and  An- 
nina  C.  Peterson.     He  was  baptized  in 


August,  1883,  by  Volney  King;  or- 
dained a  Deacon  when  a  boy,  and 
later  ordained  an  Elder  by  Walter  E. 
Hanks.  He  was  ordained  a  Seventy 
Dec.  2,  1895,  by  George  A.  Burr,  and 
ordained  a  High  Priest  and  Bishop 
Aug.  13,  1911,  by  Francis  M.  Lyman. 
From  his  earliest  youth  Brother  Pec- 
tol has  been  active  both  ecclesiasti- 
cally and  otherwise.  At  the  age  of 
five  years  he,  with  his  parents,  left 
the  home  of  his  birth,  moving  to  the 
place  known  as  Clover  Flat  in  Grass 
Valley,  Piute  county.   Here  his  school 


training  began  in  a  small  room  of  a 
log  dwelling  house,  under  the  hands 
of  his  father  as  school  teacher,  and 
here  many  of  the  impressions  which 
shaped  his  future  life  were  received, 
notably  those  ecclesiastically  under 
the  guidance  of  noble,  true  parents. 
Had  it  not  been  for  this,  he  testifies, 
his  life  might  have  been  different,  for 
even  out  in  the  lonely  country  are 
those  who  give  wrong  impressions 
which  later  in  life  battle  for  suprem- 
acy. After  a  few  years,  with  his  par- 
ents, he  again  moved,  this  time  to 
Caineville,  Wayne  county,  Utah,  where 
as  a  mere  boy  he  acted  for  several 
years  as  president  of  the  Deacons' 
quorum;  later  he  was  Ward  clerk, 
and  acted  also  as  secretary  and  coun- 


BIOGRAPHICAL  ENCYCLOPEDIA. 


483 


selor  in  the  Ward  Y.  M.  M.  I.  A.  Here 
also  his  matrimonial  fate  was  sealed, 
meeting  his  future  wife,  Dorothy  D. 
Hickman  (daughter  of  Deseret  N. 
Hickman  and  Dorothy  A.  Carrell), 
who  was  born  March  30,  1880,  in 
Bingham,  Salt  Lake  county,  Utah,  and 
to  whom  he  was  married  June  21, 
1899.  He  has  filled  the  offices  of 
superintendent  of  county  schools, 
county  water  commissioner,  county 
commissioner,  etc.,  and  followed  the 
avocation  of  school  teaching  for  thir- 
teen years.  Otherwise  he  is  a  farmer 
and  merchant  by  avocation.  In  190  6- 
1908  he  filled  a  mission  to  New  Zea- 
land, laboring  part  of  the  time  as 
president  of  the  Wairarapa  confer- 
ence, and  teaching  school  for  18 
months  in  the  Mahia  district.  Through 
it,  his  noble  wife  with  her  four  chil- 
dren struggled  with  success  at  home, 
truly  a  help-mate  and  home-maker. 
He  attributes  much  of  his  success  to 
her  wise  council.  They  now  reside  at 
Torrey,  Utah,  where  Bro.  Pectol  pre- 
sides as  Bishop.  Six  children  were 
the  issue  of  his  marriage,  namely: 
Florence,  Leona,  Elenor,  Fontella, 
Golda  and  Devona.  Elenor  died  at 
the  age  of  eleven  years  from  heart 
trouble. 

PECTOL,  George  Peter,  second 
counselor  in  the  Bishopric  of  the 
Caineville  Ward  (Wayne  Stake), 
Wayne  county,  Utah,  was  born  Aug. 
25,  1841,  in  Clark  county,  Indiana, 
the  son  of  George  Pectol  and  Sarah 
Reeser.  He  emigrated  with  his  par- 
ents to  Utah  in  1850  and  was  bap- 
tized in  the  Platte  river  June  2  9, 
1850,  by  Elijah  Everett,  while  cross- 
ing the  plains.  He  located  with  his 
parents  in  Manti  and  in  18  61  became 
one  of  the  first  settlers  of  St.  George 
where  he  stayed  one  year.  Prior  to 
this  he,  together  with  his  father, 
were  called  to  Dixie  to  raise  cotton, 
and  spent  three  years  on  the  Heber- 
ville  farm.  After  residing  in  south- 
ern Utah,  he  settled  in  Glenwood, 
Sevier  county,  where  he  served  as  a 


military  man  during  the  Black  Hawk 
war  in  1865-1867.  He  also  joined 
the  United  Order  at  Glenwood  and 
remained  with  the  same  until  the  or- 
ganization broke  up.  At  Glenwood 
he  also  acted  as  assistant  superin- 
tendent of  the  Sunday  school  from 
its  infancy  for  nine  years,  and  as 
first  counselor  in  the  presidency  of 
an  Elders'  quorum  about  five  years. 
About  1886  he  settled  in  Caineville, 
removing  to  Grover  in  1910  and  set- 
tled in  Teasdale  in  1912.  He  was  or- 
dained a  Deacon  in  1855  and  a 
Teacher  in  1858,  by  Robert  D.  Cov- 
ington; was  ordained  an  Elder  about 
1862,  by  Gustave  E.  Dodge,  and  or- 
dained   a    High    Priest   in     18  93     by 


Francis  M.  Lyman  and  set  apart  as 
second  counselor  to  Bishop  Walter  E. 
Hanks  of  the  Caineville  Ward.  He 
held  this  position  until  1910  when 
the  Caineville  Ward  was  disor- 
ganized. Prior  to  this  he  had  been 
presiding  Elder  at  Caineville  for  two 
years.  In  a  secular  way  Bro.  Pectol 
acted  as  justice  of  the  peace  at  Caine- 
ville, constable  at  Glenwood,  road 
supervisor,  etc.  Otherwise  he  is  a 
farmer,  stock  raiser  and  merchant  by 
avocation.  In  1865  (Sept.  14th)  he 
married  Anina  C.  Peterson  (daugh- 
ter of  Jens  K.  Peterson  and  Helene  C. 


484 


LATTER-DAY   SAINT 


Wyne),  who  was  born  July  17,  1850, 
in  Copenhagen,  Denmark,  and  died 
Dec.  3,  1918,  at  Teasdale,  after  bear- 
ing her  husband  thirteen  children, 
namely,  George  J.,  Sarah  C,  Frank- 
lin, Francis,  Frederick  C,  Lovina  L., 
Ephraim  P.,  William  W.,  Dorthea  A., 
Effie  M.,  Joseph  A.,  Tilman  R.  and 
Jessie  L. 

PERKINS,  William  Louis,  Bishop 
of  the  Monpelier  First  Ward  (Mont- 
pelier  Stake),  Bear  Lake  county, 
Idaho,  was  born  Dec.  20,  1885,  at 
Montpelier,   Idaho,   the   son   of  John 

A.  Perkins  and  Ann  Bunney.  He 
was  baptized  June  7,  1894,  by  E. 
Lorenzo  Burgoyne;  ordained  a  Dea- 
con in  1898;  ordained  a  Teacher  Dec. 
9,  1901,  by  Francis  M.  Winters;  or- 
dained a  Priest  Feb.  14,  1904;  or- 
dained an  Elder  in  1905;  ordained  a 
Seventy  Dec.  10,  1911,  by  Joseph  W. 
McMurrin;  ordained  a  High  Priest 
and  Bishop  Dec.  23,  1917,  by  Rudger 
Clawson  and  set  apart  to  preside 
over  the  Montpelier  First  Ward, 
which  position  he  still  holds.  Prior 
to  his  becoming  Bishop  he  acted  as 
secretary  of  a  Deacons'  quorum, 
president  of  a  Teachers'  quorum,  sec- 
retary of  a  Priests'  quorum,  presi- 
dent of  an  Elders'  quorum,  and  also 
president  of  a  Y.  M.  M.  I.  A.,  first 
assistant  and  later  superintendent  of 
a  Sunday  school,  etc.  In  1906-1909 
he  filled  a  mission  to  the  Southern 
States,  laboring  in  North  Carolina. 
In  1910   (Oct.  5th)  he  married  Nellie 

B.  Pearce  (daughter  of  Charles  R. 
Pearce  and  Agnes  Hogensen),  who 
was  born  Feb.  6,  1886,  at  Montpelier, 
Idaho,  and  has  borne  her  husband 
four  children,  namely,  Lowell  W., 
Lynn  P.,  Douglas  and  Phil  Raymond. 

PERRY,  Henry  Morgan,  Bishop 
of  the  Rudy  Ward  (Rigby  Stake),  Jef- 
ferson county,  Idaho,  and  a  resident 
of  Perry  Ward,  was  born  Dec.  3, 
1856,  at  Perry  (Three  Mile  Creek), 
Box  Elder  county,  Utah,  the  son  of 
Henry  E.  Perry  and  Elizabeth  Zabris- 


kie.  He  was  baptized  June  9,  1867, 
by  Orrin  A.  Perry;  ordained  an  El- 
der in  1877,  by  William  A.  Watkins; 
ordained  a  Seventy  in  1883,  by  Wil- 
liam Lowe;  moved  from  Perry,  Utah, 
to  his  present  home  in  Snake  River 
Valley,  Idaho,  in  1886.  He  was  or- 
dained a  High  Priest  Aug.  14,  1892, 
by  William  Rigby  and  set  apart  as  a 
member  of  the  High  Council  which 
position  he  held  until  190  4  when  he 
was  ordained  a  Bishop  by  Apostle 
Hyrum  M.  Smith  and  set  apart  to 
preside  over  the  Rudy  Ward.  He 
presided  over  this  Ward  until  1908, 
when   the    Clark    and    Perry     Wards 


were  created  out  of  the  Rudy  Ward, 
when  he  was  honorably  released  as 
Bishop  and  chosen  as  a  member  of 
the  High  Council  of  the  Rigby  Stake. 
This  position  he  still  holds.  Bro. 
Perry  filled  a  mission  to  the  Central 
States  in  1913-1914  and  in  California 
during  the  winter  of  1915-1916.  In 
1881  (Feb.  24th)  Bro.  Perry  mar- 
ried Fannie  Young,  who  has  borne 
her  husband  twelve  children,  namely, 
Henry  Elisha,  Martha  Maude,  Leslie 
Thomas,  Albert  Sabina,  Heber  Mor- 
gan, Melba  Elizabeth,  Eurene  Eliza, 
and  Eunice  Jane  (twins),  Velda, 
Annie  and  Verna  Fannie  (twins). 
Bishop  Perry  has  filled  a  number  of 


BIOGRAPHICAL  ENCYCLOPEDIA. 


485 


civil  offices  such  as  school  trustee, 
justice  of  the  peace,  etc.  By  occupa- 
tion he  is  a  farmer  and  stock  raiser. 

PETERSEN,  Adam  Lind,  a  prom- 
inent Elder  and  missionary,  was  born 
March  2,  1970,  in  Huntsville,  Weber 
county,  Utah,  the  son  of  Soren  L. 
Petersen  and  Anna  E.  Nielsen.  He 
was  baptized  in  1878  by  Samuel  S. 
Hammond,  ordained  a  Deacon  in 
1883  by  Francis  A.  Hammond,  or- 
dained a  Priest  in  18  8  6,  ordained  an 
Elder  in  1888  by  David  McKay,  or- 
dained a   Seventy  in    189  2   by  Abra- 


ham H.  Cannon  and  ordained  a  High 
Priest  in  1907  by  David  O.  McKay. 
Early  in  life  Bro.  Petersen  became  an 
active  Church  worker.  From  1887 
to  1901  he  acted  as  chorister  of  the 
Huntsville  Ward  choir,  served  as  a 
member  of  the  Stake  Sunday  School 
Board    (Weber  Stake)    from   1887  to 

1890,  presided  over  the  Y.  M.  M.  I.  A. 
of  the  Huntsville  Ward  from  1888  to 

1891,  filled  a  mission  to  Scandinavia 
in  1892-1894,  acting  part  of  the  time 
as  president  of  the  Copenhagen  con- 
ference, Denmark,  served  as  assist- 
ant superintendent  of  the  Huntsville 
Sunday  school  in  18-94-1902,  filled 
a  special  M.  I.  A.  mission  to  the  San 
Juan   Stake   of  Zion   in    1898,   acted 


as  presiding  Ward  teacher  in  Hunts- 
ville from  1898  to  1902,  and  filled 
a  second  mission  to  Scandinavia  in 
1902-1904,  presiding  over  the  Aarhus 
conference,  Denmark.  After  his  re- 
turn from  that  mission  he  was 
chosen  as  a  member  of  the  Weber 
Stake  Sunday  school  board  in  1906 
and  as  a  member  of  the  High  Council 
in  the  Ogden  Stake  in  November, 
1907.  Afterwards  he  was  appointed 
to  preside  over  the  Scandinavian 
meetings  in  the  three  Stakes  in 
Weber  county.  Bro.  Petersen  has 
also  served  as  justice  of  the  peace  in 
Huntsville  precinct  and  city,  and 
later  in  the  Eden  precinct.  His  main 
avocations  in  life  have  been  farming, 
stock  raising,  mining,  merchandizing 
(wholesale  and  retail)  and  milling. 
He  served  as  chief  clerk  of  the  House 
of  Representatives  in  1917  and  secre- 
tary of  the  Senate  of  the  Utah  Legis- 
lature in  1919.  In  1917  he  filled  a 
short  mission  to  the  Eastern  States, 
being  assigned  especially  to  Wash- 
ington, D.  C,  and  for  three  months 
he  served  as  reading  clerk  in  Con- 
gress, a  position  with  which  no  Utah 
man  ever  before  was  honored.  Bro. 
Petersen  moved  with  his  family  to 
Salt  Lake  City  in  1919  and  is  now  a 
resident  of  the  Eleventh  Ward.  Since 
April  1,  191'9,  he  has  served  as  a 
special  investigator  for  the  State 
Board  of  Equalization.  In  1888 
(Nov.  8th)  Bro.  Petersen  married 
Anna  M.  Peterson,  the  daughter  of 
Christian  Peterson  and  Emma  Back- 
man,  in  the  Logan  Temple.  This 
marriage  has  been  blessed  with  nine 
children,  namely,  Eva  Malvina,  Ollie 
May,  Ruth  Evelina,  Vivian  Myrtle, 
Dewey  Lind,  Bryan  Lind,  Golden 
Adam,  Eugene  Lyman  and  Lloyd 
La  Mar. 

PETERSEN,  Andrew,  Bishop  of 
Fairview,  Sanpete  county,  Utah,  was 
born  Feb.  8,  1829,  at  Jetzmark,  Jut- 
land, Denmark,  the  son  of  Peder 
Pedersen  and  Johanne  Marie  Ander- 
son.    Becoming  a  convert  to   "Mor- 


486 


LATTER-DAY   SAINT 


monism"  he  was  baptized  about  1852 
and  emigrated  to  Utah  in  1854, 
crossing  the  Atlantic  in  a  sailing  ves- 
sel and  the  plains  in  Captain  H.  P. 
Olsen's  company.  He  located  in 
Fairview,  then  called  North  Bend, 
Sanpete  county,  in  1860,  and  became 
one  of  its  prominent  and  influential 
citizens  and  also  a  farmer  on  a  large 
scale.  In  1864  he  was  chosen  by 
Orson  Hyde  to  act  as  Bishop  of  Fair- 
view,  which  position  he  held  until 
1866,  when  he  was  honorably  re- 
leased. In  1854  (Oct.  15th)  he  mar- 
ried Anna  Maria  Olsen,  daughter  of 
Hans  Olsen,  who  was  born  in  Den- 
mark. This  marriage  was  blessed 
with  five  children,  namely,  Christina, 
born  Sept.  15,  1855,  in  Salt  Lake 
City;  Lorenzo,  born  July  29,  1858; 
Peter,  born  Sept.  27,  1860  in  Fair- 
view;  Mette  Mary,  born  Nov.  21, 
1862,  in  Fairview,  and  A.  M.  Han- 
sine,  born  Aug.  3,  1868,  in  Fairview. 
Bro.  Petersen  married  Annette  An- 
derson in  1865.  Her  children  were: 
John,  born  Nov.  19,  1865,  in  Fair- 
view;  Lewis,  born  Feb.  9,  1868,  in 
Fairview;  Andrew,  born  April  11, 
1870,  and  James,  born  March  12, 
1872,  in  Fairview.  Bro.  Petersen 
died  a  number  of  years  ago. 

PETERSON,      Andrew      Christian, 

Bishop  of  Thatcher  (St.  Joseph  Stake), 
Graham  county,  Arizona,  and  princi- 
pal of  the  Gila  Academy,  was  born 
Sept.  24,  1870.  in  Gunnison,  Sanpete 
county,  Utah,  the  son  of  Thomas 
Peter  Petersen  and  Maria  Tyggeson. 
His  parents  were  both  natives  of  Den- 
mark and  emigrated  to  America 
direct  from  that  country,  crossing  the 
Atlantic  in  a  sailing  vessel  and  the 
plains  in  ox  teams.  His  father  en- 
gaged in  farming  until  he  was  acci- 
dentally killed  May  29,  1873,  in  Rich- 
field, Sevier  county,  Utah.  Andrew 
came  with  his  parents  to  Richfield  as 
an  infant,  and  with  his  mother  he 
moved  to  Arizona  in  1878  and  settled 
in  Brigham  City,  on  the  Little  Colo- 
rado river,   living  in  the  United   Or- 


der. When  the  settlements  on  the 
Little  Colorado  broke  up  the  Peter- 
son family  moved  to  the  Meadows, 
near  St.  Johns,  and  later  located  in 
St.  Johns.  Here  Bro.  Peterson  was 
ordained  a  Deacon,  later  an  Elder, 
and  in  1900  he  was  ordained  a  Sev- 
enty by  Seymour  B.  Young,  after 
which  he  filled  a  mission  to  the 
Northern  States  (1900-1902),  presid- 
ing over  the  Minnesota  conference, 
and  later  acting  as  secretary  of  the 
mission.  His  success  in  educational 
work  is  the  more  commendable  from 
the  fact  that  previous  to  his  eight- 
eenth birthday  he  had  only  nine 
months  of  schooling,  but  his  disad- 
vantages were  to  a  great  extent  over- 


come by  observation  and  reading,  and 
later  he  entered  the  district  school  at 
St.  Johns,  an  institution  of  which  he 
was  afterwards  the  principal.  He 
supplimented  this  by  a  normal  course 
at  Provo,  Utah,  which  he  completed 
in  1897,  after  which  he  became  prin- 
cipal of  the  St.  Johns  school.  He  held 
this  position  for  two  years  and  re- 
signed in  1898,  in  order  to  offer  his 
services  to  the  government  for  the 
Spanish-American  war.  He  joined 
Company  C  of  the  First  Territorial 
Regiment  and  was  sent  to  the  Whip- 
ple   barracks,    thence    to    Lexington, 


I 


BIOGRAPHICAL  ENCYCLOPEDIA. 


487 


Kentucky,  and  later  was  stationed 
with  his  regiment  in  Albany,  Georgia, 
where  he  was  mustered  out  in  Feb- 
ruary, 1899.  Bro.  Peterson  returned 
to  St.  Johns,  Arizona,  and  for  a  time 
worked  upon  a  farm  and  taught 
school  until  he  left  for  his  mission 
in  1900.  After  returning  from  his 
mission  he  taught  school  in  Eager, 
and  moved  to  Thatcher  in  1903, 
where  he  acted  as  a  teacher  in  the 
Gila  Academy  for  two  years.  In  1905 
he  became  principal,  which  position 
he  still  holds.  In  1916  he  graduated 
from  the  Brigham  Young  University 
with  the  degree  of  bachelor  of  arts. 
He  possesses  the  faculty  of  imparting 
to  others  something  of  his  own  zeal 
and  enthusiasm,  and  as  a  result  the 
Gila  Academy  is  well  organized,  well 
managed  and  well  taught,  being  fully 
up  to  the  standard  of  similar  institu- 
tions. He  has  ever  taken  a  part  in 
public  affairs,  serving  as  a  member 
of  the  board  of  supervisors  in  Graham 
county.  Bro.  Peterson  was  ordained 
a  High  Priest  by  Charles  M.  Layton 
Sept.  11,  1904,  and  set  apart  as  a 
High  Councilor  in  the  St.  Joseph 
Stake  of  Zion.  He  was  ordained  a 
Bishop  by  George  F.  Richards  Dec. 
1,  1907,  and  set  apart  to  preside  over 
the  Thatcher  Ward,  which  position  he 
held  about  two  years.  Since  then  he 
has  served  as  a  member  of  the  High 
Council,  and  since  1914  he  has  acted 
as  Stake  superintendent  of  religion 
classes.  In  secular  matters  he  has 
been  equally  active.  Thus  he  served 
as  State  representative  from  Graham 
county  in  the  3rd  State  legislature  of 
Arizona  (1917-1918),  and  was  re- 
elected for  the  same  position  in  the 
4th  legislature  (1919-1920);  he  was 
elected  speaker  of  the  House  of  Rep- 
resentatives Jan.  13,  1919.  Elder 
Peterson's  life  has  ever  been  in  har- 
mony with  the  standards  of  upright 
manhood  and  his  good  qualities  have 
gained  for  him  wide  spread  respect 
and  esteem  and  an  honored  name. 
In  1903  (June  18th)  Bro.  Peterson 
married    Eleanor    Post    of    Chicago. 


They  now  have  seven  children:  Pearl, 
Eleanor,  Myrtle,  Glen,  Dale,  Arman 
and  Laurel. 

PETERSON,  Linnius  Charles,  fifth 
Bishop  of  St.  John  (Tooele  Stake), 
Tooele  county,  Utah,  was  born  Dec. 
27,  1867,  near  New  Salem,  Pike 
county,  Illinois,  the  son  of  Benjamin 
F.  Peterson  and  Mary  C.  Hooper.  He 
was  baptized  in  September,  1899,  by 
Calvin  Hall;  ordained  a  Priest  soon 
afterward;  ordained  an  Elder  in  1901 
by  Andrew  Kimball;  ordained  a  High 
Priest  in  1903  by  Andrew  Kimball 
and  ordained  a  Bishop  Sept.  14,  1915, 
by  Francis  M.  Lyman.     Prior  to  this. 


in  the  spring  of  1914,  he  acted  as 
second  counselor  to  Bishop  John  P. 
Russell  of  St.  John.  At  the  age  of 
sixteen  Bro.  Peterson  moved  to  Mis- 
souri and  two  years  located  in  Kan- 
sas, where  he  joined  the  Church,  and 
in  the  spring  of  1901  he  moved  to 
St.  David,  Arizona,  where  he  acted  as 
second  counselor  In  the  Ward  bishop- 
ric. In  the  spring  of  1905  he  moved 
to  Salt  Lake  City,  and  settled  in  Rush 
Valley  in  1909.  While  residing  in 
Salt  Lake  City  he  labored  three  win- 
ters as  a  missionary  among  the  non- 
Mormons  in  the  Liebrty  Stake  and 
baptized     two     new     members.       He 


488 


LATTER-DAY   SAINT 


taught  school  for  sixteen*  years  and 
was  president  of  the  Y.  M.  M.  I.  A. 
three  years.  In  1897  (Jan.  13th)  he 
married  Carrie  P.  Andrew  (daughter 
of  Stanton  Andrew  and  Lydia  M. 
Glaughlin),  who  was  born  Nov.  15, 
1878.  She  bore  her  husband  six 
children. 

POMEROY,  BYancis  Martin,  one  of 

the  original  Utah  pioneers  of  1847 
and  a  distinguished  Indian  mission- 
ary, was  born  Feb.  20,  1820,  at 
Somers,  Connecticut,  the  son  of  Mar- 
tin Pomeroy  and  Sybil  Hunt.  The 
following    interesting    sketch    of    his 


life  is  written  by  his  son  Francis  T. 
Pomeroy:  "Francis  Martin  Pomeroy 
was  born  at  the  old  family  home- 
stead, where  had  lived  his  ancestors 
for  several  generations.  He  was 
third  in  a  family  of  nine  children. 
His  parents  were  humble  farmers, 
living  near  Somers,  and  owing  to  the 
farm  being  small  and  the  family 
large,  he  was  apprenticed  to  his 
uncle,  Oziah  Pomeroy,  who  required 
of  him  hard  labor  without  much 
recreation.  The  following  instance 
will  illustrate:  The  day  before  a 
circus  came  to  the  village  Francis 
asked   his   uncle's  permission   to   at- 


tend. The  uncle,  handing  him  a 
spelling  book,  said,  'If  you  learn  that 
book  by  heart,  you  may  go.'  All 
night  the  boy  studied  the  book,  and 
just  before  the  time  for  the  circus, 
he  came  in  triumphant,  and,  to  the 
surprise  of  his  uncle,  he  repeated  the 
entire  contents  of  the  book,  word  for 
word.  When  about  fifteen  years  of 
age,  tiring  of  his  uncle's  rather  harsh 
treatment,  he  determined  to  leave 
him  and  strike  out  for  himself,  so 
one  night  he  tied  his  belongings  in 
a  red  handkerchief,  stepped  out  of 
the  house,  and,  Benjamin  Franklin 
like,  made  his  way  to  the  little  sea 
port  of  New  London,  where  he  made 
the  acquaintance  of  a  sailor  from  a 
whaling  vessel,  who  introduced  him 
to  the  captain,  and  Francis  then 
shipped  with  them  on  their  next  voy- 
age. He  had  many  thrilling  experi- 
ences on  the  sea,  and  became  an  ex- 
pert 'harpooner'  as  well  as  an  expert 
at  the  wheel.  He  followed  the  sea 
for  about  six  years,  working  his  way 
up  to  'first  mate.'  His  vessel  cruised 
in  both  the  Atlantic  and  Pacific 
waters,  and  on  his  last  voyage,  the 
vessel  went  to  pieces  on  the  rocks  on 
the  coast  of  Peru.  After  being  buf- 
feted by  the  waves  for  hours,  he  suc- 
ceeded, by  aid  of  a  friendly  spar,  in 
swimming  to  land  which  he  reached 
in  an  exhausted  condition — the  only 
survivor  of  the  vessel,  as  far  as  he 
knew.  He  was  found  by  the  son  of 
a  Castillian  family  and  taken  to  their 
home,  and  nursed  back  to  health  and 
strength.  He  remained  with  this 
family  for  about  two  years  and  be- 
came an  expert  linquist  in  the  Span- 
ish tongue.  He  finally  made  his  way 
to  New  Orleans,  crossing  the  Isthmus 
of  Panama,  and  thence  went  to  Salem, 
Massachusetts.  Here  he  met  Irene 
Ursula  Haskell,  who,  with  her  par- 
ents, had  recently  been  baptized  into 
the  Church  of  Jesus  Christ  of  Latter- 
day  Saints.  He  also  investigated  the 
'Mormon'  faith,  and  was  baptized 
into  the  Church  in  his  24th  year,  in 
1844.      Soon  after  he  married  Irene 


BIOGRAPHICAL   ENCYCLOPEDIA. 


489 


and  the  following  year,  with  his 
young  wife,  and  her  parents,  he 
traveled  by  team  to  Nauvoo,  Illinois, 
to  cast  his  lot  with  the  Saints,  who 
had  lost  their  leader,  the  Prophet 
Joseph  Smith,  and  were  facing  the 
most  critical  period  of  their  history. 
In  September,  1845,  their  first  child 
Francelle  Eugenia)  was  born.  They 
remained  in  Nauvoo  until  the  move 
westward,  and  in  May,  18  4  6,  Bro. 
Pomeroy  loaded  his  belongings  in  a 
wagon  and  began  the  journey  to  the 
Rocky  Mountains.  When  the  band  of 
143  pioneers  were  chosen  by  Brig- 
ham  Young  to  pilot  the  route  to  the 
mountains,  Bro.  Pomeroy  was  among 
them;  he  was  assigned  to  the  'Tenth 
Ten'  under  the  captaincy  of  Apple- 
ton  M.  Harmon.  Being  a  large  man 
of  tireless  energy  and  having  much 
experience  in  life  he  became  a  very 
valuable  man  for  the  task  before 
them;  this  was  especially  the  case  in 
crossing  the  many  turbulent  streams 
that  disputed  their  way.  He  was  an 
expert  swimmer,  as  well  as  oarsman; 
he  could  drive  a  boat  with  one  oar 
(standing  on  the  rear  end)  safely 
over  the  most  turbulent  waters.  Thus 
he  did  his  full  part  on  that  memor- 
able journey  across  the  almost  track- 
less plains,  his  company  arriving  in 
Salt  Lake  Valley  in  July,  18  47.  Re- 
turning eastward  with  Brigham 
Young's  company  in  August  he  met 
his  wife  with  the  first  company  fol- 
lowing the  pioneers  and  returned 
with  them  to  the  Valley.  In  crossing 
Green  River,  where  they  were  com- 
pelled to  swim  the  horses  and  cattle 
and  float  the  wagons,  he  was  almost 
continually  in  the  water  swimming 
back  and  forth.  By  so  doing  he  con- 
tracted rheumatism,  which  caused 
him  intense  suffering,  not  only  on 
his  journey  westward,  but  intermit- 
tently for  years  to  come.  Arriving 
in  Salt  Lake  City  he  settled  in  the 
Second  Ward,  and  later  moved  to  the 
Twelfth  Ward;  he  also  owned  a  farm 
on  Little  Cottonwood.  In  the  spring 
of  1849  he  went  on  a  mission  to  Cali- 


fornia with  Charles  C.  Rich,  return- 
ing the  following  year.  In  1853 
(April  20th)  he  entered  the  Patri- 
archal order  of  marriage  with  Sarah 
Matilda  Colburn,  daughter  of  Thomas 
Colburn  and  Sarah  Bowers,  Presi- 
dent Brigham  Young  officiating.  In 
1858  (Feb.  27th)  he  also  married 
Jassamine  Routledge,  an  English 
girl  who  had  crossed  the  plains  in  a 
handcart  company.  While  living  in 
Salt  Lake  City,  he  acted  as  Spanish 
interpreter  for  Governor  Brigham 
Young,  notably  so,  when  a  delegation 
was  sent  from  the  City  of  Mexico  by 
Prest.  Benito  Juarez  to  confer  with 
Brigham  Young.  On  that  occasion 
Bro.  Pomeroy  not  only  acted  as  in- 
terpreter, but  housed  the  delegation 
while  in  the  city.  In  the  early  trou- 
bles and  trials  of  the  Saints  in  Utah 
Bro.  Pomeroy  endured  with  them 
their  hardships,  including  fighting 
and  treating  with  the  Indians.  In 
the  summer  of  1858,  when  Johns- 
ton's army  threatened  the  people  of 
Utah  with  destruction,  he  partici- 
pated in  the  move  south,  willing  to 
sacrifice  the  results  of  his  long  years 
of  toil  to  the  flames,  rather  than 
have  them  fall  into  the  hands  of  the 
enemy.  In  1860  (June  15th)  his 
first  wife,  Irene,  died.  She  had  given 
birth  to  seven  children,  and  was  be- 
loved by  all  who  knew  her.  In  1862 
Bro.  Pomeroy  sold  his  farm  and  city 
property  and  moved  with  his  fami- 
lies to  the  Weber,  where  he  remained 
two  years,  after  which  he  was  pre- 
vailed upon  by  Apostle  Charles  C. 
Rich  (who  had  been  called  to  pioneer 
the  Bear  Lake  Valley  in  Idaho)  to 
join  him  and  become  a  partner  in  a 
saw  mill  and  shingle  mill  enterprise. 
Moving  his  family  to  Paris,  Bear 
Lake  Valley,  in  1864,  he  took  per- 
sonal charge  of  the  building  and  con- 
struction of  the  first  saw  mill,  and 
shingle  and  lath  mill  in  that  Valley, 
and  he  also  cut  out  the  grist  mill 
stones  with  his  own  hands  and  built 
and  started  the  first  grist  mill,  at 
Paris.      He  took  a  great  interest  in 


490 


LATTER-DAY   SAINT 


the  development  of  the  country,  and 
acted  as  justice  of  the  peace  for  a 
number  of  terms,  being  recognized 
and  commended  for  the  justice  of  his 
decisions.  The  cold  climate,  how- 
ever, and  his  chronic  rheumatic 
troubles,  impelled  him  towards  a 
warmer  climate,  and  having  written 
to  and  received  glowing  reports  of 
the  Salt  River  Valley,  Arizona,  from 
Henry  C.  Rogers,  he  determined  to 
move  there.  He  was  now  the  father 
of  twenty  children,  six  of  whom  were 
happily  married,  but  all  but  four  ac- 
companied him  on  his  journey  to 
Arizona.  He  sold  his  property  to 
good  advantage,  fitted  up  a  good  out- 
fit, consisting  of  four  wagons,  two 
span  of  fine  American  horses,  and 
four  yoke  of  oxen,  and  ten  head  of 
milk  cows,  as  well  as  some  saddle 
horses.  The  start  was  made  Sept. 
14,  1877.  He  was  accompanied  from 
Paris  by  Geo.  W.  Sirrine  and  family, 
Warren  L.  Sirrine  and  wife,  Theo- 
dore C.  Sirrine  and  family.  Parley  P. 
Sirrine  and  J.  Harvey  Blair.  The 
journey  was  made  without  accident 
to  Salt  Lake  City,  where  the  com- 
pany remained  for  about  two  weeks 
and  were  joined  by  John  Pomeroy 
and  wife,  William  Newell  and  wife, 
Chas.  Crismon  and  family.  Job  Henry 
Smith  and  wife,  William  Schwartz 
and  family,  and  Jesse  D.  Hobson.  At 
Panguitch  the  company  was  joined 
by  Chas.  I.  Robson  and  family,  after 
which  the  company  numbered  nine 
families  or  7  4  souls.  The  route 
taken  was  over  the  Buckskin  Moun- 
tains, crossing  the  Colorado  river  at 
Lee's  Ferry.  On  the  top  of  the  Mo- 
gollon  Mountains  on  Christmas  Eve 
the  company  was  'snowed  in,'  but  by 
dint  of  wise  direction  the  road  was 
broken  through  and  the  company 
camped  at  Beaver  Head  on  the  Verde 
River,  Dec.  27,  1877.  Here  they  re- 
mained to  get  a  much  needed  rest, 
while  Francis  M.  Pomeroy,  Chas.  I. 
Robson,  Geo.  W.  Sirrine  and  Chas. 
Crismon  made  a  trip  to  the  Salt 
River  Valley  to  select  a  location  for 


their  new  home.  Here  they  found  a 
number  of  canals  projected  and 
under  way,  and  some  farming.  The 
city  of  Phoenix  had  a  population  of 
about  400.  They  journeyed  up  the 
river  from  Phoenix  to  Hayden's  Ferry, 
where  a  water-power  grist  mill  and 
store  were  operated  by  Charles  T. 
Hayden,  who  afterwards  became  a 
benefactor  to  the  struggling  colon- 
ists. Seven  miles  farther  up  the 
river  they  visited  the  Indian  mission 
established  by  Daniel  W.  Jones  and 
Henry  C.  Rogers  and  others,  living 
in  the  United  Order.  Failing  to 
make  satisfactory  arrangements  to 
settle  under  the  ditch  which  was  be- 
ing built  by  this  colony,  and  riding 
over  the  higher  lands  called  'the 
Mesa,'  they  discovered  an  old  and 
ancient  canal — called  the  'Monte- 
zuma' canal — which  had  been  con- 
structed by  the  ancients  to  irrigate 
the  broad  level  lands  of  the  mesa; 
they  determined  to  utilize  this  canal 
and  locate  on  the  mesa.  They  sought 
out  a  surveyor  at  Phoenix,  but  he 
refused  to  go  with  them,  saying  that 
it  was  impracticable  to  utilize  the  old 
canal,  as  the  river  bottom  had  low- 
ered so  much  since  its  use  that  it 
would  cost  too  much  to  connect  it 
with  the  river  at  a  proper  grade.  But 
Bro.  Pomeroy  and  George  W.  Sirrine 
ran  the  line  with  a  'spirit  level  and 
a  straight  edge'  and  then  had  the 
surveyor  run  on  their  line,  and  ob- 
tained a  good  grade.  In  about  three 
weeks  the  main  company  from  Utah 
was  transported  to  the  valley  and  on 
the  14th  of  February,  1878,  work 
commenced  on  the  construction  of 
the  canal.  By  the  latter  part  of 
October,  1878,  the  canal  was  com- 
pleted to  the  townsite  of  Mesa,  the 
camp  was  broken  up  and  the  colon- 
ists moved  to  the  mesa,  establishing 
their  homes  on  lots  of  the  townsite 
and  taking  up  the  surrounding  land 
for  farming.  Bro.  Pomeroy  was 
elected  one  of  the  directors  of  the 
canal,  and  one  of  the  trustees  of  the 
townsite  of  Mesa.     He  was  also  made 


BIOGRAPHICAL  ENCYCLOPEDIA. 


491 


justice  of  the  peace  of  the  com- 
munity, and  became  the  'pacifier'  in 
the  district,  not  only  among  the 
white  population  but  also  among  the 
Indians  and  Spanish  people.  The  In- 
dians called  him  the  'Great  White 
Chief,'  and  very  often  their  disputes 
were  brought  to  him  for  adjudica- 
tion. It  was  not  an  uncommon  thing 
to  see  several  Indian  camps  around 
his  home,  and  the  Indians  in  con- 
sultation with  him.  This,  no  doubt, 
inspired  the  authorities  to  set  him 
apart  as  an  Indian  missionary,  which 
they  did  April  16,  1880.  A  year 
later  he  was  set  apart  as  president 
of  the  Indian  Mission,  which  posi- 
tion he  filled  until  his  death,  which 
occurred  Feb.  29,  1882.  He  was 
stricken  with  heart  failure,  super- 
induced by  a  knife  wound  received  in 
1878,  and  passed  peacefully  away  to 
his  well  earned  rest.  He  died  full 
in  the  faith  of  the  gospel,  leaving  a 
family  of  two  wives  and  nineteen 
children,  and  a  host  of  friends  to 
mourn  his  loss. 

PORTER,  Lyman  Wight,  a  Patri- 
arch in  the  Church  and  a  Utah  pio- 
neer of  1847,  was  born  May  5,  1833, 
in  Jackson  county,  Missouri,  the  son 
of  Sanford  Porter.  With  his  parents 
he  shared  in  the  persecutions  of  the 
Saints,  being  driven  from  Jackson 
county,  later  from  Clay  county  and 
still  later  from  Caldwell  county,  Mis- 
souri. He  located  with  his  parents 
at  Montrose,  Iowa,  where  he  was 
baptized  in  1841.  At  the  time  of  the 
exodus  of  the  Saints  from  Nauvoo,  in 
1846,  he  traveled  with  his  people  to 
the  Missouri  river  and  spent  the  win- 
ter of  1846-1847  at  Winter  Quarters. 
In  1847  he  continued  the  journey  to 
Great  Salt  Lake  Valley,  crossing  the 
plains  in  Chas.  C.  Rich's  company.  In 
1848  the  family  located  in  Mill  Creek, 
Salt  Lake  county,  but  moved  to  Salt 
Lake  City  soon  afterwards.  In  1851, 
with  his  father's  family,  Lyman 
moved  to  Centerville,  Davis  county, 
which  became  his  home  for  a  number 


of  years.  While  residing  there  he 
took  part  in  the  Indian  troubles, 
and  in  1857  accompanied  Orrin  P. 
Rockwell  to  the  mountains  to  watch 
the  movements  of  Johnston's  army.  In 
1856  he  was  called  to  go  with  others 
to  help  the  belated  handcart  com- 
panies into  the  Valley.  In  1862  he 
settled  in  Porterville,  Morgan  coun- 
ty. In  1867  he  was  appointed  to  pre- 
side over  the  Porterville  branch  and 
under  his  direction  the  East  Porter- 
ville townsite  was  laid  out.  He  made 
the  first  brick  and  built  the  first 
brick  house  in  Morgan  county.  In 
the  spring  of  1869  he  resigned  his 
position  as  president   of  the   branch 


to  go  to  Missouri  to  assist  in  bring- 
ing his  kinspeople  to  Utah.  Return- 
ing by  way  of  Chicago,  he  purchased 
wagons,  machinery  and  cattle.  In 
1880  he  was  chosen  as  a  member  of 
the  High  Council  of  the  Morgan  Stake 
and  later  ordained  a  Patriarch.  He 
also  acted  as  sheriff,  selectman,  road 
commissioner,  etc.,  in  Morgan  county. 
Leaving  a  numerous  posterity.  Patri- 
arch Porter  died  March  31,  1914,  in 
Porterville. 

POULSON,  John  Christian,  third 
Bishop  of  Holden  (Millard  Stake), 
Millard  county,  Utah,  was  born  Nov. 


492 


LATTER-DAY   SAINT 


3,  1869,  at  Holden,  Utah,  the  son  of 
John  C.  Poulson  and  Eliza  Thomp- 
son. He  was  baptized  in  1877  by 
Ansel  B.  Harmon,  ordained  a  Deacon 


and  afterwards  a  Seventy  and  acted 
for  a  number  of  years  as  a  president 
of  the  111th  quorum  of  Seventy.  He 
also  served  as  an  officer  in  the  Ward 
Y.  M.  M.  I.  A.  four  years.  In  1896- 
1897  he  filled  a  mission  to  the  South- 
ern States.  He  was  ordained  a  High 
Priest  by  George  F.  Richards  and 
ordained  a  Bishop  Feb.  11,  1917,  by 
Joseph  F.  Smith,  Jun.,  and  set  apart 
to  preside  over  the  Holden  Ward,  suc- 
ceeding Anthony  Stephenson.  Besides 
his  ecclesiastical  offices  Bishop  Poul- 
son has  been  a  diligent  worker  in 
secular  affairs.  He  acted  as  treas- 
urer of  the  Holden  Creamery  Co. 
for  four  years;  was  secretary  and 
treasurer  of  the  Eight  Mile  Irrigation 
Co.,  and  secretary  of  the  Holden  Irri- 
gation Co.  In  1887  (March  25th)  he 
married  Edna  E.  Hawley  (daughter 
of  William  T.  Hawley  and  Vilate 
Snow),  who  was  born  May  25,  1878, 
in  Provo,  Utah.  Seven  children  are 
the  issue  of  the  marriage,  namely, 
Edna  Maurine,  Merle,  John  Stanley, 
Alton  Melrose,  Winford  Pierce,  Spen- 
cer Earl  and  Maynard  Phyl. 


PYE,  Caleb  Enoch,  a  faithful  Elder 
in  the  Church,  was  born  Dec.  13, 
1856,  in  Norwich,  Norfolkshire,  Eng- 
land, the  son  of  Samuel  Francis  Pye 
and  Ann  Blythe.  His  father  being  a 
non-commissioned  officer  in  the  Brit- 
ish army,  stationed  in  Ireland,  he 
received  his  education  in  the  regi- 
mental schools.  When  about  twelve 
years  of  age,  he  attracted  the  notice 
of  the  wife  of  the  general  and  en- 
tered her  service  as  a  page,  later  go- 
ing to  London  as  a  member  of  the 
general's  staff.  While  there  he  at- 
tached himself  to  the  United  Breth- 
ren and  became  a  Bible  reader  in  that 
denomination,  and  later  entered  into 
business,  becoming  manager  of  an 
agency  for  the  sale  of  Indian  rubber 
garments.  He  was  always  of  a 
strongly  religious  temperament  and 
had  read  the  Bible  through  three 
times  before  he  made  the  acquaint- 
ance of  the  Latter-day  Saints,  at 
which  time  he  much  enjoyed  investi- 
gating the  principles  of  the  gospel 
from  a  scriptural  standpoint,  and, 
soon  becoming  a  convert,  he  was  bap- 


tized in  London  Dec.  13,  1882,  by 
Charles  Henry  Rhees.  He  was  or- 
dained a  Teacher  May  6,  1883,  by 
Ephraim  H.  Nye,  and  an  Elder  Sept. 


BIOGRAPHICAL  ENCYCLOPEDIA. 


493 


2,  1883,  by  Louis  P.  Lund.  In  1884 
(Feb.  24th)  he  was  set  apart  as  sec- 
ond counselor  to  Thomas  Cornell, 
president  of  the  North  London  branch 
of  the  Church,  and  also  chosen  as 
secretary  of  the  North  London  branch. 
Having  moved  to  the  west  end  of 
London,  he  was  set  apart  as  first 
counselor  to  Geo.  Cross,  president  of 
the  Lambeth  branch,  April  26,  1885, 
and  on  Nov.  22,  1885,  he  was  set 
apart  by  Charles  W.  Penrose  as  clerk 
of  the  London  conference.  In  188  7 
(May  1st)  he  was  set  apart  as  presi- 
dent of  the  West  London  branch  by 
Henry  Ballard.  In  1896  he  and  his 
family  emigrated  to  Utah,  where  Bro. 
Pye  found  employment  with  the  Z.  C. 
M.  I.,  Salt  Lake  City,  locating  soon 
afterwards  in  Center  Ward.  Here  he 
acted  as  Sunday  school  teacher  and 
Ward  missionary,  having  special  jur- 
isdiction over  the  North  Point  Sunday 
school,  to  which  place  he  and  his 
companion,  Bro.  Ben.  Hollingworth, 
never  failed  to  go,  weather  conditions 
making  no  difference  to  them  at  the 
call  of  duty.  Bro.  Pye  was  especially 
successful  as  a  Ward  teacher  and  was 
blessed  to  a  remarkable  degree  with 
the  gift  of  prophecy.  By  his  exhorta- 
tion a  number  of  backsliders  and 
luke-warm  members  were  restored  to 
full  fellowship  and  active  member- 
ship in  the  Church.  In  1903  (Aug. 
9th)  he  was  appointed  second  coun- 
selor to  the  president  of  the  13th 
quorum  of  Elders  in  the  Salt  Lake 
Stake,  having  previously  acted  as 
theological  teacher  in  that  quorum, 
and  was  ordained  a  High  Priest  April 
28,  1912.  In  1877  (Dec.  17th)  Bro. 
Pye  married  Mary  Ann  Morton,  the 
daughter  of  William  Morton  and  Jane 
Elizabeth  Hedgewood,  who  was  born 
May  3,  1854,  at  Marylebone,  London. 
She  bore  her  husband  six  children, 
namely,  Lily,  Bert  C,  Daisy  Marian, 
Annie  Violet,  Elsie  Evelyn  and  Dor- 
othy Ivy,  and  died  in  Salt  Lake  City 
Oct.  28,  1906.  In  1907  (June  20th), 
Bro.  Pye  married  Mary  F.  Kelly,  a 
widow    (daughter    of    Robert    Dolby 


Francis  and  Maria  Banks),  who  was 
born  Sept.  11,  1867,  in  Allahabad, 
India,  and  who  bore  him  one  son, 
John  Kelly  Pye.  Bro.  Pye  died  in 
Salt  Lake  City,  May  15,  1915,  strong 
in  the  faith  of  the  gospel  and  confi- 
dent that  he  would  in  the  future  re- 
ceive the  blessings  pronounced  upon 
him  by  the  servants  of  the  Lord. 

RAMPTON,  Henry,  a  prominent 
Elder  in  the  East  Bountiful  Ward 
(Davis  Stake),  Davis  county,  Utah, 
was  born  Sept.  8,  1829,  at  Oldresford, 
Hampshire,  England,  the  son  of  Wm. 
Rampton  and  Elizabeth  Norgate.    He 


was  baptized  by  Wm.  Budge  Feb.  6, 
1853;  learned  the  trade  of  a  black- 
smith and  went  into  business  for  him- 
self in  England.  In  1850  (March 
9th)  he  married  Catherine  Harfield. 
He  was  ordained  a  Priest  July  31, 
1853,  by  Wm.  Bramwell.  He  emi- 
grated to  America  in  1854,  crossing 
the  Atlantic  in  the  ship  "John  M. 
Wood,"  which  sailed  from  Liverpool, 
England,  March  12,  1854,  and  arrived 
at  New  Orleans  May  2,  1854.  Pro- 
ceeding up  the  Missouri  river  he  ar- 
rived at  St.  Louis,  Mo.,  where  his 
wife  died,  Aug.  2,  18  54.  He  married 
Frances  Dinwoody  Dec.  25,  18  54.  In 
June,  1855,  he  was  ordained  an  Elder 
by    Chas.    O.    Card    and    crossed    the 


494 


LATTER-DAY  SAINT 


plains  that  year  in  John  Banks'  com- 
pany, which  arrived  in  Salt  Lake 
City  Oct.  2,  1856.  He  settled  at 
Bountiful,  where  he  established  him- 
self as  a  blacksmith.  During  the 
move  in  1858  he  settled  temporarily 
on  the  Provo  bottoms.  In  1862 
(March  29th)  he  married  Eliza  Strat- 
ford, and  in  1868  (Nov.  1st)  he  mar- 
ried Ada  Alice  McDuff.  In  1879-1882 
he  filled  a  mission  to  Great  Britain. 
Some  time  after  his  return  he  was 
ordained  a  High  Priest  by  Joseph  F. 
Smith  and  chosen  as  an  alternate 
member  of  the  High  Council.  Shortly 
afterwards  he  was  called  to  act  as 
second  counselor  to  Bishop  Chester 
Call.  After  laboring  in  this  position 
four  years  he  was,  on  July  3,  1896, 
set  apart  as  first  counselor  to  David 
Stoker  of  the  East  Bountiful  Ward. 
Having  yielded  obedience  to  the  law 
of  plural  marriage  he  was  imprisoned 
in  the  Utah  peniteniary  90  days  in 
1889  and  fined  $100.  Bro.  Rampton 
died  as  a  faithful  Latter-day  Saint 
Nov.  24,  1903,  at  East  Bountiful, 
Utah. 

RANSOM,  James  Austin,  first  Bish- 
op of  the  Wilson  Ward  (Bannock 
Stake),  Bannock  county,  Idaho,  was 
born  May  6,  1882,  at  Trenton,  Cache 
county,  Utah,  the  son  of  James  Rolley 
Ransom  and  Agnes  E.  Austin.  He 
was  baptized  in  1890  by  Jens  Larsen; 
ordained  a  Deacon,  Teacher,  Priest, 
Elder  and  Seventy  successively;  set- 
tled in  Cleveland,  Idaho,  in  1887, 
where  he  engaged  in  farming;  filled 
a  mission  to  the  Southern  States  in 
1905-1908,  laboring  principally  in 
Florida  and  Georgia,  and  filled  a 
short  mission  to  the  Northwestern 
States  in  1914-1915,  laboring  in  the 
State  of  Washington.  At  home  he 
presided  over  the  Ward  Y.  M.  M.  I.  A. 
three  years,  was  home  missionary  in 
the  Stake  for  eight  years  and  also 
Sunday  school  worker.  He  acted  as 
president  of  the  108th  quorum  of 
Seventy  eight  years.  Bro.  Ransom 
was    ordained    a    High    Priest    and 


Bishop   May   21,    1916,   by   Heber   J. 
Grant,  and  set  apart  to  preside  over 


the   Wilson    Ward,   which   was  more 
fully  organized  June  16,  1916. 

RASMUSSEN,  Niels  Peter,  Bishop 
of  Springdale  Ward  (Burley  Stake), 
Cassia  county,  Idaho,  was  born  March 
1,  1864,  at  Rodvig,  Sjaelland,  Den- 
mark, the  son  of  Ole  Rasmussen  and 
Inger  Olsen.  Becoming  a  convert  to 
"Mormonism,"  he  was  baptized  May 
9,  1889,  by  Jens  P.  Christiansen.  In 
1885  (Sept.  6th)  he  married  Karen 
Knudsen  at  Copenhagen.  He  emi- 
grated to  Utah  in  June,  1891,  leaving 
his  wife  and  two  children  in  Den- 
mark. Obtaining  employment  with 
farmers  in  Huntsville,  Weber  county, 
Utah,  he  soon  earned  money  for  the 
emigration  of  his  family,  who  joined 
him  in  Huntsville  in  November,  1891. 
After  residing  in  Huntsville  until 
July,  1903,  he  moved  to  Lynne  Ward 
(Ogden),  Utah,  where  he  resided  un- 
til May,  1905,  when  he  located  with 
his  family  in  that  part  of  Snake  River 
Valley  which  is  now  included  In  the 
Springdale  Ward.  Through  a  severe 
attack  of  sickness  in  1909  he  was 
subjected  to  treatment  at  the  L.  D.  S. 
hospital  in  the  autumn  of  that  year. 
Bro.     Rasmussen     was     ordained     a 


BIOGRAPHICAL  ENCYCLOPEDIA. 


495 


Teacher  June  30,  1889,  by  J.  C.  A. 
Weibye;  ordained  an  Elder  August  4, 
1889,  by  Christian  D.  Fjeldsted;  or- 
dained a  Seventy  Feb.  28,  1905,  by 
J.  Golden  Kimball;  ordained  a  High 
Priest  Oct.  24,  1915,  by  John  L. 
Smith,  and  set  apart  as  first  coun- 
selor to  Bishop  C.  C.  Livingston  of 
the  Springdale  Ward,  and  ordained 
a  Bishop  April  27,  1919,  by  Stephen 
L.  Richards  and  set  apart  to  preside 
over  the  Springdale  Ward  of  the 
newly  organized  Burley  Stake.  Bish- 
op Rasmussen's  marriage  has  been 
blessed  with  fourteen  children,  name- 
ly: Carl  A.,  Thora  E.,  Torvald  W., 
Anna  O.,  Niels  P.,  Inger  V.,  August 
E.,  Wilhelm  H.,  Knud  J.,  Frank  F., 
Laura  F.,  Harold  O.,  Dyveke  C.  and 
Herman  H. 

RASUMUSSEN,  Siiren.  (Continua- 
tion from  Vol.  1,  page  574.)  Soon 
after  Elder  Rasmussen's  return  from 
Europe  he  was  appointed  superin- 
tendent of  the  Draper  Ward  Sunday 
school;   he  was  also  chosen  as  Stake 


superintendent  of  Y.  M.  M.  I.  A.  and 
as  one  of  the  presidents  of  the  73rd 
quorum  of  Seventy.  In  the  meantime 
he  continued  his  business  as  a  mer- 
chant. In  1906  he  was  called  on  an- 
other mission  to  Scandinavia,  during 


which  time  he  labored  about  sixteen 
months  as  president  of  the  Chria- 
tiania  conference,  Norway,  and  after- 
wards succeeded  Elder  James  M. 
Christensen  as  president  of  the  Scan- 
linavian  Mission,  which  position  he 
held  about  one  and  a  half  years.  He 
returned  home  in  February,  1909, 
and  a  few  months  later  he  was  called 
to  act  as  Bishop  of  the  Draper  Ward, 
being  ordained  to  that  position  Jan. 
1,  1910,  by  Apostle  Francis  M.  Ly- 
man. He  labored  in  that  position  un- 
til August,  1914,  when  he  was  called 
to  act  as  first  counselor  to  President 
William  D.  Kuhre  of  the  Jordan 
Stake  of  Zion.  When  President 
Kuhre  was  released  on  account  of  ill 
health,  in  May,  1919,  Elder  Rasmus- 
sen  was  chosen  and  set  apart  as 
president  of  the  Jordan  Stake,  which 
position  he  still  holds.  President 
Rasmussen  is  a  prominent  figure 
among  the  Scandinavian  Saints,  al- 
ways taking  an  active  part  in  their 
gatherings.  His  whole  soul  is  bent 
on  promoting  the  interests  of  the 
great  Latter-day  work,  to  which 
cause  he  has  devoted  the  best  part  of 
his  life. 

REESE,  Howard,  Bishop  of  the 
Benson  Ward  (Cache  Stake),  Cache 
county,  Utah,  was  born  Dec.  23, 
1870,  at  Brigham  City,  Utah,  the  son 
of  John  D.  Reese  and  Cecelia  Howe. 
With  his  parents  he  went  to  Malad 
City,  Idaho,  in  1876,  where  he  re- 
ceived his  education  and  was  bap- 
tized when  eight  years  of  age;  later 
he  was  ordained  a  Deacon.  He 
worked  on  the  railroad  at  Pocatello. 
Later  he  attended  the  B.  Y.  College 
at  Logan  and  took  an  active  interest 
in  the  auxiliary  organizations  of  the 
Church.  In  1894  (July  17th)  he 
was  ordained  an  Elder  at  Logan  by 
George  M.  Cole,  and  the  following 
day  married  Martha  Ann  Toombs 
(daughter  of  William  Toombs  and 
Martha  Arban,  of  Logan).  The  young 
couple  made  their  home  in  Benson, 
Cache  county,  Utah,  where  they  have 


496 


LATTER-DAY  SAINT 


resided  ever  since.  Here  Bro.  Reese 
presided  over  the  Ward  Y.  M.  M.  I.  A. 
for  twelve  years.  He  was  ordained  a 
Seventy  May  1,  1904,  by  Francis  C. 
Lee;  became  a  member  of  the  132nd 
quorum  of  Seventy,  and  later  one  of 
the  presidency  of  that  quorum.  At 
a  special  Ward  conference,  held  Nov. 
19,  1911,  he  was  sustained  as  Bishop 
of  the  Benson  Ward,  being  ordained 
a  High  Priest  and  Bishop  and  set 
apart  to  that  position  by  President 
Joseph  F.  Smith  three  months  later 
(Feb.  4,  1912).  This  position  Bro. 
Reese  still  holds.  His  wife,  Martha 
Ann  Toombs,  has  borne  him  five 
children,  namely,  William  Howard, 
John  Dale,  Martha  La  Von,  Athen 
Lowell  and  Darwin  Howe.  Bishop 
Reese  is  a  farmer  by  avocation. 

REYNOLDS,  Francis  Marion,  Bish- 
op of  Driggs  Ward  (Teton  Stake), 
Teton  county,  Idaho,  was  born  July 
4,  1865,  at  Mount  Pleasant,  Sanpete 
county,  Utah,  the  son  of  Levi  B.  Rey- 
nolds and  Hannah  Johnson.  He  was 
baptized  when  eight  years  of  age  and 
ordained  a  Deacon,  Teacher  and 
Elder  successively.  In  1886  he  moved 
to  Emery  county,  located  in  Marys- 
ville,  Idaho,  1912,  and  settled  in  the 
Teton  Valley  in  1915.  While  residing 
in  Emery  county  he  acted  as  assist- 
ant Sunday  school  superintendent  of 
the  Stake  and  as  president  of  the 
Castle  Dale  Ward  Y.  M.  M.  I.  A.  He 
also  acted  as  a  High  Councilor  in  the 
Emery  Stake  for  nineteen  years,  and 
later  held  the  same  position  in  the 
Fremont  Stake  for  two  years.  In 
1915  he  was  set  apart  by  Heber  J. 
Grant  to  preside  over  the  Driggs 
Ward,  which  position  he  still  holds. 
In  1886  (July  24th)  he  married  Dian- 
tha  Anderson  (daughter  of  Soren 
Anderson  and  Hannah  Nielsen),  who 
was  born  Jan.  1,  1866,  at  Ephraim. 
Sanpete  county,  Utah.  She  bore  her 
husband  eight  children,  namely: 
Francis  M.,  Rose  H.,  Lillian,  Elma 
L.,   Prlel   E.,   Alma   C,   Guy   R.   and 


Merrll.     Bishop  Reynolds  is  a  farmer 
and  stock-raiser. 

RHEES,  Reuben  Thomas,  third 
Bishop  of  Pleasant  View  Ward  (We- 
ber Stake,  Weber  county,  Utah,  was 
born  Nov.  18,  1867,  in  Ogden,  Utah, 
the  son  of  Charles  H.  Rhees  and  Eliza 
Parratt.  He  was  baptized  Nov.  19, 
1876,  by  his  father;  ordained  a  Priest 
June  5,  1884,  by  David  John;  or- 
dained an  Elder  April  7,  1887,  by 
Ezra  H.  G.  Williams;  ordained  a 
Seventy  Dec.  31,  1893,  by  George 
Reynolds;  ordained  a  High  Priest 
Feb.  24,  1901,  by  Apostle  George 
Teasdale,  and  ordained  a  Bishop 
April  27,  1913,  by  Francis  M.  Lyman. 
He  acted  as  assistant  secretary  in  the 
Ward  Primary  Association,  secretary 
of  the  Sunday  school,  first  counselor 
in  the  Y.  M.  M.  I.  A.  and  as  a  presi- 
dent of  the  38th  quorum  of  Seventy 
(from  1900  to  IdOl).  In  1896-1898 
he  filled  a  mission  to  the  Eastern 
States,  laboring  principally  in  Penn- 
sylvania, New  York  and  New  Jersey. 
He  also  filled  a  Y.  M.  M.  I.  A.  mission 
in  Wasatch  county,  Utah,  in  the  win- 
ter of  1899-1900;  acted  as  second 
counselor  to  Bishop  Hickenlooper 
from  Feb.  24,  1901,  to  July  26,  1908, 
and  served  as  a  High  Councilor  in  the 
Ogden  Stake  from  July  26,  1908,  to 
April  27,  1913.  On  the  latter  date 
he  was  chosen  as  Bishop  of  the  Pleas- 
ant View  Ward,  which  position  he 
still  holds.  He  also  acted  as  school 
trustee  for  four  years  and  as  justice 
of  the  peace  twelve  years.  His  prin- 
cipal avocations  are  those  of  a  farmer 
and  bee-keeper.  For  many  years  he 
was  the  largest  bee-keeper  in  the 
State  of  Utah,  having  over  3,000 
colonies.  In  1894  (Feb.  8th)  Bishop 
Rhees  married  Mary  Rebecca  Tucker 
(daughter  of  George  Tucker  and  Em- 
ma Hurst),  who  was  born  May  18, 
1873,  in  Fairview,  Sanpete  county, 
Utah.  She  bore  her  huscband  ten 
children,  namely,  Lucille  E.,  Mary  E., 
Helen  E.,  Flora  G.,  Reuben  G.,  Earl  J., 
Pearl,  Raymond  and  Delsa. 


BIOGRAPHICAL  ENCYCLOPEDIA. 


497 


RICH,  Mary  Ann,  wife  of  Apostle 
Charles  C.  Rich,  was  born  Aug.  6, 
1829,  near  Peoria,  Tazewell  county 
Illinois,  the  daughter  of  Morris 
Phelps  and  Laura  Clark.  Her  par- 
ents became  converts  to  "Mormon- 
ism"  in  1831  and  moved  to  Jackson 
county,  Missouri,  where  they  secured 
an  inheritance.  They  were  expelled, 
with  the  rest  of  the  Saints,  from 
Jackson  county  in  183  3  and  were  liv- 
ing in  Clay  county,  Missouri,  in  1834 
when  Zion's  Camp  arrived.  On  that 
occasion  the  Prophet  Joseph  preached 
in  her  father's  house.  The  Prophet 
placed  the  little  girl  on  his  knee  and 
blessed    her,    an    incident    which    she 


cherished  in  her  memory.  In  18  3  6 
the  family  moved  to  Caldwell  county, 
Missouri,  where  they  became  subject 
to  the  continued  persecutions  of  the 
Saints  which  followed.  In  the  fall  of 
1838  her  father,  together  with  Parley 
P.  Pratt  and  others,  was  arrested  and 
thrown  into  prison  in  Richmond, 
Clay  county.  Every  two  weeks  the 
mother  visited  her  husband  in  prison, 
taking  him  provisions  as  the  prison- 
ers were  not  provided  with  food  fit 
to  eat.  In  the  spring  of  183  9  the 
Phelps  family  was  forced  to  leave 
their  home  in  Missouri  with  the  rest 


of  the  Saints  who  fled  to  Quincy, 
Illinois.  On  this  journey  Mary's  mo- 
ther drove  her  own  team.  After  a 
short  sojourn  in  Quincy,  Sister  Phelps 
returned  to  Missouri  for  the  purpose 
of  assisting  in  the  liberation  of  her 
husband,  who,  in  the  meantime,  had 
been  moved  from  Richmond  to 
Columbia.  Sister  Phelps  took  a  most 
heroic  part  in  bringing  about  the  es- 
cape of  her  husband,  and  the  other 
prisoners,  which  event  took  place 
from  the  Columbia  jail  on  Indepen- 
dence day,  1839.  The  story  of  this 
liberation  forms  one  of  the  most  in- 
teresting chapters  of  Church  history. 
When  Mary  was  about  twelve  years 
old  her  noble  mother  died,  leaving 
five  children,  the  youngest  a  babe 
eighteen  months  old.  Later,  when 
her  father  married  again,  Mary  went 
to  live  with  some  of  her  mother's 
relatives  in  Iowa  where  she  worked 
at  wool  spinning.  She  was  fifteen 
years  old  when  the  Prophet  Joseph 
was  martyred  and  she  saw  and  heard 
him  deliver  his  last  address  to  the 
Nauvoo  Legion.  In  her  diary  Sister 
Rich  says,  "When  the  Prophet  Joseph 
found  he  had  to  go  to  Carthage  he 
wanted  a  man  by  the  name  of  Rose- 
crantz,  who  was  well  acquainted  with 
the  governor,  to  go  with  him.  He 
sent  a  messenger  asking  me  If  I 
would  go  and  stay  with  Mrs.  Rose- 
crantz,  while  her  husband  accom- 
panied the  Prophet  to  Carthage.  On 
their  way  they  called  at  the  gate, 
with  their  company,  and  the  Prophet 
Joseph  asked  me  if  I  would  bring 
them  out  a  drink  of  water.  This  I 
cheerfully  did  and  the  Prophet  said 
to  me,  'The  Lord  bless  you,  you  shall 
have  a  disciple's  reward.'  This  was 
the  last  time  I  ever  saw  him  alive." 
Mary  was  present  at  the  time  the  re- 
mains of  the  martyred  Prophet  and 
his  brother  were  brought  to  Nauvoo 
and  with  her  father  went  to  the  Man- 
sion House  and  viewed  the  remains. 
On  January  6,  1845,  after  consider- 
able deliberation,  Sister  Mary  em- 
braced the  principal  of  celestial  mar- 


Vol.  Ill,  No.  32. 


February  21,  1920 


498 


LATTER-DAY   SAINT 


riage,  being  sealed  to  Charles  C.  Rich 
as  his  third  wife,  with  the  full  con- 
sent of  his  first  wife,  and   lived    at 
Nauvoo,  in  the  hope  of  soon  moving 
to  the  Rocky  Mountains,  where  they 
could  enjoy  the  rights  and  liberties 
of  their  religion.     During  the  winter 
of  1845-4  6,  the  Temple  having  been 
completed,    Sister    Rich,    in   common 
with  her  husband  and  his  family,  re- 
ceived her  endowments  in  the  Nau- 
yoo   Temple.      So   anxious    were   the 
people  for  this  privilege  that  Temple 
ordinances  were  given  night  and  day, 
except  on  Saturday  and  Sunday.     On 
Feb.  12,  1846,  Sister  Rich  left  Nau- 
voo for  the  journey  across  the  plains. 
She  stayed  a  week  with    her    uncle 
Ezra  T.  Clark,  who  lived  seven  miles 
from  Montrose,  Iowa,  after  which  she 
was  joined  by  her  husband  and  his 
family   and   then    started     on     their 
journey  westward.  Arriving  at  Mount 
Plsgah,    Iowa,    the    company    halted 
for  one  month,  when  it  was  decided 
to  leave  a  portion  of  the  main  com- 
pany at  this  place,  and  Bro.  Rich  was 
appointed  to  act  as  a  counselor    to 
Bro.  Wm.  Huntington  who  had  been 
appointed  to  preside  over  the  Saints 
at  Mount  Pisgah.      Soon   afterwards 
Bro.   Huntington  died,   and    the    re- 
sponsibility of  caring  for  the  settle- 
ment  fell   upon    Bro.     Rich.      Sister 
Mary  spent  the  winter  of  1846-1847 
at    Mount    Pisgah,    enduring    many 
hardships,  the  Saints  suffering  very 
much    from    chills    and    fever    which 
caused    the   death   of   about   seventy 
persons  during  that  winter.  In  March, 
1847,   most  of  the   Saints  at  Mount 
Pisgah    moved    to    Winter    Quarters, 
where  the  main  body  of  the  Church 
was    located,    and    in    the    following 
June    (1847)     Bro.     Rich     and     his 
family  left  the  Missouri  river  to  con- 
tinue  their   journey   westward,    Bro. 
Rich  being  in  charge  of  the  company. 
It  was  a  rule  among  the  Saints,  that 
if  any  one  hired  a  man  or  boy  to  help 
them   cross   the   plains,   they   should 
keep  this  hired  help  until  after  har- 
vest the  following  year,  so  that  no 


one  would  be    homeless    or    hungry 
after  reaching  the  Valley.     In  order 
to  save  this  expense  Sister  Mary  and 
another  of  her  husband's  wives  (Em- 
meline)    volunteered  to  drive  an  ox 
team  each  on  the  journey.     This  was 
hard  work,  but  instead  of  murmuring 
they  frequently  made  the  air  resound 
with  their  songs  of  joy,  for  they  were 
going  to  the  Rocky  Mountains  where 
they  would  be  free  to  live  their  re- 
ligion and  be  acknowledged  as  wives. 
Sister  Rich  relates  that  she  had  never 
enjoyed  good  health  until  she  started 
on  that  journey;  she  felt  so  well  dur- 
ing this  hard  trip  that  it  seemed  a 
pleasure  for  her  to  do  anything  in  her 
power  to  help  her  husband  and  the 
rest   of  the    company.      When    they 
reached   the   South   Pass,   they   were 
met  by  President  Brigham  Young  and 
a  company  of  pioneers  returning  to 
Winter  Quarters.      Prest.   Young  re- 
ported that  a  Stake  of  Zion  had  been 
established   in   the   Great   Salt   Lake 
Valley  and  informed  Bro.   Rich  that 
he    had    been    appointed    first    coun- 
selor to  John  Smith,  the  president  of 
the   Stake.      President   Young   spent 
one   day  with  the  company   and   his 
words  so  encouraged  the  weary  tra- 
velers that  they  continued  their  jour- 
ney with  increased  joy,  although  the 
roads   were   terrible,    the   mountains 
steep,     the     teams     weak     and     the 
weather  cold.     The  company  arrived 
in   the   Valley   Oct.    1,    1847.      Sister 
Mary  relates  that  when  they  arrived 
at  the  camp  of  the  Saints  in  Great 
Salt  Lake  City  her  skirts  only  reached 
to  her  knees,   for  in  driving  her  ox 
team  over  difficult  parts  of  the  road 
her  clothing  had  caught  in  the  brush 
many  times,  and  parts  of  it  had  been 
torn  away.     Bro.  Rich  and  his  family 
immediately  upon  their  arrival  tried 
to    make    a    comfortable     place     for 
Nancy   Rich    (mother   of   Charles   C. 
Rich),    who    had    been    seriously    ill 
on  the  journey  and  who  died  Oct.  5, 
1847,  she  being  the  first  Latter-day 
Saint  to  die  in  Salt  Lake  City.     Sister 
Mary    writes,    "During     that     winter 


BIOGRAPHICAL  ENCYCLOPEDIA. 


499 


(1847-1848)  we  had  a  hard  time,  as 
provisions  were  scarce,  and  there  was 
a  big  family  of  us,  my  husband  hav- 
ing six  wives  and  six  children,  but 
we  were  all  willing  to  help  him.  *  *  ♦ 
We  had  to  live  on  rations,  or  we 
would  not  have  had  bread  stuff  to 
last  us  till  harvest;  but  the  winter 
was  mild  and  in  the  spring  we  dug 
segoes  and  cooked  greens,  which 
helped  us  in  our  privations.  In  1851 
Bro.  Rich  was  called  to  assist  in  mak- 
ing a  settlement  for  the  Saints  in 
southern  California,  where  converts 
from  the  Southern  States  and  the 
Sandwich  Islands  might  make  their 
homes.  Sister  Mary  accompanied 
him  on  this  mission  and  thus  became 
one  of  the  first  settlers  of  San  Ber- 
nardino, where  she  resided  about  six 
years  and  then  returned  to  Salt  Lake 
City  in  June,  1857.  After  that  she 
lived  at  Centerville,  Davis  county, 
and  the  following  spring  (1858), 
with  the  rest  of  the  Saints  from  Salt 
Lake  City  and  the  northern  settle- 
ments in  Utah,  participated  in  the 
move  south  and  located  in  Prove.  In 
due  time,  however,  on  the  return  of 
the  Saints  to  their  homes,  she  moved 
back  to  Centerville.  In  18  64  Bro. 
Rich  having  been  called  to  direct  the 
making  of  settlements  for  the  Saints 
in  Bear  Lake  Valley,  Idaho,  Sister 
Rich  moved  with  him  to  Paris,  where 
she  made  her  home.  Here  she  ex- 
perienced many  hardships  and  found 
the  cold  very  trying,  especially  after 
having  lived  in  the  mild  climate  of 
California.  In  fact  the  winter  of 
1864-1865  was  so  severe  that  some 
of  the  settlers  held  a  meeting  where- 
in they  requested  Bro.  Rich  to  re- 
lease them  from  their  obligations  and 
allow  them  to  establish  themselves  in 
a  warmer  climate.  Bro.  Rich,  how- 
ever, told  them  he  had  no  right  to 
hold  them  there,  as  for  himself  and 
his  family,  they  would  remain,  since 
he  had  been  sent  to  colonize  the 
country  and  proposed  to  do  so.  Bro. 
Rich's  motto  was  always  "Church 
work  before  private  work."     So  Sis- 


ter Rich  lived  and  raised  her  family 
in  Bear  Lake  Valley,  enduring  all  the 
hardships  incident  to  the  early  settle- 
ment of  the  country.  Her  husband 
died  Nov.  17,  1883,  but  she  was  left 
in  comfortable  circumstances  and 
used  her  efforts  and  means  to  edu- 
cate her  children.  Her  declining 
years  were  peaceful  and  happy.  She 
was  the  mother  of  ten  children,  four 
of  whom  died  in  childhood.  The 
names  of  the  others  are  as  follows: 
Mary  Ann,  "William  L.,  Minerva, 
Amasa,  Ezra  and  Edward.  Sister 
Rich  died  April  17,  1912,  at  the  age 
of  82  and  was  buried  in  the  family 
burial  place  at  Paris.  She  lived  a 
life  of  usefulness  and  was  honored 
by  those  who  knew  her.  She  was 
familiarly  known  by  all  as  "Aunt 
Mary." 

RICHARDS,  Morgan,  Jun.,  Bishop 
of  Parowan  (Parowan  Stake),  Iron 
county,  Utah,  was  born  Sept.  22,  1845, 
in  Merthyr  Tydfil,  Wales,  the  son  of 


Morgan  Richards  and  Harriet  Evans. 
His  parents  having  embraced  the  gos- 
pel as  restored  through  the  Prophet 
Joseph  Smith,  Morgan  was  baptized 
when  about  eight  years  of  age  in  his 
native  land.  With  his  parents  and 
younger  brother,  Thomas,  he  came  to 


500 


LATTER-DAY   SAINT 


Utah  in  1854,  crossing  the  Atlantic 
in  the  ship  "Golconda"  and  the  plains 
in  Dr.  Darwin  Richardson's  company, 
arriving  in  Salt  Lake  City  Sept.  30th 
of  that  year.  After  the  close  of  the 
general  conference  of  the  Church 
that  fall  the  family  proceeded  to 
Parowan,  Iron  county,  Utah,  in  com- 
pany with  Bishop  Tarlton  Lewis  of 
that  place,  where  they  arrived  on  the 
26th  of  October  following.  Parowan 
has  been  their  place  of  residence  ever 
since.  Morgan  assisted  in  farming, 
canyon  work  and  home  building  for 
the  family  and  endured  the  hardships 
and  trials  of  those  early  days.  He 
took  part  in  the  Indian  troubles,  be- 
ing what  was  termed  a  minute-man, 
with  horse  and  saddle,  rifle  and  re- 
volver and  two  hundred  rounds  of 
ammunition  on  hand.  In  1866  he 
went  to  the  Missouri  river  as  a  night- 
herder  in  Captain  Samuel  D.  White's 
train  to  bring  emigrants  to  Utah.  In 
1870  (Oct.  3rd)  he  married  Margaret 
Adams  (daughter  of  William  Adams 
and  Mary  Ann  Leech),  who  was  born 
Nov.  18,  1853,  at  Parowan,  Utah. 
This  marriage  has  been  blessed  with 
ten  children,  as  follows:  Gomer  M., 
Margaret  A.,  Harriet,  Mary  I.,  Wil- 
liam A.,  Joseph  E.,  Charles  L.,  Co- 
lumbia E.,  Alma  W.  and  Catherine. 
Bro.  Morgan  was  ordained  a  Seventy 
in  the  69th  quorum,  Feb.  22,  1865, 
and  in  1880  he  was  ordained  a  High 
Priest  and  set  apart  as  first  counselor 
to  Bishop  William  C.  Mitchell  of  the 
Parowan  First  Ward.  About  three 
years  later  he  was  made  second  coun- 
selor to  President  Thomas  J.  Jones 
of  the  Parowan  Stake  of  Zion  and 
subsequently  was  promoted  to  be  first 
counselor  in  that  presidency.  When 
Uriah  T.  Jones  became  president  of 
the  Stake,  Morgan  Richards  was  re- 
tained as  first  counselor,  from  which 
position  he  was  honorably  released  in 
1897  on  account  of  a  prolonged  ab- 
sence at  Salt  Lake  City.  On  return- 
ing from  Salt  Lake  City  he  was 
called  to  preside  as  Bishop  of  the 
Parowan  Ward,  in  November,   1901, 


occupying  that  position  until  Septem- 
ber, 1909.  Of  the  civil  positions  that 
he  has  held  the  following  can  be 
named:  State  auditor,  from  1896  to 
1901;  member  of  the  lower  branch  of 
the  State  Legislature  for  1903;  chap- 
lain of  the  House  of  Representatives 
for  1911;  selectman,  clerk,  treasurer, 
superintendent  of  schools,  etc.,  in 
Iron  county.  He  was  also  a  member 
of  the  city  council  and  school  trustee 
of  Parowan.  Bro.  Morgan  taught 
school  ten  years  and  was  with  the 
Parowan  Co-op.  M.  &  M.  Co.  eighteen 
years,  being  salesman,  secretary, 
treasurer  and  superintendent  during 
those  years.  Industry,  absolute  hon- 
esty, conscientious  attention  to  duty, 
intense  devotion  to  his  religion,  deep 
patriotism  and  love  for  a  nation  most 
favored  of  God  and  a  genuine  love 
for  all  humanity  have  marked  his  life. 
He  took  part  in  the  Indian  troubles 
and  was  a  farmer  and  lumber  man 
in  his  early  life. 

RIGBY,  Martin  Clark,  Bishop  of 
the  Newton  Ward  (Benson  Stake), 
Cache  county,  Utah,  was  born  May 
23,  1868,  at  Clarkston,  Cache  county, 
Utah,  the  son  of  Wm.  F.  Rigby  and 
Mary  Clark.  He  moved  with  his  par- 
ents from  Clarkston  to  Newton  when 
an  infant,  was  baptized  by  Peter  Lar- 
sen  at  Newton  May  23,  18  76,  and  re- 
ceived a  common  school  education. 
He  was  ordained  a  Deacon  Feb.  13, 
1881,  by  William  H.  Griffin  and 
later  ordained  a  Teacher  and  still 
later  a  Priest;  ordained  an  Elder  Jan. 
11,  1891,  by  William  H.  Griffin,  and 
ordained  a  Seventy  Jan.  18,  1891, 
and  became  a  member  of  the  seventh 
quorum  of  Seventy.  In  1899-1901 
he  filled  a  mission  to  Great  Britain, 
laboring  principally  in  the  Newcastle 
and  Manchester  conferences.  Prior 
to  this  he  acted  as  a  counselor  in  the 
presidency  of  a  Deacons'  quorum  and 
as  an  officer  in  the  Ward  Y.  M.  M.  I. 
A.  at  Newton.  After  his  return  from 
his  mission  he  located  temporarily  at 
Rexburg,  in  the  Snake  River  Valley, 


BIOGRAPHICAL  ENCYCLOPEDIA. 


501 


Idaho,  where  he  acted  as  second  as- 
sistant in  the  Fremont  Stake  Sunday 
school  superintendency.  He  returned 
to  Newton  in  1903;   was  ordained  a 


High  Priest  by  Rudger  Clawson  Aug. 
5,  1901  and  set  apart  as  a  member 
of  the  Benson  Stake  High  Council; 
was  ordained  a  Bishop  May  17,  1903, 
by  Marriner  W.  Merrill  and  set  apart 
to  preside  over  the  Newton  Ward, 
which  position  he  still  holds.  In  18'dl 
(Jan.  15th)  he  married  Anna  Sophia 
Funk  (daughter  of  Bishop  Hans 
Funk  and  Anna  Sophia  Peterson), 
who  was  born  Nov.  8,  1871,  at  Rich- 
mond, Cache  county,  Utah,  and  died 
June  6,  1918,  at  Newton,  Cache  coun- 
ty. In  1919  (Oct.  2nd)  Bishop  Rigby 
married  Loretta  Merrill  (daughter  of 
Marriner  W.  Merrill  and  Elna  J. 
Johnson),  who  was  born  Nov.  11, 
1891,  in  Franklin,  Cache  county, 
Utah.  Bishop  Rigby  is  a  farmer  and 
grain  dealer  by  avocation. 

ROBINSON,  William  D.,  Bishop  of 
American  Fork,  Utah  county,  Utah, 
was  born  Aug.  19,  1836,  in  Chester 
county,  Pennsylvania.  Becoming  a 
convert  to  "Mormonism"  he  emigrat- 
ed to  Utah  at  an  early  day  and  be- 
came intimately  associated  with  the 
growth   of   American   Fork.      For    a 


number  of  years  he  acted  as  mayor 
of  American  Fork  City  and  from  the 
beginning  one  of  the  most  active  and 
enterprising  men  of  the  community, 
ever  standing  for  progress  and  ad- 
vancement. In  1889  he  was  chosea 
as  a  member  of  the  High  Council  in 
the  Utah  Stake,  and  in  1894  he  suc- 
ceeded George  Halliday  as  Bishop  of 
American  Fork,  which  position  he 
held  until  July  14,  1901,  when  the 
American  Fork  Ward  was  divided 
into  four  Wards.  He  died  in  Ameri- 
can Fork  in  September,  1901,  after 
suffering  with  an  acute  sickness 
about  three  years.  Bishop  Robinson 
was  a  pleasant,  affable  man,  with  a 
generous  heart  and  ever  devoted  to 
the  welfare  of  the  Saints  under  his 
jurisdiction.  He  left  a  large  family 
to  mourn  his  loss.  His  wife  was 
Altheria  Mousley  and  the  names  of 
his  children  are  as  follows:  William 
A.,  Margaret  A.,  George  D.,  Charles 
E.  and  Emmett  J. 

ROLAPP,  Henry  Hermann,  a  mem- 
ber of  the  general  Sunday  School 
Board  of  the  Church,  was  born  Marc^ 


22,  1860  in  Flensborg,  Schlesvig, 
Denmark,  the  son  of  Frederick  Chris- 
tian Rolapp  and  Anna  Thiesen.  He 
received  a  good  education  in  his  na- 


502 


LATTER-DAY  SAINT 


tive  district  and  later  studied  In  the 
University  of  Copenhagen  where  he 
became   a   convert   to   "Mormonlsm" 
and  was  baptized  Nov.  11,  1877.    He 
became  a  diligent  Church  worker  and 
was  ordained  successively  to  the  of- 
fice of  Deacon,  Priest  and  Elder,  the 
latter  ordination  taking  place  In  May, 
1878,   under  the  hands  of  Niels    C. 
Flygare.  For  a  short  time  he  labored 
as  a  translator    for    "Skandlnavlens 
Stjerne,"    a   periodical   published    by 
the  Latter-day  Saints  in  Copenhagen, 
Denmark,  in  the  interest  of  the  Scan- 
dinavian mission.     In  1878  he  went 
to  England,  where  he  labored  in  the 
business   department   of   the   Latter- 
day  Saint  headquarters  at  Liverpool 
until   1880,   when   he    emigrated    to 
Utah  and  located  in  Salt  Lake  City. 
Here  he  commenced  the  study  of  law 
and  was  admitted  to  the  bar  in  1881, 
after  which  he  practiced  law  in  Og- 
den,  Utah,  from   1884  to   1895.     He 
acted  as  assessor  from  1885-1887  and 
as     assistant     county     attorney     for 
Weber    county    in     1887-1891,     was 
cashier  of  the  Utah  Loan  and  Trust 
Co.   bank   in    1892-1895,   member   of 
the  State  Board  of  Corrections  1888- 
1895,  Supreme  Court  Jury  Commis- 
sioner 1888-1895,  and  was  appointed 
Justice  of  the  Supreme  Court  of  Utah 
Territory    in    November,     1895.      In 
18  96,  when  Utah  was  admitted  as  a 
State,   he  was  elected   judge   of    the 
Second   Judicial   District   and   served 
in   that   capacity   until    1905.      Since 
that  time  he  has  practiced  law  in  Og- 
den  and  elsewhere  and  has  been  as- 
sociated  with   many   business   enter- 
prises.    He  is  president  of  the  United 
States    Sugar    Association    and    Gen- 
eral Counsel  for  the  Great  Western 
Sugar  Company,  Denver.     During  the 
war  he  had  charge  of  the  government 
distribution  of  sugar  under  the  food 
administration  in  Chicago,  Illinois.  In 
1887    Bro.    Rolapp    was    ordained     a 
Seventy  and  became  a  member  of  the 
77th  quorum  of  Seventy.     He  was  or- 
dained  a   High   Priest  in     1898,     by 
Hans  Madsen,  labored    as    assistant 


Sunday  school  superintendent  in  the 
Ogden  Fifth  Ward,  served  as  a  mem- 
ber of  the  Weber  Stake  Sunday 
School  Board  from  1905  to  1910,  and 
was  chosen  as  a  member  of  the  Gen- 
eral Sunday  School  Board  in  1910, 
being  placed  In  charge  of  the  Par- 
ents' Class  Department.  In  1914  he 
was  chosen  as  a  member  of  the 
Church  auditing  committee,  and  in 
1918  he  wrote  and  published  an  in- 
teresting work  of  referense  entitled 
"Two  Thousand  Gospel  Quotations." 
In  1885  (Dec.  9th)  Elder  Rolapp 
married  Martha  Horrocks  (daughter 
of  Samuel  Horrocks  and  Catherine 
Buckingham),  who  was  born  June 
13,  1863,  in  Ogden,  Utah.  This  mar- 
riage has  been  blessed  with  five  chil- 
dren, namely,  Henry  Karl,  Franklin 
H.,  Martha  M.,  Catherine  M.  and 
Walter  H.  Elder  Rolapp  is  univer- 
sally known  as  a  successful  business 
man,  a  diligent  Church  worker  and 
an  efficient  civil  officer. 

ROMRELL,     George     Heber,     the 

third  Bishop  of  the  Labelle  Ward 
(Rigby  Stake),  Jefferson  county, 
Idaho,  was  born  June  21,  1863,  In 
Ogden,  Weber  county,  Utah,  the  son 
of  George  Romrell  and  Patience 
Swingewood.  He  was  baptized  Aug. 
7.  1873,  by  Daniel  F.  Thomas;  or- 
dained a  Teacher  soon  afterwards; 
ordained  an  Elder  Sept.  15,  1889,  by 
Winslow  F.  Walker;  ordained  a  High 
Priest  Jan.  6,  1894,  by  James  E. 
Steele  and  set  apart  as  second  coun- 
selor to  Bishop  Winslow  F.  Walker, 
and  ordained  a  Bishop  June  21,  1908, 
and  set  apart  to  preside  over  the 
Labelle  Ward,  which  position  he  held 
until  1915,  when  he  was  set  apart  as 
an  alternate  High  Councilor  in  the 
Rigby  Stake.  In  1909-1911  he  filled 
a  mission  to  California.  At  home 
Bro.  Romrell  has  taken  an  active 
part  in  Church  affairs  and  acted  as 
president  of  the  Ward  Y.  M.  M.  I.  A. 
and  as  superintendent  of  the  Ward 
Sunday  school.  He  became  a  resi- 
dent of  Labelle  in  August,  1884.     In 


BIOGRAPHICAL  ENCYCLOPEDIA. 


503 


1888  (Dec.  18th)  he  married  Louisa 
M.  Smithies  (daughter  of  Robert 
Smithies  and  Elizabeth  Scott),  who 
was  born  Aug.  23,  1869,  in  Mill 
Creek,  Salt  Lake  county,  Utah.  She 
was  active  in  the  different  auxiliary 
organizations  in  the  Labelle  Ward 
and  also  as  a  Stake  aid  in  the  Pri- 
mary Associations. 

ROSE,  Leon  Alley,  Bishop  of  Ply- 
mouth Ward  (Bear  River  Stake), 
Box  Elder  county,  Utah,  was  born 
Aug.  27,  1865,  at  Farmington,  Davis 
county,  Utah,  the  son  of  Alley  Ste- 
phen Rose  and  Elvira  Smith.  He 
was  baptized  Aug.  8,  18  75,  by  John 
W.  Hess;  married  Elvira  A.  Welling 


sistant  in  the  Plymouth  Ward  Sunday 
school  and  was  a  home  missionary  in 
Malad  Valley.  The  names  of  his 
eleven  children  are:  Annie,  Estella, 
Zina,  Adelia,  Phebe,  Ray,  Ralston, 
Ursel,  Stephen,  Ralph  and  Alta. 

SAMUELSON,  Charles,  one  of  the 

early  local  missionaries  in  Scandi- 
navia, was  born  Feb.  5,  1830,  at 
Somarod,  Jonkoping  lS,n,  Sweden,  the 
son  of  Samuel  Swenson  and  Annie 
Stina  Danielson.  He  was  baptized  in 
Denmark  May  18,  1857,  by  Christen 
L.  Hansen;  was  ordained  to  the 
Priesthood  and  labored  as  a  mission- 
ary in  Denmark  in  1857-1859.  In 
18  61  he  married  Sophia  Nielsen,  with 


March  14,  1889,  and  moved  to  Bea- 
ver Valley  the  same  year.  He  was 
ordained  a  Seventy  Feb.  24,  1887,  by 
Seymour  B.  Young,  and  ordained  a 
High  Priest  March  12,  1894,  by  Pres. 
Joseph  F.  Smith  and  chosen  as 
second  counselor  to  Bishop  Thomas 
Archibald  of  the  Plymouth  Ward, 
which  position  he  held  till  Feb.  18, 
1912,  when  he  was  called  to  the  posi- 
tion of  first  counselor.  This  posi- 
tion he  filled  till  July  31,  1913,  when 
he  was  called  to  act  as  Bishop  of  the 
Plymouth  Ward.  Prior  to  this,  for 
several   years,   he   acted  as   first   as- 


whom  he  emigrated  to  Utah  in  1862. 
He  located  in  Santaquin,  Utah  coun- 
ty, Utah.  In  1880-1882  he  filled  a 
mission  to  Scandinavia,  laboring  in 
his  native  land,  Sweden.  After  his 
return  home,  he  was  ordained  a  High 
Priest.  His  wife  died  March  17, 
1915.  She  bore  him  a  daughter  who 
was  born  in  1862  and  died  in  1868. 
Bro.  Samuelson  died  in  Santaquin  in 
June,  1919,  as  a  faithful  member  of 
the  Church. 

SATTERFIELD,  Ammon  Y.,  Bish- 
op of  Pocatello  Second  Ward   (Poca- 


504 


LATTER-DAY   SAINT 


tello  Stake),  Bannock  county,  Idaho, 
was  born  April  18,  1883,  in  Gold- 
ville,  Alabama,  the  son  of  Andrew 
Jackson  Satterfleld  and  Johanna  Lu- 
cinda  Stalvey.  He  removed  with  his 
father's  family  to  North  Texas,  where 
the  family  was  converted  to  "Mor- 
monism"  and  Ammon  was  baptized 
July  3,  1900,  by  Frank  S.  Leavitt, 
near  Sherman,  Texas.  In  April,  1901, 
the  family  emigrated  to  Utah  and 
located  in  North  Ogden,  Weber 
county,  where  Ammon  was  ordained 
an  Elder,  Nov.  3,  1901,  by  Newman 
H.  Barker.  He  removed  with  his 
father's  family  to  College  Ward, 
Cache  county  in  the  fall  of  1902. 
Here  Ammon  held  positions  in  the 
Sunday  school  and  religion  classes. 
Later  he  became  an  active  member  of 


the  Church  at  Blackfoot,  Idaho,  and 
also  at  Sterling,  having  removed  to 
Idaho,  in  1905.  Brother  Satterfleld 
was  a  pioneer  of  the  Sterling  district, 
taking  up  160  acres  of  land  under 
the  Carey  Act.  He  was  one  of  the 
original  locaters  and  incorporators  of 
■the  Sterling  townsite  and  served  for 
several  years  as  secretary,  treasurer 
and  member  of  the  board  of  directors 
of  that  incorporation.  He  organized 
the   Farmers'    Society    of   Equity,    of 


Idaho  and  Utah,  and  some  thirty  of 
its  incorporated  houses,  acting  as 
president  of  the  company  for  several 
years.  He  also  helped  to  organize 
the  Intermountain  Farmers'  Equity 
and  has  been  its  general  manager 
since  its  organization.  He  acted  as  a 
member  of  the  Pocatello  Stake  High 
Council  from  Aug.  15,  1915,  until 
Sept.  7,  1917,  when  he  was  chosen 
as  Bishop.  He  was  ordained  a  Sev- 
enty Jan.  19,  1907,  by  Joseph  W. 
McMurrin,  ordained  a  High  Priest 
Aug.  15,  1915,  by  James  E.  Talmage 
and  ordained  a  Bishop  Nov.  25,  1917, 
by  Heber  J.  Grant  and  set  apart  to 
preside  over  the  Pocatello  Second 
Ward,  which  position  he  still  holds. 
Prior  to  this  he  served  as  a  home 
missionary,  was  first  assistant  super- 
intendent of  the  Sterling  Sunday 
school  and  also  acted  as  Ward  clerk 
in  the  Sterling  Ward.  In  1905  (Nov. 
2nd)  he  married  Jane  Spence  of 
Wellsville,  Cache  county,  Utah,  who 
has  borne  her  husband  seven  chil- 
dren, namely,  Lucille  Hannah,  Rulon 
Spence,  Ruby  Alice,  Charles  Y.,  Ader- 
ine  Grace,  Homer  Stuart  and  Veda 
Elaine. 

SCHIVIID,  Robert,  second  Bishop 
of  Bern  Ward  (Montpelier  Stake), 
Bear  Lake  County,  Idaho,  was  born 
Sept.  5,  1875,  at  Bern,  Canton  Zurich, 
Switzerland,  the  son  of  Carl  A. 
Schmid  and  Anna  Landert.  He  emi- 
grated to  America  with  his  parents 
in  June,  1886,  and  located  at  Bern, 
Bear  Lake  Valley,  Idaho,  and  resided 
thirteen  years  in  Paris  and  sixteen 
years  in  Georgetown.  He  was  bap- 
tized by  his  father  Sept.  5,  1883;  or- 
dained a  Deacon  in  1890,  by  Walter 
Hodge;  ordained  an  Elder  Jan.  31, 
1898,  by  Robert  Price;  ordained  a 
Seventy  June  10,  1910,  by  Rulon  S. 
Wells;  ordained  a  High  Priest  Jan. 
7,  1917,  by  John  U.  Stucki  and  or- 
dained a  Bishop  April  5,  1917,  by 
Heber  J.  Grant  and  set  apart  to  pre- 
side over  the  Bern  Ward,  which  posi- 
tion he  still  holds.  When  quite  young 


BIOGRAPHICAL  ENCYCLOPEDIA. 


505 


he  presided   over  the   Deacons'   quo-  part  of  the  time  as  president  of  the 

rum    and   acted   as    librarian    in   the  Jura  conference.     After    his    return 

Y.   M.   M.   I.  A.   in  the  Paris  Second  home  he  acted  as  superintendent  of 

Ward   and   also   labored   as   a   home  the  Ward   Sunday  school  and  presi- 

missionary  in  the  interest  of  M.  I.  A.  dent  of  the  Y.   M.   M.   I.   A.   in  Har- 


work  in  1898.  In  1914-1916  he  filled 
a  mission  to  Switzerland  and  the 
Eastern  States.  After  his  return  he 
labored  as  a  home  missionary  in  the 
Bear  Lake  Stake.  While  residing  in 
Georgetown  he  also  acted  as  second 
assistant  superintendent  of  the  Ward 
Sunday  school. 

SCHMTTZ,  Gottlieb,  Bishop  of 
Harmony  Ward  (Parowan  Stake), 
Washington  county,  Utah,  was  born 
April  28,  1861,  at  Bolligen,  Canton 
Bern,  Switzerland,  the  son  of  John 
Schmutz  and  Elizabeth  Leman.  He 
was  baptized  April  28,  1874,  by 
Henry  Riser  and  emigrated  to  Utah 
the  same  year,  together  with  his 
father's  family.  The  family  went 
direct  to  St.  George  and  helped  to 
build  the  St.  George  Temple.  They 
also  joined  the  United  Order.  Bro. 
Schmutz  settled  in  Harmony  in  the 
fall  of  1878  and  was  ordained  suc- 
cessively to  the  offices  of  Deacon, 
Teacher,  Elder,  Seventy  and  High 
Priest.  In  1894-1897  he  filled  a 
mission   to   Switzerland   and    labored 


mony.  In  1902  he  was  ordained  a 
High  Priest  and  set  apart  as  first 
counselor  to  Bishop  Wm.  A.  Redd 
and  acted  in  that  capacity  until 
March  12,  1905,  when  he  was  or- 
dained a  Bishop  by  Hyrum  M.  Smith 
and  set  apart  to  preside  over  the 
Harmony  Ward,  which  position  he 
held  until  April  10,  1912.  Bishop 
Schmutz  has  also  filled  several  posi- 
tions of  a  secular  nature,  such  as 
constable,  school  trustee,  etc.  His 
principal  avocation  is  that  of  farmer 
and  stock  raiser.  In  188  7  (April 
2  8th)  he  married  Amelia  Neider 
(daughter  of  John  Neider  and  Anna 
Lutz),  who  was  born  Oct.  2  6,  18  65, 
in  Switzerland.  This  marriage  has 
been  blessed  with  eight  children, 
namely,  Andrew  G.,  Donald,  Anna- 
bella,  Elden  L.,  Rosalia,  George  C, 
Victor  L.  and  Ethel. 

SCHNEIDER,   Ephraim   Christian, 

Bishop  of  the  Gray's  Lake  Ward 
(Idaho  Stake),  Caribou  and  Bonne- 
ville counties,  Idaho,  was  born  Nov. 
29,  1871,  in  Salt  Lake  City,  Utah,  the 


506 


LATTER-DAY   SAINT 


son  of  Christian  Schneider  and  Su- 
sannah Klossner.  He  moved  with  his 
parents  to  Logan  when  about  seven 
years   old   and   was   baptized   by   his 


father  in  the  spring  of  1879.  At  the 
age  of  twelve  years  he  was  ordained 
a  Deacon;  later  ordained  a  Priest 
and  still  later  an  Elder,  by  William 
H.  Griffin.  He  married  Anna  Maria 
Hansen  of  Newton,  Utah,  Nov.  10, 
1898,  in  the  Logan  Temple.  The 
children  of  this  marriage  are  the 
following:  Miles  Russell,  Hermejon- 
Susannah,  Rhoda  Magdaline,  Joseph 
Burdette,  Alice  Etta,  Verl  Lenette, 
Hyrum  Delmer,  Irad  Christian  and 
Delos  V.  Bro.  Schneider  was  or- 
dained a  Seventy  May  28,  1901,  by 
Seymour  B.  Young  and  set  apart  for 
a  mission  to  Switzerland,  where  he 
labored  principally  in  Bern,  Zurich 
and  Basel,  and  returned  to  Utah  in 
November,  1903.  At  home  he  acted 
as  superintendent  of  a  branch  Sun- 
day school  at  Cache  Junction  before 
going  on  his  mission  and  at  Newton, 
Cache  county,  he  acted  as  superin- 
tendent of  the  religion  class.  After 
returning  from  his  mission  he  was 
set  apart  as  one  of  the  presidents  of 
the  7th  quorum  of  Seventy.  Moving 
to  Bancroft  in  1908  he  was  chosen  as 


a  president  of  the  108th  quorum  of 
Seventy  and  also  labored  as  first 
counselor  in  the  Stake  superinten- 
dency  of  Y.  M.  M.  I.  A.  He  was  or- 
dained a  High  Priest  and  set  apart  as 
first  counselor  to  Bishop  Geo.  H. 
Fisher  Jan.  6,  1912,  by  Louis  S. 
Pond.  After  moving  to  Gray's  Lake 
Valley,  he  was  chosen  as  Bishop  of 
the  Gray's  Lake  Ward  in  June,  1915, 
and  was  duly  ordained  a  Bishop  by 
Heber  J.  Grant  May  21,  1916.  He 
still  acts  in  that  capacity. 

SCHWENDIMAN,  Fred,  second 
counselor  to  Bishop  Alfred  Ricks  of 
Sugar  Ward  (Fremont  Stake),  Madi- 
son county,  Idaho,  was  born  July  28, 
1872,  at  Niederstocken,  Canton  Bern, 
Switzerland,  the  son  of  Samuel 
Schwendiman  and  Magdalena  Straub- 
haar.  In  December,  1883,  he  and  his 
parents  heard  the  true  gospel  which 
was  preached  by  John  Hafen  and 
John  U.  Stucki,  who  at  that  time 
labored  as  missionaries  in  Switzer- 
land. The  parents  were  baptized 
Jan.    23,    1884,    and    Fred    was   bap- 


tized April  5,  1884.  In  1886,  to- 
gether with  his  father's  family,  he 
emigrated  to  Idaho,  crossing  the  At- 
lantic  in   the    steamship     "Nevada." 


BIOGRAPHICAL  ENCYCLOPEDIA. 


507 


The  family  located  in  Paris,  Bear 
Lake  county,  Idaho.  Fred  was  or- 
dained a  Deacon  Dec.  23,  1886,  by 
William  West,  and  set  apart  as  sec- 
ond counselor  in  the  Ward  Deacons' 
quorum,  Sept.  14,  1891,  commenced 
class  teaching  in  Sunday  school  Feb. 
7,  18'92,  and  was  ordained  a  Teacher 
Feb.  22,  1892,  by  James  Nye.  In 
November,  1892,  he  went  to  Snake 
River  Valley,  Idaho,  and  made  a 
home,  was  appointed  secretary  of  the 
theological  class  of  the  Teton  Ward, 
Bannock  Stake,  Jan.  11,  1893;  at- 
tended school  in  the  Bannock  Stake 
Academy  at  Rexburg  in  1895  and 
1896;  was  set  apart  as  first  assistant 
superintendent  of  the  Teton  Sunday 
school  June  23,  1895;  set  apart  as 
second  counselor  in  the  Teton  Ward 
Y.  M.  M.  I.  A.  Oct.  27,  1895;  ap- 
pointed choir  leader  in  Teton  Ward 
Sept.  24,  1896;  ordained  an  Elder 
Dec.  26,  1896,  and  on  Jan.  7,  1897, 
was  married  to  Ethel  Amelia  Wil- 
liams; went  into  the  hardware  busi- 
ness in  Teton  in  1899;  was  ordained 
a  High  Priest  June  25,  1900,  and 
was  set  apart  as  an  alternate  mem- 
ber of  the  High  Council  of  the  Ban- 
nock Stake  by  George  Q.  Cannon.  He 
was  appointed  a  trustee  of  the  vil- 
lage of  Teton  March  11,  1901,  which 
position  he  held  until  June,  1'904, 
when  he  moved  with  his  family  to 
Sugar  City,  where  he  engaged  in  the 
hardware  and  lumber  business  and 
was  active  in  farming  at  Bowerman, 
Idaho.  In  1907  he  was  appointed  a 
member  of  the  Board  of  Trustees  of 
Sugar  City,  which  position  he  held 
for  twelve  years.  He  was  chosen  and 
sustained  as  second  counselor  to 
Bishop  Alfred  Ricks  of  Sugar  City, 
April  28,  1907.  His  wife  has  borne 
him  five  children,  namely,  Fred  W., 
born  Feb.  15,  1898;  Rulon  J.,  born 
Aug.  23,  1899;  Viola,  born  Sept.  15, 
1901;  Lynn  A.,  born  April  21,  1908, 
and  Rex  E.,  born  Oct.  15,  1916.  His 
eldest  son,  Fred  W.,  together  with 
his  wife,  are  now  filling  a  mission  to 
New  Zealand 


SELCK,  Wmiam    Walter,    junior, 

second  counselor  in  the  Stake  presi- 
dency of  the  Rigby  Stake,  Idaho,  was 
born  Dec.  31,  1870,  at  Kamas,  Sum- 
mit county,  Utah,  the  son  of  William 
W.  Selck  and  Anna  C.  Sorensen.  He 
was  baptized  Aug.  7,  1879,  by  George 
Fraughton;  moved  to  Lewisville, 
Idaho,  with  his  parents  in  July,  1885; 
was  ordained  an  Elder  in  18  92  by 
Alonzo  Dabell;  ordained  a  Seventy 
April  18,  1900,  by  Joseph  W.  Mc- 
Murrin;  filled  a  mission  to  the  South- 
ern States  in  1900-1902,  laboring 
principally  in  North  Carolina  and 
Tennesee;  acted  as  president  of  the 
Ward  Y.  M.  M.  I.  A.,  held  the  posi- 
tion of  second  assistant  and  later  as 
superintendent  of  the  Ward  Sunday 
school  and  served  on  the  Sunday 
School  Stake  Board  in  1903-1904.  He 
also  acted  as  clerk  of  the  13  0th  quo- 
rum of  Seventy  and  later  as  president 
of  that  quorum;  was  ordained  a 
High  Priest  Feb.  3,  1908,  by  John 
Henry  Smith,  and  set  apart  to  act  as 
second  counselor  to  President  Don  C. 
Walker  of  the  Rigby  Stake.  On 
March  12,  1912,  he  was  chosen  as 
second  counselor  to  President  John 
W.  Hart  of  the  same  Stake.  Elder 
Selck  has  also  been  active  in  secular 
affairs;  he  acted  as  constable  of  the 
Lewisville  precinct  one  term  and  is 
now  president  of  the  Parks  and 
Lewisville  Canal  Company  and  presi- 
dent of  Little  Feeder  Canal  Com- 
pany. In  1892  (Nov.  23rd)  Brother 
Selck  married  Sarah  Elizabeth  Myler 
(daughter  of  Orrin  M.  Myler  and 
Elizabeth  J.  Stokes),  who  was  born 
Sept.  2,  1875,  in  Clarkston,  Cache 
county,  Utah.  She  has  borne  her 
husband  four  children,  namely,  Wil- 
liam A.,  Millie,  Sarah  C.  and  Leith  S. 
Bro.  Selck's  principal  avocations  in 
life  have  been  those  of  farming  and 
stock  raising. 

SEELEY,     William     Stewart,     the 

first  Bishop  of  Mount  Pleasant  (San- 
pete Stake),  Sanpete  county,  Utah, 
was  born  May  18,  1812,  in  Pickering, 


508 


LATTER-DAY   SAINT 


Home  District,  Upper  Canada,  the 
son  of  Justus  A.  Seeley  and  Mehitta- 
bel  Bennett.  Becoming  a  convert  to 
"Mormonism"   under  the  instruction 


of  John  Taylor,  he  was  baptized  in 
1838  and  migrated  to  Nauvoo,  Han- 
cock county,  Illinois,  where  he  re- 
sided until  1846,  when  he  became  an 
exile,  like  his  co-religionists,  and  de- 
parted into  the  western  wilderness. 
He  came  to  Salt  Lake  Valley  in  184  7 
and  lived  for  some  time  in  Salt  Lake 
City  and  afterwards  in  Pleasant 
Grove,  Utah  county.  When  Mount 
Pleasant,  Sanpete  county,  w'as  re- 
settled in  1859  he  became  one  of  the 
founders  of  that  place,  where  he 
spent  the  remainder  of  his  years  and 
where  he  was  active  in  everything 
pertaining  to  the  growth  and  welfare 
of  that  commonwealth.  When  Mount 
Pleasant  became  an  incorporated  city, 
William  S.  Seeley  was  elected  its 
first  mayor,  and  he  acted  as  Bishop 
of  Mount  Pleasant  about  thirty  years. 
He  took  part  in  all  the  military 
movements  during  the  Black  Hawk 
war  and  also  filled  two  missions  to 
Canada,  one  in  1873  and  the  other  in 
1878.  In  1868  he  went  as  captain 
of  a  Church  train  as  far  east  as  Lara- 
mie after  immigrants.  Bishop  Seeley 
married    three    wives,    two    of   whom 


survived  him.  His  first  wife  was 
Elizabeth  De  Hart,  who  died  April  6, 
1873,  after  bearing  her  husband 
several  children,  of  whom  Elizabeth, 
Emily,  Moroni,  Emmeline,  Joseph  N. 
and  Lucinda  were  still  living  in  1898. 
His  second  wife  was  Ellen  Jackson, 
whose  children  are  Justice  L.  and 
William  S.  The  Bishop's  third  wife 
was  Ann  Watkins  and  her  children 
are  William  A.  and  Anna  R.  Bishop 
Seeley  was  not  only  a  prominent  citi- 
zen in  local  affairs,  but  was  well  and 
favorably  known  throughout  the  Ter- 
ritory of  Utah.  He  died  at  Mount 
Pleasant,  Sept.  17,  1896. 

SHEPHEKD,     Marcus     Lafayette, 

first  counselor  in  the  Beaver  Stake 
presidency  and  a  resident  of  Beaver 
(Beaver  Stake),  Beaver  county,  Utah, 
was  born  Oct.  10,  1824,  the  son  of 
Samuel  Shepherd  and  Roxie  Lane,  in 
Willoughby,  Geauga  (now  Lake) 
county,  Ohio,  and  christened  after  the 
famous  hero  Marquis  de  Lafayette, 
whose  title  was  anglicized  to  Marcus 
for  the  purpose.  His  parents  joined 
the  Church  in  time  to  settle  in  Jack- 


son county,  Missouri,  in  1832,  and 
were  with  the  ill-fated  colonists  when 
they  were  driven  out  of  that  county 
in  the  autumn  of  1833.     Marcus  was 


BIOGRAPHICAL   ENCYCLOPEDIA. 


509 


with  his  parents  through  the  perse- 
cutions of  that  period  down  to  the 
final  expulsion  of  the  Saints  from 
Missouri.  The  Shepherds  settled  near 
Carthage,  Hancock  county,  Illinois, 
(where  Joseph  and  Hyrum  Smith 
afterwards  were  martyred)  and  later 
moved  to  Nauvoo.  The  father  was  a 
wagon  maker  by  trade  and  pros- 
perous in  his  business.  He  had  con- 
siderable means  when  he  went  to 
Missouri,  but  was  much  reduced  in 
circumstances  by  the  persecutions 
and  drivings  in  that  State.  At  Nau- 
voo he  again  prospered.  Marcus  re- 
ceived but  little  education  in  his 
youth,  but  later  in  life  acquired, 
through  home  study,  quite  a  know- 
ledge of  mathematics.  Naturally  in- 
clined to  farming  and  stock  raising, 
he  passed  the  greater  part  of  his 
early  life  upon  the  farm.  He  led  a 
sober  life,  was  very  industrious,  al- 
ways made  money  and  never  wasted 
it.  He  attended  Sabbath  meetings 
whenever  possible  and  faithfully  ob- 
served the  requirements  of  his  re- 
ligion. His  parents  being  Latter-day 
Saints,  he  was  familiar  with  the  doc- 
trines of  "Mormonism"  from  boy- 
hood. In  1837  he  was  baptized  by 
James  Sloan  in  Caldwell  county,  Mis- 
souri. In  the  exodus  of  1846,  he 
accompanied  his  migrating  people  to 
the  Missouri  river.  When  the  call 
came  for  the  Mormon  Battalion, 
Marcus  L.  Shepherd  was  one  of  those 
who  enlisted  and  performed  the  un- 
paralleled march  undertaken  by  that 
devoted  body  of  infantry.  After  his 
discharge  at  Los  Angeles,  in  July, 
1847,  he  found  employment,  first  at 
whip-sawing  and  afterwards  at  gold 
mining,  in  California.  As  soon  as 
practicable  he  rejoined  his  people, 
who  were  settling  on  the  shores  of 
the  Great  Salt  Lake.  Loading  up  his 
pack  animals — nine  horses  and  five 
mules — with  a  stock  of  groceries  and 
clothing,  he  started  in  October,  1848, 
for  Salt  Lake  Valley.  His  company 
consisted  of  twelve  persons,  he  being 
the   leader.      They   came   by    way   of 


Carson  Valley  and  the  Humboldt 
river  to  Ruby  valley,  thence  across 
the  desert  and  around  the  south  side 
of  the  Great  Salt  Lake.  They  had  a 
very  prosperous  journey,  only  one 
incident  of  an  unusual  character  oc- 
curring on  the  way,  when,  to  use  his 
language,  "Indians  to  the  number 
of  two  or  three  hundred  formed 
across  the  road,  ten  or  twelve  deep, 
and  extending  for  a  long  way  on 
each  side.  I  saw  it  was  fight  or  do 
worse,  so  we  made  a  charge  as  fast 
as  the  packs  could  go,  with  myself 
and  another  ahead.  We  drove  them 
from  the  ground  without  a  shot." 
Brother  Shepherd  first  settled  in  Cot- 
tonwood, south  of  Salt  Lake  City,  and 
on  March  9,  1851,  he  married  Harriet 
Editha  Parrish.  The  same  year  he 
accompanied  Apostles  Amasa  M.  Ly- 
man and  Charles  C.  Rich,  with  many 
others,  to  California,  where  they  pur- 
chased and  settled  the  ranch  of  San 
Bernardino.  He  returned  to  Utah  in 
the  winter  of  1857-18  5  8  at  the  time 
of  the  general  return  of  the  Mormon 
colonists  and  missionaries,  conse- 
quent upon  the  so-called  "Buchanan 
War."  He  now  settled  at  Beaver 
City,  which  was  ever  since  his  home. 
He  made  the  first  brick  in  Beaver 
county,  built  the  first  two-story 
house  in  that  locality  and  was  the 
first  man  in  Utah  to  keep  sheep  on 
the  moveable  plan.  He  made  a  num- 
ber of  trips  in  pursuit  of  Indians 
when  they  raided  the  stock  of  the 
settlers,  and  when  the  brethren  over- 
took them,  which  they  did  at  least  on 
one  occasion.  Brother  Shepherd 
talked  to  them  in  a  friendly  manner 
and  did  them  no  harm,  although  they 
were  completely  at  his  mercy.  This 
kind  action  later  proved  of  great 
benefit  to  the  settlers.  In  18  63  Elder 
Shepherd  became  major  of  militia, 
an  office  held  by  him  until  the  gen- 
eral disbandment  of  that  organiza- 
tion in  1870.  He  was  ordained  a 
High  Priest  in  18  5  3  by  Amasa  M. 
Lyman  and  on  March  12,  1869,  he 
was  ordained  a  Bishop  and  set  apar,t 


510 


LATTER-DAY   SAINT 


to  preside  over  the  Beaver  First 
Ward.  He  held  this  position  until 
July  26,  1877,  when  he  was  chosen 
as  second  counselor  to  President 
John  R.  Murdock  in  the  Beaver 
Stake.  Between  October,  1881  and 
June,  1882,  he  filled  a  mission  to 
Kansas  and  Iowa.  By  his  first  wife, 
Harriet  Edytha  Parrish,  daughter  of 
Ezra  Parrish  and  Susanna  Sherwin 
(who  was  born  Sept.  17,  1831,  in 
Brownsville,  Jefferson  county.  New 
York),  he  had  ten  children,  namely, 
Charles  Henry,  Mary  Elizabeth,  Wil- 
liam Ashworth,  Lyman  Andrew,  Har- 
riet Susanna,  Sarah  Caroline,  Marcus 
Lafayette  jun.,  Edna  Matilda,  Samuel 
Ezra,  Julia  Esther  and  Henrietta.  In 
1869  (Dec.  13th)  Brother  Shepherd 
married  Cederissa  Cartwright  (the 
daughter  of  Thomas  Henry  Cart- 
wright  and  Jane  Allen),  who  was 
born  May  9,  1852,  at  Cedar  City, 
Utah.  She  bore  her  husband  seven 
children,  namely,  Thomas  Oscar, 
Rhoda  Jane,  Warren,  Carlos,  Pres- 
cinda,  Martha  Adeline  and  Willard. 
For  the  sake  of  his  wives  and  chil- 
dren whom  he  would  not  discard,  nor 
repudiate  his  sacred  relations  with 
them,  he  underwent  fine  and  impris- 
onment in  the  Utah  penitentiary  in 
1885,  during  the  prevalence  of  the 
anti-polygamy  crusade.  Elder  Shep- 
herd was  elected  mayor  of  Beaver  in 
1893.  He  died  Feb.  5,  1904,  univer- 
sally respected  by  all  who  knew  him. 

SHERNER,  Lawrence  William,  the 

fourth  Bishop  of  the  Lynne  Ward 
(North  Weber  Stake),  Weber  county, 
Utah,  was  born  Oct.  27,  1874,  at 
Lynne,  Weber  county,  Utah,  the  son 
of  Peter  Lorenson  Sherner  and  Mary 
Elizabeth  Hutchins.  He  was  baptized 
Oct.  27,  1882,  by  William  B.  Hutch- 
ins, was  raised  in  Lynne  as  a  farmer 
and  received  a  common  school  edu- 
cation; ordained  a  Deacon  Dec.  21, 
1885,  by  George  Smuin  and  acted  as 
a  counselor  in  the  presidency  of  a 
Deacons'  quorum;  ordained  a  Teacher 
Feb.  27,  18*3,  by  George  Smuin  and 


acted  as  a  counselor  in  that  quorum; 
ordained  an  Elder  Oct.  15,  1897,  by 
Peter  L.  Sherner  and  ordained  a 
Seventy  by  J.  Golden  Kimball  Nov. 
3,  1897  and  filled  a  mission  to  the 
Eastern  States  in  1897-1899,  labor- 
ing in  West  Virginia.  After  his  re- 
turn home  he  acted  as  superinten- 
dent of  the  Sunday  school  from  1900 
to  1908.  He  was  ordained  a  High 
Priest  Aug.  2,  1908,  by  John  V. 
Bluth  and  set  apart  as  a  member  of 
the  first  High  Council  of  the  North 
Weber  Stake.  After  laboring  In  that 
position  eight  years  he  was  ordained 
a  Bishop  March  12,  1916,  by  Apostle 
George  Albert  Smith  and  set  apart 
to  preside  over  the  Lynne  Ward, 
which  position  he  still  holds.  In 
1902  (June  18th)  he  married  Rozina 
Diana  Shaw  (daughter  of  William  D. 
Shaw  and  Anna  Rozina  Cardon),  who 
was  born  June  23,  1882,  at  Mound 
Fort,  Weber  county,  Utah.  This  mar- 
riage has  been  blessed  with  seven 
children,  namely,  Dorothea  Lucy,  Ra- 
chel Rozina,  William  Lawrence, 
Ralph  Kermit,  Donald  Melvin,  Mar- 
jorie  Rosella  and  Lawrence  junior. 
Bishop  Sherner  is  a  shareholder  in 
the  Scoville  Paper  Company  and  has 
held  a  position  in  the  business  for 
several  years. 

SHIRLEY/Charles  Coulson,  Bishop 

of  Fish  Haven  Ward  (Bear  Lake 
Stake),  Bear  Lake  county,  Idaho, 
was  born  Aug.  21,  1864,  at  Paris, 
Idaho,  the  son  of  William  Henry 
Shirley  and  Maria  Bubb.  He  moved 
with  his  parents  to  Salt  Lake  City, 
Utah,  in  1870,  and  settled  in  Fish 
Haven  in  1879.  Brother  Shirley  was 
baptized  Dec.  5,  1872;  ordained  a 
Deacon  Dec.  23,  1877,  by  George  B. 
Bailey;  ordained  an  Elder  Sept.  9, 
1888,  by  Henry  Howell;  ordained  a 
High  Priest  July  10,  1904,  by  John 
A.  Hulme  and  called  to  act  as  second 
counselor  to  Bishop  John  W.  E. 
Stock.  He  served  in  that  capacity 
until  June  23,  1918  when  he  was  or- 


BIOGRAPHICAL  ENCYCLOPEDIA. 


511 


dained  a  Bishop  by  Orson  F.  Whit- 
ney and  set  apart  to  preside  over  the 
Fish  Haven  Ward  which  position  he 
still  occupies.  Bishop  Shirley  be- 
came a  diligent  Church  worker  in  his 
early  youth  and  acted  as  president 
of  a  Deacons'  quorum  and  as  presi- 
dent of  the  Ward  Y.  M.  M.  I.  A.  In 
1888  (Sept.  12th)  he  married  Grace 
M.  Stock  (daughter  of  John  Stock 
and  Frances  Gilson),  who  was  born 
April  24,  1870,  at  Fish  Haven.  She 
has  borne  her  husband  seven  chil- 
dren, namely,  William  D.,  Florence 
M.,  Charles  H.,  Ida  M.,  Frances  M., 
Vera  C.  and  Arthur  C.  Bishop  Shirley 
is  a  farmer  by  avocation. 

SIMMONS,  Mary  Ann  Ford,  a  well 
known  Temple  worker  and  faithful 
Latter-day  Saint,  was  born  Nov.  25, 
1827,  in  Cuckfield  parish,  Sussex, 
England,  the  daughter  of  William 
Ford  and  Mary  Ann  Knight.  The  fol- 
lowing sketch  of  her  life  is  written 


by  herself:  "I  was  naturally  of  a 
religious  nature,  but  could  not  bring 
myself  to  unite  with  any  church,  as 
there  was  something  lacking  with 
them  all.  My  mother  died  when  I 
was  nearly  fifteen  and  a  little  later 
the  churchmen  in  our  neighborhood 
began  to  hunt  up  young  people  to  be 


confirmed  and  join  their  churches, 
but  I  told  them  I  did  not  want  to 
join  any,  for  I  could  not  feel  satis- 
fied with  their  doctrines.  I  then 
went  to  Brighton  to  live  with  my 
brother,  and  while  there  was  mar- 
ried on  Dec.  2  4,  184'd,  to  George 
Simmons.  He  was  a  carpenter  who 
hired  men  to  work  for  him.  One  of 
these  was  a  Latter-day  Saint  and  one 
day  my  husband  asked  me  if  I  should 
like  to  go  and  hear  what  the  "Mor- 
mons" had  to  say.  I  consented,  and 
as  soon  as  I  heard  their  message  I 
knew  that  it  was  what  I  was  hunt- 
ing for.  I  was  baptized  Sept.  6,  1852, 
and  soon  afterwards  my  husband  was 
baptized.  In  April,  1855,  we  left  our 
home  in  Brighton  in  order  to  emi- 
grate to  Zion.  We  sailed  from  Liver- 
pool April  17,  1855,  on  board  the 
ship  'Chimborazo'  with  a  company  of 
431  Saints  under  the  direction  of 
Elder  Edward  Stevenson.  Our  com- 
pany landed  in  Philadelphia,  May 
21st.  We  arrived  at  night  at  St. 
Louis,  Missouri,  feeling  very  miser- 
able and  lonely,  but  when  I  took  my 
little  boy,  three  and  a  half  years  old, 
from  his  bed  to  bring  him  on  shore 
he  said,  'Mamma,  we  will  go  on 
shore,  go  into  a  house  and  have  some 
dinner.'  This  proved  to  be  a  true 
prophesy,  as  a  brother  with  whom 
we  had  been  acquainted  in  England 
met  us  and  took  us  to  his  home  to 
supper.  The  next  day  we  started  for 
the  camping  grounds  of  the  Saints, 
called  'Mormon  Grove,'  near  Atch- 
ison, Kansas.  About  two  weeks  later 
we  started  on  our  journey  across  the 
plains,  traveling  by  ox  teams  in 
Richard  Ballantyne's  company.  When 
we  were  about  two  days'  journey 
from  Laramie,  a  sister  was  making 
her  bed  in  the  wagon  when  a  gun 
close  by  was  accidentally  discharged 
and  shot  her  arm  off.  She  ran  out 
into  the  camp  with  the  arm  hanging 
by  a  piece  of  flesh.  She  was  taken 
back  to  Laramie,  but  died  on  the 
way.  A  day  or  two  later  a  young 
man  was  playing  with  a  gun  and  ac- 


512 


LATTER-DAY   SAINT 


cidentally  shot  a  young  girl  in  the 
leg.  She  too  was  sent  back  to  Fort 
Laramie,  but  died  on  the  way.  In 
August  I  gave  birth  to  a  baby  boy, 
but  he  only  lived  half  an  hour  and 
was  buried  on  the  plains.  We  ar- 
rived in  Salt  Lake  City  Sept.  25, 
1855,  and  found  that  the  grasshop- 
pers had  eaten  all  the  crops.  If  it 
had  not  been  for  the  blessing  of  the 
Lord,  we  could  not  have  lived 
through  that  winter.  We  were  with- 
out fire  and  lived  for  two  months  on 
frozen  potatoes  and  the  coarsest 
sifting  of  corn  meal.  One  of  my  lit- 
tle children  was  sick  and  a  neighbor 
brought  her  a  cup  of  milk  warm  from 
the  cow  every  morning,  and  thus 
saved  her  life.  When  the  spring 
came,  we  lived  on  segoes  until  the 
garden  stuff  began  to  grow.  In  June 
a  baby  girl  was  born  to  me  and  a 
week  later  we  had  to  leave  Salt  Lake 
City  because  of  Johnston's  army  and 
went  to  Provo,  Utah  county,  return- 
ing again  to  our  home  in  Salt  Lake 
City  a  month  or  so  later.  Afterwards 
we  moved  to  Morgan,  Morgan  county, 
where  my  husband  built  the  first 
brick  house  in  Morgan  City.  In 
March,  1877,  I  was  called  to  be  a 
counselor  in  the  Relief  Society  in  the 
South  Morgan  Ward  and  in  1884  was 
set  apart  as  a  counselor  in  the  Mor- 
gan Stake  Relief  Society  presidency. 
In  1898  I  went  to  Australia  to  visit 
my  brother,  my  husband  having 
passed  away  in  September  of  the  pre- 
vious year.  Returning  home  in  1899 
I  made  my  home  in  Salt  Lake  City 
where  I  worked  in  the  Temple,  hav- 
ing previously  done  considerable 
work  in  the  Logan  Temple.  In  190  6 
I  again  visited  my  brother  in  Aus- 
tralia, but  as  I  engaged  in  mission- 
ary work,  buying  tracts  and  distribut- 
ing them,  my  brother  wanted  me  to 
return  home,  he  being  a  wealthy  man 
was  ashamed  that  I  should  be  as- 
sociated with  the  Latter-day  Saints. 
This  little  effort  on  my  part  was  the 
first  missionary  work  ever  done  in 
county,   Utah,   the    son    of    Harland 


Williamstown,  New  South  Wales, 
Australia.  In  1907  I  returned  to 
Salt  Lake  City  where  I  again  en- 
gaged in  Temple  work  and  soon 
afterwards  my  brother  died  in  Aus- 
tralia, leaving  all  his  means  to  stran- 
gers, although  I  was  the  only  rela- 
tive he  had.  I  am  now  in  my  92nd 
year,  have  had  twelve  children,  seven 
of  whom  are  living.  I  have  74  grand- 
children, 116  great-grandchildren 
and    7    great-great-grandchildren." 

SIMMONS,  William  Harlan,  first 
counselor  to  Bishop  Corbridge  of  the 
West  Lay  ton  Ward  (North  Davis 
Stake),  Davis  county,  Utah,  was  born 


Oct.  30,  1884,  at  Bountiful,  Davis 
Simmons  and  Sarah  Stoker.  He  was 
baptized  May  12,  1895,  by  Ephraim 
Barnett;  ordained  successively  to  the 
offices  of  Deacon,  Priest  and  Elder, 
the  latter  ordination  taking  place  in 
1907,  Jesse  M.  Smith  officiating.  He 
was  ordained  a  Seventy  Oct.  30,  1910, 
by  John  W.  Gailey  and  ordained  a 
High  Priest  Dec.  27,  1914,  by  Geo. 
Albert  Smith  and  set  apart  as  a  coun- 
selor to  Bishop  Corbridge.  In  1907- 
1910  he  filled  a  mission  to  the  South- 
ern States,  laboring  principally  in 
Virginia.  At  home  he  has  acted  as 
president  of  the  Ward  Y.  M.  M.  I.  A. 


BIOGRAPHICAL   ENCYCLOPEDIA. 


513 


and  as  a  teacher  in  the  Sunday  school. 
In  1912  (Dec.  18th)  he  married  Mae 
Strong  (daughter  of  Hyrum  Strong 
and  Mary  I.  Newton),  born  Dec.  17, 
1886. 

SKINNER,  Nephi  Aaron,  the  sec- 
ond Bishop  of  Nounan  Ward  (Mont- 
pelier  Stake),  Bear  Lake  county, 
Idaho,  was  born  Dec.  8,  1876,  at  Nou- 
nan, Idaho,  the  son  of  John  Skinner 
and  Jane  Smith.  He  was  baptized 
June  7,  1885,  by  Brigham  Skinner; 
ordained  a  Deacon  while  a  mere  boy; 
ordained  an  Elder  June  4,  1898,  by 
Edward  Austin;  ordained  a  Seventy 
March  8,  1905,  by  Wm.  H.  Spiers; 
ordained  a  High  Priest  in  1910  by 
John  U.  Stucki  and  set  apart  as 
second  counselor  to  Edgar  M.  Lind- 
say of  the  Nounan  Ward  and  was  or- 
dained a  Bishop  Dec.  23,  1917,  by 
Rudger  Clawson  and  set  apart  to 
preside  over  the  Nounan  Ward.  Prior 
to  this  he  acted  as  secretary  and 
superintendent  of  the  Nounan  Sun- 
day school  and  also  as  president  of 
the  Ward  Y.  M.  M.  I.  A.  In  190  5- 
1907  he  filled  a  mission  to  Great 
Britain,  laboring  in  the  Liverpool 
conference.  In  1898  (June  8th)  he 
married  Etta  May  Morgan,  daughter 
of  John  W.  Morgan  and  Jennie  Stock- 
ton, who  was  born  May  13,  1875,  in 
Georgia  and  has  borne  her  husband 
eight  children,  namely,  Clawson  N., 
Karl,  Portia,  Ralph,  Halver,  Lester, 
Elna  and  Ernest.  Bishop  Skinner  is 
a  farmer  and  stock  raiser  by  avoca- 
tion. 

SKINNER,  WiUiam  H„  Bishop  of 
the  Meadowville  Ward  (Idaho  Stake), 
Bannock  county,  Idaho,  was  born 
Dec.  22,  1858,  in  Genesee  county, 
New  York,  the  son  of  John  Skinner 
and  Jane  Smith.  He  migrated  with 
his  father's  family  to  Utah  in  18  68 
and  settled  in  Idaho  in  1874  as  a 
ranchman  in  Nounan  Valley.  He 
was  baptized  by  George  Marler  in 
18  69;  ordained  a  Priest  some  time 
afterwards;    ordained    an     Elder     in 


18  7  6,  by  Henry  Lewis  and  ordained 
a  High  Priest  in  1912,  by  Lewis  S. 
Pond  and  set  apart  as  a  High  Coun- 
cilman in  the  Bannock  Stake.  In 
February,  1916,  he  became  a  High 
Councilman  in  the  Idaho  Stake  and 
in  August,  1917,  he  was  ordained  a 
Bishop  and  set  apart  to  preside  over 
the  Meadowville  Ward,  which  was 
then  organized.  Prior  to  this  he 
acted  as  president  of  the  Y.  M.  M.  I. 
A.  in  the  Ovid  Ward  and  as  Sunday 
school  superintendent  in  the  Nounan 
Ward.  He  has  also  served  as  con- 
stable of  the  Gray's  Lake  precinct. 
In  November,  1876,  he  married  Mary 
Ann  Johnson,  who  was  born  Dec.  13, 
1858,  in  Denmark,  and  came  to  Utah 
with  her  mother,  Christina  Johnson, 
in  1860.  This  marriage  has  been 
blessed  with  fourteen  children,  as 
follows:  Mary  Ann,  William  J., 
George  J.,  James  H.,  John  J.,  Jane, 
Smith,  Christina,  Woodruff,  Heber 
J.,  Elizabeth  Elane,  Gladys,  Beatrice 
and  Alfred  Roland. 

SLACK,  Walter  Herbert,  Bishop  of 
Toquerville  (Saint  George  Stake), 
Washington  county,  Utah,  was  born 
June  21,  1868,  at  Toquerville,  the 
son  of  Martin  Slack  and  Eliza  Ann 
Jeffries.  He  was  baptized  Feb.  11, 
1877,  by  Charles  Stapley.  jun.;  or- 
dained a  Deacon  soon  afterwards  and 
a  Teacher  Feb.  13,  1881;  ordained  an 
Elder  Feb.  23,  1890,  by  Martin  Slack; 
ordained  a  Seventy  March  2  0.  18  96, 
by  Heber  J.  Grant;  was  set  apart  as 
a  president  of  the  9th  quorum  of 
Seventy  June  15,  1900,  having  acted 
as  clerk  of  the  quorum  for  two  years 
previously,  and  became  senior  presi- 
dent of  the  quorum  in  1-912.  In 
1912  (Sept.  14th)  he  was  ordained 
a  High  Priest  by  Anthony  W.  Ivins 
and  set  apart  as  second  counselor  to 
Bishop  Archie  P.  Spillsbury,  which 
position  he  held  until  Sept.  15,  1918, 
when  he  was  ordained  a  Bishop  by 
Orson  F.  Whitney  and  set  apart  to 
preside  over  the  Toquerville  Ward. 
Prior  to  this  he  had  acted  as  superin- 


Vol.  III.  No.  33. 


February  28,  1920 


514 


LATTER-DAY   SAINT 


tendent  of  the  Toquerville  Sunday 
school  for  six  years;  had  presided 
over  the  Y.  M.  M.  I.  A.  one  year;  had 
served  as  a  president  and  secretary 
of  the  9th  quorum  of  Seventy  four- 
teen years  and  acted  as  Ward  clerk 
six  years.  In  1896-1898  he  filled  a 
mission  to  the  Southern  States, 
laboring  principally  in  the  Alabama 
conference  and  as  clerk  of  the  con- 
ference. Bishop  Slack  has  also  been 
active  in  civil  affairs  and  business 
matters.  Thus  he  acted  as  constable 
of  the  Toquerville  precinct  six  years, 
was  clerk  of  the  Toquerville  Irriga- 
tion Company  eight  years,  served  as 
clerk  of  the  local  school  board  ten 
years,  taught  school  in  Washington 
county  nine  years  and  acted  as  post- 
master in  Toquerville  the  past  eleven 
years.  In  18  90  (March  3rd)  he  mar- 
ried Mary  E.  Bringhurst  (daughter 
of  Bishop  Wm.  A.  Bringhurst  and 
Selinda  D.  Palmer),  who  was  born 
Feb.  3,  18  70,  at  Toquerville.  After 
bearing  her  husband  four  children 
she  died  May  13,  1899.  In  1900 
(Aug.  28th)  Bishop  Slack  married 
Adelaide  M.  Jackson  (daughter  of 
James  Jackson  and  Annis  Bedford), 
who  was  born  December  8,  1868,  at 
Toquerville.  She  became  the  mother 
of  six  children.  Following  are  the 
names  of  Bishop  Slack's  children: 
Selinda,  Erma,  Walter  H.  jun.,  Nel- 
lie, Riley  L.,  Harold  E.,  Adele,  Lulu 
A.,  Francis  M.  and  Glen  J. 

SLY,  James  Calvin,  a  member  of 
the  Mormon  Battalion,  was  born  in 
the  town  of  Sodus,  Wayne  county, 
New  York,  Aug.  8,  1807,  the  son  of 
James  Calvin  Sly.  Becoming  a  con- 
vert to  "Mormonism"  he  was  bap- 
tized March  9,  1844,  emigrated  to 
Nauvoo,  Illinois,  in  the  beginning  of 
1846  and  moved  west  with  the 
Church  that  year  in  the  general  exo- 
dus of  the  Saints  from  Illinois.  Hav- 
ing reached  the  Missouri  river,  he 
enlisted  in  the  Mormon  Battalion  and 
marched  as  a  private  in  Company  B 


to  California.  After  receiving  an 
honorable  discharge,  he  joined  his 
co-religionists  in  Salt  Lake  Valley  in 
the  fall  of  1848.  At  a  general  con- 
ference of  the  Church  held  in  1854 
he  was  called  on  a  mission  to  Can- 
ada which  he  filled  successfully  and 
returned  to  the  mountains  in  the  fall 
of  1855,  after  which  he  resided  in 
Utah  until  the  time  of  his  death, 
which  occurred  at  Chicken  Creek, 
Juab  county,  Utah,  August  31,  1864. 
Brother  Sly  left  a  large  family  to 
mourn  his  loss.  He  died  a  faithful 
Latter-day  Saint,  beloved  and  re- 
spected by  relatives  and  friends. 

SIVL\RT,  Thomas  Sharratt,  one  of 

the  founders  and  the  first  president 
of  the  Franklin  (Idaho)  ecclesiastical 
branch,  was  born  Sept.   14,   1823,  at 


Stonewall,  Shenstone  parish,  Staf- 
fordshire, England,  the  son  of  Wil- 
liam Smart  and  Maria  Sharratt.  He 
was  the  second  son  of  his  father's 
family,  which  consisted  of  four  boys 
and  five  girls.  His  father  was  a 
tallow  chandler  and  truck  gardener 
and  from  early  boyhood  Thomas  as- 
sumed responsibilities  with  his  father 
in  business.  When  only  seventeen 
years  of  age  he  was  offered  a  posi- 
tion in  Normandy,  France,  where  he 


BIOGRAPHICAL  ENCYCLOPEDIA. 


515 


engaged  in  brick  making.  Here  he 
remained  five  years,  and  during  this 
time  married  Ann  Hayter,  daughter 
of  Henry  Hayter  and  Kezia  Dennison 
of  Portsmouth,  England.  Ann  had 
previously  been  married,  but  her  hus- 
band had  proved  unworthy  of  her. 
Bro.  Smart  took  care  of  her  three 
children  (Mary  Ann,  Alice  and 
Louisa)  and  subsequently  they  be- 
came his  by  celestial  adoption.  The 
New  World  having  become  attractive 
to  Thomas,  he  came  to  America  and 
settled  in  St.  Louis,  Missouri,  where 
he  engaged  in  business  and  farming. 
Having  leased  a  farm  near  the  city, 
he  hired,  among  other  men,  Henry 
Gale,  a  Latter-day  Saint,  and  from 
him  heard  the  gospel  of  salvation 
which  he  eagerly  embraced,  and  after 
only  six  weeks'  investigation  he  and 
his  wife  were  declared  ready  for  bap- 
tism. Bro.  Smart  was  baptized  by 
John  A.  Richards  and  his  wife  by 
Samuel  Obray.  President  Brigham 
Young  having  issued  a  manifesto  for 
all  Saints  who  could  do  so  to  emi- 
grate from  the  Pottawattamie  coun- 
try, Iowa,  to  the  body  of  the  Church, 
about  10,000  responded,  among  them 
Brother  Smart  and  his  family,  leav- 
ing for  the  West  April  8,  1852.  A 
Brother  Rigby,  who  was  then  presi- 
dent of  the  St.  Louis  branch,  or- 
ganized a  company  of  seventeen 
wagons  and  about  twenty  families 
over  which  he  was  made  captain. 
They  arrived  in  Salt  Lake  City  Sept. 
4,  1852,  and  Bro.  Smart  soon  after- 
wards located  in  American  Fork, 
Utah  county,  and  while  here  was  or- 
dained an  Elder  by  Claud  Rogers.  In 
185  6  he  moved  to  Provo,  where  he 
had  been  requested  to  take  charge 
of  a  tannery  and  shoe  shop.  Here 
he  was  ordained  a  Seventy  by  an 
Elder  Thomas.  Brother  Smart  also 
took  an  active  part  in  military  affairs 
and  at  the  time  of  the  Black  Hawk 
war  (1865-1867)  he  served  as  a  cap- 
tain of  guards.  In  1860  he  moved  to 
the  district  which  is  now  known  as 
Franklin,   Idaho,   being  one    of    the 


pioneers  of  that  locality  and  the  first 
president  of  the  branch  of  the  Church 
organized  there.  Subsequently,  this 
branch  was  organized  as  a  Ward, 
when  Bro.  Smart  was  installed  as  a 
counselor  in  the  bishopric,  a  position 
which  he  filled  with  great  fidelity. 
Being  very  frugal  in  his  habits  he 
accumulated  a  considerable  amount 
of  property  and  he  was  always  on 
hand  to  assist  others  who  were  in 
need.  Thus  he  sent  his  teams  several 
times  across  the  plains  after  poor 
emigrants,  going  once  himself  as 
teamster.  When  the  Oneida  Stake 
was  organized  he  was  ordained  a 
High  Priest  by  Apostle  Franklin  D. 
Richards  and  set  apart  as  a  member 
of  the  High  Council.  Besides  the 
three  children,  whom  he  adopted,  his 
first  wife,  Ann  Hayter,  bore  him 
eight  children,  namely,  Charlotte 
Elizabeth,  Maria,  Thomas  H.,  Sarah 
Ann,  Eliza,  Frances  Ann,  William 
Henry  and  Mary  Jane.  He  also  mar- 
ried Minnie  Shrives  (daughter  of  Ed- 
win Shrives  and  Elizabeth  Holton), 
who  was  born  Dec.  12,  18  60,  and  who 
bore  him  four  children,  namely,  Les- 
lie Edwin,  Vernon,  Iva  Lilla  and 
Melvin  Shrives..  He  also  married 
Margaret  Justice,  who  bore  him  one 
daughter  (Jane).  Brother  Smart  v.as 
very  active  in  organizing  utility  busi- 
ness companies  for  the  advancement 
of  the  several  localities  in  which  he 
lived.  He  died  in  Franklin,  Oneida 
county,  Idaho,  April  18,  1901.  A  few 
years  ago  a  monument  was  erected  in 
Franklin  in  honor  of  Bro.  Smart  and 
his  associate  pioneers  by  the  citizens 
of  the  town  and  the  posterity  of  the 
pioneers  of  the  settlement  in  recog- 
nition of  their  labors  for  the  public 
good.  Elder  Smart  was  of  fair  com- 
plexion, having  blue  eyes  and  auburn 
hair  and  was  of  a  pure  Anglo-Saxon 
type.  He  was  about  six  feet  in  height, 
robust  and  well  built,  weighing  about 
two  hundred  pounds.  He  was  strong 
and  athletic  and  enjoyed  hunting, 
fishing  and  all  natural  innocent 
sports.     He  was  of  a  sympathetic  and 


516 


LATTER-DAY   SAINT 


kindly  nature,  ever  upholding  the 
rights  of  the  weak  and  down-trodden, 
and  was  honest  to  the  core.  He  held 
various  positions  of  public  trust, 
serving  many  times  as  a  juror,  his 
judicial  temperament  being  of  a  high 
order.  He  was  often  chosen  as  an 
arbitrator  and  was  known  generally 
as  a  "Good  Samaritan"  and  a  man  of 
peace.  He  was  spiritually  as  well 
as  temporally  minded,  fervent  in 
prayer,  faithful  in  observing,  for  the 
most  part,  the  cardinal  principles  of 
the  gospel,  ever  upheld  authority  and 
was  especially  gifted  in  administer- 
ing to  the  sick.  He  was  retiring  and 
modest  in  his  nature,  never  intruding 
himself  and  was  among  that  great 
body  of  true  sons  of  Israel  who  must 
be  known  to  be  appreciated,  and  of 
whom  it  is  written  "There  are  they 
who  are  last  that  shall  be  first,"  and 
who,  having  taken  their  pioneer  bur- 
dens for  pillows,  await  the  reward  of 
the  faithful. 

SIVUTH,  Charles  H.,  Bishop  of  the 
Pella  Ward  (Cassia  Stake),  Idaho, 
was  born  Oct.   12,   1873,  at  Willard, 


Box  Elder  county,  Utah,  the  son  of 
George  Smith  and  Elizabeth  Altrop. 
He  was  baptized  when  a  boy;  or- 
dained a  Priest  Dec.  27,  1894,  by  Ab- 


raham Zundell;  ordained  an  Elder 
July  11,  1900,  by  Thos.  Morgan,  and 
ordained  a  Seventy  by  Joseph  W. 
McMurrin  July  11,  1900.  In  1900- 
1902  he  filled  a  mission  to  Great 
Britain,  laboring  in  the  London  con- 
ference. During  that  mission  he 
witnessed  many  manifestations  of 
the  power  of  God.  At  home  he  has 
been  busily  engaged  in  the  perform- 
ance of  Church  duties.  When  the 
Burley  Ward,  Cassia  county,  Idaho, 
was  organized  in  1906  he  was  chosen 
as  second  counselor  to  Bishop  Lor- 
enzo W.  Robbins  and  labored  in  this 
calling  three  years.  When  the  Pella 
branch  grew  out  of  the  Burley  Ward, 
he  was  chosen  as  presiding  Elder  of 
said  branch,  and  when  the  branch 
was  organized  as  a  Ward  in  1914,  he 
was  ordained  a  Bishop  by  Apostle 
Rudgar  Clawson  and  set  apart  to  pre- 
side over  said  Ward.  In  1903  (June 
26th)  he  married  Lillie  W.  Stokes  in 
the  Salt  Lake  Temple.  Bishop  Smith's 
occupations  have  been  those  of  a 
farmer  and  well  driller. 

SMITH,  Thomas  Alfred,  the  sixth 
Bishop  of  Cherry  Creek  Ward  (Malad 
Stake),  Oneida  county,  Idaho,  was 
born  Sept.  6,  1875,  at  Willard,  Box 
Elder  county,  Utah,  the  son  of  Geo. 
Smith  and  Elizabeth  Altrop.  He  was 
baptized  in  October,  1883,  by  Joseph 
Hubbard;  ordained  a  Deacon  when 
quite  young,  and  afterwards  ordained 
a  Priest  and  Elder.  He  was  ordained 
a  Seventy  June  20,  1900,  by  J.  Gol- 
den Kimball  and  filled  a  mission  to 
Colorado  in  1900-1901.  He  acted  as 
assistant  superintendent  of  the  North 
Willard  Sunday  school  for  some  time 
and  afterwards  officiated  as  the  pre- 
siding Elder  at  North  Willard  about 
two  years.  After  his  removal  to 
Idaho  he  acted  as  superintendent  of 
the  Cherry  Ward  Sunday  school  from 
190  6  to  1910  and  has  been  a  member 
of  the  Oneida  Stake  Sunday  school 
board  since  1910.  He  was  ordained 
a  High  Priest  and  Bishop  Sept.  17, 
1911,   by   Heber   J.     Grant    and    set 


BIOGRAPHICAL   ENCYCLOPEDIA. 


517 


apart  to  preside  over  the  Cherry 
Creek  Ward.  In  1902  (March  12th) 
he  married  Eliza  Middleton  (daugh- 
ter of  John  Middleton  and  Mary  Ann 


Kettle),  who  was  born  Dec.  3,  1874, 
at  American  Fork,  Utah  county, 
Utah.  His  wife  has  borne  him  eight 
children,  namely,  Lloyd  W.,  Mary  E., 
Elmer  A.,  Leon  H.,  Charles  J.,  La- 
vern  M.,  Marion  E.  and  George  V. 
Bro.  Smith  has  been  a  resident  of 
Cherry  Creek  since  1905. 

S]\nTH,  Willard  Gilbert,  Bishop  of 
Leavitt  (Alberta  Stake),  Alberta, 
Canada,  was  born  Sept.  8,  1870,  at 
Littleton,  Morgan  county,  Utah,  the 
son  of  Willard  G.  Smith  and  Hulda 
Cordelia  Thurston.  He  was  baptized 
Sept.  8,  1878,  by  Lyman  Mecham; 
was  ordained  an  Elder  Sept.  21, 
1890;  married  Mariah  Lamb  Nov.  15, 

1890,  in  the  Logan  Temple,  which 
marriage  has  been  blessed  with  five 
sons  and  two  daughters.  He  was  or- 
dained a  High  Priest  by  his  father 
and  set  apart  as  second  counselor  to 
Bishop  Giles  of  the  Milton  Ward  in 

1891.  In  1897  he  went  to  Alberta, 
Canada,  with  his  family  and  became 
a  member  of  the  Leavitt  Ward  where 
he  acted  as  school  trustee  for  nine 
years.  He  was  ordained  a  Bishop 
May   23,    1908,    by   Apostle    Geo.    F. 


Richards  and  set  apart  to  preside 
over  the  Leavitt  Ward.  Bishop 
Smith  is  a  grandson  of  Warren  Smith 
who,  together  with  his  son  Sardius, 
was  killed  in  the  Haun's  Mill  massa- 
cre in  Missouri  in  1838.  His  mother 
was  Amanda  Smith,  also  of  Haun's 
Mill  fame. 

S]\nTH,  WiUiam  Cooke,  Bishop  of 
the  Snowflake  Ward  (Snowflake 
Stake),  Navajo  county,  Arizona,  was 
born  June  1,  1889,  at  Pacheco,  Chi- 
huahua, Mexico,  the  son  of  Jesse 
Nathaniel  Smith  jun.  and  Mary  Ann 
Mitchell.  He  was  baptized  by  his 
father  June  1,  1897,  at  Colonia  Dub- 
Ian,  having  previously  moved  to  that 
colony,  where  he  also  received  a  com- 
mon school  education,  and  after  mov- 
ing to  Arizona  he  continued  his  stu- 
dies in  the  Northern  Arizona  Normal 
school  at  Flagstaff  and  finished  his 
education  at  the  B.  Y.  University  at 
Provo,  Utah,  graduating  June  1, 
1917,  with  an  A.  B.  degree.  He  had 
given  his  summer  wages  to  his  family 
and  paid  his  way  through  school  by 
doing  janitory  work  and  other  odd 
jobs.  William  was  ordained  succes- 
sively to  the  offices  of  Deacon,  Tea- 
cher, Priest,  Elder,  Seventy  and 
High  Priest;  he  filled  a  mission  to 
Southern  Mexico  in  1909-1911,  after 
being  ordained  an  Elder.  He  had 
studied  the  Spanish  language  at 
school  and  at  home,  but  learned  to 
speak  it  fluently  in  the  missionary 
field,  and  after  his  return  from  his 
mission  he  served  as  interpreter  of 
Spanish  in  the  Supreme  Court  of 
Navajo  county,  Arizona.  Two  weeks 
after  his  father's  death,  in  1912,  he 
left  Mexico  as  a  refugee,  together 
with  his  co-religionists  and  soon 
afterwards  located  in  Snowflake,  Ari- 
zona. Leaving  Mexico,  the  company 
with  which  he  traveled  was  over- 
taken by  bandits  near  Dublan.  They 
fired  into  the  camp  and  Bro.  Smith, 
who  rode  a  horse  bare  backed,  was 
hit  on  the  leg  by  a  spent  ball  and 
slightly     wounded.      With     the     as- 


518 


LATTER-DAY   SAINT 


sistance  of  his  younger  brother  he 
built  a  home  for  his  widowed  mother 
in  Parowan,  Utah.  In  1917  (Aug. 
15th)  he  married  Fernanda  Eyring 
(daughter  of  Henry  Eyring  and  Des- 
eret  Fawsett),  who  was  born  Oct.  2, 
1891,  in  Colonia  Juarez,  Mexico.  He 
commenced  teaching  in  the  Snow- 
flake  Academy  Sept.  20,  1917,  and  is 
still  an  instructor  in  that  institution. 
Being  drafted  into  the  U.  S.  service 
in  1918  he  trained  in  Camp  Cody, 
New  Mexico,  and  later  at  Camp  Dix, 
New  Jersey.  After  that  he  crossed 
the  Atlantic  and  served  nine  months 
as  a  soldier  in  France,  returning  to 
America  in  July,  1919.  While  in 
France  he  had  charge  of  a  military 
school,  having  fifty  men  under  him, 
assisted  by  three  other  teachers.  He 
also  spent  four  months  in  the  Uni- 
versity in  Rennes,  France.  After  his 
return  to  Snowflake  he  resumed  his 
former  position  as  instructor  in  the 
Snowflake  Academy.  Before  joining 
the  army  he  was  ordained  a  Seventy 
and  became  a  member  of  the  73rd 
quorum  of  Seventy.  .  At  a  meeting 
held  Oct.  5,  1919,  he  was  sustained 
as  Bishop  of  the  Snowflake  Ward  and 
on  Oct.  26,  1919,  he  was  ordained  a 
High  Priest  and  Bishop  by  Apostle 
Melvin  J.  Ballard  and  set  apart  to 
preside  over  said  Ward. 

SNOW,  Fi-ank  Mousley,  second 
Bishop  of  the  Turner  Ward  (Bannock 
Stake),  Bannock  county,  Idaho,  was 
born  March  30,  1876,  in  Salt  Lake 
City,  Utah,  the  son  of  Willard  L. 
Snow  and  Flora  Mousley.  He  was 
baptized  when  eight  years  old  by  his 
father;  ordained  successively  to  the 
offices  of  Deacon,  Teacher,  Priest 
and  Elder;  ordained  a  High  Priest 
and  Bishop  Nov.  19,  1910,  by  Apostle 
Geo.  F.  Richards,  and  held  that  posi- 
tion until  1914.  Bro.  Snow  acted  as 
assistant  superintendent  of  the  Grace 
Ward  Sunday  school  five  years.  Stake 
aid  in  the  Y.  M.  M.  I.  A.  two  years, 
and  a  home  missionary  four  years.  In 
1902-1904  he  filled  a  mission  to  the 


Eastern  States,  laboring  principally 
in  Pennsylvania.  In  1906  (June 
20th)  he  married  Mary  E.  Sullivan 
(daughter  of  David  D.  Sullivan  and 
Caroline     Calkins),     who     was    born 


Sept.  12,  1882,  at  Soda  Springs, 
Idaho.  Four  children  (Mary  Helen, 
Flora  Lavira  and  Caroline,  twins, 
and  Frank  De  Mar)  have  blessed  this 
marriage.  After  his  marriage  Bishop 
Snow  settled  permanently  at  Grace, 
Idaho.  Bro.  Snow  was  set  apart  as 
an  alternate  member  of  the  High 
Council  of  the  Bannock  Stake,  Nov. 
1^,   1916. 

SNOW,  Franklin  Richard,  first 
counselor  in  the  presidency  of  the 
Ensign  Stake,  Salt  Lake  City,  Utah, 
was  born  Sept.  21,  1854,  in  Salt  Lake 
City,  the  son  of  Erastus  Snow  and 
Artimesia  Beman.  He  moved  to  St. 
George  with  his  parents  in  18  62  and 
lived  there  until  1888.  He  obtained 
his  early  education  in  St.  George,  at- 
tending school  during  the  winter 
months  and  working  on  the  farm, 
teaming,  etc.,  during  the  summer. 
When  twenty  years  of  age  he  began 
working  in  the  St.  George  tithing  of- 
fice as  bookkeeper  and  was  connected 
with  that  position  for  fourteen  years, 
advancing  rapidly  until  he  was 
chosen  as  Bishop's  agent  of  the  St. 


BIOGRAPHICAL   ENCYCLOPEDIA. 


519 


George  Stake.  From  1874  to  1884 
he  acted  as  secretary  of  the  Rio  Vir- 
gen  Manufacturing  Company  and  was 
for  a  time  also  assistant  manager  of 
the  Co-operative  Mercantile  Institu- 
tion of  St.  George.  Bro.  Snow  was 
ordained  an  Elder  in  1872  and  a 
Seventy  Aug.  12,  1883,  by  Edward 
Stevenson.  In  1883-1885  he  filled  a 
mission  to  Mexico,  together  with 
Elder  Heleman  Pratt,  where  he  had 
many  varied  experiences.  In  1877 
(April  12th)  he  married  Lucy  Sim- 
mons (daughter  of  Joseph  M.  Sim- 
mons and  Rachel  Woolley)  in  the 
St.    George   Temple.      This    marriage 


has  been  blessed  with  eleven  chil- 
dren (three  sons  and  eight  daugh- 
ters), namely,  Ralph  Franklin,  Val- 
entine Simmons,  Joseph  Marcellus, 
Lucy,  Rachel,  Merle,  Gertrude,  Mar- 
guerite, Virginia,  Olive  and  Arte- 
mesia.  In  1888  Elder  Snow  moved 
to  Salt  Lake  City  to  engage  in  the 
wagon  and  implement  business  in 
connection  with  his  brother  George 
A.  and  others.  They  organized  the 
Consolidated  Implement  Company 
and  Franklin  was  elected  secretary 
and  treasurer,  which  position  he  held 
until  the  business  was  merged  into 
what  Is  now  the  Consolidated  Wagon 


and  Machine  Co.  He  was  elected 
treasurer  of  the  new  organization 
and  also  a  member  of  the  executive 
committee  and  occupied  those  posi- 
tions until  1904  when  he  resigned  to 
engage  in  the  wholesale  furniture 
business.  In  1906  he  became  a  mem- 
ber of  the  Salt  Lake  Stock  and  Min- 
ing Exchange  and  remained  a  mem- 
ber of  that  organization  for  thirteen 
years.  At  present  he  is  quite  exten- 
sively engaged  in  raising  and  ship- 
ping fruit  and  vegetables,  principally 
cantaloups,  from  Moapa  Valley,  Nev. 
In  1909  he  assisted  in  the  organiza- 
tion of  the  Utah-Moapa  Distributing 
Company  and  has  acted  as  president 
and  manager  of  that  company  since 
it  was  first  organized.  He  is  also  in- 
terested in  real  estate  and  other  busi- 
ness enterprises  in  Salt  Lake  City. 
From  his  early  youth  Elder  Snow  has 
been  engaged  in  Church  work  and 
has  filled  many  offices  in  the  Priest- 
hood; thus  he  was  engaged  in  Sun- 
day school  work  for  about  twenty- 
two  years,  was  a  member  of  the  first 
Stake  superintendency  of  religion 
classes  organized  in  the  Ensign  Stake 
and  later  became  Stake  superinten- 
dent. In  1904,  when  the  Ensign 
Stake  was  organized,  he  was  chosen 
as  a  member  of  the  High  Council, 
having  previously  (September,  1885) 
been  ordained  a  High  Priest  by 
Bishop  William  B.  Preston.  He 
served  as  a  High  Councilor  for  fifteen 
years.  In  March,  1912,  he  was  called 
to  labor  as  an  ordinance  worker  in 
the  Salt  Lake  Temple,  continuing 
thus  for  upwards  of  three  years.  In 
1918  (Sept.  22nd)  he  was  set  apart 
as  second  counselor  to  Richard  W. 
Young  in  the  presidency  of  the  En- 
sign Stake,  and  on  June  30,  1919,  he 
was  set  apart  as  first  counselor  to 
President  Young.  Bro.  Snow's  wife 
Lucy  died  March  4,  1905,  and  on 
August  10,  1906,  he  married  Loah 
Clayton,  who  died  Dec.  23,  1916. 

SNOW,     William,     Patriarch     and 
Bishop    of    Pine    Valley    (St.    George 


520 


LATTER-DAY   SAINT 


Stake),  Washington  county,  Utah, 
was  born  Dec.  14,  1806,  at  Saint 
Johnsbury,  Caledonia  county,  Ver- 
mont, the  son  of  Levi  Snow  and  Lu- 
cina  Streeter.  He  was  baptized  May 
19,  1832,  by  Lyman  E.  Johnson;  or- 
dained a  Priest  July  16,  1832,  by 
Lyman  E.  Johnson,  and  commenced 
to  labor  as  a  missionary,  and  or- 
dained an  Elder  Oct.  26,  1832,  by 
Lyman  E.  Johnson.  In  that  year 
(Sept.  21,  1832)  he  married  Hannah 
Miles,  who  bore  him  four  children, 
namely,  Levi,  Lucina,  Abigail  D.  and 
Mason.  In  August,  1842,  he  married 
Lydia  Adams,  by  whom  he  had  two 


children,  namely,  Sariah  and  Levi 
William.  In  January,  1845,  he  mar- 
ried Sallie  Adams,  who  became  the 
mother  of  Julia  N.,  Sarah  S.,  Emma 
L.,  Chloe  L.,  Lucy  A.,  Maryette  and 
William  J.  Bro.  Snow  migrated  to 
Utah  in  1850  and  became  a  resident 
of  Salt  Lake  City,  and  at  the  "move" 
in  1858  settled  in  Lehi,  where  he 
resided  until  1861,  when  he  was 
called  to  the  "Dixie"  mission.  He 
married  Jane  Maria  Shearer  Oct.  13, 
1850.  The  children  by  this  marriage 
were  William,  Maria,  Erastus,  Mary 
Lorena  and  Mason  Levi.  He  married 
Roxana     Leavitt     and     Ann     Rogers 


March  12,  1853.  The  children  by  his 
wife  Roxana  were  Melissa  and  John 
L.  and  his  children  by  Ann  Rogers 
were  Willard,  Jeter,  Celestia,  Charles, 
Frank,  Bernella  E.,  Orrin  H.  and 
George.  Bro.  Snow  assisted  in  com- 
piling the  first  laws  of  Utah.  In  the 
winter  of  1855-1856  he  attended  the 
legislature  at  Fillmore  and  also 
served  as  a  member  of  the  Utah 
legislature  in  the  winter  of  1868- 
1869.  For  a  number  of  years  he 
acted  as  probate  judge  of  Washing- 
ton county,  Utah,  and  on  July  6, 
1867,  he  was  ordained  a  Bishop  and 
set  apart  to  preside  over  the  Pine 
Valley  Ward  by  his  brother,  Erastus 
Snow,  which  position  he  held  until 
his  death,  which  occurred  in  Pine 
Valley  May  19,  1879.  Prior  to  his 
death  he  was  ordained  a  Patriarch. 

SORENSEN,  Peter,  Bishop  of  Dar- 
by Ward  (Teton  Stake), Teton  county, 
Idaho,  was  born  June  15,  1865,  at 
Nordrup,  Sjaelland,  Denmark,  the  son 
of  Niels  Peter  Madsen  and  Christiana 
Nielsen.  He  emigrated  to  Utah  in 
18  72  and  was  baptized  when  about 
8  years  old.  When  thirteen  years  of 
age  he  was  adopted  by  Jorgen  Soren- 
sen,  whose  name  he  took.  After  first 
being  ordained  a  Deacon  and  after- 
wards an  Elder,  he  was  ordained  a 
High  Priest  in  August,  1908,  and  set 
apart  as  second  counselor  to  Bishop 
Alexander  P.  Hamilton;  afterwards 
he  acted  as  second  counselor  to 
Bishop  Willard  Homer  and  still  later 
served  as  first  counselor  to  Bishop 
Charles  D.  Larsen.  In  August,  1913, 
he  was  ordained  a  Bishop  by  Charles 
W.  Penrose  and  set  apart  to  preside 
over  the  Darby  Ward,  which  position 
he  still  holds.  In  1891  (Dec.  16th) 
he  married  Mary  E.  Lewis  (daughter 
of  Daniel  Lewis  and  Mary  Kay),  who 
was  born  May  8,  1868,  at  Kamas, 
Summit  county,  Utah;  she  has  borne 
her  husband  ten  children,  namely: 
Arnold  L.,  Douglas  P.,  Marvin  L., 
Daniel  S.,  Daphne  C,  Sarah  U.,  Ruth 
I.,  Gordon  L.,  Mary  E.  and  Beatrice  M. 


BIOGRAPHICAL   ENCYCLOPEDIA. 


621 


STALEY,  John  Wesley,  first  Bishop 
of  Crystal  Ward  (Pocatello  Stake), 
Power  county,  Idaho,  was  born  April 
4,  1880,  at  Rural  Retreat,  Virginia, 
the  son  of  Joseph  Crocket  Staley  and 
Betsy  Collins.  He  migrated  to  Idaho 
in  1901  and  after  residing  succes- 
sively at  Blackfoot  and  Idaho  Falls, 
he  located  permanently  at  Crystal  in 
1911.  Becoming  a  convert  to  "Mor- 
monism,"  he  was  baptized  Nov.  14, 
1909,  by  James  W.  Killian;  ordained 
an  Elder  by  James  A.  Ray,  and  or- 
dained a  High  Priest  and  Bishop  Nov. 
25,  1916,  by  George  Albert  Smith 
and  set  apart  to  preside  over  the 
Crystal  Ward,  which  was  organized 
at  that  time.  Bishop  Staley  is  a  car- 
penter by  trade,  but  is  also  engaged 
in  farming.  He  has  served  as  justice 
of  the  peace  at  Crystal  since  1912. 
In  1902  (Jan.  1st)  he  married  Sarah 
Phoebe  Adams  (daughter  of  Lot 
Adams  and  Sarah  Ann  Plant),  who 
was  born  June  1,  1883,  in  Richmond, 
Cache  county,  Utah.  She  has  borne 
her  husband  three  children,  namely. 
Bertha  Virginia,  Ida  Maria  and  Ralph 
Edward. 

STAPLEY,  Orley  Sej-mour,  first 
Counselor  in  the  Stake  presidency  of 
the  Maricopa  Stake  and  a  resident  of 
Mesa,  Maricopa  county,  Arizona,  was 
born  April  28,  1872,  at  Toquerville, 
Washington  county,  Utah,  the  son  of 
Thomas  Stapley  and  Mary  Ann  Bliss. 
He  was  baptized  July  18,  1880,  by 
James  Jackson,  in  Toquerville,  where 
he  also  received  a  common  school 
education.  In  1881,  when  about  ten 
years  old,  he  went  with  his  father's 
family  to  Arizona,  where  his  father 
and  brothers  labored  for  some  time 
grading  on  the  Atlantic  and  Pacific 
Railroad.  Early  in  1882  the  family 
located  at  Mesa  and  soon  after  moved 
into  the  Alma  Ward,  near  the  present 
site  of  Mesa,  in  the  Salt  Lake  Valley. 
Here  Orley  S.  was  ordained  a  Deacon, 
when  the  Alma  Ward  was  first  or- 
ganized, and  was  also  an  active  mem- 
ber in  the  Sunday  school  and  Primary 


Associations,  while  helping  his  father 
in  his  farming  operation.  As  his 
father  was  born  partially  blind  and 
always  had  to  have  a  helper  near 
when  working,  Orley  S.  had  to  take 
the  responsibility  of  the  farm  and 
help  to  take  care  of  the  family.  In 
188  9  his  father  lost  all  his  property, 
after  which  Orley  S.  commenced 
manipulating  financial  affairs  for  his 
parents  and  himself,  working  at  first 
for  small  wages,  doing  farm  and  dairy 
work,  but  by  this  means  he  learned 
the    dairy    business    as    well    as    the 


butcher  business  proficiently.  In 
1894  (Aug.  22nd)  he  married  Polly 
May  Hunsaker  (daughter  of  Alexan- 
der and  Malissa  Johnson),  who  was 
born  Dec.  24,  1874.  The  children  by 
this  marriage  are  the  following:  Or- 
ley Glenn,  Delbert,  Leon,  Loral, 
Aaron,  Lynn  Erwin,  Zelda  La  Rue, 
Thyrle  H.,  Zola  May,  Cleo  Malissa 
and  Wayne  Curtis.  Brother  Stapley 
has  been  active  in  Church  affairs 
from  his  early  youth.  He  acted  as 
president  of  the  Alma  Ward  Y.  M.  M. 
I.  A.  and  also  after  his  removal  to 
Mesa  in  1895.  He  was  ordained  an 
Elder  in  1897  and  received  his  bless- 
ing in  the  Salt  Lake  Temple.  In 
March,  189  7,  he  went  into  the  hard- 


522 


LATTER-DAY   SAINT 


ware  business,  together  with  his 
father-in-law  (Alexander  Hunsaker), 
with  a  capital  of  $500.  This  partner- 
ship existed  until  1898,  when  Brother 
Stapley  sold  out  his  interests,  being 
called  on  a  mission  to  the  Southern 
States.  He  filled  this  mission  from 
1898  to  1900,  laboring  principally  in 
Mississippi.  When  he  was  set  apart 
for  this  mission  he  was  promised  that 
he  would  be  worth  more  if  he  re- 
sponded to  the  call  than  he  would  if 
he  had  failed  to  go.  He  sacrificed  his 
business  in  order  to  fill  his  mission, 
and  the  promise  was  literally  ful- 
filled, for  when  he  returned  and  en- 
tered into  business  again  he  became  a 
most  successful  merchant.  The  busi- 
ness which  he  commenced  in  1900  is 
now  worth  $300,000.  Brother  Stapley 
was  ordained  a  Seventy  May  17,  1898, 
by  Seymour  B.  Young,  when  he  was 
set  apart  for  his  mission.  In  1901 
he  was  appointed  superintendent  of 
the  Mesa  Sunday  school,  which  posi- 
tion he  held  until  1907,  during  which 
time  he  made  the  unprecedented 
record  of  never  being  late  but  once  in 
his  attendance  at  the  school.  In  1908 
he  was  made  Stake  superintendent  of 
Sunday  schools.  He  also  acted  as  a 
president  of  the  90th  quorum  of  Sev- 
enty. When  James  W.  Lesueur  was 
chosen  as  president  of  the  Maricopa 
Stake,  Brother  Stapley  was  ordained 
a  High  Priest  by  Francis  M.  Lyman 
and  set  apart  as  first  counselor  to 
President  Lesueur,  which  position  he 
still  holds.  Brother  Stapley  has  also 
been  active  as  a  civil  officer;  thus  he 
served  as  a  city  councilman  in  Mesa 
for  four  years  and  served  as  senator 
in  the  Arizona  legislature  from  1914 
to  1915,  assisting  to  correct  extrava- 
gance in  State  affairs  and  political 
machinery.  He  acted  as  chairman  of 
the  appropriation  committee  and  also 
as  chairman  of  State  accounts  and 
methods  of  business.  In  1910  he 
took  a  leading  part  in  the  prohibition 
movement,  making  Mesa  the  first 
city  in  Arizona  which  "went  dry." 
He  continued  his  efficient  work  until 


the  whole  State  was  "dry."  Saloon- 
keepers cursed  and  swore  against  him 
all  the  time,  but  he  won  the  victory. 
His  present  hardware  business  in 
Mesa  is  owned  by  himself  and  sons, 
and  he  is  also  connected  with  several 
other  business  enterprises.  Thus  he 
acts  as  vice  president  and  chief 
shareholder  in  the  First  National 
Bank  of  Mesa,  secretary  and  treasurer 
of  the  South  Side  Gas  &  Electric 
Company,  and  is  director  of  many 
other  business  concerns,  doing  busi- 
ness also  in  Phoenix,  the  capital  of 
Arizona.  He  is  agent  for  all  branch- 
es of  the  International  Harvester 
Company  of  America  in  the  Salt  River 
Yalley  and  represents  other  inter- 
state businesses  in  Arizona. 

STEEDMAN,  Andrew,  third  Bishop 
of  the  Mammoth  Ward  (Nebo  Stake), 
Juab  county,  Utah,  was  born  July  10, 
1865,    at    Forfar,    county    of    Forfar, 


Scotland,  the  son  of  Adam  Steedman 
and  Christina  Steedman.  He  was 
baptized  Nov.  2,  1892,  by  Orrin  Col- 
vin,  emigrated  to  Utah  in  1893  and 
lived  successively  in  Coalville,  Sum- 
mit county,  and  Salt  Lake  City.  In 
1899  he  located  at  Mammoth,  where 
he  has  been  employed  as  master  me- 
chanic for  the  Mammoth  Mining  Com- 
pany practically  ever  since.  Brother 
Steedman  was  ordained  successively 
to  the  offices  of  Priest,  Elder  and 
High  Priest.  To  the  latter  office  he 
was  ordained  by  James  W.  Paxman 
and   at   the   same   time   set   apart   as 


BIOGRAPHICAL   ENCYCLOPEDIA. 


523 


second  counselor  to  Bishop  George 
Hales.  In  1903  he  was  chosen  as 
first  counselor  to  Bishop  Fred  Lund- 
berg.  In  1905  he  was  ordained  a 
Bishop  by  Francis  M.  Lyman  and  set 
apart  to  preside  over  the  Mammoth 
Ward,  which  position  he  held  until 
Tintic  was  organized  into  a  Stake,  in 
1917,  when  he  was  chosen  as  a  mem- 
ber of  the  High  Council,  which  posi- 
tion he  now  holds.  Prior  to  this  he 
acted  as  president  of  the  Ward  Y.  M. 
M.  I.  A.  from  1899  to  1900.  He  has 
also  acted  as  city  councilman  at 
Mammoth  for  three  terms.  In  1889 
he  married  Eliza  Strang  (daughter  of 
Andrew  Strang  and  Mary  Muir ) ,  who 
was  born  Jan.  7,  1869,  at  Wisham, 
Lanarkshire,  Scotland.  Bro.  Steed- 
man's  marriage  has  been  blessed  with 
thirteen  children,  eight  sons  and  five 
daughters;  of  these,  six  sons  and 
three  daughters  are  still  alive. 

STEPHENS,  William  Orial,  Bishop 
of  Henefer,  Summit  county,  Utah, 
was  born  Sept.  23,  1885,  at  Henefer, 
the  son  of  William  Thomas  Stephens 
and  Hannah  Edith  Richins.  His 
grand-parents  joined  the  Church  in 
England  and  his  grandfather  was  the 
first  Bishop  of  Henefer.  William  O. 
was  baptized  Aug.  12,  18  94,  by  Nephi 
A.  Bond;  was  ordained  a  Deacon 
March  5,  1905,  by  John  C.  Paskett, 
and  acted  as  president  of  the  Dea- 
cons' quorum  for  some  time.  He 
was  ordained  an  Elder  Dec.  16,  1905, 
by  Micah  F.  Harris  and  filled  a 
mission  to  the  Northern  States  in 
1906-1907,  laboring  principally  in  the 
State  of  Michigan  and  at  the  mission 
office  at  Chicago.  Two  years  prior  to 
this  Bishop  Stephens  attended  the 
L.  D.  S.  University  in  Salt  Lake  City, 
taking  the  normal  and  business 
courses.  He  acted  as  president  of  the 
8th  quorum  of  Elders  in  the  Summit 
Stake  from  March  5,  1908,  until  Jan. 
31,  1915;  acted  as  president  of  the 
Henefer  Y.  M.  M.  I.  A.  from  Febru- 
ary, 1908,  until  May,  1915  ;  was  Ward 
chorister  from  1908  to  1915;  served 


as  Sunday  school  teacher  from  1903 
to  1015;  acted  as  first  counselor  in 
the  Stake  Y.  M.  M.  I.  A.  from  1909  to 
1913,  and  was  a  member  of  the  Stake 
Sunday  School  Board  in  1914-1915. 
He  was  ordained  a  Seventy  Jan.  31, 
1915,    by    J.     Golden    Kimball    and 


chosen  as  a  president  of  the  27th 
quorum  of  Seventy  the  same  day; 
was  ordained  a  High  Priest  and 
Bishop  May  12,  1915,  by  Francis  M. 
Lyman  and  set  apart  to  preside  over 
the  Henefer  Ward.  Bishop  Stephens 
is  a  farmer  by  occupation,  and  since 
Nov.  4,  1910,  he  has  served  as  county 
assessor  for  Summit  county.  In  1911 
(Sept.  27th)  he  married  Myrtle  Jane 
Harris,  of  Henefer,  which  marriage 
has  been  blessed  with  two  children. 

STERRETT,     William     Wilson,     a 

Patriarch  in  the  Church  and  a  Utah 
pioneer,  was  born  Nov.  18,  1825,  in 
Ross,  Butler  county,  Ohio,  the  son  of 
Alexander  Sterrett  and  Elizabeth 
Baxter.  In  a  brief  autobiography 
written  by  Bro.  Sterrett  he  writes: 
"My  schooling  consisted  of  reading, 
writing  and  arithmetic;  books  in 
those  days  were  scarce.  My  mother 
was  naturally  a  good  woman  and 
taught  me  to  be  honest  and  respect 
the  name  of  Deity.  Father  was 
worldly-minded,  but  an  honest  man. 


524 


L.ATTER-DAY   SAINT 


I  served  two  years  at  the  tailoring 
trade  and  spent  a  few  years  on  the 
Ohio  and  Mississippi  rivers  steam- 
boating.  At  the  commencement  of  the 
Mexican  war  I  went  to  Mexico  in  the 
quarter-master's  department,  and  re- 
turned to  Ohio  in  1848.  Having 
heard  rumors  of  the  discovery  of 
gold  in  California,  I  got  the  gold 
fever,  and  in  the  spring  of  1849 
started  for  California,  but  only  got 
to  Iowa  that  season.  In  the  spring 
of  1850  I  started  again  and  arrived 
in  Salt  Lake  City  Aug.  8,  1850.  In 
all  my  ups  and  downs  I  had  many 
temptations  to  pass  through,  and  I 
also  had  many  reflections  in  regard 
to  a  future  state.  Always  being  a 
diligent  reader  I  read  everything  that 
came  in  my  way,  and  during  the  win- 
ter of  1850  I  read  the  Book  of  Mor- 
mon, the  Voice  of  Warning  and  other 
Church  works  and  became  convinced 
of  the  truth  of  "Mormonism."  There 
were  many  Gentiles  in  Salt  Lake  City 
during  that  winter  and  some  of  them 
joined  the  Church;  they  were  some- 
times called  winter  Mormons.  I  held 
off,  not  wishing  to  be  known  by  that 
appellation,  but  in  May,  1851,  I  was 
baptized  by  Elder  Reuben  McBride 
in  the  waters  of  City  Creek,  and  mar- 
ried Mary  Jane,  the  daughter  of 
Simeon  Crandell.  The  same  fall  I 
was  ordained  a  Teacher  by  James 
Hendricks.  I  continued  in  that  office 
until  1852,  when  I  was  ordained  a 
Seventy  by  Geo.  D.  Grant.  I  helped 
to  break  land  for  the  foundation  of 
the  Temple  and  in  November,  1853, 
I  went  with  John  Nebeker  to  Fort 
Bridger,  near  which  place  I  helped  to 
build  Fort  Supply.  In  December, 
1853,  when  we  found  that  we  did  not 
have  flour  enough  to  last  until  spring 
eight  of  us  were  sent  with  four 
wagons  to  Salt  Lake  City  for  another 
supply.  The  winter  set  in  early  and 
before  we  got  to  the  top  of  the  Big 
Mountain  the  snow  became  so  deep 
that  we  had  to  camp,  the  oxen  not 
being  able  to  pull  the  wagons.  We 
counseled   together   as   to   what   was 


best  to  do;  some  were  in  favor  of  re- 
turning, but  others  were  bent  on 
pushing  ahead.  Though  the  snow  was 
about  five  feet  deep  and  still  snow- 
ing, six  of  us  concluded  to  try  and 
tramp  a  trail  to  the  top  of  the  moun- 
tain. We  started  about  8  o'clock  p. 
m.  and  took  it  single  file,  one  keep- 
ing the  lead  as  long  as  he  could  stand 
it,  and  then  falling  back  to  the  rear. 
By  this  means  we  worked  our  way, 
reaching  the  top  the  next  morning. 
We  then  returned  and  drove  our  oxen 
along  our  trail.  On  reaching  the 
summit  the  crust  bore  them  up.  We 
left  our  wagons  there  that  winter, 
and  sent  a  man  on  horseback  to  the 
City  for  help;  by  2  o'clock  the  same 
day  plenty  of  help  came  and  we 
reached  the  City  that  night.  I  spent 
the  winter  in  the  City  and  in  the 
spring  went  back  to  Fort  Supply,  Or- 
son Hyde  going  with  us."  In  the 
spring  of  1855  Bro.  Sterrett  was 
called,  together  with  others  on  the 
so-called  Elk  Mountain  Mission,  dur- 
ing which  he  was  exposed  to  great 
danger  but  while  some  of  his  breth- 
ren were  killed  by  the  savages  he  es- 
caped and  returned  after  suffering 
untold  hardships  on  the  return  jour- 
ney to  Salt  Lake  City.  (See  Elk 
Mountain  Mission.)  In  November, 
1855  he  was  sent  with  a  posse  to 
Humboldt,  now  in  Nevada,  to  arrest 
Carl  Murrey,  accused  of  murder.  He 
captured  his  man.  The  following 
year,  Bro.  Sterritt  experienced  fam- 
ine, the  grasshoppers  having  destroy- 
ed the  crops.  In  the  spring  of  1856 
he  was  called  with  his  family  to  set- 
tle at  Fort  Supply  where  he  became 
a  successful  farmer  and  operated  a 
saw  mill.  During  the  Johnston  army 
trouble  he  was  very  helpful  in  de- 
fending his  people.  In  the  spring  of 
1858  he  went  to  Beaver,  but  returned 
to  Salt  Lake  City  later  in  the  season 
and  engaged  in  hotel  business.  In 
the  spring  of  1856  he  hired  out  to 
Major  Howard  Egan  to  do  duty  on 
the  mail  line.  After  residing  a  short 
time  in  Davis  county,  Utah,  he  went 


BIOGRAPHICAL  ENCYCLOPEDIA. 


525 


to  Bear  Lake  Valley  in  1863,  taing 
part  in  the  settling  of  Paris  where  he 
subsequently  followed  merchandizing 
together  with  Joseph  C.  Rich.  In 
18  67  he  married  Sarah  Ann  Oakley. 
In  1869  he  filled  a  short  mission  to 
Ohio  and  in  1871  he  moved  to  Soda 
Springs.  At  the  organization  of  the 
Bear  Lake  Stake  he  was  ordained  a 
High  Priest  and  became  a  member  of 
the  High  Council.  He  was  the  first 
postmaster  of  Paris  and  was  also 
postmaster  at  Soda  Springs.  He 
moved  to  Gentile  Valley  and  was 
elected  justice  of  the  peace.  When  a 
post  office  was  established  at  Cove, 
he  was  appointed  postmaster.  Subse- 
quently he  took  a  contract  to  carry 
mail.  On  July  25,  1898,  at  a  con- 
ference held  in  Gentile  Valley,  Ban- 
nock county,  Idaho,  he  was  ordained 
a  Patriarch  by  Mathias  F.  Cowley. 
Patriarch  Sterrett  died  in  Bannock 
county,  Idaho,  about  1916. 

STEVENS,  Joseph  Franklin,  pre- 
siding Elder  of  the  Canyon  Creek 
branch,  Fremont  Stake,  Idaho,  and  a 
president  of  the  159th  quorum  of 
Seventy,  was  born  March  23,  1880,  at 
Paragoonah,  Iron  county,  Utah,  the 
son  of  Hyrum  S.  Stevens  and  Hannah 
Elizabeth  Wardell.  He  was  baptized 
June  11,  1891,  by  Isaac  W.  Behunin; 
ordained  a  Deacon  Aug.  26,  1895,  by 
Thos.  R.  Wilson;  set  apart  as  presi- 
dent of  a  Deacons'  quorum  Sept.  27, 
1897;  ordained  an  Elder  March  6, 
1902,  by  George  S.  Young;  married 
Martha  R.  McKinlay,  April  9,  1902, 
in  the  Salt  Lake  Temple;  was  set 
apart  as  second  counselor  in  the  Y. 
M.  M.  I.  A.  of  the  Teton  Ward,  Fre- 
mont Stake,  Feb.  16,  1903,  and  after- 
wards became  first  counselor  in  the 
same  organization;  was  ordained  a 
Seventy  Feb.  24,  1906,  by  Henry  S. 
Jackson;  set  apart  as  superintendent 
of  the  Canyon  Creek  Sunday  school 
June  10,  1906;  set  apart  as  one  of 
the  presidents  of  the  159th  quorum 
of  Seventy  Dec.  5,  1910;  filled  a  mis- 
sion to  the  Southern  States  in  1913- 


1914,  presiding  over  the  Kentucky 
conference,  and  was  set  apart  as  pre- 
siding Elder  of  the  Canyon  Creek 
branch,  June  19,  1915.  Bro.  Stevens 
worked  with  his  father  on  the  farm 
when  a  boy  and  spent  several  years 


>>jyMyp>- 


freighting  between  Price  and  Ft. 
Duchesne,  Utah.  When  twenty-two 
years  of  age  he  commenced  his  career 
at  dry  farming  and  stock  raising. 
Bro.  Stevens'  marriage  to  Martha  R. 
McKinlay  has  been  blessed  with  three 
children,  namely,  Rula  Belle,  Wanda 
and  Helen. 

STEWART,  John  Riley,  Bishop  of 
Torrey  Ward  (Wayne  Stake),  Wayne 
county,  Utah,  from  1901  to  1906,  was 
born  Aug.  27,  1873,  in  Beaver,  Bea- 
ver county,  Utah,  the  son  of  Urban 
Van  Stewart  and  Ellen  Adams.  He 
was  baptized  May  21,  1882,  at  Adams- 
ville;  ordained  a  Deacon  Nov.  30, 
1884,  by  Joseph  H.  Joseph;  ordained 
a  Priest  Aug.  30,  1897,  by  Bishop 
George  Coleman  at  Teasdale,  Wayne 
county;  ordained  an  Elder  Oct.  14, 
1897,  by  Willis  E.  Robison  at  Loa; 
ordained  a  Seventy  Oct.  19,  1897,  by 
Apostle  John  Henry  Smith;  received 
his  blessings  in  the  Salt  Lake  Temple 
Nov.  20,  18'97,  and  filled  a  mission 
to  the  Northern  States  in  1897-1900, 


526 


LATTER-DAY   SAINT 


laboring  principally  in  Michigan. 
After  laboring  as  presiding  Elder  and 
assistant  Sunday  school  superinten- 
dent at  Grover,  he  was  ordained  a 
High  Priest  and  Bishop  April  5,  1901, 
by  Francis  M.  Lyman  and  set  apart  to 
preside  over  the  Torrey  Ward,  which 
position  he  filled  until  May,  1906.  In 
1903  (Aug.  14th)  he  married  Ellen 
Amelia  Covington  (daughter  of  John 
Thomas  Covington  and  Elizabeth 
Adams),  who  was  born  Dec.  10,  1884, 
in  Orderville,  Utah.  The  children  by 
this  marriage  are  the  following:  El- 
len Elizabeth,  born  April  26,  1904; 
John  Riley  jun.,  born  Oct.  25,  1905; 
Golda,  born  Dec.  21,  1907;  Cecil  Van, 
born  March  7,  1910;  Ceroid  William, 
born  March  21,  1911,  and  Junius 
Kent,  born  July  17,  1913.  His  wife 
died  July  17,  1916,  in  childbed.  Bro. 
Stewart  acted  as  second  counselor  to 
President  Gearson  S.  Bastion  from 
1906  to  1910  and  then  as  first  coun- 
selor to  Joseph  Eckersley  from  1910 
to  1915.  He  is  a  farmer  and  stock 
raiser  by  avocation. 

STEWART,  Joseph  Alvin,  acting 
Bishop  of  the  Alma  Ward  (Maricopa 
Stake),  Maricopa  county,  Arizona, 
was  born  Dec.  21,  1848,  in  Atchison 
county,  Missouri,  the  son  of  Alvin 
Franklin  Stewart  and  Comera  Olga 
Owen.  He  crossed  the  plains  with 
his  parents  in  1853  with  an  ox  train 
and  settled  in  Utah  county,  residing 
successively  in  Spanish  Fork  and 
Springville,  and  later  in  Salt  Lake 
county.  He  moved  to  Cache  Valley 
in  1859  where  his  father's  family  be- 
came some  of  the  first  settlers  of 
Richmond,  Cache  county,  Utah,  and 
spent  the  winter  of  1859-1860  in 
that  infant  colony.  In  1867  he  crossed 
the  plains  as  a  Church  teamster,  go- 
ing to  the  terminus  of  the  railroad  to 
bring  emigrating  Saints  to  Utah. 
Joseph  A.  resided  in  Cache  Valley 
until  1882,  when  he  moved  to  Ari- 
zona, arriving  in  Mesa  April  9,  1882. 
When  the  Alma  Ward  was  first  or- 
ganized he  was  called  to  take  charge 


of  the  Sabbath  school  and  during  the 
incarceration  of  Bishop  Oscar  Marion 
Stewart  in  the  Yuma  penitentiary  for 
conscience  sake  Bro.  Joseph  A.  Stew- 
art presided  over  the  Alma  Ward.  In 
1877  (Jan.  10th)  he  married  Julia 
Christine  Hobson,  who  bore  her  hus- 
band five  boys  and  six  girls;  seven 
of  these  children  are  still  living.  Bro. 
Stewart  has  twice  been  elected  jus- 
tice of  the  peace  in  the  Alma  precinct 
and  three  times  he  has  been  elected 
constable.  During  the  past  seven 
years  he  has  served  as  a  member  of 
the  High  Council  in  the  Maricopa 
Stake. 

STEWART,  Urban  Van,  a  Utah 
pioneer  of  1847,  was  born  Nov.  9, 
1817,  in  Overton  county,  Tennesee, 
the  son  of  Wm.  Stewart  and  Eliza- 
beth Van   Hooser.      When  five  years 


of  age  he  moved  with  his  parents  to 
Madison  county,  Illinois,  where  he 
lived  till  183  5,  when  he  went  to  Mis- 
souri, where  he,  as  a  convert  to  "Mor- 
monism,"  was  baptized  July  15,  1836, 
by  Seymour  Brunson  in  Log  Creek, 
near  Far  West,  Missouri.  He  was 
married  in  the  same  place  to  Lydia 
Gage  Jacobs  in  1837.  At  this  time 
the  mob  was  very  hostile  and  by  the 
advice  of  the  Prophet  Joseph  Smith 


BIOGRAPHICAL  ENCYCLOPEDIA. 


527 


the  family  moved  into  Far  West 
where  Bro.  Stewart  stood  guard  dur- 
ing those  troublous  times.  In  the 
early  spring  of  1839  he  moved  to 
Quincy,  Illinois,  and  in  1840  he  lo- 
cated on  Sugar  Creek,  Iowa,  where 
his  house  and  nearly  everything  he 
had  was  destroyed  by  fire.  In  the 
spring  of  1841  he  moved  to  Nauvoo, 
working  much  of  the  time  on  the 
Nauvoo  Temple  until  1843,  when  he 
and  his  brother  Levi  were  called  on  a 
mission  to  southern  Illinois,  but 
were  recalled  shortly  after  on  account 
of  the  death  of  their  mother  and 
Urban's  little  son  Henry.  He  took 
part  in  the  trials  incident  to  those 
times  in  and  around  Nauvoo,  and  be- 
sides his  labors  on  the  public  works 
he  spent  much  time  on  guard  duty. 
In  1845  he  v/as  ordained  a  Seventy 
by  Daniel  S.  Miles  and  at  the  time  of 
the  exodus  in  18  4  6  he  traveled 
west  and  located  temporarily  with 
his  co-religionists  at  Winter  Quarters 
on  the  west  bank  of  the  Missouri 
river.  He  went  up  the  river  to  what 
was  called  "Brigham's  Farm"  and 
helped  to  put  in  crops,  and  in  June, 
1847,  he  left  for  Great  Salt  Lake  Val- 
ley, where  he  arrived  in  September, 
18  47,  bringing  provisions  for  eigh- 
teen months,  together  with  farming 
tools  and  other  articles  in  one  wagon. 
Bro.  Stewart  took  part  in  the  White 
Mountain  Mission  and  helped  to  put 
in  crops  in  Clover  Valley,  now  in 
Nevada,  which  place  afterwards  was 
given  up  to  the  Indians.  Bro.  Stew- 
art endured  the  hardships  incident 
to  the  early  settlement  of  Utah  un- 
complainingly and  frequently  sub- 
sisted on  roots  and  whatever  could 
be  obtained  to  keep  himself  and 
family  alive.  He  was  one  of  the 
pioneers  of  Beaver,  Utah,  where  he 
resided  for  a  great  many  years,  tak- 
ing a  most  active  part  in  establishing 
the  institutions  of  that  place.  Subse- 
quently he  moved  to  Wayne  county 
and  became  a  resident  of  Grover, 
where  he  acted  as  presiding  Elder 
and    where    he    died    Dec.    25,    1898, 


eighty-one  years  old.  Bro.  Stewart 
had  five  families  and  was  the  father 
of  thirty-three  children,  twenty-four 
of  whom  survived  him.  At  the  time 
of  his  demise  he  also  had  seventy- 
four  grandchildren,  twelve  great- 
grandchildren and  a  number  of  great- 
great-grandchildren.  By  his  first 
wife,  Lydia  Gates  Jacobs,  he  had 
three  children,  namely,  Edna,  Henry 
and  Urban  Jacobs.  By  his  second 
wife,  Elizabeth  Luck,  whom  he  mar- 
ried May  21,  1854,  he  became  the 
father  of  six  children,  namely.  Van, 
Levi,  Elizabeth,  Rosanna  E.,  Sarah 
V.  and  Eunice  A.  By  his  third  wife, 
Mary  Ann  Jones  (daughter  of  Wil- 
liam E.  and  Mary  Jones),  whom  he 
married  March  11,  1860,  he  became 
the  father  of  ten  children,  namely, 
Mary  Jane,  Liza  Ann,  Martha  Ellen, 
William  Urban,  Daniel  Jones,  Mar- 
garet Caroline,  Robert  Charles, 
George  Heber,  Lewis  Jenkins  and 
Clara  Bell.  By  his  fourth  wife,  Ellen 
Adams  (daughter  of  David %(j  Adams 
and  Mary  Cook),  to  whom  he  was 
married  July  14,  1865,  he  became 
the  father  of  ten  children,  namely, 
Mary  Ellen,  David  James,  Urban  Van, 
John  Riley,  Lydia  Catherine,  Andrew 
Adams,  Rosa  May,  Levi,  Effie  Eliza- 
beth and  Walter  Ernest.  By  his  fifth 
wife,  Keziah  Jones  (daughter  of  Wil- 
liam and  Mary  Jones),  whom  he  mar- 
ried July  16,  1855,  he  became  the 
father  of  three  children,  namely, 
Margaret,  Edward  and  Susan.  Bro. 
Stewart  and  his  wife  Elizabeth  Luck 
also  adopted  one  child,  a  boy,  named 
Joseph  Stewart.  Bro.  Stewart  was  a 
man  of  Stirling  qualities,  a  strict  ob- 
server of  the  Word  of  Wisdom  and  a 
faithful  Latter-day  Saint. 

STODDARD,    Joseph    Duncan,    the 

fourth  Bishop  of  Grant  Ward  (Port- 
neuf  Stake),  Bannock  county,  Idaho, 
was  born  Aug.  10,  1884,  at  Rich- 
mond, Cache  county,  Utah,  the  son 
of  George  Henry  and  Hannah  Eliza- 
beth Bowman.  He  was  baptized 
Sept.   7,    1900,   by  Andrew  Morrison 


528 


LATTER-DAY   SAINT 


and  soon  afterwards  ordained  a  Dea- 
con. He  was  ordained  an  Elder  Oct. 
9,  1904,  by  James  F.  Hunt  and  filled 
a  mission  to  the  Southern  States  in 
1904-1906,  laboring  in  Georgia,  Flor- 
ida, Tennesee,  Ohio  and  Kentucky. 
At  home  he  acted  as  assistant  super- 
intendent of  the  Ward  Sunday  school, 
president  of  the  Ward  Y.  M.  M.  I.  A., 
Ward  clerk,  and  president  of  the  first 
quorum  of  Elders  In  the  Portneuf 
Stake.  During  the  winter  of  1916- 
1917  he  filled  a  home  mission  in  the 
Portneuf  Stake.  In  1917  he  was  or- 
dained a  High  Priest  and  Bishop  by 
Rudger  Clawson  and  set  apart  to  pre- 
side over  the  Grant  Ward,  a  position 
which  he  still  holds.  In  1908  (Feb. 
6th)  he  married  Maud  Estella  Fox, 
daughter  of  Thomas  James  Fox  and 
Margaret  F.  Green,  who  was  born 
Dec.  21,  1888,  in  that  part  of  Marsh 
Valley  which  is  now  included  in  the 
Grant  Ward.  Four  children  have 
blessed  this  marriage,  namely,  Erma 
L.,  Diana,  Joseph  D.  and  Theodore 
Wilson.  By  avocation  Bishop  Stod- 
dard is  a  farmer  and  stock  raiser. 

STOKL,  Oleen  Nilson,  president  of 
the  Box  Elder  Stake  of  Zion  (Box 
Elder  county,  Utah),  was  born  Feb. 
19,  1865.  in  the  Sugar  House  Ward, 
Salt  Lake  county,  Utah,  the  son  of 
Ole  N.  Stohl  and  Christina  Johnson. 
He  was  baptized  Sept.  14,  1873,  by 
Elijah  A.  Box;  ordained  a  Deacon 
Nov.  13,  1882,  by  Lorenzo  Wright; 
ordained  a  Teacher  May  13,  1885,  by 
C.  Martindale;  ordained  a  Seventy 
June  7,  1885,  by  Eli  M.  Lee,  and  or- 
dained a  High  Priest  Sept.  20,  1897, 
by  Rudger  Clawson.  About  one  and 
a  half  years  after  his  birth,  his  par- 
ents moved  to  Brigham  City,  Utah, 
where  the  family  has  resided  ever 
since.  From  his  early  youth  Bro. 
Oleen  N.  Stohl  was  an  energetic  and 
faithful  Church  worker,  and  held 
many  positions  in  the  local  organiza- 
tions. Thus  he  served  as  secretary 
and  president  of  the  Brigham  City 
Fourth   Ward    Young   Men's   Mutual 


Improvement  Association,  and  as  as- 
sistant superintendent  and  later  as 
superintendent  of  the  Box  Elder 
Stake  Young  Men's  Mutual  Improve- 
ment Association.  He  also  labored 
as  a  teacher  and  secretary  of  local 
Sabbath  schools,  and  as  a  Ward 
teacher.  While  holding  the  office  of 
a  Seventy  he  acted  as  president  of 
the  58th  quorum  of  Seventy,  and 
labored  as  a  home  missionary  in  the 
Box  Elder  Stake.  Oleen  N.  Stohl  was 
industrious  and  trustworthy  from  his 
earliest  youth  and  he  soon  learned 
the  dignity  of  becoming  a  contribu- 
tor to  the  family  income.     As  a  small 


boy  he  herded  sheep  on  the  foot  hill 
near  his  home.  Desiring  to  learn  a 
trade  he  welcomed  the  opportunity 
to  enter  the  Co-op  cabinet  shop  of 
Brigham  City  and  there  learned  the 
trade  of  cabinet  making  and  carpen- 
try, and  while  still  in  his  teens  he 
left  home  for  a  time  to  work  in  Al- 
bion, Idaho.  He  was  attracted  to 
Albion  by  work  more  remunerative 
than  that  which  he  could  obtain  in 
his  own  community.  While  residing 
in  Cassia  county  he  was  set  apart  as 
a  traveling  local  missionary  in  the 
Cassia  Stake,  and  though  a  compara- 
tive   stranger,    and    working    among 


BIOGRAPHICAL   ENCYCLOPEDIA. 


529 


non-Mormons,     and     even     anti-Mor- 
mons, he  always  defended  the  faith 
and  lived  his  religion  so  consistently 
that    he    won     the     admiration     and 
friendship   of   non-Mormons   as   well 
as  "Mormons."  His  education  was  ob- 
tained in  the  common  schools  of  Utah 
and  the  Deseret  University.     For  two 
years   he   taught  school   in   Brigham 
City  and  acted  as  a  bookkeeper  for 
the  Bear  River  Canal  Company.    Sub- 
sequently he  became  cashier   of  the 
Bank  in  Brigham  City.     He  has  also 
held  a  number  of  civil  offices.     Thus 
he  acted  as  clerk  of  Box  Elder  county 
for  two  terms,   giving  general  satis- 
faction.     He   also    acted     as     school 
trustee  in  Brigham  City  for  six  years, 
during  which  time  the  splendid  Cen- 
tral  school   building   was   erected   at 
a  cost   of   $25,000.      He   was    for    a 
number  of  years  cashier  of  the  Bank 
of   Brigham    City,   a   director   and   a 
member  of  the  executive  committee 
of  the  First  National  Bank  of  Brig- 
ham City,  a  director  of  the  Promon- 
tory Curlew  Co.  and  a  trustee  of  the 
B.    Y.    College   at   Logan.      The   cul- 
mination  of   his   efforts   in   business 
affairs  is  the  Stohl    Furniture    Co., 
which  institution  is  largely  his  crea- 
tion and   in   it  he  held   the  position 
of  president  and  manager  at  the  time 
of  his  death.     In  1889-18  91  he  filled 
a  mission  to  Scandinavia,  laboring  in 
the  St§.ne,   Goteborg  and  Stockholm 
conferences   in   Sweden.      He   was    a 
most   successful   and     efficient     mis- 
sionary.    In  1892    (Sept.   7th)   Elder 
Stohl  married  Sarah  Peters    (daugh- 
ter of  John  D.  Peters  and  Louisa  E. 
Bingham).      She    bore   her    husband 
six   children,     namely,    Sarah    Edna, 
Hazel,    Anna     Laura,     Lloyd     Oleen, 
John  Raymond  and  Clark.     In  1899 
Elder  Stohl  was  chosen    to    act    as 
second    counselor   to    Charles    Kelly, 
president  of  the  Box    Elder    Stake, 
which  position  he  held  until  May  2'9, 
1905,   when  he  was  chosen   and   set 
apart  as  president  of  the  Box  Elder 
Stake,   which  position  he   held   until 
the  time  of  his  death,  which  occurred 


at  his  home  in  Brigham  City,  after  a 
lingering  illness,  Nov.  28,  1916.  Pres. 
Stohl  was  affectionate  and  sympa- 
thetic in  his  nature,  possessing  the 
love  and  confidence  of  all  who  knew 
him.  On  a  certain  occasion  the  late 
President  Joseph  F.  Smith  remarked 
that  there  was  not  a  better  man  liv- 
ing, in  or  out  of  the  Church,  than 
Oleen  N.  Stohl.  At  the  time  of  his 
death  a  friend  wrote  of  him  as  fol- 
lows: "The  passing  of  President 
Stohl  is  one  of  the  greatest  losses 
this  community  and  Stake  have  ever 
sustained,  his  rare  gifts  and  quali- 
ties are  not  easily  duplicated  and  he 
has  become  so  established  in  the  af- 
fections of  his  people  that  every 
member  of  the  Stake  will  feel  a  keen 
sense  of  personal  loss  in  his  demise. 
He  was  a  man  of  God  who  magnified 
his  calling  and  a  leader  who  presided 
in  love  and  humility,  wisdom  and 
justice." 

STORKS,  Joseph  Henry,  Bishop  of 
the  American  Fork  Second  Ward  (Al- 
pine Stake),  Utah  county,  Utah,  was 
born  Aug.  25,  1867,  at  Springville, 
Utah  county,  Utah,  the  son  of  George 
Storrs  and  Lydia  Mary  Kindred.  He 
was  raised  as  a  farmer  and  miller  in 
Springville,  where  he  also  received  a 
common  school  education.  He  was 
ordained  a  Deacon  when  quite  young 
and  at  the  age  of  sixteen  was  en- 
gaged as  salesman  in  the  Springville 
Co-op,  where  he  was  employed  seven 
and  a  half  years.  After  that  he 
worked  as  salesman  for  Henry  T. 
Reynolds  and  Company.  In  1888 
(May  2  9th)  he  was  ordained  an  El- 
der by  Nephi  Packard.  He  also  acted 
as  president  of  the  Springville  Second 
Ward  Y.  M.  M.  I.  A.,  served  as  a 
teacher  in  the  Ward  Sunday  school, 
was  a  Ward  teacher,  home  mission- 
ary, etc.  In  18  91-1897  he  acted  as 
treasurer  of  the  Springville  munici- 
pality and  in  18  9  7-18  98  he  served  as 
a  member  of  the  Springville  city 
council.  In  1898  he  moved  to  Am- 
erican Fork  where  he  first  engaged 


Vol.  Ill,  No.  34. 


March  6,  1920 


530 


LATTER-DAY   SAINT 


in  farming  and  then  labored  as  sales- 
man in  the  American  Fork  Co-op 
until  1907  when  he  became  manager 
of  that  institution,  which  position  he 
still  holds.  In  January,  1901,  when 
the  Alpine  Stake  was  organized,  he 
was  chosen  as  president  of  the  Am- 
erican Fork  Y.  M.  M.  I.  A.,  and  in 
July,  1901,  when  American  Fork  was 
divided  into  four  Bishops'  Wards, 
Bro.  Storrs  was  ordained  a  High 
Priest  and  Bishop  by  Apostle  Reed 
Smoot  and  set  apart  to  preside  over 
the  American  Fork  Second  Ward, 
which  position  he  still  holds.  In 
1888  (Oct.  24th)  he  married  Rosella 
Arvilla  Harrison  (daughter  of  George 
Harrison  and  Rosella  D.  White),  who 
was  born  Oct.  20,  1867,  in  Spring- 
ville.  This  marriage  has  been  blessed 
with  seven  children,  namely,  Joseph 
B.,  Rosella,  Duane  H.,  Norven  L., 
Myrl,  Wilford  L.  and  Betha. 

STOTT,  Edwin,  a  veteran  Elder  in 
the  Church  and  a  resident  of  Meadow, 
Millard  county,  Utah,  was  born  Nov. 
5,  1836,  at  Greenacres,  Lancashire, 
England,  the  son  of  William  Stott 
and  Sarah  Lees.  He  was  baptized 
July  26,  1848,  by  James  Taylor.  His 
mother  died  March  10,  1849,  and  Ed- 
win emigrated  to  America  in  1849 
with  his  father's  family,  crossing  the 
Atlantic  in  the  ship  "Berlin"  which 
arrived  at  New  Orleans,  Oct.  22,  1849. 
After  spending  some  time  in  St. 
Louis,  Mo.,  and  Pottawattamie,  Iowa, 
he  crossed  the  plains  in  Isaac  Bul- 
lock's company  in  1852  and  located 
in  Fillmore,  Millard  county.  In  1854 
he  assisted  in  getting  the  remains  of 
Capt.  Gunnison  and  party  who  had 
been  massacred  by  Indians,  and  par- 
ticipated in  the  White  Mountain  mis- 
sion in  1857.  He  was  one  of  the  first 
white  men  who  entered  the  cele- 
brated cave  beyond  Steptoe  Valley. 
While  living  at  Fillmore  in  1864  he 
went  to  the  Missouri  river  as  a 
Church  missionary  after  the  poor  in 
Capt.  Wm.  S.  Warren's  train,  doing 
service  as   a   n-ght  guard.      On   this 


trip  the  company  with  which  he 
traveled  encountered  very  high  water 
in  the  South  Platte  at  Julesburg  and 
the  teamsters  had  to  chain  three 
wagons  together  in  crossing,  hitching 
on  to  these  twelve  yoke  of  cattle  at 
a  time.  Brother  Stott's  first  mar- 
riage was  with  Sarah  Jane  Holder  in 
December,  18  63.  To  this  marriage 
four  children  were  born,  namely, 
Mary  Elizabeth,  Sarah  Jane,  Edwin 
and  Raymond.  In  1865  Bro.  Stott 
located  in  Meadow  and  was  first  or- 
dained a  Priest.  He  afterwards  was 
ordained  an  Elder  and  later  a  Sev- 
enty, becoming  a  member  of  the  42nd 
quorum  of  Seventy,  of  which  quorum 
he  acted  as  secretary.  He  was  finally 
ordained  a  High  Priest  by  Thomas 
Memmoth.  In  February,  18  7  6,  Bro- 
ther Stott  married  Elizabeth  Paul,  by 
whom  he  had  seven  children,  namely, 
Paul  Edward,  Arthur  Lees,  Evelyn 
May,  Emma,  Amy  Laura,  William  Ed- 
win and  Mable  Ann. 

STOUT,  Hosea,  a  prominent  and 
faithful  Elder  in  the  Church,  was 
born  Sept.  18,  1810,  at  Danville,  Mer- 
cer county,  Kentucky,  the  son  of 
Joseph  Stout  and  Anna  Smith.  When 
Hosea  was  about  eight  years  old  his 
father  moved  with  his  family  to  Clin- 
ton county,  Ohio,  and  when  he  was 
eighteen  years  of  age,  he  went  to 
Tazewell  county,  Illinois,  where  he 
first  heard  the  gospel,  and  where  he 
taught  school  for  a  number  of  years. 
In  1837  he  removed  to  Caldwell 
county,  Missouri,  where  he  was  bap- 
tized Aug.  24,  1838.  He  married 
Samantha  Peck  Jan.  7,  1838;  she 
was  born  Oct.  12,  1821.  After  his 
baptism,  Bro.  Stout  shared  in  all  the 
persecutions  to  which  the  Saints  were 
exposed  in  Missouri.  He  participated 
in  the  Crooked  river  battle  and  was 
the  first  man  to  approach  Apostle 
David  W.  Patten,  after  that  hero  had 
been  mortally  wounded.  After  the 
surrender  of  the  Prophet  Joseph  and 
others  into  the  hands  of  the  mob 
militia  at  Far  West  in  October,  1838, 


BIOGRAPHICAL  ENCYCLOPEDIA. 


531 


Hosea  Stout,  who  had  taken  an  active 
part  in  the  defense  of  the  Saints, 
found  it  necessary,  in  company  with 
twenty-five  others  of  the  brethren,  to 
flee  northward,  in  order  to  save  their 
lives,  and  after  great  suffering,  the 
weather  being  cold,  Bro.  Stout 
reached  Quincy,  Illinois,  where  his 
wife  joined  him  in  the  spring  of 
1839.  In  the  following  fall  fl839)  he 
settled  temporarily  on  Sugar  Creek, 
Iowa,  where  his  wife  Samantha  died 
Nov.  29,  1839.  At  a  meeting  held  at 
Commerce  (later  Nauvoo),  Illinois, 
Oct.  23,  1839,  he  was  chosen  as  an 
Elder   in   the   Church,   together   with 


many  others.  In  March,  1840,  he 
moved  to  Nauvoo,  where  he  was  ap- 
pointed to  act  as  clerk  of  the  High 
Council.  In  1840  (Nov.  29th)  Bro. 
Stout  married  Louisa  Taylor,  who 
was  born  Oct.  19,  1819,  and  who  sub- 
sequently bore  him  eight  children, 
namely,  Lydia  Sarah  (born  Dec.  20. 
1841,  and  died  in  infancy),  William 
Hosea  (born  April  16,  1843,  and  died 
about  three  years  afterwards  during 
the  exodus  of  the  Saints,  through  ex- 
posure), Hyrum  (born  in  the  fall  of 
1844  and  died  at  Mount  Pisgah, 
Iowa,  May  9,  1846),  Louisa  (bora 
April    22,    1846,   and     died     Aug.     5, 


1847),  Elizabeth  Ann  (born  March 
19,  1848),  Hosea  junior  (born  April 
5,  1850),  Eli  H.  (born  Sept.  17, 
1851)  and  Joseph  Allen,  who  was 
born  Dec.  30,  1852  and  died  ten  days 
later.  The  mother  also  died  Jan.  11, 
1853,  two  days  after  the  baby.  When 
the  Nauvoo  Legion  was  organized 
Feb.  4,  1841,  Hosea  Stout  was  chosen 
as  second  lieutenant  of  one  of  the 
companies  of  that  organization.  Soon 
he  became  captain  of  one  of  the  com- 
panies and  advanced  rapidly  until  he 
held  the  office  of  colonel  and  he  also 
did  service  as  acting  brigadier-gen- 
eral. When  the  Missourians  tried  to 
kidnap  the  Prophet  Joseph  in  1841, 
Hosea  Stout  was  among  those  who, 
at  the  risk  of  their  own  lives,  placed 
themselves  in  the  front  ranks  to  res- 
cue the  Prophet  from  his  persecu- 
tors. Bro.  Stout  also  served  on  the 
Nauvoo  police  force,  part  of  the  time 
as  captain  of  the  force.  He  was  a 
most  active  and  efficient  officer  in 
the  defence  of  Nauvoo  during  all  the 
mobbings  and  persecutions  which  cul- 
minated in  the  martyrdom  of  the 
Prophet  Joseph  and  others,  and 
finally  in  the  exodus  of  the  Saints 
from  Nauvoo.  When  the  Prophet 
Joseph,  early  in  1844,  called  for  vol- 
unteers to  go  to  the  Rocky  Mountains 
as  explorers  to  seek  a  new  home  for 
the  Saints,  Hosea  Stout  was  among 
the  first  to  respond  to  that  call,  and 
though  the  expedition  never  started, 
he  would  have  been  willing  to  under- 
take any  move  of  that  kind  in  order 
to  serve  and  save  his  people.  In 
April,  1844,  he  was  sent  on  a  short 
mission  to  Kentucky.  Bro.  Stout 
married  Lucretia  Fisher  as  a  plural 
wife  April  20,  1845,  in  Nauvoo,  Illi- 
nois, and  on  June  30,  1845,  he  also 
married  Marinda  Bennett.  Lucretia 
had  no  children  by  Bro.  Stout,  but 
Marinda  Bennett  died  in  childbed 
Sept.  2  6,  18  46,  while  in  exile.  When 
a  mercantile  and  mechanical  associa- 
tion was  organized  in  Nauvoo  in 
January,  18  45,  Hosea  was  elected  one 
of  the  twelve  trustees  to  control  th< 


632 


LATTER-DAY   SAINT 


association,  of  which  he  soon  after- 
wards became  the  general  secretary. 
After  the  State  legislature  of  Illinois 
had  taken  away  the  city  charter  from 
Nauvoo  and  a  small  portion  of  the 
city  was  incorporated  as  the  town  of 
Nauvoo  April  16,  1845,  Hosea  was 
appointed  captain  of  the  police  in  the 
government  of  the  town.  On  a  cer- 
tain occasion,  in  September,  1845,  he 
and  a  number  of  other  brethren  were 
arrested  on  a  trumped-up  charge  of 
treason  but,  after  trial  in  Carthage, 
they  were  acquitted.  In  December, 
1845,  Bro.  Stout  was  appointed  to 
labor  in  the  Nauvoo  Temple,  in  which 
he  also  received  his  blessings.  He 
was  ordained  a  Seventy  Oct.  24,  1844, 
under  the  hands  of  Benjamin  L. 
Clapp  and  others  and  became  a  mem- 
ber of  the  11th  quorum  of  Seventy. 
Later  he  was  chosen  as  one  of  the 
presidents  and  finally  became  the 
senior  president  of  that  quorum.  At 
the  time  of  the  general  exodus  of  the 
Saints  in  1846  he,  as  captain  of  po- 
lice, superintended  the  movements  of 
the  Saints  in  the  crossing  of  the  Mis- 
sissippi river  and  continued  active 
throughout  the  exodus,  rendering 
most  excellent  service.  When  the 
first  general  encampment  of  the  ex- 
iled Saints  was  made  on  Sugar  Creek, 
Hosea  Stout,  with  about  one  hundred 
other  men,  served  as  a  police  force 
for  the  encampment,  and  when  the 
camps  arrived  on  the  Missouri  river 
in  the  summer  of  1846  he  was  ap- 
pointed to  gather  up  such  members 
of  the  Nauvoo  Legion  as  could  be 
found  at  or  near  Cutler's  Park  and 
help  to  organize  them  for  service.  He 
was  appointed  lieutenant-colonel  of 
infantry  in  the  Nauvoo  Legion  Sept. 
26,  1846.  When  the  headquarters 
of  the  Church  were  moved  from  Cut- 
ler's Park  to  Winter  Quarters  in  Sep- 
tember, 1846,  Hosea  again  rendered 
efficient  service  as  captain  of  the 
guard,  and  in  November,  1846,  Presi- 
dent Brigham  Young  appointed  him 
to  select  a  city  guard  and  police  for 
Winter  Quarters  with  himself  as  cap- 


tain. Bro.  Stout  spent  the  winter  of 
1846-1847  with  his  family  (consist- 
ing of  his  wife  Louise  and  her  chil- 
dren) at  Winter  Quarters.  Early  in 
1847  he  frequently  met  in  council 
with  President  Brigham  Young  and 
the  other  Church  leaders  as  prepara- 
tions were  being  made  for  the  pio- 
neers to  start  west  and  find  a  new 
home  for  the  Saints.  He  was  chosen 
as  one  of  the  pioneers  and  was  even 
selected  to  act  as  captain  of  the 
guard  on  the  overland  journey,  but  as 
his  services  were  needed  at  Winter 
Quarters  the  plan  was  changed,  and 
he  remained  to  assist  the  Saints  on 
the  frontiers,  where  hostile  Indians 
sometimes  menaced  the  safety  of  the 
Saints,  and  he  participated  in  more 
than  one  expedition  against  the  red 
man.  In  the  fall  of  1847  Capt.  Stout 
with  others  went  out  on  the  plains 
quite  a  distance  to  meet  the  return- 
ing pioneers,  whom  they  escorted 
safely  to  Winter  Quarters.  In  Janu- 
ary, 1848,  Bro.  Stout,  with  many 
others,  signed  a  petition  to  the  gov- 
ernment for  the  establishment  of  a 
post  office  at  Kanesville  (the  present 
Council  Bluffs).  After  taking  a  most 
active  part  in  assisting  the  leaders  of 
the  Church  to  organize  companies  for 
the  westward  journey  Hosea  Stout 
crossed  the  plains  in  Heber  C.  Kim- 
ball's company,  doing  service  as  cap- 
tain of  the  night  guard,  and  arrived 
in  Salt  Lake  Valley    in    September, 

1848.  When  the  Nauvoo  Legion  was 
re-organized   in   the  Valley  May   26, 

1849,  Hosea  Stout  was  elected  first 
lieutenant  of  mounted  dragoons.  In 
the  early  Utah  days  he  frequently 
served  as  a  member  of  committees 
appointed  to  celebrate  Independence 
day.  Pioneer  day,  etc.  When  the  pro- 
visional government  of  the  "State  of 
Deseret"  was  organized  in  1849,  he 
was  chosen  as  attorney-general  of 
that  government,  and  in  1851  he  was 
elected  a  member  of  the  first  legisla- 
tive assembly  of  the  Territory  of 
Utah,  being  elected  as  a  member 
from  Salt  Lake  county.     In  October, 


BIOGRAPHICAL  ENCYCLOPEDIA. 


533 


1851,  he  was  appointed  a  regent  of 
the  Deseret  University  pro  tern.  At 
a  special  conference  held  in  Salt  Lake 
City  in  August,  1852,  Hosea  Stout 
was  called  on  a  mission  to  China.  He 
preached  his  farewell  sermon  in  the 
Old  Tabernacle,  Salt  Lake  City,  Oct. 
17,  1852,  and  soon  afterwards 
started  on  his  mission,  acting  as  cap- 
tain of  a  company  of  missionaries 
bound  for  different  parts  of  the 
world,  in  traveling  over  the  so-called 
southern  route,  or  Spanish  Trail,  and 
arrived  in  San  Bernardino,  Califor- 
nia, Nov.  24,  1852.  Soon  afterwards 
he  and  fellow-missionaries  secured 
passage  on  Pacific  ocean  ships,  and 
Bro.  Stout,  together  with  two  other 
missionaries,  arrived  in  Hong  Kong, 
China,  April  27,  1853.  They  imme- 
diately turned  their  attention  to  mis- 
sionary labors,  but  found  that  the 
Chinese  were  not  inclined  to  receive 
the  gospel.  Consequently  the  Elders 
returned  to  America  in  the  fall  of 
the  same  year  and  Bro.  Stout  reached 
his  home  in  Salt  Lake  City,  Dec.  8, 
1853.  In  1854  he  was  again  elected 
a  member  of  the  house  of  represen- 
tatives of  the  Utah  legislature  and 
did  excellent  service  during  that  and 
subsequent  sessions.  He  usually 
served  as  a  member  of  the  commit- 
tee on  judiciary  and  in  the  session 
commencing  in  December,  1856,  he 
served  as  speaker  of  the  house.  In 
1855  (July  l'9th)  he  married  Alvira 
Wilson  (daughter  of  Lewis  D.  Wil- 
son and  Nancy  Ann  Waggoner),  who 
was  born  April  21,  1844,  in  Ohio.  She 
bore  her  husband  eleven  children, 
namely,  Lewis  W.  (born  April  27, 
1856),  Brigham  H.  (born  Sept.  5, 
1857),  Alfred  L.  (born  July  8,  1859), 
Allen  E.  (born  Feb.  18,  1861),  Wil- 
liam H.  (born  Oct.  10,  1863),  Elvira 
(born  June  5,  1866),  Frank  H.  (born 
June  9,  1868),  Edgar  W.  (born  Aug. 
2,  1870),  Arthur  and  Ida,  twins, 
(born  Feb.  9,  1875)  and  Charles  S. 
(born  Sept.  30,  1876).  In  January, 
1857,  Hosea  Stout  was  elected  a  re- 
gent of  the   Deseret  University,   and 


in  April  following  he  was  appointed 
judge  advocate  of  Utah  by  the  legis- 
lative assembly.  At  the  time  of  the 
Johnston  Army  troubles  he  was 
again  found  in  the  front  ranks  and 
did  excellent  service  as  a  military 
man  in  preparing  defences  in  Echo 
Canyon,  and  he  also  did  service  as  a 
special  messenger  between  the  camps 
in  the  mountains  and  the  headquar- 
ters of  the  militia  in  Salt  Lake  City. 
During  the  noted  Judge  Cradlebaugh 
misrule  in  Provo,  Hosea  Stout  took 
a  bold  and  fearless  stand  in  defend- 
ing the  rights  of  his  brethren,  some 
of  whom  were  illegally  imprisoned. 
Afterwards  Bro.  Stout  figured  prom- 
inently as  a  prosecuting  attorney  in 
the  Third  District  Court  in  Salt  Lake 
City,  and  continued  most  active  as 
an  attorney  until  within  a  short  time 
of  his  death.  While  always  ready  to 
defend  the  rights  of  his  people,  Bro. 
Stout  w^as  by  no  means  inclined  to  be 
aggressive  when  his  own  rights  were 
at  issue.  His  integrity  to  the  gospel 
was  unswerving.  At  one  time  he  got 
into  a  controversy  with  a  leading 
man  in  the  Church.  Before  the  mat- 
ter could  be  settled  the  case  was 
taken  before  the  High  Council  and 
the  decision  of  that  body  was  in 
favor  of  Bro.  Stout's  opponent.  In 
conversation  upon  the  subject  a  few 
days  later,  President  Brigham  Young 
remarked  to  him:  "I  suppose  now 
you  will  go  and  apostatize."  "Oh 
no,"  answered  Bro.  Stout.  "The 
Church  of  Christ  is  as  much  my 
Church  as  it  is  theirs,  and  what  you 
or  any  one  else  may  do  cannot  effect 
my  Church."  In  a  little  time  this 
difference  of  opinion  was  settled,  but 
in  this  matter  and  throughout  his 
whole  life,  Bro.  Stout  insisted  that 
the  actions  of  men,  no  matter  how 
contrary  to  his  views  of  right  they 
might  be,  could  in  no  way  effect  his 
faith  in  the  truth  of  the  gospel.  Bro. 
Stout  was  noted  for  his  fidelity  to 
President  Brigham  Young,  who,  es- 
pecially in  matters  connected  with 
legal    affairs,     frequently    consulted 


534 


LATTER-DAY   SAINT 


him.  His  judgment  could  always  be 
relied  upon  as  being  on  the  side  of 
right  and  equity.  In  18  61  Bro.  Stout 
was  called  on  a  colonization  mission 
to  southern  Utah.  Thus  he  became 
one  of  the  founders  of  St.  George, 
where  he  resided  about  five  years. 
While  a  resident  of  southern  Utah  he 
was  commissioned  as  district  attor- 
ney, a  position  which  he  held  for 
four  years.  In  18  66  he  returned  to 
Salt  Lake  City.  In  1868  (May  23rd) 
he  married  Sarah  Cox,  widow  of 
David  Jones  (of  Mormon  Battalion 
fame).  This  wife  had  no  children  by 
Bro.  Stout.  In  1870  Bro.  Stout  was 
ordained  a  High  Priest  and  chosen 
as  an  alternate  member  of  the  High 
Council  of  the  Salt  Lake  Stake;  later 
he  became  a  regular  member  of  that 
organization,  which  position  he  held 
until  he  was  released  because  of  fail- 
ing health.  For  a  number  of  years 
he  served  as  judge-advocate  on  the 
staff  of  General  Daniel  H.  Wells,  do- 
ing excellent  service  in  the  Nauvoo 
Legion  until  that  organization  ceased 
operation  by  arbitrary  orders  from 
the  federal  officers  of  Utah.  After 
devoting  nearly  his  entire  life  to  the 
Church  and  to  the  benefit  of  his  fel- 
low-citizens, Hosea  Stout  passed 
away  March  2,  1889,  at  his  residence 
in  Big  Cottonwood.  He  had  spent 
a  long  and  useful  life  and  left  a  large 
family  (a  wife,  nine  sons  and  two 
daughters)  besides  quite  a  number  of 
grandchildren.  Hosea  Stout  was  a 
man  of  sterling  integrity  and  excel- 
lent ability.  He  possessed  great  cour- 
age, physical  and  moral,  was  firm  in 
his  convictions,  steadfast  and  loyal 
as  a  friend  and  blessed  withal  with  a 
genial,  kindly  humor.  In  his  youth 
he  was  very  intimate  with  the  Pro- 
phet Joseph  Smith  and  served  as  one 
of  the  Prophet's  body-guard.  After- 
wards he  became  a  true  and  staunch 
friend  of  President  Brigham  Young, 
who  placed  the  utmost  confidence  in 
his  ability  and  integrity. 


SWALBERG,       Ernest       L«onard, 

Bishop  of  Gunnison  Ward  (South 
Sanpete  Stake),  Sanpete  county, 
Utah,  was  born  May  5,  1880,  at  Gun- 
nison, the  son  of  Carl  August  Swal- 
berg  and  Caroline  Peterson.  He  was 
baptized  July  4,  1888,  by  Christian 
A.  Madsen  and  ordained  successively 
to  the  offices  of  Deacon,  Teacher, 
Priest  and  Elder.  He  took  an  active 
part  in  Church  affairs  from  his  early 
youth,  acted  as  president  of  the  Ward 
Y.  M.  M.  I.  A.  for  six  years,  held  the 


position  of  choir  leader  nine  years, 
served  as  a  member  of  the  Gunnison 
city  council  nine  years  and  filled  a 
mission  to  Sweden  in  1903-06.  He  left 
home  on  that  mission  in  September, 
1903,  and  returned  in  February, 
1906;  he  labored  in  the  Sk&ne  con- 
ference. In  his  youth  he  learned  the 
blacksmith's  trade  and  worked  with 
his  father  at  blacksmithing  for 
twelve  years;  he  is  at  present  the 
agricultural  superintendent  for  the 
Gunnison  Valley  Sugar  Company.  He 
was  ordained  a  High  Priest  and 
Bishop  by  Heber  J.  Grant  May  1, 
1915,  and  set  apart  to  preside  over 
the  Gunnison  Ward,  which  position 
he  still  holds.  In  1906  (May  30th) 
he    married    Ella    May    Gottfredson 


BIOGRAPHICAL   ENCYCLOPEDIA. 


535 


(daughter  of  Hans  Gottfredson  and 
Ellen  Larson),  who  was  born  April 
3,  1883,  in  Mount  Pleasant,  Sanpete 
county,  Utah,  and  died  April  11, 
1907,  at  Rupert,  Idaho.  In  1909 
(July  14th)  Bro.  Swalberg  married 
Ida  K.  Johnson  (daughter  of  Lars 
Johnson  and  Louise  Larson  of  Mt. 
Pleasant),  who  was  born  Jan.  19, 
1882,  in  Melsing,  Sweden.  Two  chil- 
dren, Ernest  U.  and  Carol  M.,  are  the 
issue  of  this  marriage. 

SYMONS,  Arzella  W.,  a  Latter-day 
Saint  lady  missionary  who  died  in 
her  field  of  labor,  was  born  May  6, 
1885,  in  Salt  Lake  City,  Utah,  the 
daughter  of  Charles  W.  Symons  and 
Arzella  Whitaker.     She  was  baptized 


when  about  eight  years  of  age,  re- 
ceived a  good  common  school  educa- 
tion and  afterwards  graduated  from 
the  L.  D.  S.  business  college  in  Salt 
Lake  City.  She  was  an  active  worker 
in  the  Tenth  Ward  Sunday  school  and 
Y.  L.  M.  I.  A.  and  a  member  of  the 
Tabernacle  Choir.  For  fifteen  years 
she  was  in  the  employ  of  the  express 
companies  of  Salt  Lake  City.  Having 
received  a  call  for  a  mission  to  the 
Central  States,  she  left  for  that  field 
Jan.  28,  1920.  Two  days  after  her 
arrival  in  Independence,  Missouri, 
she  was  stricken  with  pneumonia,  to 
which  she  succumbed  Feb.   12,  1920. 


She  is  survived  by  her  father  and 
mother  and  the  following  sisters,  all 
of  Salt  Lake  City.  Mrs.  Sarah  S. 
Hilstead,  Mrs.  Hattie  S.  Woods,  Mrs. 
Eveline  S.  Derrick,  Mrs.  Florence  S. 
Simmons,  Mrs.  Maude  S.  Anderson 
and  Mrs.  Ethel  S.  Anderson.  Sister 
Symons  was  a  loveable  character 
talented  in  artistic  lines  and  ear- 
nestly devoted  to  the  Church.  She 
responded  to  a  call  for  a  mission 
cheerfully  and  had  just  been  ap- 
pointed stenographer  to  President 
Samuel  O.  Bennion  when  she  was 
stricken  with  her  last  illness.  The 
best  of  care  and  medical  attention 
was  provided  for  her  and  everything 
possible  was  done  for  her  comfort  in 
the  missionary  home  at  Indepen- 
dence. Her  remains  were  shipped  to 
Salt  Lake  City  where  most  impressive 
funeral  services  were  held  in  the 
Tenth  Ward  meeting  house,  Feb.  15, 
1920,  at  which  President  Anthon  H. 
Lund,  President  Hugh  J.  Cannon  of 
Liberty  Stake  and  other  prominent 
Elders  spoke  the  last  comforting 
words. 

TANNER,  John  Alma,  the  sixth 
Bishop  of  Mound  Valley  Ward  (Ban- 
nock Stake),  Bannock  county,  Idaho, 
was  born  March  9,  1872,  in  Tooele, 
Tooele  county,  Utah,  the  son  of 
George  Tanner  and  Martha  Crawser. 
He  was  baptized  in  1881  by  David 
Brown  and  afterwards  ordained  a 
Deacon,  was  ordained  a  Teacher  Dec. 
22,  1901,  by  Wm.  H.  Mendenhall;  or- 
dained an  Elder  Jan.  17,  1903,  by 
Lewis  S.  Pond;  ordained  a  High 
Priest  May  18,  1913,  by  Lewis  S. 
Pond  and  ordained  a  Bishop  Aug.  2  0, 
1916,  by  Orson  F.  Whitney  and  set 
apart  to  preside  over  the  Mound  Val- 
ley Ward.  From  his  earliest  youth 
Bishop  Tanner  has  been  a  diligent 
Church  worker.  He  acted  as  secre- 
tary and  afterwards  as  counselor  in 
the  Ward  Y.  M.  M.  I.  A.,  was  first 
assistant  superintendent  of  the  Ward 
Sunday  school,  acted  as  a  counselor 
in  the  presidency  of  the  second  quo- 


536 


LATTER-DAY   SAINT 


rum  of  Elders  in  the  Bannock  Stake 
and  acted  as  a  president  in  the  108th 
quorum  of  Seventy  from  1910  to 
1915.     He  filled  a    mission    to    the 


Southern  States  in  1909-1911,  labor- 
ing a  part  of  the  time  as  president  of 
the  Ohio  conference.  In  1900  (Nov. 
15th)  he  married  Delilah  Warner 
(daughter  of  Orange  H.  Warner  and 
Louisa  Stewart),  who  was  born  Jan. 

26,  1877,  at  Benjamin,  Utah.  This 
marriage  has  been  blessed  with  five 
children,  namely,  Charles  W.,  Lovina, 
George  A.,  John  Marvin,  Eunice  and 
Lovell. 

TANNER,  Nathan,  jun.,  historian 
of  the  Tanner  family,  was  born  Oct. 

27,  1845,  at  Montrose,  Lee  county, 
Iowa,  the  son  of  Nathan  Tanner  sen. 
and  Rachel  W.  Smith.  He  crossed 
the  plains  with  his  parents  in  1848 
and  settled  in  South  Cottonwood, 
Salt  Lake  county,  Utah.  During  his 
youth  and  early  manhood  he  assisted 
his  father  at  freighting  and  working 
on  the  farm.  His  chances  for  school- 
ing were  meagre  and  the  splendid 
education  he  obtained  later  in  life 
was  mostly  the  result  of  self  effort. 
He  married  Margaret  G.  Harrington 
and  located  at  Ogden  where  he 
studied    and   practiced    law.      For    a 


number  of  years  he  was  prominent 
in  his  profession  and  also  acted  as 
alderman  and  attorney  for  the  city  of 
Ogden.  Having  been  baptized  when 
about  eight  years  old,  he  became  an 
active  member  of  the  Church  in  his 
early  youth  and  after  being  ordained 
to  the  Priesthood  he  acted  as  super- 
intendent of  the  Ogden  Second  Ward 
Sunday  school  and  as  president  of 
the  76th  quorum  of  Seventy.  In 
1884-1885  he  filled  a  mission  to  the 
Southern  States.  Bro.  Tanner  was  a 
gifted  writer  and  was  ever  ready  and 
willing  to  defend  the  principles  of 
the  gospel  against  the  virulent  at- 
tacks of  newspaper  editors,  which 
were  so  common  years  ago.  Along 
with  his  legal  work  he  attended  to 
the  collections  of  Scowcroft  Sons  and 
the  Z.  C.  M.  I.,  which  took  him  to 
different  parts  of  Utah  and  Idaho. 
On  his  extensive  travels  he  formed  a 
large  acquaintanceship  among  the 
Latter-day  Saints.  Conditions  came 
into  his  life  which  deprived  him  of 
membership  in  the  Church  for  a  num- 
ber of  years,  but  not  once  during  his 


entire  life  did  he  lose  faith  in  the 
gospel,  nor  the  divine  mission  of  the 
Prophet  Joseph  Smith,  and  as  a  re- 
sult of  this  he  regained  his   fellow- 


BIOGRAPHICAL  ENCYCLOPEDIA. 


537 


ship  in  the  Church  and  had  all  his 
former  blessings  sealed  upon  him.  He 
obeyed  the  higher  law  of  marriage 
by  taking  Anna  Pingree  as  a  plural 
wife  and  later  he  married  Jane  A. 
Hamilton.  He  was  the  father  of 
thirteen  children,  and  five  of  his  sons 
have  filled  honorable  missions.  Dur- 
ing the  latter  part  of  his  life  Bro. 
Tanner  resided  at  Blackfoot  and 
Springfield,  Idaho.  In  the  latter 
place  he  passed  away  peacefully  June 
16,  1919,  in  full  faith  of  the  gospel. 
For  thirty  years  Bro.  Tanner  acted 
as  historian   for  the  Tanner   family. 

TAYLOR,  Elmer,    Bishop    of    the 

Juab  Ward  (Juab  Stake),  Juab  coun- 
ty, Utah,  was  born  in  Grafton,  Lo- 
raine  county,  Ohio,  Nov.  4,  1831,  the 


son  of  Benjamin  F.  Taylor  and  Ann 
Mennell.  With  his  parents  he  locat- 
ed at  Ramus,  near  Carthage,  Han- 
cock county,  Illinois,  in  18  42.  He 
became  well  acquainted  with  the 
Prophet  Joseph  Smith  and  at  one 
time  slept  in  Hyrum  Smith's  barn, 
and  passed  through  the  mobbings  in- 
cident to  those  days,  having  joined 
the  Church  in  1844.  He  was  bap- 
tized in  Macedonia,  Hancock  county, 
Illinois,  and  emigrated  with  his  par- 
ents to   Utah  in   1850.      In   1851   he 


accompanied  Elders  Amaza  M.  Ly- 
man and  Charles  C.  Rich  to  Califor- 
nia and  thus  became  one  of  the 
founders  of  San  Bernardino,  and  he 
built  the  first  adobe  house  In  that 
place.  He  returned  to  Utah  in  1857 
and  settled  in  Springville,  Utah 
county.  In  1866-1867  he  filled  a 
mission  to  Great  Britain.  In  the 
spring  of  1868  he  moved  to  Levan, 
Juab  county,  where  he  subsequently 
acted  as  Bishop  for  seven  years. 
Thence  he  moved  to  Juab  and  pre- 
sided as  Bishop  there  about  three 
years  and  resigned  on  account  of  fail- 
ing health.  He  located  temporarily 
in  Salt  Lake  City  in  the  summer  of 
18  95,  but  removed  in  the  fall  to  his 
old  home  at  Juab  and  worked  several 
weeks  in  the  Manti  Temple.  He  died 
April  26,  1896,  at  Juab.  Before 
passing  away  he  called  his  family  to- 
gether and  exhorted  them  to  keep 
the  faith.  Bishop  Taylor  married 
Wealthy  Ann  Spafford  (daughter  of 
Horace  Spafford  and  Martha  Styles), 
who  was  born  Oct.  31,  1831.  The 
names  of  her  children  follow:  Mar- 
tha, Horace  F.,  Wealthy,  Olive  U., 
Helen,  James  E.,  Irinda,  Pattie  and 
Minerva.  Bishop  Taylor  was  a  far- 
mer and  merchant  during  most  of  his 
life  and  held  many  responsible  posi- 
tions of  a  secular  nature  at  different 
times.  He  was  the  father  of  fifteen 
children  by  two  wives. 

TAYLOR,  James  Elmer,  Bishop  of 
the  Levan  Ward  (Juab  Stake),  Juab 
county,  Utah,  was  born  Feb.  20,  1864, 
at  Springville,  Utah  county,  Utah,  the 
son  of  Elmer  Taylor  and  Wealthy 
Ann  Spafford.  He  was  raised  in 
Levan  and  educated  in  Juab  and 
Levan  and  the  B.  Y.  U.  at  Provo.  He 
was  baptized  in  1872,  by  Eric  Peter- 
sen, ordained  an  Elder  about  1885 
and  a  Seventy  in  18'd5.  by  B.  H.  Rob- 
erts. In  1895-1896  he  filled  a  mis- 
sion to  Great  Britain,  laboring  in  the 
Liverpool  conference.  In  1898-1900 
he  filled  another  mission  to  Great 
Britain,   during   which    he    presided 


538 


LATTER-DAY   SAINT 


over  the  Lancaster  branch  of  the 
Liverpool  conference.  He  served  as 
Ward  clerk  at  Juab  ten  years,  and 
later,  in  Levan,  he  acted  as  assistant 
superintendent  of  Sunday  school  and 
president  of  the  Y.  M.  M.  I.  A.  After 
removing  to  Levan  he  became  an  ac- 
tive worker  in  that  Ward,  and  in 
1902  (Jan.  12th)  he  was  ordained  a 
High  Priest  and  Bishop  by  George 
Teasdale  and  set  apart  to  preside 
over  the  Levan  Ward.  Bishop  Taylor 
has  filled  many  positions  of  honor 
and  responsibility  in  the  interest  of 
his  fellow-citizens.  Thus  he  served 
one  term  as  a  county  commissioner 
and  ten  years  on  the  school  board  of 
Juab  county.  He  also  acted  as  con- 
stable in  the  Juab  precinct  two  years. 
In  1885  (Nov.  12th)  he  married  Al- 
mira  Ollerton  (daughter  of  Seth  01- 
lerton  and  May  Ann  Newman),  who 
was  born  April  7,  1868,  in  Parowan, 
Iron  county,  Utah.  This  marriage 
has  been  blessed  with  eight  children, 
namely,  Ann  M.,  Joel  E.,  Vinnie  J., 
Frank  S.,  Mary  J.,  James  Orlando, 
Wealthy  Eva  and  Olive.  Farming  and 
mercantile  business  are  the  Bishop's 
main  avocations.  Bishop  Taylor  has 
already  presided  over  the  Levan 
Ward  for  nearly  eighten  years,  and 
during  that  time,  has  taken  a  leading 
part  in  building  a  meeting  house,  a 
modern  school  building,  a  Relief  So- 
ciety building,  and  at  the  present 
time  a  $15,000  amusement  hall  is  be- 
ing erected  in  Levan. 

TAYLOR,  James  Green,  fourth 
Bishop  of  Winder  Ward  (Oneida 
Stake),  Franklin  county,  Idaho,  was 
born  Nov.  7,  18  62,  at  Kaysville,  Davis 
county,  Utah,  the  son  of  James  C. 
Taylor  and  Sarah  M.  Hyde.  He  was 
baptized  Oct.  1,  1871,  by  John  Elli- 
son; ordained  a  Priest  by  Wm.  Louis 
and  ordained  an  Elder  by  Herman 
Hyde.  In  1874  he  settled  in  Lewis- 
ton  (now  Fairview),  Franklin  coun- 
ty, Idaho,  and  in  1892  located  as  the 
first  settler  in  that  part  of  Cache 
Valley  which  is  now  included  in  the 


Winder  Ward.  From  1899  to  1906 
he  lived  in  Millville,  Cache  county, 
Utah,  where  he  acted  as  a  member  of 
the  Millville  town  board  and  also  as 
town  marshal.  He  was  first  justice 
of  the  peace,  the  first  road  super- 
visor, one  of  the  first  trustees  in  the 
Winder  settlement,  and  also  ran  the 
first  header  and  the  first  thresher  in 
that  Ward.  From  1907  to  1918  he 
was  manager  and  director  in  the 
Oneida  Irrigation  District,  and  he 
acted  as  presiding  Elder  in  the  Bat- 
tle Creek  branch  for  two  years;  was 
ordained  a  High  Priest  Sept.  4,  1909, 
by  Hyrum  M.  Smith,  was  set  apart  to 
act  as  second  counselor  in  the  Bish- 
opric of  the  Winder  Ward.  On  Dec. 
3,  1916,  he  was  set  apart  as  first 
counselor  to  Thomas  C.  Palmer,  by 
President  Joseph  S.  Geddes,  and  in 
1917  (June  3rd)  he  was  ordained  a 
Bishop  and  set  apart  by  Orson  F. 
Whitney  to  preside  over  the  Winder 
Ward,  which  position  he  now  occu- 
pies. March  31,  1886,  he  married 
Mary  Alice  Jessop  (daughter  of 
Richard  Jessop  and  Ellen  Shaffer), 
who  was  born  April  18,  1867,  in  Mill- 
ville, Utah.  She  bore  her  husband 
eleven  children,  namely.  Ivy,  Allen 
Green,  Richard  Rosel,  Bessie,  Mer- 
elda,  Alice,  Ira  Jessop,  Marvil,  Golden 
James,  Archie  and  Blanche.  All  of 
these  sons  and  daughters  so  far  have 
married  in  the  Church.  Bishop  Tay- 
lor now  has  nine  living  children, 
seventeen  grandchildren,  and  has  the 
prospects  of  a  large  posterity.  Bishop 
Taylor  is  a  stock  raiser  and  farmer 
by  avocation. 

TAYLOR,  Joseph  Lake,  the  second 
Bishop  of  Grant  Ward  (Rigby  Stake), 
Fremont  county,  Idaho,  was  born 
Aug.  1,  1864,  at  Harrisville,  Weber 
county,  Utah,  the  son  of  Pleasant 
Green  Taylor  and  Clara  Lake.  He 
was  baptized  June  6,  1872,  by  Noah 
L.  Shurtliff.  Subsequently  he  was 
ordained  a  Priest  and  later  an  Elder, 
the  latter  ordination  taking  place 
Jan.    30,    1887,    William    C.    Rawson 


BIOGRAPHICAL  ENCYCLOPEDIA. 


539 


officiating.  Later  he  was  ordained 
a  Seventy.  In  1892  (Nov.  29th)  Bro. 
Taylor  was  ordained  a  High  Priest  by 
Wm.  F.  Rigby  and  set  apart  as  first 
counselor  to  Bishop  Alfred  K.  Da- 
bell  of  the  Grant  Ward.  In  1906 
(Nov.  4th)  he  was  ordained  a  Bishop 
by  John  Henry  Smith  and  set  apart 
to  preside  over  the  Grant  Ward.  He 
also  acted  as  school  trustee  for  some 
time.  In  1887  (Feb.  2nd)  Bro.  Tay- 
lor married  Nancy  Elizabeth  McEn- 
tire,  daughter  of  William  McEntire 
and  Sarah  Bryant  Pritchett,  who  was 
born  May  14,  1867,  in  Smith  county, 
Virginia,  and  bore  her  husband 
twelve  children,  namely,  Lorin  R., 
Ira  J.,  Orial  B.,  Grace  E.,  Delbert  G., 
Darwin  F.,  Lawrence  I.,  Dorthulia, 
La  Vaughan,  Herald  P.,  Wells  D.  and 
Marion  E.  Brother  Taylor  is  a  far- 
mer and  stock  raiser  by  avocation. 

TAYLOR,  Leo  Sanford,  Bishop  of 
the  Redmesa  Ward  (Young  Stake), 
La  Plata  county,  Colorado,  was  born 
Nov.  25,  1892,  at  Mancos,  Monte- 
zuma county,  Colorado,  the  son  of 
Hiram  M.  Taylor  and  Clarentine  Mar- 
inda  Burnham.  He  was  raised, 
schooled  and  baptized  in  Mancos,  or- 
dained successively  to  the  offices  of 
Deacon  and  Teacher,  moved  with  his 
parents  to  Redmesa  in  the  spring  of 
190  6  and  thus  became  one  of  the 
first  settlers  in  that  part  of  the  coun- 
try now  included  in  the  Redmesa 
Ward.  Soon  after  his  arrival  at  Red- 
mesa he  was  ordained  a  Priest  and 
on  the  21st  of  May,  1912,  he  was  or- 
dained a  High  Priest  and  Bishop  by 
Francis  M.  Lyman  and  set  apart  to 
preside  over  the  Redmesa  Ward,  suc- 
ceeding his  father  in  that  position, 
although  only  nineteen  years  of  age 
and  unmarried.  From  his  earliest 
youth  Bishop  Taylor  has  been  most 
active  both  in  Church  and  secular 
matters.  He  is  a  farmer  and  stock- 
raiser  by  avocation.  In  1914  (Oct. 
2nd)  he  married  Florence  Stella 
Dean  (daughter  of  Joseph  H.  Dean 
and  Florence  Ridges),  who  was  born 


Nov.  22,  1896,  in  Salt  Lake  City, 
Utah.  This  marriage  has  been  blessed 
with  four  children,  namely,  Vaughan 
and  Dean  (twins),  Hal  and  Garth. 

TEUSCHER,  Henry,  jun.,  second 
Bishop  of  Geneva  Ward  (Montpelier 
Stake),  Bear  Lake  county,  Idaho,  was 
born  Oct.  3,  1875,  in  Dientigen,  Can- 
ton Bern,  Switzerland,  the  son  of 
Henry  Teuscher  and  Annie  B.  Hir- 
schi.  He  was  baptized  in  1883  and 
emigrated  to  Utah  with  his  father's 
family  soon  afterwards,  crossing  the 
Atlantic  in  the  steamship  "Nevada." 
He  was  ordained  a  Deacon  by  Thomas 
Sleight  in  Paris,  Idaho;  ordained  a 
Teacher  afterwards;  ordained  an  El- 
der by  Jacob  Spori;  ordained  a  Sev- 
enty Oct.  27,  1901,  by  Seymour  B. 
Young;  ordained  a  High  Priest  by 
John  U.  Stucki  and  set  apart  as  sec- 
ond counselor  to  Bishop  A.  D.  Hir- 
schi,  and  ordained  a  Bishop  Dec.  7, 
1915,  by  Joseph  F.  Smith  jun.  and 
set  apart  to  preside  over  the  Geneva 
Ward,  which  position  he  still  holds. 
In  1901-1904  Bro.  Teuscher  filled  a 
mission  to  Turkey,  laboring  prin- 
cipally in  Palestine.  At  home  he  has 
acted  as  assistant  Sunday  school  sup- 
erintendent, superintendent  of  re- 
ligion classes,  counselor  in  the  Ward 
Y.  M.  M.  I.  A.,  Ward  clerk,  constable, 
justice  of  the  peace,  school  trustee, 
etc.  In  1900  (Nov.  21st)  he  married 
Mary  Aegler  (daughter  of  John  Aeg- 
ler  and  Mary  Knutty),  who  was  born 
Sept.  5,  1879,  in  Dientigen,  Canton 
Bern,  Switzerland.  She  has  borne 
her  husband  eight  children,  namely, 
Barbara  M.,  John  H.,  Aurelia  V.,  Ly- 
man E.,  Lily  R.,  Ivan  M.,  Grace  T. 
and  Vern  O.  Bishop  Teuscher  is  a 
farmer  and  stock  raiser  by  avocation. 

THO>L\SSOX,  Charles  R.,  second 
Bishop  of  the  Independence  Ward 
(Fremont  Stake),  Madison  county, 
Idaho,  was  born  March  18,  1869,  in 
Goteborg,  Sweden,  the  son  of  Gustave 
Thomasson  and  Andrina  Olsen.  He 
emigrated  to  America  with  his  par- 


540 


LATTER-DAY   SAINT 


ents  as  an  infant  in  18  69  and  located 
in  the  Fourth  Ward  in  Logan,  Cache 
county,  Utah.  In  1898  he  settled  in 
Independence,|Idaho.  Bro.  Thomasson 
was  baptized  in  1877;  ordained  a 
Deacon  and  afterwards  a  Priest;  or- 
dained an  Elder  April  14,  1892,  by 
James  Lishman;  ordained  a  Seventy 
April  22,  1892,  by  Francis  M.  Lyman 
and  filled  a  mission  to  Samoa  in 
1892-1895;  acted  as  secretary  and 
counselor  in  the  Logan  Fourth  Ward 
Y.  M.  M.  I.  A.,  and  later  as  superin- 
tendent of  the  Union  Branch  Sunday 
school  and  president  of  the  Burton 
Ward  Y.  M.  M.  I.  A.  He  was  or- 
dained a  High  Priest  March  26,  1900, 
by  John  Henry  Smith  and  set  apart 
as  a  High  Councilor  in  the  Fremont 
Stake;  ordained  a  Bishop  Sept.  21, 
1908,  by  George  F.  Richards  and  set 
apart  to  preside  over  the  Indepen- 
dence Ward,  which  position  he  still 
occupies.  In  1897  Brother  Thomasson 
married  Marie  K.  Hentze  (daughter 
of  Christian  Hentze  and  Maren  V. 
Jokensen),  who  was  born  Sept.  2  5, 
1873,  in  Randers  amt,  Denmark.  She 
bore  her  husband  eight  children, 
namely.  Hazel  M.,  Gladys  V.,  Mabel 
A.,  Viola,  Jennie,  Charles  G.,  Leo 
and  Levi  E.  Louis,  another  son,  is 
an  adopted  boy. 

THOMPSON,  Orvil  Lorenzo,  presi- 
dent of  the  Millard  Stake  of  Zion, 
Millard  county,  Utah,  and  a  resident 
of  Scipio,  was  born  Dec.  11,  1864, 
in  Bountiful,  Davis  county,  Utah,  the 
son  of  Orvil  Thompson  and  Emily 
Lydia  Snyder.  He  was  raised  in  the 
Church  and  received  a  good  common 
school  education,  having  attended  the 
B.  Y.  Academy  three  years  (1881- 
1883).  After  being  baptized  when 
about  eight  years  of  age,  he  began 
his  Church  activities.  He  was  or- 
dained a  Seventy  April  7,  1885,  by 
Apostle  Francis  M.  Lyman  and  set 
apart  for  a  mission  to  Scotland, 
from  which  he  returned  June  10, 
1887.  After  his  return  he  acted  for 
some  time  as  Ward   clerk  at   Scipio 


and  as  president  of  the  Ward  Y.  M. 
M.  I.  A.  He  also  acted  as  a  president 
of  the  111th  quorum  of  Seventy.  In 
1902  (Nov.  14th)  he  was  ordained  a 
High  Priest  and  Bishop  by  President 
Joseph  F.  Smith  and  set  apart  to  pre- 
side over  the  Scipio  Ward,  which 
position  he  held  until  May  12,  1907, 
when  he  was  chosen  as  second  coun- 
selor to  President  Alonzo  A.  Hinck- 
ley. In  May,  1911,  he  was  set  apart 
as  first  counselor  to  President  Hinck- 
ley and  on  Aug.  11,  1912,  he  was  set 
apart  as  president  of  the  Millard 
Stake.  Also  in  secular  affairs  Presi- 
dent Thompson  has  been  most  active. 
Thus  he  acted  for  several  years  as 
justice  of  the  peace  of  the  Scipio  pre- 
cinct; served  as  county  superinten- 
dent of  schools  and  served  four  terms 
as  the  representative  from  Millard 
county  in  the  Utah  Legislature.  He 
has  acted  as  postmaster  of  Scipio  for 
twenty  years.  In  1888  (Dec.  5th) 
President  Thompson  married  Susan 
Monroe  (daughter  of  George  Monroe 
and  Margaret  Saunder^),  who  was 
born  Oct.  29,  1867,  at  Scipio.  This 
marriage  has  been  blessed  with  ten 
children,  namely,  Jennie,  Orvil  H., 
Lillian,  Rulon  S.,  Roscoe  B.,  Grant 
L.,  Burton  M.,  Edna,  Alonzo  W.  and 
Fred   Lyman. 

THORPE,  Christian  Larsen,  Bishop 
of  Ephraim  North  Ward  (Sanpete 
Stake),  Sanpete  county,  Utah,  was 
born  January  5,  1834,  at  Skjaerbaek, 
Veile  amt,  Denmark,  the  son  of  Lars 
Petersen  and  Bodil  Petersen.  He  was 
baptized  Aug.  7,  1862,  by  Knud  H. 
Bruun  and  emigrated  to  Utah  in 
18  63,  crossing  the  Atlantic  in  the 
ship  "B.  S.  Kimball"  and  the  plains 
in  Capt.  John  F.  Sanders'  train.  He 
located  at  Ephraim,  Sanpete  county, 
where  he  has  been  a  leading  citizen 
ever  since.  Being  ordained  an  Elder 
during  the  winter  of  1863-1864  he 
acted  as  a  counselor  to  Hans  F.  Pet- 
erson in  the  presidency  of  an  Elders' 
quorum  for  many  years.  He  was  or- 
dained a  High  Priest  July   4,    1877, 


BIOGRAPHICAL  ENCYCLOPEDIA. 


541 


by  John  W.  Young  and  set  apart  as  a 
High  Councilor  in  the  Sanpete  Stake 
and  was  also  chosen  as  a  counselor 
to  Bishop  Lars  S.  Anderson  of  the 
Ephriam  North  Ward.  Having  yielded 
obedience  to  the  higher  law  of  mar- 
riage, he  was  arrested  on  a  charge 
of  unlawful  cohabitation  and  being 
convicted,  after  trial,  he  spent  four 
months  in  the  Utah  penitentiary  in 
1888.  In  1887  he  was  ordained  a 
Bishop  and  set  apart  to  preside  pro 
tern,  over  the  Ephraim  North  Ward, 
which   position   he   held   two   and     a 


half  years,  after  which  he  again  be- 
came a  member  of  the  High  Council. 
During  the  Black  Hawk  Indian  war 
in  1865-1867  he  served  as  a  lieuten- 
ant in  the  Utah  militia  and  took  an 
active  part  in  moving  the  Saints  from 
Sevier  county  in  18  67.  Brother 
Thorpe  has  also  been  active  in  secu- 
lar matters  and  has  served  as  police- 
man, constable,  city  marshal  and  city 
councilman  at  Ephraim.  His  princi- 
pal avocations  are  farming  and  fruit 
raising.  In  July,  1855,  he  married 
Anna  Marie  Knudsen,  who  bore  him 
eight  children,  and  in  March,  18  68. 
he  married  Kirsti  Maria  Sorenson, 
who  bore  him  seven  children 


THUR>L\N,  Ray  Stewart,  a  Pat- 
riarch and  Bishop  of  Grover  Ward 
(Star  Valley  Stake),  Lincoln  county, 
Wyoming,  was  born  Oct.  30,  1881,  at 
Hyde  Park,  Cache  county,  Utah,  the 
son  of  Edward  M.  Thurman  and 
Femina  B.  Stewart.  He  was  baptized 
Oct.  30,  1889,  by  his  father;  ordained 
a  Deacon  Jan.  20,  18  96,  by  Andrew 
P.  Andersen;  ordained  an  Elder  Feb. 
2  4,  1906,  by  Morris  Hale  and  or- 
dained a  High  Priest  and  Bishop 
June  2,  1912,  by  Orson  F.  Whitney 
and  ordained  a  Patriarch  June  1, 
1913,  by  Hyrum  M.  Smith.  Prior  to 
this  he  had  acted  as  second  assistant 
superintendent  of  the  Grover  Sunday 
school;  president  of  the  first  quorum 
of  Elders  of  the  Star  Valley  Stake; 
counselor  in  the  Ward  Y.  M.  M.  I.  A., 
etc.  In  1909  (April  8th)  he  married 
Lucy  Luvilla  McCoombs  (daughter 
of  Andrew  C.  McCoombs  and  Ellen 
Grey),  who  was  born  Oct.  12,  1888 
in  Afton,  Wyoming.  The  issue  of 
this  marriage  is  six  children,  namely, 
Reita  L.,  Nellie  M.,  Stewart  M.,  Ruth 
M.,  Helen  L.  and  Ray  McCoombs. 
Bishop  Thurman  is  a  farmer  and 
stock  raiser  by  avocation. 

TIETJEN,  Alma,  second  counselor 
to  Bishop  Collins  R.  Hakes  jun.  of 
Bluewater,  Valencia  county.  New 
Mexico,  was  born  Jan.  4,  1891,  at 
Ramah,  New  Mexico,  the  son  of 
Ernst  A.  Tietjen  and  Emma  O.  Erick- 
son.  He  was  baptized  May  2  7,  1899, 
by  his  father  and  moved  to  Blue- 
water,  New  Mexico,  with  his  parents. 
When  eight  years  old  (on  a  certain 
occasion)  he  was  seriously  injured, 
his  head  being  cut  open  and  his  lungs 
mashed.  There  was  no  doctor  within 
reach,  so  the  boy  asked  his  father  to 
pray  for  him,  which  he  did,  and  the 
boy  was  healed  through  faith  by  the 
power  of  God.  On  another  occasion 
(Oct.  25,  1918)  he  was  taken  very 
ill  and  being  a  long  way  from  medi- 
cal skill  he  was  again  miraculously 
healed,  through  fasting  and  prayer  on 
the    part    of    his    brother's    wife    and 


542 


LATTER-DAY   SAINT 


her  children,  with  whom  he  was  liv- 
ing. In  1913  (Oct.  8th)  he  married 
Clarinda  Whetten  (the  daughter  of 
Bishop  J.  T.  Whetton).     Bro.  Tietjen 


was  ordained  a  High  Priest  June  19, 
1914,  by  President  David  K.  Udall 
and  set  apart  as  second  counselor  to 
Bishop  Collins  R.  Hakes  jun.  of  the 
Bluewater  Ward.  He  held  that  posi- 
tion until  Dec.  12,  1915.  Bro.  Tiet- 
jen was  engaged  in  the  cattle  busi- 
ness and  shipped  great  quantities  of 
cattle  to  Kansas  City.  He  died  Jan. 
31,  1919,  the  cause  of  his  death  be- 
ing an  accident  in  which  a  wagon 
tipped  over  him.  He  left  a  wife  and 
two  children  (Walma  and  Wesley). 

TIETJEX,  Joseph  Engebert,  second 
counselor  to  Bishop  Collins  R.  Hakes 
jun.  of  Bluewater,  Valentia  county. 
New  Mexico,  was  born  Aug.  22,  1875, 
at  Santaquin,  Utah  county,  Utah,  the 
son  of  Ernst  Albert  Tietjen  and  Em- 
ma O.  Erikson.  He  was  baptized 
Oct.  13,  1883,  by  Samuel  E.  Lewis. 
When  a  boy  his  father  was  called  to 
Arizona  on  an  Indian  mission  and 
took  his  family  with  him;  he  settled 
in  the  little  valley  in  which  Ramah 
is  now  situated,  and  while  there 
Joseph  was  ordained  to  the  office  of 


a  Deacon  Dec.  12,  1886,  by  James 
E.  Ashcroft  and  to  the  office  of 
a  Teacher  May  24,  1896,  by  Samuel 
E.  Lewis.  Later  his  father  moved  to 
Bluewater,  New  Mexico,  and  pur- 
chased a  stock  ranch  and  farm  in 
company  with  others,  and  as  Joseph 
E.  had  prevoiusly  had  experience  in 
handling  stock  at  Ramah  he  was 
placed  in  charge  of  the  stock  pur- 
chased by  his  father  and  made  a  suc- 
cess of  that  particular  enterprise.  He 
purchased  his  father's  stock  and  re- 
mained in  this  kind  of  business  the 
remainder  of  his  life.  He  was  en- 
abled to  render  financial  aid  to  many 
and  aid  his  father  in  his  missionary 
work  among  the  Indians.  Joseph  E. 
also  became  a  great  favorite  among 
the  Indians  and  was  commonly  called 
"the  Big  White  Chief."  He  married 
Maud  S.  Hunt  (daughter  of  Thomas 
J.  Hunt  and  Martha  Miranda  Man- 
uel), who  was  born  Oct.  10,  1880,  at 
Payson,  Utah.  About  1900  he  was 
ordained  a  High  Priest  and  set  apart 
as  second  counselor  to  Collins  R. 
Hakes   jun.    and     remained     in     that 


position  until  after  he  returned  from 
his  mission  to  Mexico.  Being  called 
on  a  mission  to  Mexico,  Bro.  Tietjen 
was  set  apart  as  a  missionary  Dec.  9, 


BIOGRAPHICAL   ENCYCLOPEDIA. 


543 


1909,  and  labored  in  Mexico  until 
June,  1910,  when  he  was  honorably 
released  on  account  of  ill  health. 
After  being  confined  in  a  hospital  for 
some  time  he  returned  to  Bluewater. 
Bro.  Tietjen  died  at  Albuquerque, 
New  Mexico,  Sept.  20,  1918.  His  re- 
mains were  interred  at  Bluewater, 
Sept.  22,  1918.  The  following  chil- 
dren were  the  issue  of  his  marriage: 
Josephine  Maud,  Embert  Lehi,  Vol- 
ton  Sheldon,  Ina,  Thomas  Jefferson 
and  Gladdus  Miranda. 

TOLMAN,  Benjamin  H.,  the  second 
Bishop  of  Honeyville  (Box  Elder 
Stake),  Box  Elder  county,  Utah,  was 
born  March   15,     1853,    in    Brigham 


City,  Utah,  the  son  of  Benjamin  H. 
Tolman  and  Sarah  Jane  Angell.  His 
father  died  in  1857  (twenty-seven 
years  old).  Benjamin  was  baptized 
July  30,  1865,  was  ordained  an  El- 
der in  1874,  and  while  living  tem- 
porarily in  Salt  Lake  City,  he  was  or- 
dained a  Seventy  in  January,  1876. 
Subsequently  he  became  a  president 
of  the  16th  quorum  of  Seventy.  In 
1876-1877  he  filled  a  mission  to 
Great  Britain.  Before  starting  on 
this  mission  he  married  Eliza  Bell 
Grant,  a  daughter  of  David  Grant  and 
Mary  Hunsaker,  April  24,  1876.  This 


marriage  was  blessed  with  eleven 
children,  namely,  Sarah  Jane,  Benja- 
min H.,  David  Denmark,  Abinadi, 
Jaron  G.,  Jarvis  Truman,  Nathan, 
Mary  Theda,  Emma  Angell,  Claudius 
and  Twila.  After  his  return  from 
his  mission  to  Europe  he  located  in 
Honeyville,  where  he  acted  as  super- 
intendent of  the  Sunday  school  and 
took  a  most  active  part  in  all  the 
public  affairs  of  the  Ward.  From 
1877  to  1889  he  served  as  first  coun- 
selor to  Bishop  Abraham  Hunsaker 
and  after  the  demise  of  Bishop  Hun- 
saker in  1889  he  was  chosen  as 
Bishop  of  Honeyville,  which  position 
he  filled  till  1893.  His  death  occur- 
red June  8,  1913,  at  Honeyville. 
About  nine  years  before  his  death, 
while  working  as  a  carpenter  on  the 
power  house  ,at  the  mouth  of  Bear 
River  Canyon,  he  was  accidentally 
burned  by  electricity.  After  spending 
several  months  in  a  hospital  in  Salt 
Lake  City,  losing  his  leg  by  amputa- 
tion, he  resumed  his  labors  at  home 
and  continued  active  as  far  as  his 
health  would  permit  till  the  last.  His 
life  was  saved  after  the  terrible  acci- 
dent by  the  power  of  God,  as  every- 
body who  saw  him  at  the  time  be- 
lieved that  almost  immediate  death 
was  inevitable.  Bro.  Tolman  was 
highly  respected  by  all  who  knew 
him,  was  a  most  faithful  and  ardent 
Church  worker  and  never  faltered  in 
his  fidelity  to  the  Church.  By  his 
second  wife,  Mary  Neeley,  he  had 
two  children,  namely,  Polly  Belle  and 
Austin. 

TOLTON,  Edward,  a  prominent 
Church  member  and  pioneer,  was 
born  March  2,  1822,  at  Newbold- 
upon-Avon,  Warwickshire,  England, 
the  son  of  John  Tolton  and  Ann 
Smith.  He  emigrated  to  America 
with  his  father's  family  and  married 
Mary  Ann  Tomlinson  at  St.  Louis, 
Missouri,  Dec.  24,  1847.  The  issue 
of  the  marriage  was  fourteen  chil- 
dren (five  boys  and  nine  girls)  whose 
names,   given  in   the   order   of  their 


544 


LATTER-DAY   SAINT 


birth,  are  as  follows:  Emily,  Louise, 
Clara  Ann,  Ellen  Maria,  Edward 
Henry,  Frances  Elizabeth,  John 
Franklin,     Walter     Smith,     Margaret 


Esther,  Mary  Adeline,  Guy  Herbert, 
Selena  Alice,  Nellie  Edith  and  James 
Percy  Walker.  The  family  emigrated 
to  Utah  in  1853,  crossing  the  plains 
in  Capt.  Moses  Clawson's  company  of 
57  wagons.  After  residing  tempor- 
arily in  Salt  Lake  City,  Bro.  Tolton 
was  called  to  settle  at  Grantsville, 
Utah,  in  1856;  later  he  was  called  to 
settle  Willard,  Box  Elder  county, 
Utah,  but  before  the  family  reached 
that  place  (after  having  built  a  home 
at  Willard)  they  were  called  to  San- 
pete county  where  they  located  in 
1858.  Six  years  later,  Bro.  Tolton, 
responding  to  a  call  from  President 
Brigham  Young,  moved  to  Piute 
county,  and  located  at  Circleville  as 
one  of  the  pioneers  of  that  town.  He 
served  as  the  first  probate  judge  of 
Piute  county.  In  1866,  when  Circle- 
ville was  abandoned  on  account  of  In- 
dian depredations,  the  Tolton  family 
located  in  Beaver  where  they  have 
since  resided.  Bro.  Edward  Tolton 
was  county  recorder  of  Beaver  county 
for  eighteen  years,  and  died  Oct.  23, 
1896,  leaving  a  large  posterity. 


TOLTON,  John  Franklin,  president 
of  the  Beaver  Stake  of  Zion  and  a 
resident  of  Beaver,  Beaver  county, 
Utah,  was  born  Nov.  14,  18  61,  at 
Ephraim,  Sanpete  county,  Utah,  the 
son  of  Edward  Tolton  and  Mary  Ann 
Tomlinson.  He  was  baptized  April 
13,  1878,  by  Thomas  Parkinson  and 
spent  the  first  twenty  years  of  his 
life  on  a  farm  in  Beaver.  At  the  age 
of  21  years  he  attended  the  B.  Y. 
Academy  at  Provo  and  in  1882-1883 
he  taught  school  in  Beaver.  Being 
called  on  a  mission  to  Great  Britain 
he  left  home  for  Europe  April  1, 
1884,  and  labored  in  Staffordshire, 
Worcestershire,  Hereforeshire  and 
Warwickshire,  England.  Owing  to 
ill  health  he  was  released  and  re- 
turned home  Nov.  10,  1885.  He  then 
entered  upon  activities  in  religious, 
political  and  social  life  and  filled 
many  positions  of  honor  and  trust. 
Thus  he  acted  as  city  councilman  at 
Beaver,  U.  S.  court  commissioner,  U. 
S.  deputy  marshal,  county  clerk  and 
legislator.  In  the  latter  capacity  he 
served  four  terms  and  was  speaker 
of  the  House  in   1917.     He  ran   for 


Governor  on  the  Democratic  ticket 
in  1912.  From  1889  to  1890  he 
served  as  a  member  of  the  High 
Council  of  the  Beaver  Stake  and  as 


BIOGRAPHICAL   ENCYCLOPEDIA. 


545 


second  counselor  in  the  Beaver  Stake 
presidency  from  1891  to  1908.  In 
June,  1908,  he  was  called  to  act  as 
president  of  the  Beaver  Stake  of 
Zion,  which  position  he  held  until 
April,  1916.  During  his  term  of 
presidency  he  was  also  president  of 
the  board  of  the  Murdock  Academy 
and  succeeded  in  having  erected  a 
$70,000  new  building  and  also  the 
present  Stake  Administration  Build- 
ing at  Beaver.  Bro.  Tolton  has  been 
engaged  in  operating  the  Beaver 
Woolen  Mills  four  years  and  has  fol- 
lowed mercantile  business  twenty- 
five  years.  He  was  county  surveyor 
ten  years,  during  which  time  he  did 
much  civil  engineering  work  in  Bea- 
ver county.  He  also  acted  as  school 
trustee  of  the  Beaver  schools  ten 
years.  Notwithstanding  his  present 
duties  at  home.  Elder  Tolton  has 
traveled  much,  having  visited  38 
States  of  the  Union  and  also  Canada 
and  Mexico.  During  the  late  war  he 
acted  as  chairman  of  the  Beaver 
County  Council  of  Defence  and  took 
an  active  part  in  several  other  war 
activities;  thus  he  conducted  two 
bond  drives  and  other  war  interests. 
In  October,  1886,  Bro  Tolton  married 
Caroline  Olivia  Hales,  who  was  born 
Nov.  17,  1861,  at  Spanish  Fork,  Utah 
county,  Utah.  Seven  children  were 
the  issue  of  this  marriage,  namely, 
Aubrey  Franklin,  John  Carlisle, 
Irene,  Olivia,  Grant  Hales  and  Lulu 
and  LaRue,  twins,  six  of  whom  are 
still  living.  His  three  sons  have  all 
filled  honorable  missions  to  the 
United  States.  Aubrey  Tolton,  his 
eldest  son,  is  state  bank  examiner  and 
his  eldest  daughter,  Irene,  is  a  mem- 
ber of  the  faculty  of  the  University 
of  Utah. 

TUCKER,  Charles,  a  High  Coun- 
cilor in  the  Morgan  Stake,  Morgan 
county,  Utah,  was  born  Jan.  14,  1842, 
at  Eastdown,  Devonshire,  England, 
the  son  of  John  Tucker  and  Susan 
Blackmore;  he  was  baptized  in  18  61 
by  Thomas  Yates,  emigrated  to  Utah 

Vol.  Ill,  No.  35 


in  1863,  crossing  the  Atlantic  in  the 
ship  "Antarctic"  which  sailed  from 
Liverpool  May  2  3,  1863,  and  arrived 
in  New  York  July  10,  1863,  and 
crossed  the  plains  in  Peter  Nebeker's 
company  which  arrived  in  Salt  Lake 
City,  Sept.  3,  1863.  Bro.  Tucker  was 
ordained  an  Elder  by  John  D.  T.  Mc- 
Allister in  1864;  ordained  a  Seventy 
Feb.  17,  1884,  by  Thomas  Grover 
and  ordained  a  High  Priest  in  1908 
by  Wm.  Hemming.  He  acted  as  sup- 
erintendent of  the  Milton  Ward  Sun- 


day school  from  1877  to  1885,  pre- 
sided over  the  Ward  Y.  M.  M.  I.  A. 
for  a  number  of  years,  was  president 
of  an  Elders'  quorum  and  later  presi- 
dent of  the  35th  quorum  of  Seventy, 
and  in  1913  became  a  member  of  the 
High  Council.  In  1873  and  1874  he 
labored  as  a  missionary  in  the  erec- 
tion of  the  St.  George  Temple  and  in 
1899-1901  he  filled  a  mission  to 
Great  Britain,  laboring  in  the  Man- 
chester conference.  In  1863  (July 
23rd)  he  married  Betsey  Rawle, 
(daughter  of  John  Rawle  and  Nancy 
Blackmore),  who  was  born  July  9, 
1832,  in  Canterbury,  England,  and 
died  Sept.  28,  1909.  In  1882  he 
married  Mary  Smith  (daughter  of 
William  Smith),  who  was  born  in 
18  32  in  England  and  died  Jan.  10, 
1915.  In  1884  (Dec.  12th)  he  mar- 
March  13,  1920 


546 


LATTER-DAY   SAINT 


ried  Ann  Hardman  (daughter  of 
John  Hardman  and  Anna  Seddon), 
who  was  born  Aug.  30,  1866,  at  Hay- 
dock,  Lancashire,  England.  She  be- 
came the  mother  of  seven  children, 
three  boys  and  four  girls.  Brother 
Tucker  is  by  occupation  an  agricul- 
turist and  horticulturist.  He  has  also 
assisted  with  his  means,  at  different 
times,  to  bring  emigrants  from  Eu- 
rope to  Zion. 

TYLER,  Prank  Newton,  Bishop  of 
the  Thatcher  Ward,  St.  Joseph  Stake, 
Graham  county,  Arizona,  was  born 
Aug.  26,  1860,  at  Washington,  Wash- 
ington county,  Utah,  the  son  of  Os- 
car Tyler  and  Harriet  Amanda  Brown. 
He  was  baptized  Aug.  26,  1868,  by 
Oscar  Tyler,  was  raised  and  schooled 
in  Washington,  where  he  also  was 
ordained  a  Deacon.  Subsequently  he 
was  ordained  an  Elder  in  the  St. 
George  Temple  and  when  twenty-two 
years  old  he  married  Mary  Adelia 
Pace,  Sept.  20,  1882.  She  was  the 
daughter  of  James  Pace  (of  Mormon 
Battalion  fame)  and  Ann  Webb  and 
was  born  Sept.  18,  1864.  The  chil- 
dren by  this  marriage  were  the  follow- 
ing: Amanda  Norena,  Viola  Ann,  Lu- 
cinda,  Frank,  James  Bliss,  Ella,  Del- 
bert,  Furnando,  Jesse  Leroy,  Flossie 
and  Adelia.  Brother  Tyler  moved  to 
Thatcher,  Arizona,  in  1882,  where  he 
has  resided  ever  since.  Here  he  took 
an  active  part  in  Church  affairs,  and 
labored  as  an  officer  in  the  Ward  Y. 
M.  M.  I.  A.  Being  ordained  a  Sev- 
enty by  Seymour  B.  Young  in  1886 
he  was  chosen  president  of  the  89th 
quorum  of  Seventy.  In  1899-1901  he 
filled  a  mission  to  the  Southern 
States,  laboring  principally  in  Flor- 
ida and  Georgia.  When  Andrew  C. 
Peterson  was  chosen  as  Bishop  of 
the  Thatcher  Ward,  Bro.  Tyler  was 
ordained  a  High  Priest  by  Pres.  An- 
drew Kimball  and  set  apart  to  act  as 
first  counselor  to  Bishop  Peterson, 
which  position  he  held  until  March 
28,  1909,  when  he  was  chosen  Bishop 
of  the  Thatcher  Ward  and  ordained 


to  that  office  by  John  Henry  Smith. 
He  held  that  position  until  Nov.  9, 
1919,  when  the  Thatcher  Ward  was 
divided  into  two  Wards.  Bishop  Ty- 
ler is  a  farmer  by  avocation,  but  has 
held  many  civil  offices  within  the 
gift  of  his  fellow-citizens.  Thus  he 
served  for  some  time  as  a  city  coun- 
cilman at  Thatcher.  He  was  one  of 
the  promoters  and  business  manager 
of  the  Mt.  Graham  Lumber  Co.  and 
was  also  one  of  the  promoters  and 
president  of  the  Citizens'  Bank  at 
Thatcher.  He  has  always  taken  a 
most  active  and  efficient  part  in  all 
public  affairs. 

WADE,  EdAvard  D.,  a  member  of 
the  Mormon  Battalion,  was  born  in 
1822,  at  Farmersville,  Cattaraugus 
county.  New  York,  the  son  of  Moses 
Wade  and  Sallie  Maria  Bundy.  He 
was  raised  as  a  Latter-day  Saint  and 
remained  with  his  father's  family  un- 
til 1846,  when  he,  together  with  his 
father,  enlisted  in  the  Mormon  Bat- 
talion and  marched  ai  a  private  in 
Company  C  to  California.  After  be- 
ing honorably  discharged  from  the 
Battalion  he  came  to  Utah,  in  1851, 
where  he  married  Belinda  Hicken- 
looper  in  Salt  Lake  City.  She  died  in 
North  Ogden  Nov.  11,  1894.  After 
his  marriage  Brother  Wade  settled  in 
North  Ogden,  where  he  resided  until 
the  day  of  his  death.  The  issue  of  his 
marriage  with  Belinda  Hickenlooper 
was  ten  children,  namely:  Edward 
W.,  James  Monroe,  Franklin,  Sarah 
Jane,  John,  Moses,  Joseph,  Andrew, 
George  and  Clarence.  By  his  plural 
wife,  Ellen  Page,  whom  he  married 
about  1854,  he  had  nine  children, 
namely:  Daniel  D.,  Henry  C,  Mary 
E.,  Isaac,  George,  Minerva  L.,  Lucy, 
Ruth  and  Jedediah.  Brother  Wade 
was  called  on  a  mission  to  China 
about  1855,  but  only  went  as  far  as 
San  Francisco,  California,  when  he 
was  called  back.  Bro.  Wade  died 
in  North  Ogden  Jan.  2,  1880.  His 
wife,  Belinda,  died  in  the  same  place 
Nov.  11,  1894.     His  son,  Edward  W.. 


BIOGRAPHICAL   ENCYCLOPEDIA. 


547 


has  acted  as  Bishop  of  Pleasant 
View  and  afterwards  as  a  member  of 
the  Weber  Stake  High  Council.  An- 
other son,  Franklin,  acted  as  Bishop 
of  the  Liberty  Ward,  Weber  Stake, 
and  James  M.  Wade,  another  son, 
served  as  a  Bishop's  counselor  in  the 
Liberty  Ward  and  afterwards  in  the 
Warren  Ward. 

WADE,  Moses,  a  member  of  the 
Mormon  Battalion,  was  born  July  2, 
1792,  at  Farmersville,  Cattaraugus 
county.  New  York,  the  son  of  Jacob 
Wade  and  Sarah  Jones.  He  learned 
the  trade  of  a  dyer  and  cleaner  and 
also  practiced  medicine  for  a  number 
of  years.  Becoming  a  convert  to 
"Mormonism,"  he  was  baptized  April 
1,  183  7,  at  Farmersville,  New  York, 
and  was  with  the  Saints  at  the  time 
of  the  exodus  from  Nauvoo  in  1846. 
Prior  to  this  he  had  married  Sallie 
Maria  Bundy,  who  was  born  May  13, 
1798,  and  who  bore  her  husband  four 
children,  namely:  Mary  E.,  Edward 
D.,  Sarah  M.,  and  Minerva.  In  1846 
he  and  his  family  journeyed  west- 
ward with  the  rest  of  the  e.xiled 
Saints,  and  having  arrived  on  the 
Missouri  river,  he  enlisted  in  the  Mor- 
mon Battalion  and  marched  as  a  pri- 
vate in  Company  C  to  California. 
While  he  was  still  in  California  his 
wife  died  at  Council  Bluffs,  in  Janu- 
ary, 1848,  and  his  daughter,  Minerva, 
had  married  Wm.  A.  Hickman.  Bro. 
Wade  arrived  in  Utah  from  California 
in  1850  and  established  himself  as  a 
broom  maker  in  Salt  Lake  City,  where 
he  spent  the  remainder  of  his  days. 
Bro.  Wade  also  married  a  widow  lady, 
Mrs.  Armstrong,  of  Salt  Lake  City, 
who  bore  him  one  daughter  (Jane). 
He  died  in  Salt  Lake  City,  Nov.  20, 
1869. 

WALKER,  Ezra  Brown,  BisTiop  of 
the  Pleasant  View  Ward  (Utah 
Stake),  Utah  county,  Utah,  was  born 
Dec.  9,  1882,  in  Pleasant  Grove,  Utah 
county,  Utah,  the  son  of  Ezra  F.  Wal- 
ker and  Laura  Brown.     Both  on  his 


father's  and  mother's  side  he  is  a 
grandson  of  original  pioneers  of  Utah 
(Henson  Walker  and  John  Brown). 
From  his  early  youth  he  was  taught 
the  principles  of  true  religion  and 
was  baptized  when  eight  years  old 
by  Benjamin  Walker.  He  was  raised 
in  Pleasant  Grove  and  after  receiv- 
ing a  common  schol  education  in  that 
place  he  attended  the  Brigham  Young 
University  at  Provo  about  two  years. 
After  being  ordained  successively  to 
the  offices  of  Deacon  and  Priest  he 
was  ordained  an  Elder  in  March, 
1903,  by  Ezra  F.  Walker  and  filled 
a  mission  to  the  Northern  States 
in  1903-1905,  laboring  principally  in 
Indiana.  After  his  return  home,  he 
became  an  active  worker  in  the  Lin- 
don  Sunday  school  and  was  ordained 
a  Seventy  in  February,  1906,  by  J. 
Golden  Kimball.  In  190  6  (May  16th) 
he  married  Alta  Malissa  Ercanbrack 
(daughter  of  William  Thomas  Ercan- 
brack and  Ruth  Ann  Seaberry),  who 
was  born  Aug.  29,  1882,  in  Goshen. 
Utah  county,  Utah.  Three  children 
have  been  born  to  them,  namely, 
Melba,  Laura  and  Orvil.  In  1908 
Bro.  Walker  located  in  Pleasant  View 
Ward,  where  he  acted  as  superinten- 
dent of  the  Mountain  View  Sunday 
school  and  also  presided  over  the 
Ward  Y.  M.  M.  I.  A.  At  present  he 
serves  as  justice  of  the  peace  in  the 
Pleasant  View  district.  In  1919 
(April  27th)  he  was  ordained  a  High 
Priest  and  Bishop  by  Apostle  Joseph 
F.  Smith  jun.  and  set  apart  to  pre- 
side over  the  Pleasant  View  Ward, 
which  position  he  still  holds. 

WALKER,  James  John,  presiding 
Elder  at  Croyden,  Morgan  county, 
Utah,  was  born  July  26,  1830,  at 
Sheerness,  Kent,  England,  the  son  of 
Thomas  Walker  and  Mary  Ann  Mel- 
lows. He  was  baptized  as  a  convert 
to  "Mormonism"  at  an  early  day  and 
emigrated  to  Utah  with  his  mother  in 
1853,  crossing  the  Atlantic  in  the 
ship  "Ellen  Maria,"  which  arrived  at 
New  Orleans    March     6,     1853.      He 


548 


LATTER-DAY   SAINT 


crossed  the  plains  the  same  year,  on 
which  journey  his  mother  died  and 
was  buried  about  three  hundred  miles 
from  Salt  Lake  City.     After  residing 


Salt  Lake  City,  Utah,  the  son  of 
James  John  Walker  and  Mary  Ann 
Cox.  He  was  baptized  in  1864;  or- 
dained a  Teacher  a  few  years  later; 
ordained  an  Elder  in  1878,  by  Bishop 
Peter  Barton;  ordained  a  Seventy 
in  1890,  by  Seymour  B.  Young,  and 
ordained  a  High  Priest  Dec.  7,  1895, 
by  Geo.  Q.  Cannon  and  at  the  same 
time  set  apart  as  second  counselor  to 
Bishop  Cook  of  the  Syracuse  Ward. 
Later  he  was  promoted  to  the  posi- 
tion of  first  counselor.  For  several 
years  he  labored  as  a  Ward  teacher. 
In  1877  (March  5th)  he  married 
Martha  Alice  Layton  (daughter  of 
Christopher  Layton  and  Caroline 
Cooper),  who  was  born  Feb.  20,  1860, 
at  Kaysville.  She  bore  her  husband 
two  children  and  died  Feb.  2,  1880. 
In  1890  (Jan.  16th)  Bro.  Walker 
married  Christine  Cook  (daughter  of 
Wm.  S.  Cook  and  Christine  Bow- 
man), who  was  born  Jan.  29,  1866, 
in  South  Weber;  she  is  the  mother  of 
two  children.  In  1862  Elder  Walker 
moved  to  Croyden,  Morgan  county, 
Utah,  where  he  lived  until  1869, 
when   he   moved     to     Kaysville     and 


in  Salt  Lake  City  about  ten  years,  he 
moved  to  Croyden  in  18  62  where  he 
acted  as  presiding  Elder.  In  1869 
he  settled  at  Kaysville,  Davis  county, 
where  he  acted  as  a  counselor  to 
Bishop  Christopher  Layton  and  in 
1880  he  moved  to  Syracuse.  In  1856 
he  filled  a  short  mission  to  Salmon 
river,  now  in  Idaho.  In  18  53  (Nov. 
23rd)  he  married  Mary  Ann  Cox 
(daughter  of  Thos.  Cox  and  Ann 
Harris),  who  was  born  Aug.  17,  1828, 
at  Wootten,  Northamptonshire,  Eng- 
land, emigrated  to  Utah  in  1853, 
crossing  the  Atlantic  in  the  ship 
"Golconda,"  and  arrived  at  Salt  Lake 
City  Oct.  11,  1853.  She  became  the 
mother  of  seven  children.  In  June, 
1867,  Bro.  Walker  married  Alice 
Townsend,  who  bore  her  husband 
eight  children.  Faithful  and  true  to 
the  gospel  he  had  espoused  in  his 
youth.  Elder  Walker  died  June  3, 
1896,  at  Syracuse,  Utah. 


WALKER,    James    Thomas,    first  finally   settled   at   Syracuse   in    1880. 

counselor   to   Bishop   David    Cook   of  In  1890-1892   he  filled  a  mission  to 

the    Syracuse    Ward,    Davis    county,  the   Southern   States,    laboring   prin- 

Utah,    was    born    Sept.    11,    1854,    in  cipally  in  North  Carolina. 


BIOGRAPHICAL   ENCYCLOPEDIA. 


549 


WALKER,  Solomon,  Bishop  of 
Minersville  (Beaver  Stake),  Beaver 
county,  Utah,  from  1890  to  1894,  was 
born  Nov.  20,  1848,  at  Winter  Quar- 
ters, Nebraska,  the  son  of  John  Wal- 
ker and  Elizabeth  Wansley.  He  came 
to  Utah  with  his  parents  in  1852  and 
located  in  Minersville  in  1863.  He 
was  baptized  when  about  eight  years 
old  by  Eli  B.  Kelsey  and  ordained  a 
Deacon  soon  afterwards.  Later  he 
was  ordained  an  Elder.  In  1887  he 
filled  a  mission  to  the  Northwestern 
States,  but  returned  because  of  sick- 
ness, after  filling  a  short  mission.     In 


his  early  youth  he  acted  as  president 
of  a  Deacons'  quorum  in  Minersville 
and  also  as  president  of  the  Ward  Y. 
M.  M.  I.  A.  He  was  ordained  a  Bishop 
by  George  Q.  Cannon  March  2  5,  1890, 
and  set  apart  to  preside  over  the 
Minersville  Ward.  In  1866  (Jan.  1st) 
he  married  Amanda  Grundy  (daugh- 
ter of  Isaac  Grundy  and  Elizabeth 
Grundy),  who  was  born  March  15, 
1848,  in  Salt  Lake  City,  Utah.  Two 
children  were  the  issue  of  this  mar- 
riage, namely,  Emma  and  Elizabeth. 
In  1875  (Dec.  5th)  Bro.  Walker  mar- 
ried Maria  Blackburn  (daughter  of 
Elias  Blackburn  and  Nancy  Lain), 
who   was   born     Aug.     25,     1868,     in 


Provo,  Utah.  Only  one  child  (Lorin) 
blessed  this  marriage.  In  1888  (May 
9th)  Bro.  Walker  married  Martha 
Ann  Eyre  (daughter  of  Edwin  Eyre 
and  Malinda  Myers),  who  was  born 
Nov.  22,  1870,  in  Minersville,  Utah. 
This  wife  bore  her  husband  eight 
children,  namely,  Duane  S.,  John  O., 
Delia,  Edwin  V.,  Karl  G.,  Alberta, 
Jennie  and  Reed. 

WALSER,   George  Jasper,    Bishop 

of  Miami  Ward  (St.  Joseph  Stake), 
Gila  county,  Arizona,  was  born  Nov. 
14,  1878,  in  Payson,  Utah  county, 
Utah,  the  son  of  John  Jacob  Walser 
and  Annie  Elizabeth  Louisa  Schaer- 
rer.  He  was  the  fourth  child  of  a 
family  of  eleven  children.  When 
twelve  years  of  age  he  accompanied 
his  mother  and  family  to  Colonia 
Juarez,  Chihuahua,  Mexico,  to  join 
his  father,  who  had  gone  to  that  land 
the  previous  year  to  prepare  a  new 
home  for  his  family.  There  he  at- 
tended school  and  helped  his  father 
on  the  farm;  was  ordained  a  Deacon 
Oct.  25,  1891,  by  George  W.  Sivey; 
ordained  a  Teacher  April  16,  1898, 
by  Ernest  L.  Taylor;  was  called  on  a 
mission  to  the  Northern  States  in 
November,  1899,  being  the  first  mis- 
sionary from  the  Juarez  Stake  Acad- 
emy; ordained  an  Elder  March  25, 
1900,  by  his  father  and  was  ordained 
a  Seventy  April  2,  1900,  by  Apostle 
Rudger  Clawson.  While  filling  his 
mission  he  first  labored  in  the 
Missouri  conference,  and  afterwards 
in  the  Lone  Star  conference,  in  Texas, 
and  returned  to  his  home  in  Juarez, 
Feb.  25,  1902.  After  his  return  he 
labored  as  a  Sunday  school  mission- 
ary in  the  mountain  settlements  in 
Chihuahua  and  in  the  colonies  in 
Sonora.  He  was  chosen  as  one  of 
the  presidents  of  the  99th  quorum  of 
Seventy  and  as  a  member  of  the 
Juarez  Stake  Sunday  School  Board. 
From  1902  to  1909  he  labored  as  a 
Ward  Sunday  school  teacher;  was  a 
member  of  the  Juarez  Ward  and 
Stake   choir,   and   a   member   of   the 


550 


LATTER-DAY   SAINT 


Juarez  brass  band,  and  filled  a  num- 
ber of  other  positions.  An  an  exile 
he  left  Mexico  with  his  family  July 
29,  1912,  with  the  rest  of  the  "Mor- 
mon" colonists,  and  after  a  tem- 
porary residence  in  El  Paso,  Texas, 
he  took  his  family  to  Miami,  Arizona, 
where  he  entered  the  employ  of  the 
Miami  Copper  Company,  as  a  carpen- 
ter. In  1913  (Dec.  1st)  he  was  set 
apart  as  presiding  Elder  of  the  Miami 
branch  of  the  Globe  Ward  (St.  Joseph 
Stake),  which  position  he  held  until 
March  1,  1914,  when  the  Saints  in 
Miami  were  organized  as  an  inde- 
pendent branch  of  the  St.  Joseph 
Stake  with  Bro.  Walser  as  presiding 
Elder.  This  position  he  held  until 
Sept.  3,  1916,  when  the  branch  was 
organized  as  a  Ward  with  Bro.  Wal- 
ser as  Bishop.  He  was  ordained  a 
Bishop  Nov.  26,  1916,  by  Hyrum  M. 
Smith.  Under  Bishop  Walser's  ad- 
ministration a  beautiful  chapel  was 
built  in  Miami  which  was  dedicated 
on  the  day  that  the  Ward  was  or- 
ganized. In  1904  (June  29th)  Bro. 
Walser  married  Nellie  Turley  (the 
daughter  of  Isaac  Turley  and  Clara 
A.  Tolton),  who  has  borne  her  hus- 
band nine  children,  namely,  George 
Dion,  Ruth,  Maurice  Edward,  Gordon 
Kimberley,  Nellie  Eva,  Robert  Eu- 
gene, Paul  Leroy,  Joseph  Jasper  and 
Ivarl  Loraine. 

WALTERS,  Henry  B.,  a  faithful 
Elder  in  the  Church,  was  born  Aug. 
2,  1827,  in  London,  England,  the  son 
of  Reese  Walters  and  Ann  Booth.  He 
was  baptized  in  August,  1845,  by  El- 
der Edward  Creer  and  confirmed 
Aug.  31,  1845,  by  Apostle  Wilford 
Woodruff.  He  labored  as  a  local 
missionary  in  Preston,  England,  in 
the  early  fifties  and  later  was  ap- 
pointed to  do  missionary  work  in  the 
Liverpool  conference  under  the  direc- 
tion of  Thos.  Taylor.  In  1849  he 
married  Sarah  Smalley  who  bore  him 
seven  children,  four  sons  and  three 
daughters.  Six  of  these  were  born 
in  Preston,  England.     In  his  anxiety 


to  emigrate  to  Utah  he  arranged  for 
his  family  to  precede  him  to  America 
and  secured  their  passage  on  the 
ship  "Antarctic"  in  1863.  While 
crossing  the  Atlantic  the  wife  gave 
birth  to  a  child.  May  18,  1863,  and 
died  the  same  day  and  was  buried 
in  the  ocean.  The  baby,  which  was 
named  Sarah  Jane  Antarctic,  after 
the  vessel,  died  ten  days  after  the 
mother.  One  child  had  died  in  Eng- 
land. The  five  surviving  children 
were  left  with  their  mother's  sister, 
Jane  Smalley,  who  cared  for  them 
while    crossing    the    ocean,    but    she 


was  called  by  death  while  crossing 
the  plains  and  buried  on  Hams  Fork. 
The  children  arrived  in  Utah  safely, 
but  the  youngest  child  died  six  weeks 
after  they  arrived.  The  other  four 
children  were  well  taken  care  of  until 
Bro.  Walters  himself  arrived  in  Utah 
in  1865.  After  the  departure  of  his 
family  to  America,  Bro.  Walters  was 
appointed  to  preside  over  the  Lan- 
cashire conference  in  1864.  He  mar- 
ried Caroline  Francis  Feb.  19,  1865, 
and  left  England  for  America  a  few 
months  later,  crossing  the  Atlantic 
in  the  ship  "Belle  Wood"  which  ar- 
rived in  New  York  June  1,  18  65.  He 
crossed  the  plains  in  Capt.  Willey's 
company  which  was  snowed  in  at 
Laramie,  Wyoming,  but  were  met  by 


Biographical  encyclopedia. 


551 


volunteers  who  brought  food  and 
blankets!  The  wife  left  in  Capt.  Or- 
son Arnold's  company,  which  had 
been  sent  by  Pres.  Young  to  meet 
the  immigrants,  while  Bro.  Walters 
remained  back  with  Capt.  Thos.  Tay- 
lor to  bring  in  the  freight.  Sister 
Walters'  first  son  was  born  on  Green 
River,  Nov.  11,  1865,  the  child  being 
four  days  old  when  the  company  ar- 
rived in  Salt  Lake  City.  Bro.  Wal- 
ters arrived  Nov.  29,  1865,  finding 
his  wife  and  baby  doing  well;  also 
his  other  four  children  had  been  well 
taken  care  of.  He  had  driven  an  ox 
team  all  the  way  across  the  plains. 
Bro.  Walters  was  a  member  of  the 
Nauvoo  Legion  from  the  time  of  his 
first  arrival  in  Utah  until  his  death. 
Twelve  children,  namely,  five  sons 
and  seven  daughters,  were  born  to 
him  by  his  second  wife;  eleven  of 
these  were  born  in  Salt  Lake  City. 
Altogether  Brother  Walters  was  the 
father  of  nineteen  children,  nine  sons 
and  ten  daughters.  Bro.  Walters  was 
ordained  a  Seventy  about  1871,  by 
Bro.  Cahoon  and  for  twenty-two 
years  (1884  to  190  6)  he  acted  as 
secretary  and  treasurer  of  the  2nd 
quorum  of  Seventy.  Finally  he  was 
ordained  a  High  Priest  March  25, 
1.106,  by  Wm.  Asper.  At  the  time  of 
his  death,  which  occurred  in  Salt 
Lake  City,  Feb.  23,  1913,  he  had 
fifty  grandchildren  and  thirty-five 
great  grandchildren  living. 

WAIiZ,  Conrad,  third  Bishop  of 
Burton  Ward  (Fremont  Stake),  Mad- 
ison county,  Idaho,  was  born  April 
26,  1865,  at  Waldorf,  Switzerland, 
the  son  of  George  L.  Walz  and  Chris- 
tine M.  Walz.  He  was  baptized  June 
5,  1879,  by  H.  Christensen,  having 
emigrated  with  his  parents  to  Utah 
in  1878.  He  lived  in  Logan  till  1884, 
when  he  located  in  Snake  River  Val- 
ley, at  Rexburg.  His  first  ordination 
to  the  Priesthood  was  to  the  office  of 
a  Priest,  and  while  residing  in  Rex- 
burg he  acted  as  secretary  of  the 
Sunday  school  and  president  of  the 


Rexburg  Y.  M.  M.  I.  A.  After  re- 
moving to  Burton  he  acted  as  super- 
intendent of  the  Burton  Sunday 
school  seven  years.  In  1898-1901  he 
filled  a  mission  to  Germany,  labor- 
ing as  president  of  the  Hamburg 
conference  twenty-five  monxhs.  He 
was  ordained  a  High  Priest  Nov.  2  6, 
18  8  7,  by  Henry  Flamm  and  set  apart 
as  second  counselor  to  Bishop  Casper 
Steiner  in  the  Rexburg  Second  Ward, 
which  position  he  held  until  1892, 
when  he  moved  to  Burton.  He  was 
ordained  a  Bishop  April  26,  1902,  by 
Abraham  Owen  Woodruff  and  set 
apart  to  preside  over  the  Burton 
Ward,  which  position  he  still  holds. 
Bro.  Walz  first  married  Eliza  Miller, 
by  whom  he  was  the  father  of  five 
children,  namely,  Conrad  L.,  Eliza  S., 
Reinhart  J.,  Ada  F.  and  Edward  M. 
In  1905  (April  5th)  Brother  Walz 
married  Lina  Wieter  (daughter  of 
August  Wieter  and  Julia  Tadje),  who 
was  born  Jan.  25,  18  73,  in  Barsing- 
hausen,  Hannover,  Germany.  The 
children  of  this  marriage  were  three 
in  number,  namely,  Herman,  Grace 
L.  and  Gladys  M.  Bro.  Walz  is  a 
farmer  by  avocation,  but  has  filled 
many  positions  of  a  secular  nature 
within  the  gift  of  his  fellow-citizens. 
Thus  he  acted  as  county  assessor  for 
Fremont  county  three  terms. 

AVANDELL,  Charles  Wesley,  presi- 
dent of  the  Australian  mission  from 
1852  to  1853,  was  born  April  12, 
1819,  at'Courtland,  Westchester  coun- 
ty. New  York.  Becoming  a  convert 
to  "Mormonism,"  he  was  baptized 
Jan.  5,  1837,  and  ordained  an  Elder 
by  L.  R.  Foster,  April  6,  183  7,  at  a 
conference  held  in  New  York.  He 
commenced  missionary  labors  soon 
after  his  ordination  and  seemed  to  be 
successful  in  his  administration,  fill- 
ing a  number  of  missions  to  several 
States.  In  1844  he  was  called  on  a 
special  mission  to  the  State  of  New 
York,  being  appointed  to  take  charge 
of  the  missionary  labors  in  that  State, 
with   forty-eight   other   Elders   work- 


552 


LATTER-DAY   SAINT 


ing  under  his  direction.  Among  tliese 
were  Augustus  A.  Farnham,  Daniel 
Shearer,  Samuel  P.  Bacon,  Joseph  B. 
Noble,  Horace  S.  Eldredge,  Cyrus  H. 
Wheelock,  David  H.  Redfield  and 
Charles  Thompson.  After  the  mar- 
tyrdom of  the  Prohpet  he  went  to  St. 
Louis,  Missouri,  where  he  engaged  in 
the  local  river  trade  as  a  steamboat 
officer.  A  few  years  later  he  went  by 
water  to  California  (doubling  Cape 
Horn)  and  there  became  associated 
with  Samuel  Brannan  and  later  with 
Apostle  Parley  P.  Pratt.  In  1851  he 
was  called,  together  with  John  Mur- 
dock,  to  open  up  a  mission  in  Au- 
stralia; the  two  Elders  arrived  in 
Sydney,  October  30,  1851,  and  after 
laboring  under  adverse  circumstances 
they  succeeded  in  raising  up  a  branch 
of  the  Church  at  Sydney  and  making 
openings  to  preach  in  other  places. 
On  the  departure  of  John  Murdock 
for  home  in  1851,  Elder  Wandell  suc- 
ceeded him  in  the  presidency  of  the 
Australian  mission,  which  position  he 
held  until  April,  1853,  when  he  left 
Sydney  on  his  return  to  America. 
After  spending  some  time  in  Cali- 
fornia, he  ciossed  the  southern  desert 
to  Utah  in  1857.  In  1873  Brother 
Wandell  joined  the  "Re-organites" 
(Josephites) ,  being  baptized  into  that 
organization  July  6,  1873.  Soon  af- 
terwards he  was  called  by  that  organ- 
ization on  a  mission  to  Australia,  to- 
gether with  Glaud  Rodger.  On  the 
voyage  these  two  men  visited  the  So- 
ciety Islands,  where  they  found  a 
number  of  Latter-day  Saints,  as  a 
remnant  of  the  work  commenced 
many  years  before  by  Elders  Addison 
Pratt  and  Benjamin  F.  Grouard.  They 
continued  their  voyage  to  Sydney, 
Australia,  where  they  arrived  in  Jan- 
uary, 1874.  Here  Charles  W.  Wan- 
dell took  sick  and  died,  March  14, 
1875.  (Reorganized  "Journal  of  His- 
tory," Vols.  3  and  4.) 

WARD,  Elijah  Barney,  famous 
trapper  and  pioneer,  was  born  in  Vir- 
ginia about  the  year   1820.      At  the 


early  age  of  fifteen  years  he  left  the 
parental  home  and  went  west,  where 
he  fell  in  with  trappers  and  moun- 
taineers. Crossing  the  plains  he 
reached  the  Rocky  Mountains  in 
1835.  Here  he  helped  to  build  Fort 
Hall,  on  Snake  river,  now  in  Idaho, 
and  also  worked  at  Astoria,  near  the 
mouth  of  the  Columbia  river,  Oregon. 
He  was  a  companion  of  Kit  Carson, 
Jim  Bridger,  Baker,  Smith  and  other 
prominent  mountaineers  of  those 
early  times  and  he  spent  many  years 
of  his  life  among  the  Indians,  be- 
coming master  of  several  Indian  lan- 
guages. His  life  naturally  abounds 
in  adventure  and  thrilling  experi- 
ences. One  day,  while  in  a  section 
infested  by  hostile  Blackfoot  Indians, 
he  was  discovered  and  pursued  by  a 
number  of  warriors.  As  they  were 
noted  for  their  fleetness  of  foot  he 
knew  that  he  could  not  outrun  them 
so  he  left  his  horse  and  took  to  the 
rocks  and  timber.  He  hid  in  the 
bushes,  jumped  from  rock  to  rock, 
waded  in  streams,  etc.,  in  order  to 
hide  his  tracks,  and  finally  climbed 
a  tree,  concealing  himself  in  its  fol- 
iage. While  here  the  Indians  came 
so  near  that  he  could  hear  them  talk- 
ing, but  they  did  not  discover  him. 
During  the  night  he  waded  down  the 
creek  and  next  day  came  in  sight  of 
an  Indian  village.  He  waited  until 
evening,  not  knowing  to  what  tribe 
they  belonged,  but  with  all  his  cau- 
tion he  was  discovered  by  a  squaw 
who  had  come  down  to  the  creek  for 
water.  She  hurried  back  to  camp 
and  he  heard  her  tell  in  the  Flathead 
language,  which  he  understood,  of 
seeing  a  white  man.  The  Flatheads 
being  friendly,  he  went  at  once  into 
the  village,  where  he  was  kindly  re- 
ceived and  learned  from  them  that  a 
train  of  emigrants  on  their  way  to 
Oregon  were  camped  near  by.  The 
next  morning,  a  Flathead  Indian 
came  in  and  reported  that  the  Black- 
foot  warriors  had  attacked  the  immi- 
grants. Mr.  Ward  quickly  mustered 
a  company  of  Flatheads  and  hurried 


BIOGRAPHICAL  ENCYCLOPEDIA. 


553 


to  their  rescue.  The  emigrants  were 
camped  in  a  canyon  and  the  Black- 
foot  warriors  were  attacking  them 
from  the  higher  ground.  Ward  and 
his  company  managed  to  get  in  the 
rear  of  the  hostile  Indians,  and  thus 
they  were  completely  trapped.  After 
a  brief  but  fierce  battle  the  Black- 
feet  surrendered,  having  lost  twenty 
killed  and  a  number  wounded. 
Ward's  loss  was  three  killed  and 
several  wounded.  Having  recovered 
his  horse,  he  accompanied  the  emi- 
grants until  they  were  out  of  danger. 
Mr.  Ward  is  next  found  journeying 
to  Santa  Ana  and  San  Pedro,  South- 
ern California,  with  Kit  Carson  and 
others,  for  the  purpose  of  buying 
horses  and  supplies.  The  party  re- 
turned to  Fort  Bridger  by  the  old 
California  route.  Here  he  remained 
for  some  time  among  the  Snake  In- 
dians. During  this  period  a  very 
dear  friend  of  his,  a  Mr.  Exervid,  a 
Frenchman,  died.  Just  before  his 
death  he  called  Mr.  Ward  to  his  bed- 
side and  confided  to  his  care  his 
young  wife,  a  handsome  Indian  girl, 
and  also  his  little  daughter,  Adelaide. 
Mr.  Ward  accepted  the  trust  and  was 
true  to  his  charge,  in  time  marrying 
the  woman  by  whom  he  subsequently 
had  two  daughters,  Polly  and  Louisa 
Jane.  He  lived  with  the  Indians  un- 
til the  "Mormon"  pioneers  arrived, 
soon  after  which  he  moved  to  Great 
Salt  Lake  Valley,  bringing  his  family 
with  him.  He  joined  the  Church  and 
became  an  intimate  friend  of  Presi- 
dent Brigham  Young  and  others  of 
the  Church  leaders.  Later,  he  moved 
to  Provo  where  he  acted  as  Indian 
interpreter.  When  Fort  Supply  was 
founded  by  the  brethren  in  1853, 
near  Fort  Bridger,  Brother  Ward  be- 
came one  of  the  early  settlers  of  that 
place,  and  remained  there  until  the 
approach  of  Johnston's  army.  For  a 
while  it  appeared  as  if  all  the  "Mor- 
mons" would  be  wiped  out  by  the 
soldiers  and  Indians,  so  Brother 
Ward's  wife  concluded  that  she 
would    be    safer    among    her    Indian 


relatives.       She    therefore    absented 
herself  from  her  husband,  but  while 
sojourning  with  a  tribe  of  Indians  she 
took  sick  and  died.     Thus  Bro.  Ward 
was  left  alone  with  his  Indian  chil- 
dren, to  whom  he  proved  a  dear  and 
affectionate  father  and  in  due  course 
of  time  they  all  grew  up  and  mar- 
ried white  men.     Bro.  Ward  partici- 
pated in  the  battle  with  the  Indians 
at  Fort  Utah    (Provo)    in  the  spring 
of  1850,  for  which  the  Indians  ever 
after  had  a  grudge  against  him.     At 
the  general  move  south  in  1858  Bro. 
Ward  went  as  far  as  Payson,  Utah, 
and  located  at  Fairview,  and  later  at 
Gunnison,    Sanpete   county.      He   re- 
sided in  the  latter  place  with  his  two 
daughters  when  the  Black  Hawk  war 
broke  out  and  was  still  acting  as  In- 
dian interpreter.     Having  no  fear  of 
the    Indians    he    went    unarmed     up 
Salina    Canyon    April    10,    1865,    in 
company  with  a  young  man  by  the 
name  of  James  Anderson  to   search 
for  cows.     Not  returning  that  night  a 
searching  party  was  sent  out  the  next 
morning.     They  found  the  bodies  of 
both   men,     terribly     mutilated     and 
scalped,    they    having   met    death    at 
the  hands  of  the  hostile  Black  Hawk 
Indians.     The  remains  were  brought 
to    Salina    and    prepared    for    burial, 
theirs  being  the  first  bodies  to  be  de- 
posited in  what  is  now  the  old  Salina 
cemetery.     After  the  killing  of  Bro. 
Ward,  the  two  daughters  were  taken 
into  the  family  of  President  Brigham 
Young,  where  they  remained  a  num- 
ber  of  years,   and   finally   moved  to 
Ogden,  where  their  half-sister,  Ade- 
laide, who  had  married  James  Brown 
(a  son  of  the  late  Capt.  James  Brown 
of   Mormon    Battalion    fame),    lived. 
There   both   Polly   and    Louisa   Jane 
lived  until  they  were  married.     Bro. 
Ward,  being  a  true  and  devoted  friend 
of  President  Young,  had  served  as  a 
member  of  his   body  guard   and   ac- 
companied    him     on     several     trips 
through     the    Territory.      While     in 
Salina,     shortly     before     his     death, 
President  Young  tried  to  locate  the 


554 


LATTER-DAY   SAINT 


burial  place  of  Bro.  Ward,  but  for 
several  years  it  could  not  be  found. 
When  at  last  it  was  located,  Bishop 
Jensen  of  Salina  mentioned  the  mat- 
ter to  President  Wm.  H.  Seegmiller 
of  the  Sevier  Stake,  who  informed 
the  First  Presidency,  and  they  at 
once  directed  that  a  suitable  monu- 
ment be  erected  at  the  expense  of  the 
Church,  to  the  memory  of  Bro.  Ward, 
which  was  done.  Bro.  Wards  step- 
daughter, Adelaide,  who  married 
James  Brown,  became  the  mother  of 
nine  children,  one  of  these  being  the 
late  Bishop  Moroni  Brown  of  the  Og- 
den  First  Ward.  Adelaide  died  in 
Ogden  about  1899.  Polly,  Bro.  Ward's 
oldest  daughter  by  his  Indian  wife, 
was  born  at  Fort  Bridger  July  15, 
1847.  She  afterwards  married  John 
Perry  Williams  of  Ogden  and  bore 
her  husband  five  children.  Her  hus- 
band died  May  12,  1918,  and  the 
widow  now  resides  with  her  son, 
Frank,  in  Ganett,  Idaho.  Bro.  Ward's 
second  daughter,  Louisa  Jane,  mar- 
ried James  Daly  and  lived  in  Ogden. 
She  bore  her  husband  three  children 
and  died  about  1880  in  Ogden. 

WARD,  George  Moroni,  third  Bish- 
op of  Washakie  Ward,  Box  Elder 
county,  Utah,  was  born  Sept.  8,  1873, 
at  Willard,  Box  Elder  county,  Utah, 
the  son  of  Moroni  Ward  and  Eliza 
Vess.  He  was  baptized  Sept.  18, 
1881,  by  his  father  and  ordained  a 
Deacon  in  1889;  ordained  a  Priest 
Jan.  27,  1891,  by  Oliver  C.  Hoskins; 
ordained  an  Elder  Jan.  3,  1893,  by 
Enoch  Harris  and  ordained  a  Seventy 
April  11,  1900,  by  John  Henry  Smith, 
and  set  apart  to  fill  a  mission  to  the 
Northern  States.  He  labored  in  the 
State  of  Iowa,  principally  in  the  cities 
of  Ottumwa,  Jefferson,  Fort  Dodge, 
Harlan,  Des  Moines  and  Council 
Bluffs.  After  returning  home  in  1902, 
he  was  ordained  a  High  Priest  and 
Bishop  Dec.  12,  1-902,  by  Rudger 
Clawson  and  set  apart  to  preside 
over  the  Washakie  Ward  (an  Indian 
settlement),    to    succeed    his    father. 


Prior  to  this  he  had  acted  as  a  coun- 
selor in  the  presidency  of  a  Deacons' 
quorum  and  as  an  assistant  superin- 
tendent of  the  Portage  Ward  Sun- 
day school.  In  1894  (April  19th)  he 
married  Mary  Ann  Morris  in  the 
Logan  Temple.  She  is  the  daughter 
of  John  S.  Morris  ahd  Esther  Wil- 
liams and  was  born  Dec.  25,  1875,  at 
West  Portage.  This  marriage  has 
been  blessed  with  ten  children,  name- 
ly, Mary  Arminta,  born  Jan.  6,  1895; 


George  Cliiford,  born  Feb.  17,  18  9  6 
Esther    Eliza,    born    Aug.    20,    1898 
Vida    Luvena,    born    Oct.    12,    1900 
John    Moroni,    born   April   22,    1903 
Newel  Thomas,  born  March  1,  1905 
Isaac  Ozene,    born   March    29,    1907 
Glen    Morris,    born    April    13,    1910 
Joseph    Voss,    born    Sept.    20,    1912 
and  Irene  Ann,   born  Dec.    15,   1915 
The  first,  second  and  seventh   child 
died  in  infancy,  the  others  are  still 
living.     Bishop  Ward's  principal  avo- 
cations in  life  have  been  farming  and 
stock  raising.      He  has  held   the  of- 
fice of  school  trustee  for  a  number 
of  years. 

WARD,  Richard  Alvin,  fourth  Bish- 
op of  Sterling  Ward  (Blackfoot  Stake), 
Bingham  county,  Idaho,  was  born 
Feb.  10,  1882,  on  the  site  of  the  pres- 


BIOGRAPHICAL   ENCYCLOPEDIA. 


555 


ent  town  of  Woodruff,  Oneida  county, 
Idaho,  the  son  of  George  Ward  and 
Eunice  Alice  Nichols.  He  was  bap- 
tized in  1890  by  James  William  How- 
ell; was  ordained  a  Deacon  when 
quite  young;  ordained  an  Elder  in 
1904,  by  Joseph  R.  Harris,  after  hav- 
ing acted  as  counselor  in  a  Deacons' 
quorum  and  also  acted  as  second 
assistant  superintendent  in  the  Wood- 
ruff Ward  Sunday  School.  In  1905 
he  moved  into  that  part  of  the  Snake 
River  Valley  which  is  now  included  in 
the  Sterling  Ward,  where  he  acted  as 
a  Y.  M.  M.  I.  A.  officer  and  as  assist- 
ant superintendent  of  the  Sunday 
school.  He  was  ordained  a  High 
Priest  April  4,  1910,  by  Rudger  Claw- 
son,  and  set  apart  as  second  counselor 
to  Bishop  Oscar  E.  Nelson,  which  po- 
sition he  held  until  Feb.  15,  1913, 
when  he  was  ordained  a  Bishop  by 
George  F.  Richards  and  set  apart  to 
preside  over  the  Sterling  Ward,  which 
position  he  still  holds.  In  secular 
matters  Bishop  Ward  has  also  been 
active  for  a  number  of  years.  Thus 
he  has  served  as  a  school  trustee,  as 
president  of  the  Sterling  Townsite 
Company  and  president  of  the  Otis 
Perchin  Horse  Company.  In  1903 
(April  27th)  Bishop  Ward  married 
Marinda  Irene  John,  daughter  of 
James  John  and  Mary  James,  who 
was  born  in  18  84  in  West  Portage, 
Box  Elder  county,  Utah.  She  has 
borne  her  husband  eight  children, 
namely:  Willis  R.,  Harley  J.,  Minnie 
Hilda,  Eunice  M.,  Rose  V.,  Eurilla  I., 
Owen  Kenneth  and  Vyron  Lewis. 

WARDLE,  Junius  F.,  second  Bish- 
op of  Heman  Ward  (Yellowstone 
Stake),  Fremont  county,  Idaho,  was 
born  June  9,  1879,  at  South  Jordan, 
Salt  Lake  county,  Utah,  the  son  of 
Isaac  J.  Wardle  and  Martha  Ann  Eg- 
bert. He  was  baptized  when  eight 
years  old,  raised  in  South  Jordan, 
ordained  successively  to  the  offices  of 
Deacon,  Teacher,  Priest,  Elder,  Sev- 
enty, High  Priest  and  Bishop.  In 
his  early  youth   he  presided   over  a 


Deacons'  quorum,  afterwards  over  a 
Teachers'  quorum,  and  later  acted  as 
a  counselor  in  a  quorum  of  Elders, 
Yellowstone  Stake;  moved  with  his 
parents  to  Parker,  Snake  River  Val- 
ley, in  1900,  where  he  has  been  an 
active  member  of  the  community  ever 
since.  He  filled  a  mission  to  Aus- 
tralia in  1908-1910,  laboring  in 
different  field  in  the  New  South 
Wales  and  Victoria  conferences.  While 
a  member  of  the  Parker  Ward,  Idaho, 
he  labored  as  Sunday  school  teacher. 
Ward  teacher,  etc.  After  being  or- 
dained a  Seventy  Nov.  3,  1912,  by 
James  T.  Mason,  he  acted  as  superin- 
tendent of  the  Heman  Ward  Sunday 
school  and  in  October,  1916,  he  was 
ordained  a  High  Priest  by  Pres.  Jos. 
F.  Smith  and  set  apart  as  a  coun- 
selor to  Bishop  Rhodehouse.  When 
Bishop  Rhodehouse  was  released  Bro. 
Wardle  was  chosen  as  Bishop  of  the 
Heman  Ward,  June  17,  1917  and 
was  ordained  a  Bishop  by  Apostle  Or- 
son F.  Whitney  July  29,   1917. 

WARE,  James  Russell,  Bishop  of 
the  Monroe  Ward  (Sevier  Stake), 
Sevier  county,   Utah,   was  born  Dec. 


25,  1870  at  Manti,  Sanpete  county, 
Utah,  the  son  of  Samuel  G.  Ware  and 
Caroline  A.    Russell.      He   was   bap- 


556 


LATTER-DAY   SAINT 


tized  May  6,  1878,  by  James  Craw- 
ford, ordained  a  Deacon  in  May,  1884, 
and  ordained  an  Elder  April  22,  1896, 
by  John  B.  Maiben.  In  1896  (April 
22nd)  he  married  Annie  S.  Willard- 
son  (daughter  of  Christian  Willard- 
sen  and  Annie  K.  Sorensen),  who  was 
born  April  23,  1875,  in  Ephralm, 
Sanpete  county,  Utah.  This  marriage 
has  been  blessed  with  six  children, 
namely,  Annie  Leah,  Samuel  Rus- 
sell, Eva  Ardella,  Erma  Vashti,  An- 
netta  and  Calvin  W.  In  the  spring 
of  1898  he  moved  to  Elsinore,  where 
he  presided  over  an  Elders'  quorum 
and  over  the  Ward  Y.  M.  M.  I.  A.; 
he  also  acted  as  superintendent  of 
the  Brooklyn  Sunday  school,  and 
when  the  Brooklyn  Ward  was  or- 
ganized May  20,  1900,  he  was  or- 
dained a  High  Priest  by  Francis  M. 
Lyman  and  set  apart  to  act  as  second 
counselor  to  Bishop  Bryant  Jolley  of 
the  Brooklyn  Ward,  which  position 
he  held  until  1902  when  he  moved  to 
Monroe.  In  1904  (April  24th)  he 
was  chosen  as  second  counselor  to 
Bishop  Joseph  H.  Jenson  of  the  Mon- 
roe North  Ward,  which  position  he 
held  until  April,  1910.  In  1907- 
1909  Bro.  Ware  filled  a  mission  to 
Scandinavia,  laboring  in  the  Chris- 
tiania  conference,  most  of  the  time  as 
president  of  the  Christiania  branch. 
In  October,  1916,  he  moved  to  the 
Monroe  South  Ward,  where  he  acted 
as  president  of  the  Ward  Y.  M.  M.  I. 
A.  until  June,  1919,  when  he  was  or- 
dained a  Bishop  by  Anthony  W.  Ivins 
and  set  apart  to  preside  over  the 
Monroe  South  Ward,  which  position 
he  still  holds.  Farming  and  milling 
have  been  the  chief  avocations  of 
Bishop  Ware  hitherto. 

WARNER,  Alvin,  second  counselor 
to  Bishop  Joseph  D.  Wilkins  of  the 
Franklin  Ward  (St.  Joseph  Stake), 
Greenlee  county,  Arizona,  was  born 
Jan.  10,  1875,  at  Montpelier,  Bear 
Lake  county,  Idaho,  the  son  of  Chas. 
Alma  Warner  and  Harriet  Ellen  Les- 
ueur.     He  was  baptized  May  3,  1883, 


by  James  A.  Marfait,  ordained  a  Dea- 
con by  Charles  W.  Smithson  when 
about  fffteen  years  old,  ordained  an 
Elder  Feb.  5,  1898,  by  John  Henry 
Smith,  ordained  a  Seventy  Sept.  20, 
1899,  by  Christian  D.  Fjeldsted  and 
filled  a  mission  to  the  Southern 
States  in  1899-1901,  laboring  in  the 
South  Alabama  conference.  In  1*901 
(Dec.  24th)  he  married  Caroline 
Josephine  Chesser  who  has  borne  her 
husband  ten  children,  namely,  Evell 
D.,  Alvin  Chesser,  Edna,  Lars  Alma, 
Waldo  Boyle,  Loren  Edward,  Hattie, 
Seth  Legrand,  Lois  and  Grant  T.  Bro. 
Warner  came  with  his  parents  to 
Arizona  in  1881  and  resided  for 
many  years  in  Layton,  Graham  coun- 
ty, Arizona.  In  August,  1917,  he 
moved  with  his  family  from  Layton 
to  Franklin,  where  he  still  resides, 
engaged  in  farming  and  also  busily 
engaged  in  Church  activities.  He  was 
ordained  a  High  Priest  in  November, 
1917,  by  John  F.  Nash  and  set  apart 
to  act  as  second  counselor  to  Bishop 
Joseph  D.  Wilkins,  which  position  he 
still  holds. 

WARNER,  William  Henry,  Bishop 
of  Nephi  First  Ward  (Juab  Stake), 
Juab  county,  Utah,  was  born  Aug. 
20,  1827,  in  Essex  county,  Massa- 
chusetts, the  son  of  Geo.  Warner  and 
Mary  Salisbury.  He  was  baptized  as 
a  convert  to  "Mormonism"  May  8, 
1852,  by  Richard  Salisbury,  in  Illi- 
nois, came  to  Utah  in  1853  and  set- 
tled at  Nephi  where  he  resided  until 
his  death.  He  was  chosen  as  superin- 
tendent of  the  Nephi  Sunday  school 
in  1871  and  held  that  position  for 
fifteen  years.  In  January,  1883.  he 
was  ordained  a  Bishop  and  set  apart 
to  preside  over  the  Nephi  First  Ward, 
which  position  he  held  for  eighteen 
years.  In  1850  (Sept.  1st)  he  mar- 
ried Emma  Thompson,  who  bore  him 
six  children,  namely,  Thomas  George, 
Emma  J.,  William  H.,  Mary  S.,  Isa- 
bella and  Elizabeth  S.  In  1871  (July 
24th)  he  married  Elizabeth  Andrews 
(daughter  of  William  Andrews  and 


BIOGRAPHICAL   ENCYCLOPEDIA. 


557 


Ann  Wright),  who  was  born  Nov.  21, 
1852,  at  Packington,  Leicestershire, 
England.  The  children  of  this  mar- 
riage were  twelve,  namely,  Mary  Ann, 


^..s^f^^^y'^: 


Sarah  E.,  Ann  Eliza,  William  A., 
John  H.,  Alfred,  Alice  M.,  Samuel, 
Kate  E.,  Florence  A.,  Mabel  and 
Francis.  Bro.  Warner  was  ordained 
a  Patriarch  early  in  1901  by  George 
Teasdale  and  died  at  Nephi  July  14, 
1901. 

WATKINS,  George  Wilford,  Bishop 
of  the  Brigham  City  First  Ward  (Box 
Elder  Stake),  Box  Elder  county, 
Utah,  was  born  Feb.  1,  1871,  in  Brig- 
ham  City,  Utah,  the  son  of  William  L. 
Watkins  and  Teah  J.  Johnson.  He 
was  baptized  Sept.  14,  1879,  by  Niels 
P.  Hansen,  ordained  a  Deacon  Dec.  6, 
1885,  by  David  L.  Rees  and  after- 
wards presided  over  a  Deacons'  quo- 
rum; ordained  a  Teacher  Dec.  19, 
1891,  by  Rudger  Clawson  and  subse- 
quently presided  over  a  Teachers' 
quorum;  ordained  an  Elder  March  4, 
1893,  by  Charles  Kelley  and  presided 
over  an  Elders'  quorum;  ordained  a 
Seventy  Sept.  22,  1899,  by  John 
Henry  Smith  and  filled  a  mission  to 
Wales  in  1899-1901.  After  his  re- 
turn he  was  chosen  as  a  president  of 
a  quorum  of  Seventy.     At  home  he 


also  labored  as  president  of  the  Ward 
Y.  M.  M.  I.  A.,  acted  in  the  superin- 
tendency  of  the  Ward  Sunday  school 
and  also  in  the  superintendency  of 
the  Stake  Board  of  Religion  Classes 
and  Y.  M.  M.  I.  A.  Of  secular  offi- 
ces he  acted  as  deputy  county  clerk 
two  years  and  was  county  clerk  in 
Box  Elder  county  two  years.  He  also 
taught  school  four  years,  acted  as 
bookkeeper  in  the  First  National 
Bank  of  Brigham  City  six  years  and 
was  manager  of  the  Brigham  City 
Fruit  Growers'  Association  ten  years. 
Bro.  Watkins  was  ordained  a  High 
Priest  in  September,  1906,  by  Lucius 
A.  Snow  and  ordained  a  Bishop  Feb. 
28,  1909,  by  Rudger  Clawson  and  set 
apart  to  preside  over  the  Brigham 
City  First  Ward,  which  position  he 
still  holds.  In  1893  (May  3rd)  Bro. 
Watkins  married  Emeline  A.  Peters 
in  the  Logan  Temple.  This  union 
has  been  blessed  with  eight  children, 
namely,  Florence,  George  Reynold, 
Eugene  Peters,  Glendon  Wilford,  Vic- 
tor Hughes,  Phyllis,  Perry  Lamont 
and  Edith. 

WATTS,  Baldwin  Harvey,  a  vet- 
eran Elder  of  the  Church  and  a  resi- 
dent of  Kanosh  (Millard  Stake),  Mil- 
lard county,  Utah,  was  born  April  10, 
1835,  near  Raymond,  Hinds  county, 
Mississippi,  the  son  of  Robert  Harris 
Watts  and  Elizabeth  Heath.  He  was 
baptized  in  the  summer  of  1843  by 
Capt.  James  Brown;  arrived  in  Utah 
Sept.  6,  1850,  after  crossing  the 
plains  in  Aaron  Johnson's  hundred. 
After  residing  in  Ogden  sixteen  years 
he  moved  to  Beaver  in  1865  and  in 
November,  1867,  settled  in  Kanosh. 
In  1855  he  was  ordained  a  Seventy 
by  Lorin  Farr  and  called  by  the 
Church  authorities  on  a  colonization 
mission  to  the  Indians  in  the  north 
and  thus  became  one  of  the  founders 
of  Fort  Limhi.  He  remained  in  that 
mission  until  February,  1858,  when 
Fort  Limhi  was  vacated  owing  to  In- 
dian troubles.  In  1874-1875  Brother 
Watts  filled  a  mission  to  Great  Bri- 


558 


LATTER-DAY   SAINT 


tain,  laboring  in  the  Bristol  con- 
ference. Later  (Feb.  17,  1895)  he 
was  ordained  a  High  Priest  by  F.  M. 
Lyman.  Bro.  Watts  had  charge  of 
the  Kanosh  Sunday  school  about  five 
years,  served  as  constable  about  three 
years  and  was  president  of  the  Kan- 
osh Co-op  store  about  thirty  years.  In 
1856  (Oct.  26th)  he  married  Bar- 
bara Jane  Levi  (daughter  of  Freder- 
ick Levi  and  Julia  Levi),  who  was 
born  July  24,  1837,  at  Toronto,  Can- 
ada. After  bearing  her  husband 
seven  children  she  died  May  13, 
1909.  In  1876  April  10th)  Brother 
Watts  married  (as  a  plural  wife) 
Emma  Wheadon  (daughter  of  John 
Wheadon  and  Jane  Seal),  who  was 
born  Sept.  29,  1860,  in  Broadwindsor, 
Dorsetshire,  England.  She  became 
the  mother  of  seven  children,  was  a 
most  active  and  successful  Church 
worker  and  was  accidentally  killed 
near  Fillmore,  April  27,  1919.  Fol- 
lowing are  the  names  of  Bro.  Watts' 
children:  Baldwin  H.,  Julietta, 
Charles,  , Barbara  J.,  Charlotte  A. 
Harry  F.,  Etta  E.,  John  A.,  Emma  J., 
Robert,  Jeremiah,  Eliza  E.,  Lucy  M. 
and  Ruby  E. 

WEBER,  Robert,  second  Bishop  of 
the  Etna  Ward  (Star  Valley  Stake), 
Lincoln  county,  Wyoming,  was  born 
July  5,  1879,  in  Canton  Aargau,  Swit- 
zerland, the  son  of  Samuel  Weber  and 
Ferena  Goldenberger.  He  emigrated 
to  Utah  with  his  parents  in  1888  and 
located  in  Providence,  Cache  county, 
Utah;  was  baptized  in  Logan  when 
about  nine  years  of  age;  ordained  a 
Deacon  in  Providence;  located  in 
Freedom,  Salt  River  Valley,  together 
with  his  parents  in  1894;  took  an 
active  part  in  Sunday  school  and  Y. 
M.  M.  I.  A.  work  in  the  Fremont 
Ward  and  was  ordained  an  Elder  and 
afterwards  a  Seventy.  He  was  or- 
dained a  Bishop  by  Francis  M.  Lyman 
June  1,  1913,  and  set  apart  to  preside 
over  the  Etna  Ward,  succeeding  Bish- 
op Carl  Cook.  In  1903  Bro.  Weber 
married  Alice  Louisa  Hayes   (daugh- 


ter of  Alma  Hayes),  who  was  born  in 
Georgetown,  Bear  Lake  county,  Idaho, 
and  has  borne  her  husband  six  chil- 
dren, namely,  lola,  Wilford  H.,  Grant 
Walter,  Ferena,  Alice  and  Delia. 
Bro.  Weber  located  on  the  east  side 
of  Salt  river  in  1903,  soon  after  his 
marriage,  is  a  farmer  and  stock-raiser 
by  avocation  and  has  filled  a  number 
of  local  positions  of  a  secular  nature, 
besides  those  pertaining  to  his  activ- 
ities in  Church  matters. 

WEBSTER,  George  William,  a  Vet- 
eran Elder  of  Kaysville,  Davis  coun- 
ty, Utah,  was  born  May  26,  1838,  at 
Luton,  Bedfordshire,  England,  the 
son  of  William  Webster  and  Anna 
Day.  In  1855  he  emigrated  with  his 
parents  to  Utah  and  settled  at  Kays- 


ville.  In  1859  he  married  Christiana 
Elliott  (daughter  of  Luke  Elliott), 
who  died  July  22,  1893,  after  giving 
birth  to  two  children  (Geo.  W.  and 
John  A.).  In  1894  Bro.  Webster  mar- 
ried Annie  Latimer,  who  was  born  in 
1848  in  Ireland.  Bro.  Webster  was 
ordained  to  the  Priesthood  at  an 
early  day,  having  joined  the  Church 
as  a  boy.  As  a  military  man  he  took 
an  active  part  in  the  Black  Hawk  In- 
dian war.  He  made  two  trips  to  his 
native  land  to  visit  his  relatives  and 
gather  genealogy  and  was  the  means 


BIOGRAPHICAL  ENCYCLOPEDIA. 


559 


of  bringing  a  number  of  families 
from  England  to  Utah.  Bro.  Webster 
died  as  a  High  Priest,  March  7,  1910, 
at  his  home  in  Kaysville.  He  was  a 
faithful  Latter-day  Saint  throughout 
his  entire  life. 

WEBSTER,  John    James    Godson, 

Bishop  of  the  Cedar  City  East  Ward 
(Parowan  Stake),  Iron  county,  Utah, 


work  in  the  Legislature  was  done 
with  zeal  and  ability  and  he  won  the 
respect  and  confidence  of  his  col- 
leagues. In  1883  (Jan.  30th)  at  the 
age  of  22  years,  he  married  Miss 
Eliza  Ann  Urie,  who  bore  him  ten 
children,  namely,  Sarah  A.,  John  U., 
Cathleen,  Parsons,  Wilford,  Ruth, 
Daniel,  Gwen,  Clara  and  Echo. 
Bishop  Webster  died  in  Cedar  City 
August  19,  1914,  beloved  and  re- 
spected by  all  who  knew  him. 

WEBSTER,  William,  a  counselor 
in  the  High  Priests'  quorum  in  the 
Davis  Stake  and  a  resident  of  Kays- 
ville, Davis  county,  Utah,  was  born 
Nov.  15,  1816,  at  Mans  Grove,  Here- 
fordshire, England,  the  son  of  Thos. 
Webster  and  Mary  Bent.  He  was 
baptized  in  1843  by  Thos.  Squires, 
emigrated  to  Utah  in  1855,  and  set- 
tled at  Kaysville,  where  he  took  a 
most  active  part  in  building  up  that 


from  1911  to  1913,  was  born  Nov. 
22,  18  61,  in  Cedar  City,  Iron  county, 
Utah,  the  son  of  Francis  Webster  and 
Ann  Elizabeth  Parsons,  who  were 
pioneers  of  Cedar  City.  He  was  born 
and  reared  in  the  Church  of  which 
he  was  a  faithful  member  during  his 
entire  life.  In  his  youth  he  acted  as 
president  of  the  Ward  Y.  M.  M.  I.  A. 
for  several  years  and  otherwise  took 
a  most  active  part  in  Ward  ecclesiasti- 
cal affairs.  From  1903  to  1909  he 
served  as  second  counselor  to  the 
president  of  the  Parowan  Stake  and 
was  chosen  Bishop  of  Cedar  City  East 
Ward  in  1911,  being  ordained  June 
25,  Idll.  He  held  that  position  two 
and  a  half  years  and  was  released  on 
account  of  failing  health.  In  addi- 
tion to  his  activity  in  Church  circles 
he  served  in  the  Utah  Legislature  as 
a  representative  from  Iron  county 
during  the  years  1909  and  1910.  His 


section  of  country.  He  was  ordained 
a  High  Priest  April  6,  1858,  by  Elias 
Morris,  and  in  1859  he  was  set  apart 
as  a  counselor  to  Edward  Phillips, 
which  position  he  held  until  the  time 
of  his  death,  which  occurred  July  14, 
18  9  4,  at  Kaysville.  Brother  Webster 
was  always  prompt  and  energetic  in 
the  discharge  of  his  duties  as  an  El- 
der in  the  Church  and  passed  away 


560 


LATTER-DAY   SAINT 


in  full  faith  regarding  the  principles 
of  the  gospel. 

WHEELWRIGHT,   Thos.   Bristow, 

Bishop  of  the  Ogden  Twelfth  Ward 
(Weber  Stake),  Weber  county,  Utah, 
was  born  Dec.  26,  1869,  in  Ogden,  the 
son  of  Matthew  B.  Wheelwright  and 
Catherine  E.  Farrer.  He  was  bap- 
tized June  15,  1879,  by  David  M. 
Stewart;  ordained  a  Deacon  March 
22,  1886,  by  Thomas  J.  Stevens  and 
labored  as  a  counselor  in  the  presi- 
dency of  a  Deacons'  quorum;  or- 
dained an  Elder  Feb.  8,  1891,  by 
Thomas  J.  Stevens;  ordained  a  Sev- 
enty Jan.  12,  1-900,  by  John  Henry 
Smith;  filled  a  mission  to  Great  Bri- 
tain in  1900-1901,  laboring  in  the 
Manchester  and  Leeds  conferences; 
ordained  a  High  Priest  Dec.  31,  1908, 
by  David  O.  McKay  and  set  apart  as 
first  counselor  to  Bishop  H.  C.  Jacobs 
of  the  Ogden  Fifth  Ward,  and  was 
ordained  a  Bishop  April  19,  1914,  by 
David  O.  McKay,  and  set  apart  to 
preside  over  the  Ogden  Twelfth  Ward 
which  was  then  organized.  Bishop 
Wheelwright  is  a  modest  man,  who 
does  not  let  his  left  hand  know  what 
his  right  hand  doeth,  and  is  a  most 
active  worker  ecclesiastically  and 
otherwise.  He  has  been  in  the  lum- 
ber business  for  a  number  of  years 
and  is  president  of  the  Wheelwright 
Lumber  Company.  Due  to  his  untir- 
ing efforts  a  new  meeting  house  has 
recently  been  erected  in  his  Ward  at 
a  cost  of  about  $30,000.  In  1891 
(Feb.  11th)  Bro.  Wheelwright  mar- 
ried Eliza  Whitear  (daughter  of 
Eli  Whitear  and  Annie  M.  Hall),  who 
has  borne  her  husband  five  children, 
namely,  Hyrum  B.,  Bertha,  Wilford, 
Grace  and  Elsie. 

WHIPPLE,  Edson,  one  of  the  orig- 
inal Utah  pioneers  of  1847,  was  born 
Feb.  5,  1805,  in  the  town  of  Dum- 
merston,  Windham  county,  Vermont, 
the  son  of  Timothy  Whipple  and  Eliz- 
abeth Safford.  He  married  Lavinie 
Goss  Feb.  16,  1832,  and,  becoming  a 


convert  to  the  restored  gospel,  he 
was  baptized  by  Benjamin  Winches- 
ter in  Phialadelphia,  Pa.,  June  15, 
1840,  and  confirmed  by  Lorenzo  D. 
Barnes.  He  was  ordained  a  Priest 
by  Orson  Hyde,  Oct.  17,  1840;  or- 
dained a  High  Priest  and  set  apart  as 
first  counselor  to  Benjamin  Winches- 
ter in  Philadelphia  by  Hyrum  Smith, 
April  6,  1841,  and  removed  to  Nau- 
voo.  111.,  in  September,  1842.  Bro. 
Whipple  writes:  "I  was  called  at  the 
general  conference  held  in  Nauvoo  in 
April,  1844,  to  go  on  a  mission  to 
Pennsylvania,  in  company  with  David 
Yearsley,  to  canvass  that  State  and 
present  to  the  people  Joseph  Smith's 
views  on  government,  and  also  to 
advocate  his  candidacy  for  the  presi- 
dency of  the  United  States.  I  left 
Nauvoo,  May  4,  1844,  and  returned 
the  following  November.  During  my 
absence  the  Prophet  had  been  mur- 
dered in  Carthage.  I  assisted  in 
building  the  city  of  Nauvoo  and  the 
Temple  and  was  among  the  defenders 
of  our  homes  against  the  mob.  I  was 
present  at  the  laying  of  the  capstone 
of  the  Temple  and  received  my  en- 
dowments in  that  sacred  edifice. 
During  the  winter  of  1845-1846  I 
worked  under  Captain  Charles  C. 
Rich,  making  wagons,  and  was  or- 
ganized for  traveling  in  his  ten.  I 
crossed  the  Mississippi  river  May  15, 
1846,  on  my  way  to  the  Rocky  Moun- 
tains with  a  family  of  four,  consist- 
ing of  myself,  wife  and  child  and  my 
mother.  We  stopped  at  Garden 
Grove,  Iowa,  two  weeks  and  then 
continued  the  journey  to  Council 
Bluffs,  overtaking  Bishop  Hale's  com- 
pany on  the  way.  We  arrived  at  the 
Bluffs  about  the  middle  of  July,  but 
before  arriving  there  we  met  Pres. 
Brigham  Young  returning  from  the 
Bluffs  to  raise  volunteers  for  the 
Mormon  Battalion.  On  our  arrival 
on  the  Missouri  river  we  were  coun- 
seled to  locate  for  the  winter  on  Pony 
creek,  down  the  river  about  30  miles, 
but  on  our  arrival  there  we  found  the 
place  very  unhealthy  and  thus  unfit 


BIOGRAPHICAL  ENCYCLOPEDIA. 


561 


for  habitation.  My  mother  (Basmath 
Hutchens  Whipple)  died  Sept.  9, 
1846.  She  was  born  Sept.  7,  1769, 
in  Massachusetts.  A  few  days  later 
(Sept.  13,  1846)  my  wife  died.  She 
was  born  July  7,  1811,  in  Dummers- 
ton,  Vermont.  Of  the  whole  camp 
consisting  of  14  families  all  but  two 
persons  were  sick,  and  while  there 
we  buried  some  whole  families.  We 
finally  moved  to  another  place,  about 
four  miles  distant.  My  little  girl 
(Maria  Blanch),  when  twenty-two 
months  old,  died  at  our  new  location, 
Dec.  8,  184  6,  and  her  remains  were 
taken  to  the  place  where  her  mother 
was  buried.  She  was  born  Feb.  15, 
1845;  her  remains  were  placed  in  a 
coffin  made  of  split  plank  (bugswood 
tree).  Driven  from  our  comfortable 
homes  in  Nauvoo  to  be  exposed  as  we 
were  to  the  heat  and  storms,  and  de- 
prived of  all  comforts  of  life,  was 
more  than  our  people  could  endure. 
Thus  my  whole  family  died  as  mar- 
tyrs for  the  cause  of  Christ.  In  the 
spring  of  1847  I  was  called,  in  com- 
pany with  142  others,  to  lead  the  way 
to  the  wilderness  in  search  of  a  new 
home  for  the  Saints.  I  left  Winter 
Quarters  April  9,  18  47,  and  traveled 
in  the  first  ten  of  the  second  division 
under  Captain  Appleton  M.  Harmon, 
in  which  company  Pres.  Heber  C. 
Kimball  also  traveled.  I  took  my 
turn  to  guard  the  camp  every  third 
night,  half  the  night.  When  the  pio- 
neers returned  from  their  temporary 
stay  in  the  Salt  Lake  Valley  I  was 
called  to  remain  to  take  charge  of 
the  property  left  by  the  pioneers  and 
also  the  family  of  Heber  C.  Kimball 
and  other  families  which  followed 
the  pioneers.  Having  buried  my 
whole  family  on  the  journey,  I 
farmed  for  Heber  C.  Kimball  the 
first  season  and  raised  some  four 
hundred  bushels  of  grain  for  him.  I 
was  a  member  of  the  first  High 
Council  organized  in  Salt  Lake  City. 
Oct.  13,  1848,  I  started,  in  company 
with  eleven  others,  for  the  States  on 
business    for    myself    and    the    dis- 

Vol.  Ill,  No.  36. 


charged  members  of  the  Mormon 
Battalion.  While  in  the  States  Elder 
Wilford  Woodruff  was  sent  back  east 
with  an  epistle  of  the  Twelve  con- 
taining instructions  to  gather  out  the 
saints  from  the  East.  I  was  called 
to  assist  him  in  visiting  the  saints 
and  help  gather  them.  I  had  been 
laboring  in  Maryland,  where  I  bap- 
tized several  and  organized  a  branch 
of  16  members.  Visiting  Bro.  Wood- 
ruff in  Boston,  I  was  requested  to 
cross  the  plains  in  his  company  in 
the  summer  of  1850.  I  met  him  at 
Bethlehem,  at  the  crossing  of  the 
Missouri  river,  where  his  company 
was  organized  with  captains  of  tens, 
fifties  and  hundreds.  I  was  ap- 
pointed captain  of  fifty.  Each  fifty 
traveled  separate,  but  sometimes  we 
camped  together  on  Sundays.  Cap- 
tain Leonard  W.  Hardy  had  charge 
of  the  first  fifty  in  which  Bro.  Wood- 
ruff started.  I  had  a  blacksmith  in 
my  company,  and  when  we  arrived  at 
Ash  Hollow,  he  (having  ten  wagons 
loaded  with  merchandise  and  ma- 
chinery which  required  repairing) 
moved  them  and  his  family  wagons 
into  my  fifty  and  traveled  with  me 
the  rest  of  the  way.  We  arrived  in 
Salt  Lake  City  Oct.  13,  1850.  I  had 
then  been  absent  from  the  Valley 
over  two  years.  Soon  after  I  arrived 
I  married  again,  having  remained 
single  from  the  time  I  buried  my 
companion  in  the  Pottawattamie 
lands  in  1846.  I  was  now  called  ta 
go  with  George  A.  Smith  to  settle 
Iron  County.  Consequently  I  left 
Salt  Lake  City  Dec.  9,  1850,  with 
about  a  hundred  wagons  and  we  all 
arrived  at  the  place  where  Parowan 
now  stands  in  January,  1851.  When 
Iron  County  was  organized  Geo.  A. 
Smith  was  appointed  county  judge 
and  I  was  chosen  as  associate  justice. 
In  the  military  organizations  I  was 
chosen  as  captain  of  the  company  or- 
ganized to  do  home  guard  duty.  Geo. 
A.  Smith  requested  the  brethren  to 
present  plans  for  laying  off  a  fort 
and  for  building  our  houses.  I, 
March  20,  1920 


562 


LATTER-DAY  SAINT 


among  others,  presented  a  plan,  and 
mine  was  accepted  and  adopted,  ana 
Parowan  was  built  up  according  to 
my  plan.  Bro.  Brimhall  and  I  built 
a  thrasher  and  a  water  power,  get- 
ting a  grant  from  the  Parowan  City 
Council  to  use  the  water  of  the 
creek.  We  threshed  the  first  crop 
raised  in  Parowan.  I  was  elected  a 
member  of  the  Parowan  city  council 
in  May,  1851.  When  Pres.  Young  and 
company  visited  Parowan  in  1851 
Pres.  Kimball  advised  me  to  move 
north,  and  consequently  I  settled  in 
Provo."  Edson  Whipple  died  May 
11,  1894,  at  Colonia  Juarez,  Mexico. 

WHITE,  Edward,  a  Patriarch  in 
the  Granite  Stake  of  Zion  (Salt  Lake 
county),  Utah,  was  born  Feb.  8,  1831, 
at  Bosham,  Sussex,  England,  the  son 


of  Henry  White  and  Anna  Arnold.  His 
father  was  a  fisherman  which  avoca- 
tion he  followed  for  about  twenty 
years,  having  a  fishing  vessel  of  his 
own  in  which  he  made  trips  to  the 
fishing  banks  on  the  southeast  coast 
of  England  and  also  over  to  France. 
On  one  of  the  latter  trips  his  brother 
Matthew  was  lost  overboard.  Bro. 
White  joined  the  Church  in  the  early 
fifties,  was  ordained  an  Elder  by 
Elder  Hunt,  and  emigrated  with  his 
family  to  America  in  1864,  in  a  com- 


pany of  nine  hundred  Saints,  cross- 
ing the  Atlantic  on  the  ship  "Hud- 
son." The  ship  arrived  in  New  York 
in  July  and  Bro.  White  and  his  family 
crossed  the  plains  in  Capt.  Warren 
Snow's  company,  arriving  on  Weber 
river  Oct.  29,  1864.  The  following 
winter  was  exceptionally  severe,  and 
food  being  scarce  flour  was  sold  at 
$24  a  sack.  Late  in  the  winter  of 
18  64  Bro.  White  secured  a  contract 
to  build  a  canal  and  moved  with  his 
family  to  Salt  Lake  City  and  in  1866 
took  up  a  quarter  section  of  land  in 
Mill  Creek,  where  he  become  known 
as  one  of  the  most  successful  farmers 
of  Salt  Lake  county.  He  was  or- 
dained a  High  Priest  March  3,  1872, 
by  Reuben  S.  Miller  and  a  Patriarch 
Feb.  14,  1904,  by  John  R.  Winder. 
He  made  three  trips  to  his  native 
land,  each  time  spending  from  six  to 
seventeen  months  in  actual  mission- 
ary labor.  While  in  England  Bro. 
White  married  Eliza  Howick,  daugh- 
ter of  William  Howick  and  Charlotte 
Carter.  Eleven  children  were  the 
issue  of  this  marriage,  namely,  Kesia, 
Katura,  Edward,  Eunice,  John  Wil- 
liam, Hannah,  Henry  H.,  Matthew 
and  Eliza  E.  (twins),  Joseph  A.  and 
Mahonri  M.  Bro.  and  Sister  White 
also  adopted  one  son,  Eugene  B.  In 
secular  matters  Bro.  White  has  been 
a  leading  and  energetic  citizen  and 
has  assisted  in  many  different  busi- 
ness enterprises. 

WHITTIER,  Ell  Frank,  first  coun- 
selor to  Bishop  Joseph  E.  Robbins  of 
the  Peterson  Ward,  Morgan  county, 
Utah,  was  born  March  13,  1857,  at 
Farmington,  Davis  county,  Utah,  the 
son  of  Eli  Whittier  and  Maria  Brooks. 
He  was  baptized  when  a  boy  and  or- 
dained successively  to  different  posi- 
tions in  the  Priesthood.  He  came  to 
Morgan  county  with  his  parents  and 
after  residing  a  number  of  years  at 
Milton  he  settled  permanently  at 
Peterson  in  1892.  In  March,  1879, 
he  married  Melissa  Rich,  daughter 
of  John  Rich  and  Lydia  Pond,  who 
was  born  Oct.  31,  1859,  at  Farming- 


BIOGRAPHICAL   ENCYCLOPEDIA. 


563 


ton,  Davis  county,  Utah,  and  died 
Oct.  15,  1879.  In  1893  (June  21st) 
he  married  Sarah  Alice  Boyden, 
daughter  of  Chas.  Boyden  and  Mary 
Horsefield,  who  was  born  Sept.  29, 
1862,  in  Peterson,  Morgan  county, 
Utah.  Four  children  were  born  as 
the  result  of  this  marriage,  namely, 
Charles  B.,  born  June  24,  1894; 
Frank  L..  born  Feb.  27,  1897;  Robert 
E.,  born  Nov.  1,  1898,  and  Mary  J., 
born  March  1,  1901.  Brother  and 
Sister  Whittier  were  the  first  couple 
from  Morgan  county  married  in  the 
Salt  Lake  Temple.  Sister  Whittier 
acted  as  counselor  in  the  Ward  Re- 
lief Society  for  a  number  of  years 
and  is  now  (1916)  secretary  of  said 
society.  In  1898  Bro.  Whittier  was 
sustained  as  first  counselor  to  Bishop 
Joseph  E.  Robbins  of  the  Peterson 
Ward  of  the  Morgan  Stake,  which 
position  he  held  at  the  time  of  his 
death,  which  occurred  Oct.  28,  1900. 

WHITING,  Francis  Marion,  Bishop 
of  the  Vernon  Ward  (St.  Johns 
Stake),  Apache  county,  Arizona,  was 
born  May  3,  1885,  in  Colonia  Diaz, 
Chihuahua,  Mexico,  the  son  of 
Charles  Whiting  and  Verona  Snow. 
He  was  baptized  May  1,  1893,  by  his 
father  and  from  his  early  youth  he 
became  a  diligent  and  faithful 
Church  worker,  being  ordained  suc- 
cessively to  the  offices  of  Deacon, 
Teacher  and  Elder.  In  Colonia  Diaz 
he  acted  as  president  of  a  Deacons' 
quorum,  second  assistant  in  the  Sun- 
day School  superintendency,  first 
counselor  in  the  Y.  M.  M.  I.  A. 
presidency,  etc.  In  1912  he  was  ex- 
iled from  Mexico,  together  with  his 
co-religionists,  and  moved  to  Ari- 
zona, where  he  continued  his  Church 
activities  and  was  chosen  as  first  as- 
sistant to  George  H.  Crosby  jun.  in 
the  Stake  superintendency  of  Y.  M. 
M.  I.  A.  (St.  Johns  Stake,  Arizona). 
Later  he  was  ordained  a  High  Priest 
and  set  apart  to  act  as  first  counselor 
to  Bishop  W.  D.  Rencher  of  St. 
Johns.     In  1919  he  was  called  to  act 


as  Bishop  of  the  Vernon  Ward,  to 
which  settlement  he  moved  soon 
afterwards  and  is  now  helping  to  de- 
velop the  resources  of  that  new 
colony.  In  1910  he  married  Winnie 
Johnson,  who  has  borne  him  three 
children,  namely,  Francis  Marion 
jun.,  Verona  and  Monita. 

WHITNEY,  EUzabeth  Ann  (famil- 
iarly known  as  "Mother  Whitney"), 
first  counselor  to  President  Emma 
Smith  in  the  initial  organization  of 
the  Relief  Society  at  Nauvoo,  Illinois, 
was  born  Dec.  26,  1800,  in  Derby, 
New  Haven  county,  Connecticut.  She 
was  the  eldest  child  of  Gibson  Smith 
and  Polly  Bradley,  and  received  in 
early  life  the  most  judicious  training, 
being  carefully  educated  according 
to  the  customs  of  that  early  period. 
When  about  eighteen  years  of  age 
she  went  with  a  maiden  aunt  to  Ohio, 
and  subsequently  became  acquainted 
with  Newel  K.  Whitney,  a  young 
merchant  at  Kirtland,  to  whom  she 
was  married  Oct.  20,  1822.  Some 
time  after  their  marriage  they  both 
joined  the  Campbellite  Church,  and 
remained  members  of  it  until  con- 
verted to  the  true  gospel  of  Christ, 
through  the  preaching  of  Oliver  Cow- 
dery  and  other  Elders,  who  came  to 
Ohio  on  their  way  to  Missouri. 
Mother  Whitney  was  baptized  in  No- 
vember, 1830,  and  from  that  time 
to  her  death  was  a  faithful  and  de- 
voted member  of  the  Church.  In  its 
early  days  she  was  designated  by  the 
Prophet  Joseph  Smith  as  "the  sweet 
songstress  of  Zion."  She  was  among 
the  first  members  of  the  Church  to 
receive  the  gift  of  tongues,  which  she 
always  exercised  in  singing.  The 
Prophet  said  that  the  language  was 
the  pure  Adamic  tongue,  the  same 
that  was  used  in  the  garden  of  Eden, 
and  he  promised  that  if  she  kept  the 
faith,  the  gift  would  never  leave  her. 
It  never  did,  and  many  who  heard 
her  sing  never  forgot  the  sweet  and 
holy  influence  that  accompanied  her 
exercise  of  this  heavenly  gift.     The 


564 


LATTER-DAY  SAINT 


last  time  she  sang  in  tongues  was  on 
the  day  she  was  81  years  old.  It  was 
at  the  home  of  Sister  Emmeline  B. 
Wells,  the  latter  having  arranged  a 
party  in  honor  of  Mother  Whitney's 
birthday.  At  a  meeting  held  in  the 
Kirtland  Temple,  Sister  Whitney 
sang  in  tongues  and  Parley  P.  Pratt 
interpreted,  the  result  being  a  beau- 
tiful hymn  descriptive  of  the  differ- 
ent dispensations  from  Adam  to  the 
present  age.  She  is  said  to  be  the 
second  of  her  sex  to  receive  the  en- 
dowments, being  a  High  Priestess  in 
the  House  of  the  Lord,  in  which 
capacity  she  served  until  a  short  time 
before  her  death,  or  until  she  was 
obliged  to  relinquish  her  labors  on 
account  of  ill  health.  In  that  posi- 
tion it  became  her  privilege  to  bless 
hundreds,  perhaps  thousands,  of  the 
daughters  of  Zion.  Bishop  Newel  K. 
Whitney  and  family  left  Kirtland  for 
Missouri  in  1838,  but  hearing  that 
the  Saints  were  being  driven  from 
that  State,  they  remained  In  Carlton, 
Illinois,  during  the  winter,  and  in  the 
spring  of  1839  went  up  to  Commerce 
(afterwards  Nauvoo).  There  Mother 
Whitney  endured  much  hardship  and 
privation,  but  never  a  murmur  es- 
caped her  lips.  She  was  always  cheer- 
ful and  looked  on  the  bright  side  of 
life,  ever  encouraging  her  husband  in 
the  performance  of  his  duty,  even 
when  it  left  her  destitute  and  alone. 
In  March,  1842,  when  the  first  Relief 
Society  was  organized.  Sister  Whit- 
ney was  chosen  and  set  apart  as  first 
counselor  in  its  presidency,  which  of- 
fice she  filled  with  honor  and  credit. 
At  the  time  of  the  exodus  from  Nau- 
voo, in  1846,  she  crossed  the  Mis- 
sissippi river  on  the  ice  with  a  family 
of  little  children,  and  from  sleeping 
on  the  ground  she  contracted  a  cold 
which  settled  in  her  limbs,  causing 
rheumatism,  from  which  she  never 
entirely  recovered.  Her  youngest  son. 
Newel  M.,  was  born  at  Winter  Quar- 
ters, and  she  passed  through  such 
scenes  of  sorrow  and  suffering  as  no 
pen    can    portray.      Her    two    eldest 


sons,  Horace  and  Orson,  were  among 
the  original  Utah  pioneers  of  1847. 
Bishop  Whitney  and  family  arrived 
in  Salt  Lake  Valley,  October,  1848, 
having  crossed  the  plains  in  Heber  C. 
Kimbairs  company.  Bishop  Whitney 
died  Sept.  23,  1850,  leaving  Sister 
Whitney  with  a  family  of  nine  chil- 
dren. She  resided  in  the  9th  Ward, 
Salt  Lake  City,  where  she  died  Feb: 
15,  1882.  Her  death  was  caused  by 
general  debility,  incident  to  old  age. 
She  was  the  mother  of  eleven  chil- 
dren (seven  sons  and  four  daugh- 
ters), six  of  whom  survived  her.  At 
the  time  of  her  decease  she  had  32 
grandchildren  and  13  great-grand- 
children. Sister  Whitney  was  gifted 
with  many  of  the  most  amiable  qual- 
ities of  womanhood — patience,  meek- 
ness, humility  and  the  power  of  self- 
sacrifice  being  among  them.  The 
spirit  of  peace  seemed  ever  to  rest 
upon  her.  She  was  often  alluded  to 
as  "the  comforter,"  so  powerful  were 
her  blessings  upon  those  needing 
such  help.  Her  ministrations  among 
the  sick  and  afflicted  endeared  her 
to  the  community  at  large  and  made 
her  truly  a  mother  in  Israel. 

AV^LHELMSEN,  Niels,  president  of 
the  Scandinavian  Mission,  and  the 
first  Elder  from  Zion  who  died  while 
filling  a  mission  in  Scandinavia,  was 
born  April  21,  1824,  at  Feuling,  Den- 
mark, the  son  of  Wilhelm  Christen- 
sen  and  Else  Nielsen.  Becoming  a 
convert  to  "Mormonism"  he  was  bap- 
tized by  Frederik  Phister  in  Copen- 
hagen, Denmark,  Aug.  30,  1854, 
labored  as  a  local  missionary  in  Den- 
mark about  six  years,  during  which 
he  occupied  some  of  the  most  im- 
portant positions  in  the  mission 
among  which  was  that  of  counselor 
to  Pres.  Carl  Widerborg;  he  emi- 
grated to  Utah  in  1861,  and  after  re- 
siding at  different  places  settled  at 
St.  Charles,  Bear  Lake  county,  Idaho. 
In  1865-1867  he  filled  a  mission  to 
Scandinavia,  laboring  as  a  traveling 
Elder  in  the  whole  mission.     On  his 


BIOGRAPHICAL   ENCYCLOPEDIA. 


565 


return  to  America  he  led  a  large 
company  of  emigrating  Saints  to 
Utah.  Having  been  called  on  a  second 
mission   to   Scandinavia   in    1879,    he 


presided  over  the  Scandinavian  mis- 
sion until  his  death,  which  occurred 
in  Copenhagen,  Denmark,  Aug.  1, 
1881.  He  was  buried  at  Copenhagen, 
but  twenty  years  later  his  body  was 
removed  to  St.  Charles,  Bear  Lake 
county,  Idaho.  Elder  Wilhelmsen 
married  two  wives;  his  first  wife 
was  Anna  Christine  Nielsen,  whom 
he  married  May  5,  1854;  his  second 
wife  was  Kirstine  Margrethe  Steph- 
ensen,  who  was  married  to  him  June 
27,  1868;  the  names  of  his  children 
by  these  two  wives  are:  Eliza  Wil- 
helmina,  Christian  William,  Joseph 
Jabez,  Dan  Nephi,  Annima  Theresia, 
Benjamin,  Anna  Eleanore,  Nelson 
Edward  and  Orson.  Bro.  Wilhelmsen 
was  ordained  a  Deacon  Nov.  27,  1854, 
a  Priest  Jan.  29,  1855,  and  an  Elder 
April  27,  1855.  During  most  of  his 
life  he  followed  the  occupation  of  a 
mason  and  farmer.  Among  the  many 
civil  offices  held  by  him  may  be  men- 
tioned that  he  was  county  commis- 
sioner, justice  of  the  peace,  school 
trustee,  etc.  Elder  Wilhelmsen  was 
one  of  the  most  successful  mission- 
aries   that    ever    labored    in    Scandi- 


navia and  was  up  to  the  time  of  his 
death  highly  respected  and  beloved 
by  all  who  knew  him. 

WILHELMSEN,  Benjamin  Everett, 

a  Latter-day  Saint  Elder  who  died  in 
the  missionary  field,  was  born  Sept. 
25,  1893,  at  St.  Charles,  Idaho,  the 
son  of  Benjamin  Wilhelmsen  and  Ida 
Viola  Gheen.  He  was  baptized  in 
September,  1901,  by  Hosea  Berg;  or- 
dained a  Deacon  Sept.  1,  1907,  by 
Bishop  A.  J.  Cannon;  ordained  a 
Teacher  Feb.  20,  1911,  by  Ephraim 
E.  Marshall,  and  ordained  an  Elder 
June  7,  1914,  by  Bishop  John  Clay- 
ton. He  acted  as  first  counselor  in 
the  St.  Charles  Deacons'  quorum  for 
some  time,  received  a  good  school 
education  and  spent  four  years  in  the 
L.  D.  S.  University.  While  still  at- 
tending this  school,  he  was  called  on 
a  mission  to  Scandinavia,  where  he 
labored  in  the  Trondhjem  conference 
for  some  time,  until  he,  on  account 
of  the  war,  was  transferred  to  the 
Southern  States  Mission  and  appoint- 
ed to  labor  in  Kentucky.  While  in 
the  discharge  of  his  duties  there  as 


a  faithful  missionary,  he  was  taken 
sick  with  pneumonia  and  died  March 
27,  1915,  at  Louisville,  Kentucky. 
His  remains   were    shipped    to    Salt 


566 


LATTER-DAY   SAINT 


Lake  City,  and  there  interred  April 
3,  1915. 

WTLKES,  Albert  Lester,  a  faithful 
Elder  in  the  Church  who  died  while 
laboring  as  a  missionary  in  the  Sand- 
wich Islands,  was  born  May  14,  1894, 
in  Salt  Lake  City,  Utah,  the  son  of 
Albert  Wilkes  and  Josephine  Sim- 
mons. His  father  is  a  well  known 
photographer  in  Salt  Lake  City,  where 
the  son  received  a  good  common 
school  education  and  took  an  active 
part  in  Church  work  from  his  early 
youth.       He    was    baptized    May    22, 


1902,  by  Charles  W.  Worthen,  con- 
firmed May  24,  1902,  by  Charles  R. 
Savage,  and  ordained  an  Elder  May 
1,  1913,  by  Merrill  Nibley.  When 
lacking  one  week  of  being  nineteen 
years  old  he  left  home  to  fill  a  mis- 
sion to  Hawaii,  May  8,  1913.  On  his 
arrival  there  he  quickly  mastered  the 
Hawaiian  language  and  showed  great 
zeal  and  energy  In  his  work,  being 
appointed  to  various  positions  of 
trust  and  responsibility.  After  labor- 
ing nine  months  at  Hilo,  he  was  ap- 
pointed president  of  the  Kauai  con- 
ference, where  he  labored  for  one 
year,  and  was  then  appointed  to  labor 
in  the  Waikiki  branch.  Every  week 
he    wrote   to    his    parents    and    other 


loved  ones  at  home,  and  his  letters 
always  told  of  his  excellent  health 
and  the  joy  he  was  taking  in  his  mis- 
sionary labors.  While  in  the  dis- 
charge of  his  duties  as  president  of 
the  Waikiki  branch  he  was  stricken 
with  sickness  and  died  from  blood 
poisoning  Aug.  28,  1915,  at  Hono- 
lulu. His  remains  were  shipped  to 
his  home  in  the  Ensign  Ward,  Salt 
Lake  City,  and  interred  in  the  Salt 
Lake  City  cemetery.  Elder  Wilkes 
was  a  bright  and  promising  young 
man,  and  while  on  his  mission  he 
wrote  several  articles  which  were 
published  in  the  "Improvement  Era." 
In  one  of  these  published  in  the  issue 
of  that  paper  dated  Jan.  19,  1917,  he 
gave  an  interesting  description  of 
the  volcano  Kilauea  on  Hawaii.  Just 
prior  to  his  death,  he  wrote  a  very 
interesting  letter  to  his  younger 
brother,  Joseph,  who  later  entered 
the  service  of  his  country  and  gave 
his  life  for  the  cause  of  liberty,  being 
killed  on  the  battle  fields  of  France, 
June  8th,  1918.  This  young  man  was 
cited  for  conspicuous  gallantry  in 
action  and  was  awarded  the  Croix  de 
Guerre  by  the  French  government. 
The  first  American  Legion  Post  of 
Salt  Lake  City  has  been  named  "The 
Joseph  Simmons  Wilkes  Post  No.  2," 
in  his  honor.  The  letter  which  Albert 
Lester  wrote  to  his  brother  was 
printed  in  the  "Improvement  Era"  of 
July,   1917. 

WILLES,  AVilliam  Sidney  Smith,  a 

member  of  the  Mormon  Battalion, 
was  born  March  18,  1819,  in  Jeffer- 
son county,  New  York,  the  son  of 
Eleazer  Willes  and  Achsah  Jones.  He 
was  the  sixth  child  of  a  family  of 
seven  children  (five  sons  and  two 
daughters).  His  ancestors  in  the  di- 
rect line  emigrated  from  England  to 
New  England  prior  to  the  Revolution- 
ary war.  He  and  his  brother,  Ira, 
were  the  only  ones  of  his  father's 
family  who  joined  the  Church  of  Jesus 
Christ  of  Latter-day  Saints.  William 
was  baptized  July  16,   1846,  by  Par- 


BIOGRAPHICAL  ENCYCLOPEDIA. 


567 


ley  P.  Pratt.  They  were  with  the 
Saints  when  the  call  was  made  upon 
the  Church  for  a  battalion  of  men  to 
go  and  fight  in  the  war  with  Mexico. 
They  volunteered  and  were  mustered 
as  privates  in  Company  B  of  the  Mor- 
mon Battalion  and  made  the  long  and 
perilous  journey  overland  to  Cali- 
fornia. Arriving  in  California,  Sid- 
ney, as  he  was  commonly  called,  se- 
cured work  at  Sutter's  Mill  at  the 
time  that  gold  was  first  found  there. 
Later,  he  dug  gold  at  Mormon  Island 
with  the  "Mormon"  boys.  A  great 
deal  has  been  said  among  his  friends 
to  the  effect  that  he  was  actually  the 
first  discoverer  of  gold,  instead  of 
James  W.  Marshal.  The  facts  as  re- 
lated by  him  are  as  follows:  He 
found  some  particles  of  yellow  metal 
and  suspected  their  true  character, 
but  decided  to  say  nothing  until  he 
could  verify  his  suspicions,  thinking 
he  would  put  them  to  the  test  after 
his  day's  work  was  ended.  In  the 
meantime  Marshal  had  also  found 
some  of  the  same  metal  and  confided 
his  belief  that  it  was  gold  to  Henry 
W.  Bigler  and  others,  and  thus  the 
great  discovery  was  made  known  to 
the  world.  Being  urged,  at  different 
times,  by  his  friends  to  press  his 
claim  to  the  honor  of  being  the  first 
discoverer  of  gold  in  California,  he 
invariably  answered:  "What  matters 
who  the  discoverer  was,  just  so  that 
the  gold  was  discovered."  He  made 
the  scales  on  which  the  first  gold  was 
weighed  in  California.  In  1852  (April 
23d)  he  married  Alzina  L.  Lott, 
daughter  of  Cornelius  P.  and  Per- 
melia  Darrow  Lott,  in  Lehi,  Utah, 
Brigham  Young  performing  the  cere- 
mony. They  established  their  home 
in  Lehi,  where  were  born  to  them 
nine  children,  two  sons  and  seven 
daughters,  and  their  house  was  the 
first  one  in  Lehi  with  a  board  floor. 
With  the  assistance  of  a  hired  man, 
Bro.  Willes  sawed  the  lumber  with  a 
pit  saw,  first  taking  off  a  slab  which 
he  used  for  the  roof;   next,  a  board 


for  the  floor,  while  the  balance  of  the 
log  was  used  in  the  construction  of 
the  walls  with  the  sawed  side  inside. 
March  10,  1855,  he  was  commissioned, 
under  the  hand  of  Governor  Brigham 
Young,  captain  of  Company  A,  Lehi 
Post,  of  Utah  Military  District  of  the 
Nauvoo  Legion  (Utah  Militia),  hav- 
ing been  elected  to  this  office  May 
11,  1854.  On  the  organization  of  the 
68th  quorum  of  Seventy,  Nov.  28, 
18  62,  he  was  appointed  one  of  its 
presidents.  In  1863  he  was  called  on 
a  mission  to  England  and  assigned  to 
labor  in  the  Norwich  district;  he  was 
absent  nearly  three  years.  Returning 
home  in  the  fall  of  1865,  he  was  cap- 
tain of  an  ox-train  which  brought  a 
company  of  immigrating  Saints  across 
the  plains,  and  arrived  in  Salt  Lake 
City  Nov.  29,  1865.  In  December, 
18  66,  he  was  elected  major  of  the 
Second  Regiment,  First  Brigade,  Sec- 
ond Division,  Nauvoo  Legion  (Utah 
Militia).  His  commission  was  issued 
by  Governor  Durkee  March  27,  1868. 
He  participated  in  the  various  Indian 
wars  of  the  Territory,  except  the 
Black  Hawk  war,  being  absent  in 
England  during  the  greater  part  of 
this  war.  He  took  part  in  the  so- 
called  Echo  Canyon  war  in  1857,  and 
was  captain  of  a  company  which,  in 
1858,  left  Lehi  to  go  to  the  relief  of 
settlers  on  Salmon  River.  He  brought 
the  first  bees  to  Lehi,  consisting 
of  three  hives,  one  for  himself  and 
one  each  for  two  other  men.  He 
was  several  times  elected  to  the  city 
council  of  Lehi.  Although  his  oppor- 
tunities for  an  education  were  mea- 
ger he  was  an  ardent  supporter  of 
education.  Bro.  Willes  was  a  man 
well  adapted  to  pioneer  a  new  coun- 
try, because  he  was  able  to  turn  his 
hand  to  almost  any  line  of  work,  be- 
ing an  excellent  gunsmtih,  carpenter, 
machinist,  etc.  In  fact,  he  was  what 
is  generally  called  a  natural  born 
genius.  He  surveyed  the  Spring  Creek 
ditch  in  Lehi  from  the  old  mill  pond 
to  the  lower  field  and,  not  having  a 


568 


LATTER-DAY   SAINT 


spirit  level,  he  made  one  out  of  a 
piece  of  wood  with  a  groove  cut  in 
the  top  which  he  filled  with  water. 
This  incident  shows  his  aptitude  in 
contriving  things  to  meet  an  emer- 
gency. He  made  jewelry  for  his 
daughters  from  the  gold  which  he 
brought  from  California,  and  he  could 
repair  any  kind  of  machine  from  a 
clock  to  a  steam  engine.  Bro.  Willes 
was  noted  for  his  kindness  of  heart, 
cheerfulness,  generosity,  bravery  and 
coolness  in  times  of  great  danger. 
These  qualities  won  for  him  the  re- 
spect and  love  of  all  who  knew  him. 
He  was  of  a  modest,  retiring  disposi- 
ti/)n,  never  caring  for  prominence  or 
position  among  men;  yet  his  strict 
integrity,  mature  wisdom,  and  large 
experience  placed  him  in  the  front 
ranks  among  his  associates.  In  the 
winter  of  1870-1871,  while  working 
as  a  sawyer  at  a  mill  in  American 
Fork  Canyon,  he  was  caught  in  the 
saw,  which  resulted  in  injuries  from 
which  he  died  Feb.  3,  1871,  cutting 
short  a  useful  career  in  the  fifty- 
second  year  of  his  age. 

WILLIAMS,  David  James,  sixth 
Bishop  of  Greenville  (Beaver  Stake), 
Beaver  county,  Utah,  was  born  March 
3,  1869,  at  Greenville,  Utah,  the  son 
of  David  E.  Williams  and  Margaret 
Reese.  He  was  baptized  when  about 
eight  years  of  age  by  Thomas  Reese 
and  ordained  a  Deacon  when  a  mere 
youth.  From  his  earliest  years  he 
took  an  active  part  in  Church  mat- 
ters, was  ordained  an  Elder  in  Febru- 
ary, 1892,  by  John  D.  T.  McAllister 
and  ordained  a  High  Priest  by  John 
F.  Tolton  in  1909  and  set  apart  as 
second  counselor  to  Bishop  William 
Edwards  of  Greenville.  From  1913 
to  1915  he  served  as  second  coun- 
selor to  Bishop  John  A.  Horton  of 
Greenville.  He  was  ordained  a  Bishop 
July  22,  1915,  and  set  apart  to  pre- 
side over  the  Greenville  Ward.  In 
1892  (Feb.  8th)  he  married  Mar- 
garet T.  Singleton  (daughter  of  Wm. 
Singleton   and   Mary  Ann   Edwards), 


who  was  born  July  22,  1859,  in 
Pennsylvania.  She  died  Nov.  7, 
1902,  after  bearing  her  husband  six 
children.  In  1903  (April  28th)  Bro. 
Williams  married  Mary  Emma  Bar- 
ton (daughter  of  Alma  Barton  and 
Sarah    M.    Horton),    who    was    born 


Jan.  24,  1881,  in  England.  She  also 
became  the  mother  of  six  children. 
The  names  of  Bishop  Williams'  chil- 
dren follow:  Nettie  G.,  Mary  A., 
Clifford  E.,  Margaret  T.,  Charles, 
Gertrude,  Lavera,  David  James  jun., 
Alice,  Ruby,  Pauline  and  Elma. 

A'nXX,    William    Lucellu.s,    Bishop 

of  the  Smithfield  Second  Ward,  (Ben- 
son Stake),  Cache  county,  Utah,  was 
born  Oct.  13,  1866,  at  Smithfield, 
Cache  county,  Utah,  the  son  of  Thos. 
G.  Winn  and  Elizabeth  Nelson.  He 
was  baptized  July  25,  1875,  by  John 
J.  Plowman;  ordained  a  Deacon  Dec. 
19,  1878,  by  Bishop  Samuel  Ros- 
kelly;  ordained  a  Teacher  March  21, 
1882,  by  Geo.  L.  Farrell;  ordained  a 
Priest  June  10,  1883,  by  Geo.  L.  Far- 
rell; ordained  an  Elder  Nov.  11, 
1888,  by  Preston  T.  Morehead  and 
ordained  a  Seventy  Jan.  11,  1890,  by 
Lyman  O.  Littlefield.  He  was  set 
apart  as  a  president  in  the  17th  quo- 
rum  of  Seventy   in   June,    1900.   and 


BIOGRAPHICAL  ENCYCLOPEDIA. 


569 


later  (Nov.  11,  1906)  ordained  a 
High  Priest  and  Bishop  by  Orson  F. 
Whitney.  In  18-98-1899  he  filled  a 
mission  to  the  Northern  States,  labor- 


ing in  the  South  Illinois  conference. 
At  home  he  has  acted  as  an  officer  in 
the  Smithfield  Ward  and  as  superin- 
tendent of  the  Ward  Sunday  school. 
He  also  labored  as  a  Ward  teacher 
for  some  time  and  had  charge  of  the 
ordained  Deacons;  served  one  term 
In  the  Smithfield  city  council  and  has 
been  city  marshal  and  road  super- 
visor. Bro.  Winn  was  raised  on  a 
farm  and  followed  the  vocation  of  a 
farmer  for  many  years,  but  later  he 
engaged  in  merchandizing.  In  1888 
(Nov.  14th)  he  married  Edith  Weeks 
(daughter  of  David  Weeks  and  Han- 
nah Riches),  who  was  born  Sept.  5, 
1870.  This  marriage  has  been  blessed 
wTEh  twelve  children,  namely,  Wil- 
liam Frank,  Wallas  Weekes,  George 
Thomas,  David  Griffin,  Fred  Milton, 
Glenn  Riches,  Wesley,  Parley  Nelson, 
Edith  Stella,  Leonard,  Elva  and 
Blanche. 

WINSOR,  Anson  Ferry,  Bishop  and 
Patriarch,  was  born  Aug.  19,  1818, 
at  Elliotville,  New  York,  the  son  of 
Abraham  Winsor  and  Sophia  Bige- 
low.     Being  converted  to  "Mormon- 


ism,"  he  was  baptized  May  15,  1842, 
and  gathered  with  the  Church  at 
Nauvoo,  Illinois,  where  he  became 
intimately  acquainted  with  the  Pro- 
phet Joseph  Smith  and  acted  as  one 
of  his  body  guards.  In  1842  (March 
20th)  he  married  Emeline  Zenatia 
Brower  (daughter  of  John  Brower 
and  Delight  Smith),  who  was  born 
March  2,  1824.  This  marriage  was 
blessed  with  nine  children,  namely, 
Walter  J.,  Ida  R.,  Margaret  E.,  An- 
son P.  jun.,  Samuel  A.,  Emeline  G., 
Phoebe  P.  and  Lucy  D.  Bro.  Winsor 
emigrated  to  Utah  in  1852  with  his 


family  and  soon  afterwards  located 
in  Provo,  where  he  in  1855  married 
Mary  Nielsen  (daughter  of  Peter  Niel- 
sen), who  was  born  in  Denmark.  The 
children  by  this  marriage  were  the 
following:  Joseph  F.,  Andrew  N.  and 
Mary  J.  In  Provo  Bro.  Winsor  served 
as  city  councilman,  and  in  1857  he 
was  appointed  wagon  master  of 
President  Brigham  Young's  Express 
Company.  He  was  sent  to  the  States 
in  charge  of  a  company  and  arrived 
at  Fort  Leavenworth  May  1st,  1857. 
From  that  place  he  wrote  a  letter  to 
President  Brigham  Young,  notifying 
him  that  Johnston's  army  had  started 
for  Utah.     This  letter  was  sent  with 


570 


LATTER-DAY   SAINT 


Abraham  O.  Smoot,  who  delivered 
the  same  to  President  Brigham 
Young  July  24,  1857,  at  the  memor- 
able celebration  in  Big  Cottonwood 
Canyon.  Bro.  Winsor  was  sent  to 
Echo  Canyon  in  October,  1857,  to 
guard  against  the  invaders  and  to 
assist  in  making  fortifications.  The 
following  spring  (1858)  he  was  again 
sent  into  Echo  Canyon,  this  time  with 
300  men  to  release  those  who  had 
been  on  duty  during  the  previous 
winter.  In  1861  he  was  called  on  a 
colonization  mission  to  southern 
Utah  and  settled  at  Grafton  on  the 
Rio  Virgen  river,  where  he  in  1863 
was  appointed  to  preside  as  Bishop. 
In  the  spring  of  1869  he  was  ap- 
pointed to  build  a  fort  as  a  protec- 
tion against  the  Indians  at  Pipe 
Springs  and  to  collect  tithing  cattle 
and  take  charge  of  them.  He  was 
with  the  parties  who  went  out  to  se- 
cure the  bodies  of  Dr.  James  M. 
Whitmore  and  Robert  Mclntyre,  who 
had  been  killed  by  Indians.  Previous 
to  this  he  had  been  appointed  colonel 
in  the  Third  Regiment  of  Militia 
under  General  Erastus  Snow,  and 
participated  in  several  battles  with 
the  Indians.  In  1877  he  was  called 
to  St.  George  to  labor  as  an  ordinance 
worker  in  the  Temple,  and  he  re- 
mained active  in  this  work  as  long 
as  his  physical  strength  would  per- 
mit him  to  do  so.  He  was  one  of  the 
first  ordinance  workers  in  the  St. 
George  Temple  and  performed  bap- 
tism for  the  dead  for  more  than  100, 
000  people.  For  a  number  of  years 
he  acted  as  first  counselor  to  Bishop 
Charles  A.  Terry  of  the  St.  George 
Third  Ward.  In  1880  (Jan.  29th)  he 
married  Martha  N.  Knight.  Bro. 
Winsor  died  at  St.  George  June  17, 
1917,  98  years  and  10  months  old. 
He  was  quite  active  until  within  two 
days  of  his  death  and  retained  his 
faculties  until  the  last.  He  was  able 
to  read  without  glasses  and  right  up 
to  the  day  of  his  demise  his  mental 
faculties  were  so  well  preserved  that 


he  could  converse  freely  upon  all 
phases  of  the  great  world's  war. 

WINSOR,  Andrew  Nielsen,  Bishop 

of  the  St.  George  Third  Ward  (St. 
George  Stake),  Washington  county, 
Utah,  was  born  Feb.  16,  1866,  at 
Grafton,  Washington  county,  Utah, 
the  son  of  Anson  P.  Winsor  and 
Mary  Nielsen.  He  was  baptized  April 
1,  1877,  by  his  father;  was  ordained 
a  Deacon  Nov.  2  9,  1879;  ordained  a 
Teacher  Feb.  24,  1884;  ordained  a 
Priest  June  27,  1886;  ordained  an 
Elder  (by  his  father)  Feb.  30,  1887; 
ordained  a  Seventy  Dec.  24,  1887,  by 
Lorenzo  Clark,  and  ordained  a  High 
Priest  and  Bishop  Sept.  15,  1890,  by 
John  Henry  Smith,  who  also  set  him 
apart  to  preside  over  the  St.  George 
Third  Ward.  He  held  that  position 
until  1896,  when  the  four  St.  George 
Wards  were  consolidated  into  one. 
Bishop  Winsor  has  also  acted  as 
president  of  a  Deacons'  quorum,  as- 
sistant superintendent  of  the  Saint 
George  Third  Ward  Sunday  school, 
second  assistant  superintendent  of 
the  Saint  George  Fourth  Ward 
Sunday  school;  clerk  of  the  99th  quo- 
rum of  Seventy  (1892-1894),  Stake 
secretary  of  Y.  M.  M.  I.  A.  (1901- 
1906),  superintendent  of  the  Saint 
George  West  Ward  Sunday  school, 
etc.  In  September,  1903,  he  was 
chosen  as  second  counselor  to  Bishop 
James  McArthur  of  the  St.  George 
West  Ward,  which  position  he  still 
holds.  He  labored  eight  months  as  a 
volunteer  Temple  worker,  served  as 
a  city  councilman  in  St.  George  from 
1891  to  1895,  acted  as  justice  of  the 
peace  in  1900-1901,  road  supervisor, 
chief  probation  officer  of  Washing- 
ton county,  etc.  In  1888  (April  26th) 
he  married  Agnes  Macfarlane  (the 
daughter  of  John  Macfarlane  and 
Agnes  E.  Hey  borne),  who  was  born 
Dec.  9,  1869,  in  St.  George.  The 
children  by  this  marriage  are  the 
following:  Tillie,  Andrew  L.,  John 
H.,  Marion  M.,  Mary,  Ruth  and  Karl 
F.      Bishop  Winsor  is  a  farmer  and 


BIOGRAPHICAL   ENCYCLOPEDIA. 


571 


stock  raiser.     From  1870  to  1877  he 
resided  at  Pipe  Springs. 

WOODARD,  Jabez,  president  of  the 
Italian  and  later  of  the  Swiss  and 
German  mission,  was  born  Oct.  2  7, 
1821,  at  Debro,  Aldenham  Parish, 
Hertfordshire,  England,  the  son  of 
James  Woodard.  Becoming  a  convert 
to  "Mormonism,"  he  was  baptized  in 
1849  and  soon  afterwards  ordained  a 
Priest.  Later  he  was  ordained  an 
Elder  and  called  to  assist  Lorenzo 
Snow  in  missionary  work  in  Italy. 
He  arrived  at  La  Tour,  Sept.  18, 
1850,  and  commenced  missionary 
labors  among  the  Waldenses  in  the 
Piedmont  Valley.  He  was  one  of  the 
four  Elders  who  ascended  Mount 
"Brigham"  when  they  organized 
themselves  into  the  first  branch  of 
the  Church  in  Italy,  Sept.  19,  1850, 
and  was  also  present  when  the  first 
baptism  by  divine  authority  was  per- 
formed in  Italy,  Oct.  27,  1850.  In 
1852  he  accompanied  Lorenzo  Snow- 
on  a  mission  to  the  island  of  Malta 
and  remained  there  five  months,  as- 
sisting in  organizing  a  branch  of  the 
Church  on  that  island.  He  then  re- 
turned to  Piedmont,  Italy,  and  pre- 
sided over  the  Italian  mission  until 
he  emigrated  to  Utah  in  1854,  cross- 
ing the  Atlantic  in  the  ship  "John  M. 
Wood,"  which  sailed  from  Liverpool, 
England,  March  10,  1854,  and  arrived 
in  New  Orleans  May  2,  185  4.  Bro. 
Woodard  crossed  the  plains  the  same 
year  and  became  a  resident  of  Utah. 
Three  years  later,  in  185  7,  he  was 
called  on  a  mission  to  Europe,  and  to 
fill  that  mission  he  crossed  the  plains 
with  hand-carts,  together  with  many 
other  missionaries  bound  for  different 
part  of  the  world.  On  his  arrival  in 
Europe  he  was  called  to  preside  over 
the  Swiss  and  German  mission,  which 
position  he  held  until  the  spring  of 
18  61,  when  he  returned  to  America, 
crossing  the  Atlantic  in  the  ship 
"Monarch  of  the  Sea,"  which  sailed 
from  Liverpool  May  16,  18  61,  with  a 
company     of     nearly     one     thousand 


Saints  of  various  nationalities  in 
charge  of  Elder  Woodard.  Soon  af- 
ter his  return  to  Utah  he  was  called 
on  the  Dixie  mission  and  made  his 
home  in  St.  George.  In  the  latter 
part  of  18  69,  leaving  his  family  in 
southern  Utah,  he  went  to  Morgan 
county  to  spend  the  winter  of  1869- 
1870  with  Geo.  W.  Thurston  at  Mil- 
ton. Early  in  February,  1870,  he  met 
with  the  misfortune  of  freezing  one 
of  his  feet  quite  severely,  which  acci- 
dent led  gradually  to  other  ailments, 
from  the  effect  of  which  he  died  at 
Milton,  March  2,  1870.  Dying  away 
from  his  family  made  his  demise 
doubly  sad.  Bro.  Woodard  was  a  tal- 
ented writer  and  poet,  some  of  the 
sweetest  and  most  impressive  songs 
of  Zion  being  from  his  pen.  From 
the  time  he  first  joined  the  Church, 
Bro.  Woodard  was  a  faithful  and  true 
Latter-day  Saint. 

WRIGHT,    Alexander,    one    of    the 

first  Latter-day  Saint  misssionaries 
who  introduced  the  fulness  of  the 
gospel  into  Scotland,  was  born  Jan. 
27,  1804,  in  the  parish  of  Marnoch, 
Banffshire,  Scotland.  In  1835  he  em- 
igrated to  Canada,  where  he  became 
a  convert  to  "'Mormonism,"  being 
baptized  in  183  6.  Soon  afterwards 
he  moved  to  Kirtland,  Ohio,  and  was 
ordained  to  the  Priesthood.  Early  in 
183'9  he  was  called  on  a  mission  to 
Scotland.  Complying  with  this  call 
he  left  Springfield,  Ohio,  March  14, 
183  9,  accompanied  by  Henry  C.  Ja- 
cobs, Jesse  Haven  and  others.  Their 
destination  was  New  York  and  they 
traveled  on  foot  at  the  rate  of  twenty 
or  twenty-five  miles  a  day,  preaching 
and  visiting  by  the  way.  Arriving  in 
New  York  late  in  the  summer,  they 
waited  there  for  the  arrival  of  some 
of  the  Twelve  coming  from  the  west. 
About  this  time  Samuel  Mulliner 
joined  Elder  Wright,  having  just  ar- 
rived from  the  headquarters  of  the 
Church.  Before  sailing,  they  labored 
in  the  regions  around  about  New  York, 
visiting    both    Saints    and    strangers, 


572 


LATTER-DAY   SAINT 


until    they    had    obtained    sufficient 
means  to  enable  them  to  pay  their 
passage  across  the  water.   They  sailed 
from    New   York   Nov.    6,    1839,    and 
arrived    in    Liverpool    Dec.    3,    1839. 
After  visiting  the  brethren  and  Saints 
in  Liverpool  and  Preston,  and  confer- 
ring with  Willard   Richards,   Joseph 
Fielding  and  others,  they  left  Liver- 
pool for  Scotland  Dec.  19,  1839,  ar- 
riving in  Glasgow  the  following  day. 
On  the  21st  they  went  by  canal-boat 
to  Edinburgh,  where  Elder  Mulliner's 
parents    lived.      After    a    brief    stay 
there.  Elder  Wright  became  desirous 
of  visiting  his  parents,  who  lived  in 
Banffshire,  in  the  north  of  Scotland. 
Being  unable  to  find  a  boat  leaving 
for  the  north  (the  boats  having  been 
withdrawn  for  the  season),  he  set  out 
on  foot,  crossing  the  Firth  of  Forth 
to  Kirkcaldy.     He  persevered  on  his 
journey,  visiting  Dundee  on  the  road. 
Being   exposed   to   the   weather,   and 
finding   shelter   where   he   could,    he 
was  taken  sick,  but  did  not  fully  real- 
ize what  ailed  him  until  he  reached 
Aberdeen,   where  he   consulted  some 
druggist   friends   and    found   that   he 
was  suffering  from  smallpox.  Nothing 
daunted,  he  proceeded,  after  resting 
a  day  or  two,  to  his  father's  house, 
sick  as  he  was.     Once  there  he  rest- 
ed, and  in  the  course  of  a  few  days 
he   was    well    again.      Elder    Wright 
visited   his   friends   and   relatives   in 
that  part  of  the  country  and  also  in 
the  city  of  Aberdeen,  preaching  where- 
ever  he  could  find  a  place  to  do  so, 
and  bearing  testimony  of  the  restor- 
ation of  the   gospel   through   Joseph 
Smith.     In  the  meantime  Elder  Mulli- 
ner  had  been  laboring  at  Bishopton, 
near    Glasgow,    and    had   there    bap- 
tized Alexander  Hay  and  his  wife  Jan. 
14,  1840;  they  were  the  first  to  em- 
brace  the   fulness   of   the    gospel   in 
Scotland   in   this   dispensation,   being 
the  first  fruits  of  the  Elders  in  that 
land.      At   this   time   Elder   Mulliner 
wrote    to    Elder    Wright,    requesting 
him  to  join  him  at  Bishopton.     Elder 
Wright    very    shortly    left    the    north 


to  join  his  companion,   traveling  all 
the  way  south  to   Edinburgh,   as  he 
had  done  north  to  Banff,  on  foot.   He 
used  every  opportunity  to  proclaim  his 
mission  on  the  way,  at  Dundee  and 
elsewhere.      When  he  reached  Edin- 
burgh he  found  Eider  Mulliner  there, 
visiting  his  parents.     They  remained 
in   that   city   a   brief   season,    during 
which  they  became  acquainted  with 
two  men  (Gillispie  and  McKenzie)  at 
Leith,  who  were  both  baptized  Feb. 
2,  1840.     Elders  Wright  and  Mulliner 
then   started    for    Glasgow   by   canal- 
boat   and    arrived    at    Bishopton    the 
following  day.     Their  conjoint  labors 
now  commenced  in  earnest,  and  they 
held  meetings  in  Kilpatrick,  Bishtop- 
ton,  Bridge-of-Weir,  Paisley,  Kilmar- 
comb,    Johnstone,    Houston,    Kilbar- 
chan,  Glasgow  and  other  places.      It 
appears  that  their  presentation  of  the 
gospel  brought  a  ready  response,  for 
a  number  of  persons  were  soon  after- 
wards   baptized.       In    fact    baptisms 
soon  became  a  daily  occurrence,  and 
by  the  close  of  April,  l840,  upwards 
of  sixty  persons  had  been  led  into  the 
waters    of    baptism.      Early    in    May, 
1840,   Elder  Orson   Pratt  arrived   in 
Paisley  and  on  May  8,  1840,  the  Pais- 
ley  branch    (the  first  branch  of  the 
Church  of  Jesus  Christ  of  Latter-day 
Saints    in    Scotland)    was    organized 
with   Robert  McArthur  as  president. 
The  work  now  spread  rapidly,  addi- 
tional   branches    being   organized    at 
Bridge-of-Weir,  Bishopton  and'Green- 
ock.     Soon  after  organizing  the  Pais- 
ley  branch.  Elder  Orson  Pratt  went 
to  Edinburgh,  accompanied  by  Elder 
Mulliner,  and  established  a  branch  of 
the    Church    there.      Elder    Mulliner 
returned   to   America   in   the   fall   of 
1840,  but  Elder  Wright  continued  his 
work  and  was  the  means  of  bringing 
many  into  the  Church.     In  August, 
September  and  October,  1840,  he  la- 
bored  in   Aberdeen,   Banff,    Macduff, 
Portsoy  and  other  places,  endeavoring 
to  spread  a  knowledge  of  the  gospel 
among  his  relatives  and  among  the 
people  generally,  but  the  work  of  in- 


BIOGRAPHICAL  ENCYCLOPEDIA. 


573 


troducing  the  gospel  into  this  north- 
ern part  of  Scotland  was  slow.    Much 
difficulty  was  experienced  in  obtain- 
ing places  to   hold  meetings,   except 
where  extortionate  prices  were  asked, 
which   Elder   Wright   was   unable   to 
pay.     When  he  arrived  in  Aberdeen 
he  had  only  13  i/^  pence  in  his  pocket. 
He     persevered     diligently,     seeking 
conversations     everywhere,     loaning 
books  for  the  people  to  read,  main- 
taining   himself    as    best    he    could, 
traveling  continuously.     From  sheer 
necessity  he  occasionally  sought  labor 
where  he  could  find  it,  in  order  to 
buy  himself  a  pair  of  shoes  or  to  buy 
books,  etc.,  with  which  to  enable  him 
to  persue  his  labors.    On  one  occasion 
he  slept  in   a  field   on  some  shocks 
of  grain;  on  another  he  slept  on  some 
rocks  on  the  sea  shore.      Returning 
from  the  north  in  October,  he  imme- 
diately   resumed    his    labors    in    the 
Paisley  district,   working  there   dur- 
ing  that   winter   and    until   the  next 
summer,    baptizing     converts     every 
few   days.      In  the   summer   of   1841 
he  returned  to  the  north,  taking  up 
labors  there  again  and  covering  the 
country  pretty  much  from  Aberdeen 
to    Inverness.       Many    friends    were 
made  and  some  interest  manifested, 
but  results  were  slow  at  that  time. 
The   people    were    very    excited    just 
then   over   religious   differences   and 
difficulties     existing     among     them, 
which  shortly  after  culminated  in  the 
disruption  of  the  Church  of  Scotland, 
when   the  Free   Church   of   Scotland 
drew     away     from     the     established 
Church.     Elder  Wright  spent  the  win- 
ter  of  1841-1842    and   the  following 
spring   in    the   north.      Early   in   the 
summer  of  18  42  his  father's  family 
concluded   to   emigrate   to   America; 
most   of  the   family   were   enquiring 
after  truth  and  were  favorably  dis- 
posed   toward    the    restored    gospel. 
Later  a  number  of  them   joined  the 
Church.     Elder  Wright  arranged  for 
seventeen  passages   for  his  relatives 
and  with  them  he  sailed  from  Liver- 
pool Sept.  17,  18  42,  on  the  ship  "Syd- 


ney."     After   a   long  voyage,   during 
which  several  deaths  occurred,  they 
arrived  at  the  mouth  of  the  Missis- 
sippi, whence  they  proceeded  up  the 
river    on    the    steamboat    "Alexander 
Scott,"    and    were    much    delayed    by 
the  boat  going  aground.     At  last  they 
reached  Altoona,  Dec.  19,  1842,  where 
they  stayed  temporarily.  Elder  Wright 
was   thus  some   two   years   and   nine 
months   away   on   this   mission.      He 
soon  afterwards  became  a  resident  of 
Nauvoo,  111.,  where  he  married  Han- 
nah   Butterfield,    May    25,    1844.      A 
daughter,  who  died  soon  afterwards, 
was  born  to  them;   the  wife  died  in 
childbirth.      Brother    Wright    passea 
through  the  persecutions  in  Illinois 
and   became  an   exile,  together  with 
his    people,    in    1846.       In    1847    he 
crossed  the  plains  to  Great  Salt  Lake 
Valley,  driving  a  team  for  President 
John  Taylor  on  the  journey.     In  Jan- 
uary, 1851,  he  married  Hannah  Leigh 
in  Salt  Salt  Lake  City,  by  whom  he 
had  two  children,  Mary  Elizabeth  and 
Hannah  Ann.     After  living  for  some 
time  near  Pioneer  Square,  Salt  Lake 
City,  he  moved  out  into  the  country 
in  the  spring  of  1853,  locating  near 
where  Wandemere  Park  now  stands. 
He  lived  there  until  he  went  south  on 
a  colonization  mission  to  Dixie,  where 
he  settled  on  the  Rio  Virgen,  at  Vir- 
gen  City.     In  1856   (Nov.  23d)  Elder 
Wright  married  Hannah  Walters,  by 
whom  he   had   six  children,   namely, 
Sarah     Ann,     Alexander,      Elizabeth 
Jean,  William  Walters,  Hannah  May 
and  John  Edmond.     Bro.  Wright  con- 
tinued a  resident  of  Virgen  City  until 
the  time  of  his  death,  which  occurred 
Aug.  3,  1876,  at  Virgen  City,  after  an 
illness  of  about  seven  years.     He  left 
a  wife  and  six  children. 

YATES,  James  Maxwell,  fourth 
Bishop  of  E  T  Ward,  Tooele  county, 
Utah,  was  born  Aug.  27,  1875,  at 
Lake  Point,  Tooele  county,  Utah,  the 
son  of  Joseph  Yates  and  Elizabeth 
Maxwell.  He  was  baptized  in  Sep- 
tember, 1883,  by  his  father;  ordained 


574 


LATTER-DAY   SAINT 


successively  to  the  office  of  Deacon, 
Teacher  and  Priest;  ordained  an  El- 
der in  March,  1892,  by  Wm.  F.  Moss; 
ordained  a  Seventy  in  1896,  by  Jos. 


Dunn  and  ordained  a  High  Priest  and 
Bishop  Oct.  3,  1909,  by  Francis  M. 
Lyman  and  set  apart  to  preside  over 
the  E  T  Ward.  In  1892-1894  he 
filled  a  mission  to  the  Southern 
States.  At  home  he  acted  as  assist- 
ant superintendent  of  the  Lake  Point 
Sunday  school  one  year,  was  coun- 
selor in  the  Ward  Y.  M.  M.  I.  A.  two 
years  and  Ward  clerk  ten  years.  In 
1895  (Nov.  22nd)  he  married  Mary 
J.  Shandrew  (daughter  of  Henry 
Shandrew  and  Annie  Jenson),  who 
was  born  April  9,  1887;  four  chil- 
dren (Oswald  C,  Zell  J.,  Lyman  S. 
and  Ula  M.)  are  the  issue  of  this 
marriage. 

YATES,  Thomas,  Bishop  of  Scipio 
(Millard  Stake),  Millard  county, 
Utah,  was  born  June  6,  1840,  at 
Bath,  Sommersetshire,  England,  the 
son  of  William  Yates  and  Hannah 
Howes.  He  was  baptized  May  2  9, 
1853,  by  Dorr  P.  Curtis  at  Bath, 
England,  ordained  a  Deacon  June  8, 
1856,  by  Jesse  B.  Martin,  ordained 
an  Elder  Oct.  6,  1856,  by  Ezra  T. 
Benson,  labored  as  a  traveling  Elder 
in  Great  Britain  from  the  latter  date 


until  May  23,  1863,  when  he  emi- 
grated to  Utah.  He  located  in  Scipfo, 
Millard  county,  in  1864,  and  in  1877 
(July  22nd)  was  ordained  a  High 
Priest  by  Erastus  Snow  and  set  apart 
to  act  as  second  counselor  to  Bishop 
Daniel  Thomas  of  Scipio.  He  was  or- 
dained a  Bishop  in  May,  1882,  by 
Apostle  Francis  M.  Lyman  and  set 
apart  to  preside  over  the  Scipio 
Ward,  which  position  he  held  until 
the  time  of  his  death.  His  first  wife 
was  Elizabeth  Francis,  whom  he  mar- 
ried July  22,  1863,  at  Florence, 
Nebraska.  She  was  the  daughter  of 
John  Francis  and  Susan  Mallet.  Five 
children  (Hannah  E.,  Sarah  L.,  Em- 
ily F.,  Thomas  J.  and  Maud  M.) 
blessed  this  union.  Sister  Yates  died 
Dec.  31,  1910.  In  June,  1880,  Bro. 
Yates  married  Susan  I.  McArthur, 
(daughter  of  Henry  McArthur  and 
Sarah  Elizabeth  Ivie),  who  was  born 
Nov.  14,  1860,  in  Mount  Pleasant, 
Sanpete  county,  Utah.  She  bore  her 
husband  five  children,  namely,  Eva, 
Ella,  Henry  M.,  Dora  and  Viola.  Hav- 
ing married  two  wives  Bishop  Yates 
was  arrested,  convicted  under  the  Ed- 


munds law  and  imprisoned  in  the 
Utah  penitentiary  in  1899-1900. 
Bishop  Yates  died  at  Scipio,  Feb.  21, 
1903,  faithful  and  true  till  the  last. 


BIOGRAPHICAL   ENCYCLOPEDIA. 


575 


YOUD,  John  Pickles,  Bishop  of  the 
Lake  Shore  Ward  (Nebo  Stake),  Utah 
county,  Utah  ,was  born  Jan.  18,  1860, 
in  Spanish  Fork  county,  Utah  the 
son  of  Thomas  Youd  and  Elizabeth 
Pickles.  He  was  raised  and  educated 
in  Spanish  Fork,  and  after  being  bap- 
tized when  eight  years  of  age  by 
Charles  A.  Davis,  he  became  an  act- 
ive Church  worker.  He  was  ordained 
a  Priest  and  subsequently  an  Elder. 
Still  later  he  was  ordained  a  Seventy 
by  George  Reynolds,  and  filled  a  mis- 
sion to  Great  Britain  in  1891-1893, 
laboring  in  the  Liverpool  conference. 
In  1886  he  changed  his  residence  from 
Spanish  Fork  to  Lake  Shore,  where 
he  again  took  an  active  part  in 
Church  affairs.  After  being  a  mem- 
ber of  the  149th  quorum  of  Seventy 
for  some  time,  he  was  ordained  a 
High  Priest  and  Bishop  May  25, 
1913,  by  Hyrum  M.  Smith,  and  set 
apart  to  preside  over  the  Lake  Shore 
Ward,  which  position  he  still  occu- 
pies. In  1889  (Sept.  2  5th)  he  mar- 
ried Serine  Sorensen,  who  has  borne 
her  husband  eleven  children,  namely, 
Annie  Elizabeth,  Florence  Lorella, 
Thomas  Leslie,  John  Ivan,  Wilford 
Joseph,  Alice  Serine,  Nellie,  Arthur 
S.,  Stella,  Ruby  and  Loa.  Bishop 
Youd  is  a  farmer  and  stock-raiser  by 
avocation. 

YOUNG,  Lorenzo  Sobieski,  the  only 
survivor  of  the  orginal  company  of 
Utah  pioneers  of  1847,  was  born 
March  9,  1841,  in  Winchester,  Scott 
county.  111.,  the  son  of  Lorenzo  Dow 
Young  and  Persis  Goodall.  He  ar- 
rived in  Salt  Lake  Valley  with  his 
parents  in  July,  1847.  In  1872  he 
married  Sarah  A.  Black,  who  bore 
him  12  children.  He  now  lives  at 
Shelley,  Idaho. 

YOUNG,  Willard,  superintendent 
of  Church  building  activities,  was 
born  April  3  0,  1852,  in  Salt  Lake 
City,  Utah,  the  son  of  President  Brig- 
ham  Young  and  Clarissa  Ross.  His 
mother  died  when  he  was  six  years 
of  age  and  he  and  his  three  sisters, 


Mary,  Maria  and  Phebe,  were  placed 
in  charge  of  Sister  Zina  D.  H.  Young, 
who  proved  a  real  mother  to  them. 
Willard  was  baptized  April  30,  1860, 
by  James  Works,  and  was  ordained 
an  Elder  and  received  his  endow- 
ments in  the  Endowment  House,  Salt 
Lake  City,  Dec.  28,  1868.  He  was  or- 
dained a  Seventy  in  October,  1891, 
by  Moses  Thatcher,  and  in  the  fall  of 
the  same  year  he  labored  for  several 
months  as  a  Mutual  Improvement 
missionary  in  Davis,  Weber  and  Box 
Elder  counties.  From  1891  to  1893 
he  was  president  of  the  Young  Uni- 
versity and  from  1906  to  1915  presi- 
dent of  the  L.  D.  S.  University.  He 
was  appointed  a  member  of  the  Gen- 
eral Church  Board  of  Education  Oct. 


18,  1888,  and  a  member  of  the  Church 
Board  of  Examiners  in  1906,  serving 
in  the  latter  capacity  until  June  3  0, 
1915.  He  was  ordained  a  High  Priest 
by  John  T.  Caine  March  2  6,  1907, 
and  set  apart  as  an  alternate  member 
of  the  High  Council  of  the  Ensign 
Stake;  later  he  became  a  regular 
member  of  that  organization.  He  was 
appointed  and  set  apart  as  assistant 
to  the  president  of  the  Logan  Temple 
Jan.  3,  1'916,  and  labored  in  that 
capacity  until  July,  1917.  In  1919 
(Nov.  1st)  he  was  appointed  superin- 


576 


LATTER-DAY   SAINT 


tendent  of  Church  building  activities, 
a  position  which  he  still  holds.  In 
1882  (Aug.  IsC)  he  married  Harriet 
Hooper  (daughter  of  Wm.  H.  Hooper 
and  Mary  Ann  Knowlton),  who  was 
born  May  3,  18  61,  at  Cummingsville, 
Ohio.  Their  children  are  Mary,  Har- 
riet, Anna,  Claire,  Alice  and  Sidney 
Hooper.  Sidney  is  a  graduate  of  the 
U.  S.  Military  Academy  and  now 
(1920)  a  captain  of  infantry  in  the 
U.  S.  army.  Bro.  Young  commenced 
his  military  career  in  1871,  when  he 
entered  the  U.  S.  Military  Academy 
at  West  Point  as  a  cadet,  graduating 
therefrom  in  1875  with  the  rank  of 
second  lieutenant  (Corps  of  Engin- 
eers). He  was  with  the  Engineer 
Battalion  at  Willets  Point,  N.  Y., 
from  Oct.  1,  1875,  to  Aug.  17,  1877, 
and  acted  as  assistant  engineer  under 
the  orders  of  Lieutenant  Wheeler  in 
the  geographical  survey  west  of  the 
100th  meridian  from  Sept.  13,  1877, 
to  Aug.  28,  1879.  Returning  to  West 
Point  he  was  appointed  instructor  of 
civil  and  military  engineering  Aug. 
28,  1879,  and  acted  as  assistant  pro- 
fessor in  that  department  from  Aug., 
1881,  to  August,  1883.  Later  he 
acted  as  assistant  to  Captain  Powell 
and  to  Major  Jones  and  had  local 
charge  of  the  construction  of  the  Cas- 
cade Locks,  Oregon,  from  Oct.  4, 
1883,  to  July  16,  1887,  being  ap- 
•  pointed  captain  of  a  corps  of  engin- 
eers Oct.  12,  1886.  From  July,  1887, 
to  October,  1889,  he  was  in  Portland, 
having  charge  of  various  river  and 
harbor  improvements  and  surveys  in 
Oregon,  and  from  October,  1889,  to 
June,  1890,  at  Memphis,  Tenn.,  in 
charge  of  the  Third  District  of  the 
Mississippi  River.  At  the  request  of 
President  Woodruff,  he  resigned 
from  the  army  in  1891  (Feb.  22nd) 
to  accept  the  presidency  of  Young 
University.  On  April  5,  18  9  6,  he  was 
appointed  brigadier-general  of  the 
National  Guard  of  Utah  and  held  that 
position  until  the  breaking  out  of  the 
Spanish-American  war  in  1898  when, 
after   having   assisted    in    organizing 


the  Utah  volunteers,  he  was  ap- 
pointed a  colonel  of  the  Second 
Regiment,  U.  S.  Volunteer  Engineers, 
and  served  in  the  United  States  and 
in  Cuba  until  May  16,  1899.  During 
the  world's  war  he  was  appointed  U. 
S.  agent  under  the  chief  of  engineers, 
U.  S.  army,  Sept.  1,  1897,  and  was 
stationed  at  Kansas  City,  Mo.,  in 
charge  of  the  Kansas  City  Engineer 
District,  Western  Division,  and  en- 
gaged in  improvements  of  the  Mis- 
souri, Osage,  Gasconade  and  Kansas 
rivers,  and  also  on  work  for  the  pre- 
servation of  the  bank  line  of  the  Re- 
publican River,  in  front  of  Fort  Riley 
(Kansas),  Military  Reservation,  in 
which  capacity  he  served  until  July 
1,  1919.  In  a  civil  capacity  Brother 
Young  served  as  city  engineer  of  Salt 
Lake  City  from  1893  to  1895  and 
was  the  first  state  engineer  of  Utah, 
serving  in  that  capacity  from  March, 
1897,  until  the  outbreak  of  the  Span- 
ish-American war.  From  1889  to 
1902  he  served  as  general  manager 
of  the  National  Contracting  Company 
in  New  York  City,  on  large  works, 
such  as  the  drainage  of  the  city  of 
New  Orleans;  the  construction  of  one 
of  the  great  wheel  pits  for  electric 
power  development  at  Niagara  Falls, 
N.  Y.;  the  building  of  the  great  inter- 
cepting sewer  in  Boston;  construc- 
tion of  the  tunnel  under  the  bay  be- 
tween Boston  and  East  Boston,  the 
building  of  a  large  dam  for  electric 
power  development  on  the  Hudson 
river,  near  Glenn's  Falls,  N.  Y.,  etc. 
From  1902  to  1905  he  engaged  in  pri- 
vate engineering  practice  in  the  city  of 
New  York  and  from  1905  to  1906  he 
was  engaged  in  private  engineering 
practice  in  Salt  Lake  City.  From 
such  an  experience  in  life  he  is  well 
qualified  for  his  present  position  as 
superintendent  of  Church  building 
activities.  Wherever  his  lot  has 
been  cast  among  his  fellowmen  he 
has  always  been  a  valiant  defender 
of  the  faith  and  his  whole  life  a 
worthy  example  of  one  of  Utah's  dis- 
tinguished sons. 


BIOGRAPHICAL  ENCYCLOPEDIA. 


577 


ABEL,  Elijah,  the  only  colored 
man  who  is  known  to  have  been 
ordained  to  the  Priesthood,  was  born 
July  25,  1810,  in  Maryland.  Becoming 
a  convert  to  "Mormonism"  he  was 
baptized  in  September,  1832,  by  Eze- 
kiel  Roberts  and,  as  appears  from 
certificates,  he  was  ordained  an  Elder 
March  3,  1836,  and  a  Seventy  April 
4,  1841,  an  exception  having  been 
made  in  his  case  with  Trgard  to  the 
general  rule  of  the  Church  in  relation 
to  colored  people.  At  Nauvoo,  Illi- 
nois, where  he  resided,  he  followed 
the  avocation  of  an  undertaker.  After 
his  arrival  in  Salt  Lake  City  he  be- 
came a  resident  of  the  Tenth  Ward, 
and,  together  with  his  wife,  he  man- 
aged the  Farnham  Hotel  in  Salt  Lake 
City.  In  Nauvoo  he  was  intimately 
acquainted  wuth  the  Prophet  Joseph 
Smith  and  later  in  life  was  the 
especial  friend  of  the  late  Levi  W. 
Hancock.  In  1883,  as  a  member  of 
the  Third  Quorum  of  Seventy,  he  left 
Salt  Lake  City  on  a  mission  to  Can- 
ada, during  which  he  also  performed 
missionary  labors  in  the  United  States. 
Two  weeks  after  his  return  he  died, 
Dec.  25,  1884,  of  debility,  consequent 
upon  exposure  while  laboring  in  the 
ministry  in  Ohio.  He  died  in  full  faith 
of  the  gospel. 

ADAIR,  Thomas  Jefferson,  an  Elder 
who  died  away  from  home,  filling  a 
mission  for  the  Church,  was  born 
May  28,  1884,  at  Nutrioso,  Apache 
county,  Arizona,  the  son  of  Samuel 
Newton  Adair  and  Helen  J.  Brown. 
His  grandparents  on  his  father's  side 
were  among  the  noted  residents  of 
Nauvoo,  Illinois,  and  his  grand- 
parents on  his  mother's  side  were 
associated  with  the  Church  in  Kirt- 
land,  Ohio,  where  his  grandfather 
Brown  assisted  in  the  erection  of  the 
Kirtland  Temple.  His  parents  were 
among  the  early  settlers  in  Apache 
county,  Arizona,  and  were  staunch 
Latter-day  Saints.  Thomas  J.  was 
baptized  Sept.  1,  1892,  by  his  father 
and  was  ordained  successively  to  the 


offices  of  Priest  and  Elder.  He  was 
set  apart  for  a  mission  to  the  South- 
western States  April  1,  1904,  and  was 
appointed  to  labor  in  Arkansas,  where 
he  spent  twenty-eight  months  as  a 
faithful,  energetic  missionary.  While 
thus  engaged  he  contracted  a  disease 
and  being  released  from  his  mission 
he  started  for  home  and  arrived  at 
St.  Johns,  Arizona,  July  23,  1904. 
His  parents,  who  lived  about  seventy- 
five  miles  from  St.  Johns,  were  noti- 
fied, but  when  they  arrived  at  his 
bedside  he  was  unable  to  travel 
further,  and  getting  gradually  worse, 
he  died  Aug.  1,  1906,  at  St.  Johns. 
Elder  Adair  was  greatly  respected  by 
all  who  knew  him.  He  had  received 
a  good  education,  had  attended  the 
Stake  academy  at  St.  Johns,  and 
taken  the  missionary  course  prior  to 
going  on  his  mission.  He  was  noted 
for  his  exceptionally  energetic  and 
lively  disposition  and  ever  showed  the 
greatest  loyalty  and  devotedness  to 
the  Church. 

ADAMwS,   Barnabas  L.,   one  of  the 

original  Utah  pioneers  of  1847,  was 
born  August  28,  1812,  near  Pearth, 
Upper  Canada,  of  Vermont  parents 
and  was  educated  in  the  Methodist 
faith,  several  of  his  immediate  rela- 
tives being  preachers  in  that  denomi- 
nation. He  became  a  convert  to  "Mor- 
monism" when  about  twenty-three 
years  of  age  and  afterwards  gathered 
to  Missoui,  traveling  to  that  State  in 
what  was  known  as  the  Canada  Camp, 
led  by  Elder  John  E.  Page.  Together 
with  his  co-religionists  he  was  ex- 
pelled from  the  State  of  Missouri  by 
mobocratic  violence,  and  settled  with 
the  Saints  in  Illinois.  There  he  after- 
wards became  subject  once  more  to 
the  ruthless  hand  of  persecution,  and 
during  the  general  exodus  in  1846  he 
came  west,  having  lived  for  some 
time  in  Montrose,  Lee  county,  Iowa. 
In  June,  1846,  he  married  Julia  Ann 
Bawker  at  Montrose.  She  was  a 
native  of  the  State  of  New  York. 
When  President  Brigham Youngmade 


Vol.  Ill,  No.  37. 


March  27,  1920 


578 


LATTER-DAY   SAINT 


up  his  company  of  pioneers  in  the 
spring  of  1847  at  Winter  Quarters, 
Barnabash  L.  Adams  was  chosen  as 
one  of  them  and  traveled  with  the 
rest  of  the  pioneers  to  Great  Salt 
Lake  Valley.  He  returned  to  Winter 
Quarters  the  same  season.  In  the 
fall  of  1848  he  arrived  in  Salt  Lake 
Valley  the  second  time  and  located 
in  Mill  Creek.  Afterwards  he  settled  at 
the  mouth  of  Little  Cottonwood  Can- 
yon, Salt  Lake  county.  While  engaged 
in  getting  out  logs  for  President  Brig- 
ham  Young's  saw  mill  in  City  Creek 
canyon,  he  had  occasion  to  lift  the 
bed  of  a  wagon  whereby  he  seemed 
to  have  injured  himself  internally, 
and  while  in  the  act  of  eating  his 
dinner  June  2,  1869,  he  expired  sud- 
denly, although  he  up  to  that  time 
seemed  to  posses  the  best  of  health. 
Bro.  Adams  was  universally  known 
as  a  faithful,  kindhearted,  unobtru- 
sive, industrious  man  and  was  much 
beloved  by  a  large  circle  of  friends. 
He  left  a  large  family. 

ADAMS,  Hyrum,  an  active  pioneer 
and  Church  worker,  was  born  May 
28,  1855,  at  Layton,  Davis  county, 
Utah,  the  son  of  Elias  Adams  and  Be- 
linda Raileigh.  His  father  was  a  sol- 
dier in  the  Revolutionary  War  of  1812, 
and,  becoming  a  convert  to  "Mormon- 
ism,"  he  emigrated  to  Utah  with  his 
family  in  1850.  Hyrum  Adams  was 
baptized  June  20,  1866,  by  Richard 
Pilling  and  later  ordained  to  the  dif- 
ferent offices  in  the  Priesthood.  As 
a  boy,  he  worked  on  his  father's  farm 
and  experienced  the  hardships  and 
adventures  of  a  pioneer.  He  enjoyed 
hunting  and  was  well  known  for  his 
shrewdness  and  excellent  marksman- 
ship, which  was  proven  in  many  in- 
stances. He  was  captain  and  first 
baseman  in  the  baseball  team  that 
won  credit  throughout  Davis  county 
for  many  years.  In  1877  (Jan.  15th) 
he  married  Rosa  R.  Higgs  (daughter 
of  David  Higgs  and  Eliza  Dodwell), 
who  was  born  April  25,  1858,  in  Chel- 
tenham,   England.      This    union    was 


blessed  with  six  children,  namely,  Hy- 
rum Rufus,  Eliza  Selecta,  Elias  An- 
drew, Alma  John,  Lottie  Rosa,  and 
Emery  David.  Sister  Adams  died  Dec. 
25,  1887,  at  her  home  in  Layton, 
Utah.  Four  of  her  children  preceded 
her  to  the  "great  beyond."  In  1889 
(June  13th)  Brother  Adams  married 
Annie  Laura  Penrod  (daughter  of 
William  H.  H.  Penrod  and  Lucene 
Bird  Bybee),  who  was  born  April  29, 
1870,  in  Mountain  Green,  Morgan 
county,  Utah.  This  marriage  has  been 
blessed  with  eight  children,  namely, 
Delbert  Hyrum,  Frank  David,  Bird 
Belinda,  Clay  Quincy,  Annie  Blanche, 


Blaine  William,  Bessie  Amanda  and 
Bonnie  Catherine.  Frank  D.  has  filled 
a  successful  mission  in  the  Eastern 
States  and  later  served  as  a  lieutenant 
and  an  aviator  in  the  late  World  War. 
Bro.  Hyrum  Adams  has  been  promi- 
nent in  the  building  up  of  Davis  coun- 
ty and  has  followed  the  occupation  of 
farming  and  stock  raising.  In  the 
early  eighties  he  entered  the  sheep 
industry,  which  he  still  pursues;  he 
was  also  one  of  the  first  dry  farmers 
in  Davis  county,  using  oxen  to  plow 
the  sod,  as  horses  were  unavailable  at 
that  time.  He  has  also  filled  many 
positions  of  trust  and  responsibility 
in  the  community.     Thus  he  acted  as 


BIOGRAPHICAL   ENCYCLOPEDIA. 


579 


school  trustee,  director  and  manager 
of  Holmes  Creek  Irrigation  Co.  for 
many  years,  manager  of  a  threshing 
machine  company  for  25  years,  and 
superintended  the  building  of  the  Lay- 
ton  Ward  chapel.  He  was  the  prime 
mover  in  establishing  the  Layton  wa- 
ter system,  of  which  he  is  now  a  di- 
rector, and  was  associated  with  the 
building  of  the  first  reservoir  (now 
known  as  the  Adams  reservoir),  in 
Davis  county.  It  is  the  largest  and 
most  important  reservoir  in  that  coun- 
ty, being  supplied  with  water  from  a 
small  mountain  stream  entering  the 
valley  through  Adams  Canyon  (thus 
named  in  honor  of  the  Adams  family) . 
For  his  family  Hyrum  Adams  has 
built  a  beautiful  home,  and  has  al- 
ways been  a  liberal  provider.  Through 
his  patience  and  affection  he  has  won 
the  esteem  of  all  his  associates  in  life 
and  many  have  shared  his  unbounded 
hospitality.  He  is  a  man  of  strong 
physique  and  at  the  age  of  sixty-four 
he  indulged  in  a  buffalo  hunt  on  An- 
telope Island,  on  which  he  was  suc- 
cessful in  killing  two  buffalos.  Bro. 
Adams  is  now  a  High  Priest  in  the 
Church,  having  been  ordained  to  that 
office  by  Joseph  A.  Clark. 

ADAMS,  Annie  Laura  Penrod,  wife 
of  Hyrum  Adams,  was  born  April  2  9, 
1870,  at  Mountain  Green,  Morgan 
county,  Utah,  a  twin  daughter  of  Wil- 
liam H.  H.  Penrod  and  Lucene  Bird 
Bybee.  Being  born  of  Latter-day  Saint 
parents,  she  was  baptized  when  ten 
years  of  age  and  took  an  active  part 
in  Church  activities  from  her  early 
youth.  She  moved  with  her  parents 
to  Arizona  in  1883  and  later  returned 
to  Layton,  Davis  county,  Utah,  where 
she  was  married  to  Hyrum  Adams 
June  13,  1889.  She  has  borne  her 
husband  eight  children,  all  of  whom 
are  still  living.  Sister  Adams  has 
achieved  great  success  as  an  artist  and 
has  acquired  local  fame  as  a  painter 
of  animals  and  landscapes,  both  in  oil 
and  pastel.  Her  paintings  have  been 
on  exhibition  many  times  and  received 


unstinted  praise  from  the  judges.  She 
is  a  resourceful,  industrious,  amiable 
wife  and  mother.  Among  her  many 
Church  activities,  we  may  mention 
that  she  labored  as  a  Stake  aid  in  the 
Davis  Stake  Relief  Societies  for  eight 
years  and  has  served  as  a  Ward  teach- 
er in  Relief  Society  work  upwards  of 


twenty  years.  She  now  acts  as  second 
counselor  in  the  presidency  of  the 
North  Davis  Stake  Primary  Associa- 
tion. During  the  late  World  War  she 
acted  as  chairman  of  the  Layton  Red 
Cross  Auxiliary  and  chairman  of  the 
local  farm  bureau  association  of  Lay- 
ton. 

ADAMSON,  William  Lennox,  Bishop 
of  Carey  Ward,  Idaho,  was  born  Feb. 
11,  1882,  at  Heber  City,  Wasatch 
county,  Utah,  the  son  of  John  Adam- 
son  and  Margaret  Murdock.  He  was 
baptized  July  5,  1891,  by  Henry  L. 
McMullen,  attended  school  at  Heber 
City,  and  Park  City,  Utah,  moved  to 
Carey,  Idaho,  with  his  parents,  in 
April,  1898,  attended  the  Cassia  Stake 
Academy  in  1905,  worked  at  ranching 
and  riding  after  cattle  for  ten  years, 
was  ordained  an  Elder  by  his  father, 
and  filled  a  mission  to  Great  Britain 
in  1906-1908,  laboring  in  the  Scottish 


580 


LATTER-DAY   SAINT 


and  London  conferences.  At  Carey 
he  acted  as  president  of  the  Ward  Y. 
M.  M.  I.  A.  for  four  years  and  was 
ordained   a   High   Priest   and   Bishop 


by  Apostle  Rudger  Clawson  Nov.  3, 
1913,  and  set  apart  to  preside  over 
the  Carey  Ward.  Under  his  direction 
a  new  meeting  house, costing  $11,000, 
was  built  in  the  Carey  Ward  in  1915. 
Bishop  Adamson  served  as  chairman 
of  the  county  board  of  commissioners 
of  Blaine  County,  Idaho,  in  1912- 
1913,  and  was  elected  a  member  of 
the  Idaho  State  Legislature  in  1916. 
Otherwise  he  has  been  engaged  in 
many  successful  enterprises. 

ALDER,  Godfred,  an  Elder  who 
died  in  the  missonary  field,  was  born 
July  20  1848,  in  Schwelbuum,  Appen- 
zell,  Switzerland,  and  was  the  son  of 
John  Ulrich  Alder,  and  Susanna  Bar- 
bara Zuberbubler.  He  was  baptized 
Feb.  1,  1862,  by  John  Huber  and 
emigrated  to  America  in  1869.  Soon 
after  his  arrival  in  Salt  Lake  City  he 
married  Anna  R.  Ruesch,  who  had 
emigrated  in  the  same  company  with 
him.  Afterwards  they  made  their 
home  at  Manti,  Sanpete  county,  Utah, 
where  they  had  born  to  them  four 
sons  and  three  daughters.  Elder 
Alder  was  set  apart  for  a  mission 
to  Germany,  April   22,  1898,  by  Brig- 


ham  H.  Roberts,  and  was  a  faithful 
missionary.  At  the  time  of  his  sick- 
ness and  death  he  was  laboring  alone 
in  Chur,  the  most  remote  part  of  the 
Swiss  Mission.  During  this  sickness 
he  had  his  home  with  Brother  Braun 
and  family  of  that  district,  who  gave 
him  all  the  kindly  care  he  could  have 
had  in  his  own  family.  When  the 
symptoms  became  unfavorable,  medi- 
cal aid  was  called  and  a  letter  sent 
to  President  Bowman  at  Bern,  who 
immediately  wrote  to  Elder  Keller 
to  go  and  see  Brother  Alder  forth- 
with, he  being  near  him.  Besides 
being  old  and  warm  friends,  they 
were  raised,  emigrated  and  lived  in 
Manti  together,  and  sent  on  their 
mission  at  the  same  time.  March  13, 
1898,  brought  a  telegram,  that  Bro- 
ther Alder's  case  was  critical,  when 
Brother  Bowman  started  immediately, 
reaching  the  bedside  of  the  sick  man 
some  time  before  Brother  Keller,  his 
absence  from  home  when  the  letter 
arrived  being  the  cause  of  his  delay. 
The  disease  had  developed  into  pneu- 
monia, one  lung  and  half  the  other 
being  clogged,  and  a  high  fever  re- 
sulting so  that  sleep  had  been  out 
of  the  question;  yet,  after  adminis- 
tration. Brother  Alder  rallied  and 
for  some  time  seemed  so  much  better 
that  Elder  Bowman  returned  to  Bern, 
assured  of  his  ultimate  recovery. 
However,  relapse  set  in,  and  on  Sat- 
urday, March  18,  1898,  at  10  a.  m., 
he  peacefully  passed  away.  The  re- 
mains were  placed  in  a  hermetically 
sealed  casket  and  every  thing  was 
done  in  accordance  with  the  legal  re- 
quirements of  the  country,  so  that 
removal  could  be  made,  if  desired. 
At  a  later  date  the  remains,  as  well 
as  those  of  other  Elders  who  had 
died  in  the  European  countries,  were 
removed  to  the  homes  of  the  de- 
ceased in  the  land  of  Zion. 

ALLEN,  Albem,  a  member  of  the 
Mormon  Battalion,  was  born  May  22, 
1802,  in  Cornwall,  Litchfield  county, 
Connecticut,    the   son    of   Daniel   and 


BIOGRAPHICAL   ENCYCLOPEDIA. 


581 


Clarissa  Allen.  Becoming  a  convert 
to  "Mormonism,"  he  was  baptized  in 
Cattaraugus  county,  New  York,  in 
1835.  The  next  year  (183  6)  lie  moved 
to  Missouri  with  his  family  and  lo- 
cated in  Caldwell  county,  where  he 
passed  through  the  persecutions  and 
hardships  which  befell  the  Saints  at 
that  time.  Thus  he  was  with  his 
brethren  at  Far  West  when  they  were 
betrayed  into  the  hands  of  their  ene- 
mies and  laid  down  their  arms.  When 
the  Saints  were  expelled  from  Mis- 
souri, in  1839,  he  located  temporarily 
in  Adams  county,  Illinois,  and  became 
a  resident  of  Nauvoo,  Hancock  coun- 
ty, in  1840.  In  Nauvoo  he  was  or- 
dained an  Elder  and  afterwards  a 
Seventy  and  filled  a  short  mission  to 
the  South.  As  a  military  man  he 
served  as  a  lieutenant  in  one  of  the 
companies  of  the  Nauvoo  Legion.  In 
1846  he  became  an  exile,  together 
with  his  co-religionists,  after  sharing 
in  the  sufferings  of  the  Saints  at 
Nauvoo.  He  went  with  the  body  of 
the  Church  to  Council  Bluffs,  Iowa, 
where  he  enlisted  in  the  Mormon  Bat- 
talion, leaving  his  family  sick  in  a 
wagon  on  the  prairie.  He  marched 
with  the  Battalion  to  California,  and, 
having  been  mustered  out  of  «ervice, 
he  made  his  way  to  Great  Salt  Lake 
Valley  in  the  fall  of  1847,  expecting 
to  meet  his  family  there.  In  this, 
however,  he  was  disappointed,  as  his 
family  did  not  arrive  in  the  Valley 
until  the  fall  of  1848.  During  his 
absence  from  his  family,  serving  in 
the  Battalion,  he  lost  two  of  his 
younger  children  by  death.  Locating 
in  Ogden,  he  was  chosen  as  senior 
president  of  the  3  3rd  quorum  of  Sev- 
enty, and  later  he  served  two  terms 
in  the  Utah  legislature  as  a  member 
from  Weber  county.  In  the  spring  of 
1857,  being  called  on  a  mission  to 
Canada,  he  crossed  the  plains,  to- 
gether with  a  company  of  other  mis- 
sionaries with  hand-carts.  On  arriv- 
ing on  the  Missouri,  he  was  detained 
there  to  preside  over  a  small  branch 
of  the  Church.      After  his  return  to 


Ogden,  in  1858,  he  acted  as  a  coun- 
selor to  Bishop  Edward  Bunker  of  the 
Ogden  Third  Ward.  As  a  faithful  and 
exemplary  Latter-day  Saint,  he  died  at 
Ogden  June  2,  1867,  leaving  quite  a 
large  family  of  children,  he  having 
married  several  wives.  Brother  Allen 
was  known  universally  as  a  liberal 
and  broad-minded  man,  always  will- 
ing to  render  both  financial  and  spir- 
itual aid  whenever  it  was  needed. 

ALLEN,  Elijah,  was  born  Feb.  7, 
182  6,  in  the  town  of  Burton,  Cat- 
taraugus county,  New  York,  the  son 
of  Andrew  Lee  Allen  and  Clarinda 
Knapp.  Becoming  a  convert  to  "Mor- 
monism," he  was  baptized  in  Kirt- 
land,  Ohio,  in  1836,  and  confirmed  a 
member  of  the  Church  by  Sidney  Rig- 
don.  He  afterwards  shared  with  the 
Saints  in  their  persecutions  and  trials 
in  Missouri  and  Illinois.  Early  in 
February,  1846,  he  left  Nauvoo  for 
the  west,  driving  a  team  for  President 
Brigham  Young.  On  his  arrival  on 
the  Missouri  river  he  enlisted  in  the 
Mormon  Battalion  and  marched  as  a 
private  in  Company  B  to  California. 
After  his  discharge  in  that  State,  July 
16,  1847,  and  after  passing  through  a 
siege  of  sickness,  he  obtained  em- 
ployment at  the  San  Gabriel  Mission, 
where  he  worked  until  1848.  In  Feb- 
ruary of  that  year,  together  with 
about  a  dozen  other  men,  he  started 
for  Great  Salt  Lake  with  about  two 
hundred  head  of  cattle,  purchased  for 
the  Church,  and  after  a  difficult  jour- 
ney he  arrived  in  Salt  Lake  Valley  in 
the  latter  part  of  May,  1848,  and  com- 
menced farming  at  the  mouth  of  Red 
Butte  Canyon.  He  paid  a  Brother 
Fuller  $5  for  half  a  bushel  of  seed 
corn  to  plant  and  the  same  amount 
for  half  a  bushel  of  buckwheat,  and 
he  also  paid  2  5  cents  per  pound  for 
flour.  The  crickets,  who  destroyed 
his  growing  crops,  saved  him  the 
trouble  of  harvesting.  Later  in  the 
year  (1848)  he  started  for  the  States 
with  Mr.  Miles  Goodyear,  with  a  band 
of  horses.     On  Sweetwater  they  met 


582 


LATTER-DAY   SAINT 


"President  Brigham  Young  and  his 
company  en  route  for  the  Valley.  Con- 
tinuing his  journey  eastward,  he  fin- 
ally reached  the  States,  crossing  the 
Missouri  river  Oct.  23,  1848.  There 
again  he  met  his  parents,  brothers 
and  sisters,  from  whom  he  had  been 
absent  two  years  and  three  months. 
When  Bro.  Allen  returned  to  Utah,  he 
became  a  resident  of  Provo,  Utah 
county,  where  he  was  identified  with 
the  21st  quorum  of  Seventy.  He  died 
in  Herriman,  Salt  Lake  county,  Utah, 
April  12,  1866. 

ALLEN,  Joseph  S.,  a  member  of 
Zion's  Camp,  was  born  June  25,  1810, 
in  Oneida  county,  New  York,  the  son 
of  Daniel  Allen  and  Nancy  Steward. 
He  moved  with  his  father  to  Thomp- 
son, Geauga  county,  Ohio,  where  he 
became  a  convert  to  "Mormonism" 
and  was  baptized  in  February,  1831. 
Soon  afterwards  he  was  ordained  a 
Teacher.  He  remained  in  Ohio  till  the 
spring  of  18  34,  when  he  marched  to 
Missouri  as  a  member  of  Zion's 
Camp,  led  by  the  Prophet  Joseph 
Smith.  After  Zion's  Camp  was  dis- 
banded, Bro.  Allen  remained  in  Clay 
county,  Missouri,  where  he  was  mar- 
ried Sept.  2,  1835.  In  the  spring  of 
1838  he  moved  to  Far  West,  Cald- 
well county,  and  in  the  summer  of 
the  same  year  he  was  ordained  a 
Seventy  by  the  Prophet  Joseph  Smith 
and  became  a  member  of  the  first 
quorum  of  Seventy.  In  February, 
1839,  being  driven  from  Missouri,  he 
moved  to  Illinois  and  settled  in  the 
town  of  Lima,  Hancock  county.  In 
June  following  he  went  on  a  preach- 
ing mission  to  Indiana  and  was  ab- 
sent four  months.  After  his  return 
home  he  was  chosen  as  a  member  of 
the  High  Council  at  Lima.  In  conse- 
quence of  mob  threatenings  he,  in 
company  with  Isaac  Morley,  went  to 
Nauvoo  to  consult  the  Prophet  Joseph. 
While  returning  home  with  horse  and 
buggy  they  were  waylaid  and  as- 
saulted by  three  armed  men,  one  of 
whom   seized   the   horse's   bit.      Bro. 


Allen  took  out  one  of  his  pistols  and 
ordered  the  mobbers  to  desist,  which 
they  did.  According  to  the  Prophet's 
council,  Bro.  Allen  moved  to  Nauvoo, 
where  he  took  a  prominent  part  in 
defending  the  lives  and  property  of 
the  Saints.  Early  in  1846  he  left 
Nauvoo  with  his  family  for  the  west. 
After  stopping  for  a  short  time  at 
Mount  Pisgah,  Iowa  (where  he  put 
in  a  crop),  he  went  on  to  Council 
Bluffs  and  passed  the  winter  herd- 
ing Church  stock  up  the  Missouri 
river,  together  with  ten  other  men. 
In  the  spring  of  1847  he  moved  to 
the  so-called  Summer  Quarters  where 
he  raised  a  crop  and  acted  as  a  coun- 
selor to  Bishop  Houston.  While  thus 
staying  on  or  near  the  Missouri  river 
he  buried  four  of  his  children.  In  1848 
he  migrated  to  the  mountains  in 
President  Young's  company  and  win- 
tered in  Salt  Lake  Valley.  In  October, 
1849,  he  was  called,  together  with 
Isaac  Morley  and  others,  to  settle 
Sanpete  Valley.  Thus  he  became  one 
of  the  founders  of  Manti  and  was 
appointed  a  member  of  the  High 
Council  at  that  place.  In  1854  he 
moved  back  to  Salt  Lake  Valley  and 
located  on  the  Little  Cottonwood, 
where  he  put  in  a  crop,  which  was 
destroyed  by  crickets.  Later  he  lo- 
cated at  Santaquin,  Utah  county, 
where  he  remained  three  years  and 
acted  as  counselor  to  Bishop  Holman. 
Ne.xt  he  became  a  settler  at  Glen- 
wood,  Sevier  county,  where  he  passed 
through  many  hardships  and  dangers 
during  the  Black  Hawk  war.  In  1866 
he  moved  to  Moroni,  Sanpete  county, 
where  he  on  a  certain  occasion  was 
Involved  in  a  fearful  fight  with  three 
Indians,  while  standing  guard.  The 
savages  rushed  on  the  guards  with 
clubs  and  knives,  and  while  Bro.  Al- 
len's companion  fled  for  his  life  he 
stood  his  ground  and  with  his  six 
shooter  killed  two  of  the  Indians  on 
the  spot  and  wounded  the  other  in 
the  foot  as  he  ran  away.  The  latter 
was  captured  the  next  day.  In  the 
struggle    Bro.    Allen    lost    several    of 


BIOGRAPHICAL  ENCYCLOPEDIA. 


583 


his  teeth  through  a  blow  from  a  rack 
stake  in  the  hands  of  one  of  the 
Indians.  His  hat  and  vest  were  cut 
full  of  holes  by  knives  and  other 
sharp  weapons.  In  the  latter  part  of 
1866  he  went  to  the  Muddy,  now  in 
Nevada,  with  his  whole  family.  Here 
he  took  an  active  part  in  building  up 
settlements  in  that  part  of  the  coun- 
try. In  due  course  of  time  he  re- 
turned to  Utah  and  remained  active 
in  the  Church  until  his  death,  which 
occurred  at  Huntington,  April  25, 
1889.  He  died  a  faithful  Latter-day 
Saint  and  was  80  years  and  ten 
months  old  at  the  time  of  his  demise. 

AliLEN,  Bufus,  one  of  the  original 
Utah  pioneers  of  1847,  was  born 
March  22,  1814,  in  Litchfield  county, 
Connecticut,  the  son  of  Gideon  and 
Rachel  Allen.  He  became  a  convert 
to  "Mormonism"  at  an  early  day  and 
suffered  considerable  persecution 
through  mob  violence.  When  strong 
and  valiant  men  were  chosen  for 
pioneers  to  the  Rocky  Mountains  in 
1847,  he  was  selected  as  one  of  them 
and  thus  he  journeyed  to  Great  Salt 
Lake  Valley  under  President  Brig- 
ham  Young.  He  returned  to  Winter 
Quarters  the  same  fall  and  after  his 
arrival  in  the  Valley  the  second  time 
he  became  a  resident  of  Ogden, 
Weber  county,  where  he  died  during 
the  winter  of  1888-1889. 

ALLRED,  James,  a  member  of 
Zion's  Camp  and  presiding  Elder  of 
the  Allred  settlement  (now  Spring 
City,  Sanpete  county,  Utah),  in  1852- 
53,  was  born  Jan.  22,  1784,  in  North 
Carolina,  the  son  of  William  Allred 
and  Elizabeth  Thresher.  He  became  a 
member  of  the  Church  at  an  early 
day,  being  baptized  Sept.  10,  1832, 
in  Missouri,  by  Geo.  M.  Hinkle  and 
was  a  member  of  Zion's  Camp  in 
1834,  and  served  as  a  body  guard 
to  the  Prophet  Joseph  Smith.  He 
passed  through  all  of  the  persecu- 
tions of  the  Saints  in  Missouri  and 
Illinois,  and  he  was  ordained  a 
High   Priest  by   the  Prophet   Joseph 


Smith.  In  1851  he  arrived  in  Utah 
and  was  one  of  the  founders  of 
Spring  City  in  1852.  Bro.  Allred,  or 
"Father"  Allred,  as  he  was  known  by 
his  associates,  was  always  a  faithful 
member  of  the  Church.  He  raised  a 
large  family  and  died  in  Spring  City, 
Sanpete  county,  June  10,  1876. 

AUjRED,  James  Riley,  a  member 
of  the  Mormon  Battalion,  was  born 
Jan.  28,  1827,  in  Bedford  county, 
Tennessee,  the  son  of  Isaac  Allred. 
He  joined  the  Church  at  an  early  day 
and  gathered  with  the  Saints  at 
Xauvoo,  111.  In  1846  he  became  an 
exile,  together  with  his  co-religionists, 
from  Illinois  and  started  for  the 
Rocky  Mountains.  On  the  journey 
from  Nauvoo  to  the  Missouri  river 
he  served  as  a  guard  in  Pres.  Brig- 
ham  Young's  company.  At  Council 
Bluffs,  Iowa,  he  enlisted  in  the  Mor- 
mon Battalion  in  July,  1846,  and 
marched  with  that  body  as  a  private 
in  Company  A.  He  was  honorably 
discharged  in  California,  when  his 
term  of  enlistment  had  expired  in 
July,  1847.  Agreeable  to  council  re- 
ceived from  Pres.  Brigham  Young, 
he  remained  in  California  the  follow- 
ing winter  (.1847-48),  together  with 
a  number  of  his  Battalion  compan- 
ions. During  his  stay  there  gold  was 
discovered.  In  1848  he  went  to  Salt 
Lake  Valley  where  he  remained  about 
a  year  and  then  returned  with 
Charles  C.  Rich  and  others  to  Upper 
California.  When  he  later  again  went 
to  Utah,  his  constitution  was  greatly 
impaired;  he  located  in  Spring  City, 
Sanpete  county,  which  then  became 
his  permanent  home.  In  1861  he 
went  to  the  Missouri  river  as  a  night 
guard  in  one  of  the  companies  sent 
out  to  bring  poor  Saints  to  the  Valley. 
In  1863  he  made  a  similar  trip.  After 
that  he  suffered  with  ill  health  until 
the  time  of  his  death  which  occurred 
in  Spring  City  April  14,  1871.  He 
died  in  full  faith  of  the  gospel  and 
was  highly  respected  by  all  who  knew 
him. 


584 


LATTER-DAY   SAINT 


ANDERSEN,  Andrew  K.,  an  Elder 
who  died  while  filling  a  foreign  mis- 
sion, was  born  Aug.  6,  1859,  in  Hovl- 
bjerg  parish,  Viborg  amt,  Denmark, 
the  son  of  Johan  Andersen  and  Anna 
Nielsen.  He  became  a  convert  to  the 
restored  gospel  and  was  baptized  by 
Christian  Jensen  May  5,  1880.  After 
emigrating  to  Utah  he  located  in 
Ephraim,  Sanpete  county,  where  he 
was  ordained  a  Seventy  and  became  a 
member  of  the  47th  quorum  of 
Seventy.  In  1888  (Oct.  9th),  Elder 
Andersen  was  set  apart  for  a  mission 
to  Scandinavia  by  Apostle  Lorenzo 
Snow.  He  was  accompanied  by  his 
wife  on  this  mission,  and  after  labor- 
ing for  one  year  in  the  Aarhus  con- 
ference as  a  traveling  Elder,  he  was 
appointed  to  preside  over  the  Aalborg 
conference,  which  position  he  held 
till  Jan.  5,  1890,  when  he  died  in 
the  city  of  Aalborg  of  lung  disease, 
after  only  a  few  days'  sickness.  The 
remains  were  interred  Jan.  12,  1890, 
at  Hovlbjerg,  by  the  side  of  l>is 
parents.  Elder  Andersen,  who  was 
called  hence  in  his  youth  and  in  the 
midst  of  a  useful  career,  was  much 
beloved  by  all  who  knew  him,  both 
at  home  and  abroad. 

ANDERSEN,        Oluff        Bernhard, 

Bishop  of  the  North  Morgan  Ward 
(Morgan  Stake),  Morgan  county, 
Utah,  was  born  July  29,  1848,  in 
Nakskov,  Maribo  amt  (Lolland),  Den- 
mark, the  son  of  Andreas  L.  Ander- 
sen and  Margrethe  Prederiksen.  He 
received  a  common  school  education 
in  the  city  of  Nakskov  and  served  five 
years  as  an  apprentice  to  learn  the 
trade  of  a  tailor.  Becoming  a  convert 
to  "Mormonism"  he  was  baptized 
Aug.  11,  1867,  by  Rasmus  Rasmus- 
sen  and  soon  after  ordained  to  the 
lesser  Priesthood  and  appointee^  to 
labor  as  a  local  missionary  on  the 
islands  of  Lolland,  Falster  and  Moen. 
In  1868  (July  19th),  he  was  ordained 
an  Elder  by  Christian  D.  Fjeldsted 
and  continued  his  missionary  labor 
with  zeal,  until  October,  1868,  when 


his  field  of  labor  was  changed  to  the 
island  of  Fyen.  Subsequently  he  be- 
came president  of  the  Odense  branch. 
In  the  latter  part  of  1871  he  was  ap- 
pointed traveling  Elder  in  the  Aarhus 
conference.  Altogether  he  spent  five 
years  and  three  months  as  a  local 
missionary  in  Denmark.  He  emi- 
gated  to  Utah  in  1873,  crossing  the 
Atlantic  in  the  steamship  "Wyo- 
ming," and  located  in  Scipio,  Millard 
county,  where  he  engaged  in  farm- 
ing. Three  years  later  (1876),  he 
moved  to  Morgan,  where  he  was  or- 
dained a  High  Priest  June  1,  1877, 
by  Lorenzo  Snow  and  set  apart  to  act 
as  first  counselor  to  Bishop  Wyman 
M.  Parker.  Later  he  acter  as  first 
counselor  to  William  B.  Parkinson, 
which  position  he  held  until  1884, 
when  he  was  ordained  a  Bishop  by 
Albert  Carrington  and  set  apart  to 
preside  over  the  North  Morgan  Ward, 
which  postion  he  held  until  1905, 
when  he  was  chosen  as  second  coun- 
selor in  the  presidency  of  the  High 
Priests  quorum  of  the  Morgan  Stake; 
since  1911  he  has  acted  as  president 
of  said  quorum.  In  1873  (June  29th), 
Bro.  Andersen,  while  on  the  voyage 
across  the  North  Sea,  married  Hen- 
riette  Frederiksen,  who  was  born 
April  28,  1844,  in  Odense,  Denmark. 
This  marriage  was  blessed  with  seven 
children,  namely:  Nancy  Henrietta, 
Olga  Josepha,  Hannah  Margaret,  Ida 
Zina,  Oluff  Bernhard  junior,  John 
Henry  and  Agnes  Frederikka.  Bro- 
ther Andersen  acted  as  county  sur- 
veyor from  1888  to  1919  and  has 
filled  many  other  positions  of  honor 
and  responsibility. 

ANDERSON,  Gustave  Theodore,  an 

Elder  of  the  Church  who  died  while 
filling  a  foreign  mission,  was  born 
June  22,  1881,  at  Billaberg,  Skara- 
borg  l^n,  Sweden,  the  son  of  Anders 
Peter  Swenson  and  Stina  Kisa  Peter- 
son. He  emigrated  with  his  parents 
to  Utah  and  afterwards  became  a 
resident  of  Taylorsville,  Alberta,  Can- 
ada.    He  was  baptized  Sept.  2,  1906, 


BIOGRAPHICAL   ENCYCLOPEDIA. 


585 


and  later  ordained  to  the  Priesthood. 
In  1913,  he  was  called  on  a  mission 
to  Sweden  and  on  his  way  was  set 
apart  for  that  mission  in  Salt  Lake 
City,  Jan.  7,  1913.  He  arrived  in 
Stockholm,  Sweden,  Feb.  2,  1913,  and 
was  appointed  to  labor  in  the  Sunds- 
vall  conference;  he  spent  most  of  his 
time  in  the  ministry  in  the  Harno- 
sand  and  Lule§,  branches.  While  dili- 
gently engaged  in  his  missionary 
work  he  complained  of  pain  in  the 
bowels  and  when  medical  aid  was 
secured  it  was  found  that  he  suf- 
fered with  an  attack  of  appendicitis. 
The  sickness  had  already  gone  too 
far  for  him  to  become  subject  to  an 
operation  and,  continuing  to  grow- 
worse,  he  finally  died  Dec.  11,  1913, 
at  LuleS,.  His  remains  were  placed  in 
a  metal  coffin  and  shipped  to  his 
home  in  Canada  in  care  of  Mathias 
Erickson,  a  returning  missionary. 

ANDERSON,    Marcus    Conrad,    an 

Elder  who  died  while  filling  a  mis- 
sion, was  born  Feb.  4,  1898,  at  Hy- 
rum,  Cache  county,  Utah,  the  son  of 
Joseph  Willard  Anderson  and  Carrie 
Ann  Thoresen.  He  was  educated  in 
the  grade  schools  of  Hyrum  and  also 
attended  the  South  Cache  High  School. 
He  was  baptized  July  7,  1906,  by 
David  O.  Nielsen  and  afterwards  or- 
dained an  Elder.  He  was  set  apart 
for  a  mission  to  the  Central  States 
Sept.  3,  1918,  and  after  arriving  at 
mission  headquarters  (Sept.  6,  1918), 
he  was  assigned  to  labor  in  the  South 
Texas  conference.  Later,  on  account 
of  ill  health,  he  was  transferred  to 
the  West  Texas  conference  and  died 
Jan.  11,  1919,  at  San  Antonio,  Texas, 
after  an  illness  of  eight  days.  Brother 
Anderson  was  a  very  faithful  mis- 
sionary and  labored  earnestly  to  pro- 
claim the  truths  of  the  gospel,  ever 
diligent  in  bearing  testimony  of  the 
divine  mission  of  the  Prophet  Joseph 
Smith.  His  earnest  testimony  and 
exemplary  life  impressed  many  peo- 
ple with  the  divinity  of  the  cause  he 
represented. 


ANDERSON,  Walter  H.,  an  Elder 
who  died  in  the  missionary  field,  was 
born  May  31,  1897,  at  Pima,  Graham 
county,  Arizona,  the  son  of  Hakon  J. 
Anderson.  He  was  baptized  as  a  boy, 
ordained  to  the  Priesthood  later,  and 
resided  with  his  parents  in  Pima, 
when  he  was  called  on  a  mission  to 
the  Northern  States.  Arriving  at  mis- 
sion headquarters  in  May,  1918,  he 
was  assigned  to  the  Wisconsin  con- 
ference, and  on  his  arrival  in  Milwau- 
kee, he  was  appointed  to  labor  on  the 
south  side  of  that  city;  later  he  was 
transferred  to  Racine,  where  he  did 
country  work  in  near-by  cities  and 
towns,  and  after  that  he  was  trans- 
ferred again  to  the  south  side  of  Mil- 
waukee, where  he  was  stricken  with 
sickness  and  died  with  pneumonia, 
following  influenza,  Oct.  31,  1918,  at 
the  age  of  21  years.  From  the  time 
he  arrived  in  the  missionary  field  he 
magnified  his  calling  as  an  Elder  to 
the  entire  satisfaction  of  those  placed 
over  him,  rendering  able  and  valiant 
service  in  the  cause  of  the  Master. 
He  was  an  inspiration  to  all  who 
knew  him  and  was  loved  and  respect- 
ed for  his  agreeable  disposition,  his 
clean  and  sincere  manhood,  and  his 
love  for  right  and  righteousness  of 
life.  His  sister  Nora,  also  a  mission- 
ary of  exceptional  ability,  was  at  his 
bedside  at  the  time  of  his  death,  and 
accompanied  the  body  of  her  brother 
to  their  home  in  the  west. 

ANDRUS,  Mile,  a  Patriarch  and 
a  most  successful  missionary,  was  born 
March  6,  1814,  in  Pleasant  Valley, 
Essex  County,  New  York,  the  son  of 
Ruluf  Andrus  and  Azuba  Smith.  In 
1818  he  moved  with  his  parents  to 
Huron  county,  Ohio.  His  parents 
were  adherents  to  the  Calvinistic 
creed,  but  Milo  dissented  from  that 
faith  at  the  age  of  fourteen  and  for 
several  years  after  that  he  was  study- 
ing religion,  without  being  able  to 
decide  which  sect  to  join,  but  as  soon 
as  he  heard  the  doctrines  of  the  re- 
stored   gospel    preached,    he    became 


586 


LATTER-DAY   SAINT 


a  convert  and  was  baptized  March  12, 
1832,  by  Gideon  H.  Carter.  About 
two  months  later  he  was  ordained  an 
Elder  and  performed  a  number  of 
short  missions.  In  1834  he  marched 
to  Missouri  in  Zion's  Camp.  After 
his  return  to  the  East  he  was  ap- 
pointed to  preside  over  the  Florence 
branch.  New  York,  which  position  he 
held  until  1837.  He  was  ordained  a 
Seventy  and  became  a  member  of  the 
first  quorum  of  Seventy.  He  also 
attended  grammar  school  in  Kirt- 
land  and  received  his  blessings  in 
the  Kirtland  Temple  in  18  3  6.  When 
the  Kirtland  Temple  was  dedicated 
he  beheld  a  glorious  vision  and  saw 
cloven  tongues  of  fire  descending 
upon  the  brethren,  until  the  whole 
house  was  filled  with  the  glory  of 
God.  A  number  of  the  saints  spoke 
in  tongues  and  prophesied.  In  1837 
he  was  appointed  to  lead  the  saints 
of  the  Florence  branch  to  Missouri; 
they  arrived  in  Far  West  in  the 
spring  of  1838.  Here  Bro.  Andrus 
became  subject  to  the  terrible  perse- 
cutions which  the  saints  had  to  en- 
dure in  Missouri  and  was  finally 
compelled  to  leave  the  State  with  his 
co-religionists  in  1839.  He  then  be- 
came one  of  the  early  settlers  of  Com- 
merce (afterwards  called  Nauvoo), 
Hancock  county,  Illinois.  In  1840 
he  went  on  a  mission  to  the  State  of 
Ohio;  later  he  was  sent  to  Canada  on 
a  mission  and  in  the  spring  of  1844 
he  was  sent  on  a  mission  to  Ohio. 
While  filling  that  mission  the 
Prophet  Joseph  and  his  brother  Hy- 
rum  were  murdered  in  Carthage. 
After  his  return  to  Nauvoo,  Milo  An- 
drus was  set  apart  as  a  president  of 
the  tenth  quorum  of  Seventy  and 
labored  diligently,  together  with  many 
others,  on  the  erection  of  the  Nauvoo 
Temple,  in  which  he,  after  receiving 
his  own  blessings,  became  an  ordi- 
nance worker.  After  enduring  the 
persecutions  to  which  the  saints  in 
Illinois  were  subjected  he  started 
with  the  rest  of  his  people  for  the 
Rocky  Mountains,  arriving  at  Coun- 


cil Bluffs,  Iowa,  in  the  fall  of  1846. 
He  was  then  called  on  a  mission  to 
England  and  crossed  the  sea  with 
Apostle  Orson  Pratt.  After  his  ar- 
rival in  Liverpool,  he  attended  a  gen- 
eral conference  of  the  British  Mission 
and  was  appointed  to  preside  over 
the  Liverpool  conference,  which  posi- 
tion he  occupied  until  he  returned 
home  in  1850.  During  his  presi- 
dency four  hundred  and  sixty  souls 
were  added  to  the  Church  by  baptism. 
Returning  to  America,  he  crossed  the 
Atlantic  in  the  ship  "Argo,"  which 
arrived  in  New  Orleans  March  8, 
1850.  He  reached  the  frontier  in 
May,  when  he  was  appointed  captain 
of  fifty-six  wagons  and  five  hundred 
souls,  with  which  he  crossed  the 
plains  and  arrived  in  Salt  Lake  City 
Aug.  31,  1850.  His  wife,  Sarah  Ann 
Miles,  had  accompanied  him  on  this 
mission  to  Great  Britain.  Brother 
Andrus  remained  in  the  Valley  until 
the  spring  of  1854,  acting  a  part  of 
the  time  as  a  counselor  to  Bishop 
David  Brinton  of  Big  Cottonwood.  In 
18  54  he  was  appointed  by  the  general 
conference  of  the  Church  to  preside 
over  the  St.  Louis  conference.  He  re- 
sponded to  the  call,  crossed  the  plains 
once  more  and  attended  to  his  duties 
in  Missouri  until  1855,  when  he  was 
appointed  to  bring  another  company 
of  saints  across  the  plains.  He  ar- 
rived in  Salt  Lake  City  in  October  of 
that  year  with  his  company.  After 
his  return  he  labored  for  sometime 
as  a  home  missionary  and  as  acting 
Bishop,  but  in  the  fall  of  1860  he 
was  called  to  take  another  mission 
to  England.  On  his  arrival  at  mis- 
sion headquarters  he  was  appointed 
to  travel  in  the  south  part  of  Eng- 
land and  in  the  Welsh  principality. 
Later  he  presided  over  the  Birming- 
ham district,  which  embraced  a  num- 
ber of  conferences.  Returning  home 
he  was  placed  in  charge  of  seven 
hundred  saints,  who  crossed  the  At- 
lantic on  the  ship  "Underwriter," 
which  arrived  in  New  York,  May  2  2, 
1861.  From  New  York  he  and  his  com- 


BIOGRAPHICAL   ENCYCLOPEDIA. 


587 


pany  journeyed  inland  to  Florence, 
Neb.,  where  he  helped  fit  out  the  emi- 
gration for  the  plains  and  finally  led 
a  company  of  saints  to  the  Valley. 
After  his  return  home  he  located  on 
Dry  Creek  and  he  was  again  ap- 
pointed to  labor  as  a  home  mission- 
ary. In  1869-70  he  filled  a  short 
mission  to  the  States.  In  the  winter 
of  1873  he  went  to  St.  George, 
southern  Utah,  and  the  following  year 
he  moved  a  part  of  his  family  to  St. 
George,  where  he  later  tried  to  work 
in  the  United  Order.  In  1874  he  was 
appointed  a  member  of  the  High 
Council  in  the  St.  George  Stake,  and 
held  that  position  until  1881,  when 
he  was  called  to  take  charge  of  a 
mission  to  Green  River  in  Emery 
county.  This  mission,  however,  did 
not  succeed,  and  he  therefore  re- 
turned to  Salt  Lake  City.  In  the  fall 
of  1882  he  was  appointed  chaplain 
of  the  council  of  the  Utah  Legisla- 
ture. In  1883  he  moved  to  Cache 
Valley  and  located  in  Oxford  in  1884. 
When  the  Oneida  Stake  of  Zion  was 
organized  in  1884,  he  was  chosen 
as  a  member  of  the  High  Council  of 
that  Stake  and  also  appointed  to 
preside  over  the  High  Priests'  quo- 
rum. He  was  ordained  a  Patriarch 
in  1884.  Ripe  in  years  and  faithful 
and  true  to  his  Church  to  the  last, 
Patriarch  Andrus  died  at  Oxford, 
Oneida  county,  Idaho,  June  18,  1893, 
leaving  a  large  posterity.  Brother 
Andrus  was  universally  known  among 
the  saints  as  an  eloquent  expounder 
of  the  gospel;  he  possessed  the  gift 
of  speech  to  a  marvelous  extent  and 
exercised  influence  for  good  wherever 
he  associated  with  other  men.  He 
was  one  of  the  most  successful  mis- 
sionaries known  in  the  Church.  His 
missionary  activities  are  summed  up 
in  the  following:  Southern  Ohio 
(1833),  five  months;  Zion's  Camp 
(18  34),  six  months;  Temple  worker 
at  Kirtland  (1834),  six  months;  State 
of  New  York  (18  35),  five  months; 
Canada  (1841),  six  months;  Ohio 
(1844),  seven  months;  Nauvoo  Tem- 


ple (1845,  eight  months;  Great  Brit- 
ain (1848),  two  years;  St.  Louis,  Mo. 
(1854),  nine  months;  Salmon  River, 
Idaho  (1856),  two  months;  Great 
Britain  (1859),  two  years,  and  Ohio 
(1869),  five  months. 

ANDRUS,  Silas  Terry,  an  Elder 
who  died  while  filling  a  mission,  was 
born  Oct.  8,  1883,  at  Franklin,  Onei- 
da county,  Idaho,  the  son  of  Laron  A. 
Andrus  and  Rosannah  P.  Terry.  He 
was  baptized  Oct.  28,  1891,  by  Albert 
N.  Clements,  was  ordained  an  Elder, 
and  resided  at  Oxford,  Bannock 
county,  Idaho,  when  he  was  called  on 
a  mission  to  the  Southern  States.  Re- 
sponding cheerfully  to  the  call,  he 
was  set  apart  for  his  missionary 
labors,  Feb.  3,  1903,  but  after  being 
engaged  in  the  ministry  a  few  months 
he  was  stricken  with  sickness  and 
died  at  Waycross,  Ga.,  May  27,  1903. 
Elder  Andrus  died  an  unmarried  man, 
being  less  than  twenty  years  of  age  at 
the  time  of  his  demise. 

ANGELL,  Harvey  Leon,  an  Elder 
who  died  while  filling  a  foreign  mis- 
sion, was  born  March  5,  1883,  in  Salt 
Lake  City,  Utah,  the  son  of  Theodore 
J.  Angell  and  Kate  Willie.  He  was 
baptized  in  1891,  and  moved  with  his 
parents  to  Butte,  Montana,  where  he 
still  lived  when  he  was  called  on  a 
mission  to  Great  Britain,  being  set 
apart  for  the  same  Oct.  2,  1907.  On 
his  arrival  in  Liverpool,  England,  Oct. 
18,  1907,  (having  crossed  the  Atlan^ 
tic  on  the  steamship  "Cymric"),  he 
was  assigned  to  the  Leeds  conference 
and  appointed  to  labor  in  Halifax.  He 
was  somewhat  run  down  through  hard 
work  before  he  left  home  and  appear- 
ed to  be  unwell  very  soon  after  reach- 
ing Halifax,  and  in  consultation  with 
a  physician  his  case  was  pronounced 
typhoid  fever.  He  was  removed  to 
the  fever  hospital  at  Halifax,  where 
every  attention  possible  was  given 
him  and  he  lingered  until  Sunday, 
Dec.  1,  190  7,  when  he  died.  The  re- 
mains were  properly  clothed  in  linen 


588 


LATTER-DAY   SAINT 


robes,  embalmed,  encased  in  a  suit- 
able casket,  and  sent  in  care  of  Elder 
Jonathan  R.  Pugmire,  to  the  home 
of  the  dead  Elder  in  Montana. 

Archibald,  Andrew  Leavitt,  one  of 

the  Elders  of  the  Church  who  died 
while  filling  a  foreign  mission,  was 
born  April  27,  1897,  at  Cardston,  Al- 
berta, Canada,  the  son  of  Andrew  R. 
Archibald  and  Martha  E.  Leavitt.  He 
was  baptized  when  eight  years  old, 
ordained  to  the  Priesthood  when 
quite  young,  and  resided  in  the  Card- 
ston First  Ward,  when  he  was  called 
on  a  mission  to  Samoa  in  1914.  He 
was  set  apart  for  this  mission  Nov. 
18,  1914,  and  the  next  day  started  for 
his  field  of  labor.  On  his  arrival  in 
Samoa,  he  took  hold  of  the  work  of 
the  ministry  with  diligence  and  zeal, 
and  labored  faithfully  until  he  was 
stricken  with  typhoid  fever,  with 
which  he  died  March  21,  1917. 

ARCHIB.\L.D,  Roy  G.,  an  Elder 
who  died  while  laboring  in  the  mis- 
sionary field,  was  born  Feb.  11,  1898, 
at  Cardston,  Alberta,  Canada,  the 
son  of  Thomas  H.  Archibald  and 
Rachel  Gregson.  He  was  baptized 
Oct.  7,  1906,  by  Joseph  Steed  and 
resided  with  his  parents  at  Glenwood- 
ville,  Alberta,  when  he  was  called  on 
a  mission  to  the  Northwestern  States. 
Being  set  apart  for  his  mission  Jan. 
8,  1918,  he  arrived  in  the  mission  in 
which  he  had  been  assigned  to  labor 
Jan.  11,  1918.  After  laboring  faith- 
fully in  the  British  Columbia  confer- 
ence about  a  year,  he  was  attacked 
with  Spanish  influenza,  and  died  in 
Victoria,  on  the  island  of  Vancouver, 
British  Columbia,  Jan.  10,  1919.  Bro. 
Archibald  was  known  among  his  fel- 
low-missionaries, as  a  valiant,  ster- 
ling character  and  a  most  energetic 
Elder.  He  was  highly  respected  by 
those  who  knew  him.  His  remains 
were  shipped  to  his  home  in  Alberta, 
in  care  of  his  father,  who  had  come 
to  visit  him  and  who  stayed  by  his 
side  till  the  last. 


ARMSTRONG,  William,  Bishop  of 
the  Eleventh  Ward  (Ensign  Stake), 
Salt  Lake  City,  Utah,  was  born 
March  12,  1870,  at  Ashfield,  New 
South  Wales,  Australia.  His  parents 
joined  the  Church  in  his  childhood 
and  he  was  baptized  when  about 
eight  years  by  Fred  J.  May,  a  mis- 
sionary from  Salt  Lake  City.  Emigrat- 
ing to  America,  he  arrived  in  Salt 
Lake  City,  May  16,  1888.  Six  months 
later  he  was  followed  to  Utah  by  the 
rest  of  the  family,   consisting  of  his 


mother,  a  brother  and  four  sisters. 
Soon  after  his  arrival  in  Utah,  Wil- 
liam was  ordained  a  Priest  by  Bishop 
James  Watson  of  the  19th  Ward,  Salt 
Lake  City,  and  labored  for  some  time 
as  a  Ward  teacher.  He  also  acted  as 
one  of  the  officers  of  the  Ward  Y.  M. 
M.  I.  A.,  and  later  as  a  teacher  in 
the  Sunday  School.  Afterwards  he 
was  ordained  an  Elder  and  subse- 
quently a  Seventy  and  chosen  as  one 
of  the  presidents  of  the  30th  quorum 
of  Seventy.  He  spent  one  year  in 
the  L.  D.  S.  High  School  in  Salt  Lake 
City  and  during  the  winter  of  1893- 
1894  he  was  called  to  take  the  M.  I 
A,  course  at  the  Brigham  Young 
Academy  in  Provo.  About  this  time 
he  worked  as  a  line  man  for  the  old 


BIOGRAPHICAL  ENCYCLOPEDIA. 


589 


Deseret  Telegraph  Company,  served 
as  a  clerk  in  Hardy  Young  and  Co's. 
store  on  Main  Street,  Salt  Lake  City, 
and  spent  two  or  three  years  in  the 
photographic  business,  principally 
with  Charles  R.  Savage  of  Salt  Lake 
City.  Later  he  went  to  work  as  a 
bookkeeper,  etc.,  for  Barton  &  Co., 
clothiers.  After  filling  a  successful 
mission  to  Australia)  where  he  pre- 
sided over  the  Queensland  conference 
for  nearly  two  years),  he  was  called 
to  go  to  Mercur,  a  mining  camp  in 
Tooele  county,  to  hold  meetings  with 
the  Saints  who  were  located  there, 
and  in  the  winter  of  1898-1899  he 
filled  a  mission  to  Saftpete  county  in 
the  interest  of  the  M.  I.  A.  cause. 
After  this  he  took  charge  of  the  min- 
ing department  of  the  "Deseret  News" 
and  was  thus  employed  until  1901, 
when  he  married  Emma  L.  Armstrong 
(daughter  of  Francis  Armstrong  of 
Salt  Lake  City)  and  went  to  work  in 
the  Utah  Commercial  and  Savings 
Bank.  Eighteen  months  later  he  be- 
came secretary  and  treasurer  of  the 
Taylor,  Romney  &  Armstrong  Co., 
which  position  he  held  until  January, 
1906.  When  the  Ensign  Stake  was 
organized  in  1904  Bro.  Armstrong 
was  ordained  a  High  Priest  and  set 
apart  to  act  as  a  High  Councilor  in 
that  Stake.  In  190  6  he  was  called 
on  a  second  mission  to  Australia,  this 
time  to  preside  over  the  Australian 
mission;  he  was  accompanied  by  his 
wife  and  two  small  children.  After 
spending  three  years  in  Australia,  he 
returned  to  Utah  and  identified  him- 
self with  the  old  firm  of  Asper,  Noall 
&  Co.,  through  the  purchase  of  the 
interest  of  the  late  William  Asper. 
He  was  ordained  a  Bishop  Oct.  13, 
1912,  and  set  apart  to  preside  over 
the  Eleventh  Ward.  Bishop  Armstrong 
has  a  family  of  six  children,  two  boys 
and  four  girls.  The  names  of  his 
children  are  Helen,  Marion,  William, 
Louise,  Robert  and  Kathryn. 

ARNOLD,   Henry,   presiding   Elder 
at  Herriman,  Salt  Lake  county,  Utah, 


and  otherwise  a  prominent  man  in 
the  Church,  was  born  Feb.  15,  1822, 
at  Kenchester,  near  Hereford,  Eng- 
land, the  son  of  Henry  Arnold  and 
Elizabeth  Monk.  He  was  baptized  by 
William  Kay,  Feb.  4,  1841,  and  soon 
afterwards  ordained  to  the  Priest- 
hood, after  which  he  commenced  a 
useful  career  in  England  as  a  local 
missionary.  In  the  spring  of  1842  he 
was  called  on  a  mission  to  Wales,  and 
thus,  together  with  his  missionary 
companion.  Elder  Wm.  Allen,  was 
one  of  the  first  Latter-day  Saint  El- 
ders who  preached  the  gospel  in  South 
Wales.  They  raised  up  a  branch  of 
the  Church  consisting  of  17  members 
in  Pembrokeshire.  Subsequently  El- 
der Arnold  presided  over  several 
branches  in  Herefordshire,  England, 
and  later  was  appointed  to  labor  as  a 
traveling  Elder  in  the  Mars  Hill  (for- 
merly Froomes  Hill)  conference,  un- 
der the  direction  of  Elijah  F.  Sheets, 
whom  he  subsequently  succeeded  as 
president  of  the  conference.  He  also 
organized  a  branch  of  the  Church  in 
the  city  of  Hereford.  In  1848  he  emi- 
grated to  St.  Louis,  Mo.,  where  be 
presided  over  the  2nd  Ward  or  dis- 
trict of  the  St.  Louis  conference,  and 
four  years  later  he  journeyed  to  Utah, 
crossing  the  plains  in  Capt.  John  Par- 
ker's company,  which  arrived  in  Salt 
Lake  City  Aug.  28,  1852.  He  located 
in  the  Fifteenth  Ward.  Oct.  8,  1852, 
he  was  ordained  into  the  17th  quo- 
rum of  Seventy,  and  in  the  spring  of 
1853  called  on  an  Indian  expedition 
to  the  southern  settlements  in  Utah, 
where  he  assisted  the  people  to  fort 
up  as  a  means  of  protection  against 
the  savages.  Elder  Arnold  served  the 
entire  summer  in  Capt.  L.  W.  Hardy's 
rifle  company,  under  the  command 
of  Cols.  Geo.  A.  Smith  and  Wm.  H. 
Kimball.  In  the  fall  of  that  year  he 
located  with  his  family  in  the  Butter- 
field  Settlement,  subsequently  known 
as  Fort  Herriman,  Salt  Lake  county. 
There  he  took  a  very  active  part  in 
opening  up  the  canyons,  making  wa- 
ter  ditches,   building   forts,   etc.      In 


590 


LATTER-DAY   SAINT 


the  winter  of  1857-58  he  participated 
in  the  Echo  canyon  expedition  as  first 
lieutenant  in  Capt.  Elijah  Allen's 
company,  remaining  out  until  the 
greatest  danger  was  over  and  the  ma- 
jority of  the  brethren  returned  to 
their  homes.  When  the  general  move 
of  the  Saints  south  took  place  in  1858, 
he  took  his  family  to  Pondtown  (Sa- 
lem), Utah  county,  but  returned  to 
Herriman  as  soon  as  peace  was  es- 
tablished. Shortly  afterwards  he  was 
ordained  to  the  office  of  a  High  Priest, 
under  the  hands  of  A.  O.  Smoot  and 
L.  W.  Hardy,  and  set  apart  to  act  as 
second  counselor  to  Bishop  Alexander 
F.  Barron  at  Herriman.  He  filled 
that  position  from  1858  to  1861,  af- 
ter which  he  had  charge  of  the  Saints 
in  Fort  Herriman  under  the  presi- 
dency of  Bishop  Archibald  Gardner 
of  the  West  Jordan  Ward  until  1866, 
when  he  removed  to  Salt  Lake  City, 
and  during  the  following  ten  years 
had  charge  of  the  Warm  Springs  bath- 
houses under  the  direction  of  the  Salt 
Lake  City  council.  During  that  time 
the  present  bath-house  buildings  were 
erected.  In  1877  he  purchased  the 
Globe  Bakery  from  the  administra- 
tors of  the  late  Richard  Golightly, 
where  he  carried  on  quite  an  exten- 
sive business  for  many  years.  In  the 
spring  of  1870  Elder  Arnold  was  set 
apart  to  act  as  second  counselor  to 
Bishop  A.  H.  Raleigh  of  the  19th 
Ward.  Salt  Lake  City.  Subsequently 
he  acted  as  a  counselor  to  Bishop  R. 
V.  Morris,  and  in  June,  1882,  he  was 
called  to  act  as  first  counselor  to 
Bishop  James  Watson,  this  position 
he  held  until  his  death  which  occur- 
red in  Salt  Lake  City  Sept.  24,  1888. 
Since  he  first  became  identified  with 
the  19th  Ward,  Bro.  Arnold  took  aii 
active  part  in  all  local  affairs.  For  a 
number  of  years  he  officiated  as  a 
Ward  teacher,  and  served  several 
terms  as  a  school  trustee,  taking  a 
leading  part  in  the  erection  of  pub- 
lic buildings  and  improvements  of  a 
general  nature.  In  1885  he  was  called 
on  a  mission  to  Great  Britain.  As  an 
active  and  zealous  Elder  in  the  Church 


he  won  the  confidence  and  good  will 
of  the  Saints  generally  wherever  he 
was  known.  His  fidelity  to  the  cause 
of  truth  was  well  established  by  his 
teachings  and  example.  During  his 
eventful  life  Brother  Arnold  married 
six  wives,  all  of  whom  bore  him  chil- 
dren. At  the  time  of  his  demise  he 
had  nineteen  living  sons  and  daugh- 
ters and  a  host  of  grandchildren.  In 
consequence  of  his  family  relations 
he  was  exiled  from  his  home  for  sev- 
eral years  and  passed  through  many 
hardships. 

ASHBY,  Nathanial,  jun.,  one  of  the 

missionaries  of  the  Church  who  died 
in  the  missionary  field,  was  born 
May  25,  1835,  in  Salem,  Massachu- 
setts, the  son  of  Nathaniel  Ashby  and 
Susan  A.  Hammond.  He  emigrated  to 
Nauvoo,  lillinois,  with  his  father's 
family  in  1843,  passed  through  the 
persecutions  of  the  Saints  in  Illinois 
and  participated  in  the  exodus  of 
1846.  After  residing  temporarily 
with  his  parents  in  Winter  Quarters, 
the  family  migrated  to  Great  Salt 
Lake  Valley  in  1848,  where  Nathaniel 
lived  with  his  mother  until  her  death 
in  1851.  After  that  he  lived  with 
Briant  Stringham  and  was  employed 
by  the  Church  to  take  care  of  stock, 
etc.  He  participated  in  the  Echo 
Canyon  campaign  in  1857  under  Col. 
Robert  T.  Burton.  In  1861  he  was 
called  on  a  colonization  mission  to 
Southern  Utah  and  became  one  of 
the  pioneers  in  founding  the  settle- 
ment of  St.  George.  Here  he  served 
for  a  number  of  years  as  Bishop  of 
the  St.  George  Fourth  Ward,  being 
ordained  a  High  Priest.  In  1881  he 
was  called  on  a  mission  to  the  Hawai- 
ian Islands.  He  was  set  apart  for  that 
mission  Dec.  13,1881,  and  left  for  the 
islands,  accompanied  by  his  wife, 
Martha  Ann,  and  his  son,  Benjamin 
Franklin.  He  had  expected  to  im- 
prove his  health  from  the  change 
of  climate,  but  finding  no  relief  from 
his  sufferings  he  started  on  his  re- 
turn journey  homeward,  but  died  of 
consumption    on    the    Pacific    ocean. 


BIOGRAPHICAL  ENCYCLOPEDIA. 


591 


March  19,  1882,  about  two  days' 
voyage  from  San  Francisco.  His  re- 
mains were  brought  home  to  St. 
George  for  burial.  In  1858  (Feb.  11th), 
Brother  Ashby  married  Mary  Garr, 
who  bore  him  ten  children,  and  in 
1870  (Aug.  11th),  he  married  Martha 
Ann  Truman  (daughter  of  Jacob 
Micah  Truman  and  Elizabeth  Boice), 
who  bore  him  six  children.  Elder 
Ashby  was  in  delicate  health  when  he 
left  for  his  mission  to  the  islands, 
the  hope  of  recuperating  being  par- 
tially the  object  of  his  going  there. 

ATKINSON,  Charles  H.,  an  Elder 
of  the  Church  who  died  in  the  mis- 
sionary field,  was  born  July  10,  1867, 
at  South  Bountiful,  Davis  county, 
Utah,  the  son  of  William  Atkinson 
and  Sarah  Ann  Tingley.  He  was  bap- 
tized July  22,  1876,  by  William 
Brown  and  soon  afterwards  ordained 
to  the  Priesthood.  When  he  was 
called  on  a  mission  to  the  Northwest- 
ern States  in  1900  he  was  a  member 
of  the  74th  quorum  of  Seventy  and 
a  resident  of  South  Bountiful.  He 
was  set  apart  for  his  mission  Oct.  10, 
1900,  and  on  his  arrival  in  his  ap- 
pointed field  of  labor,  he  entered 
into  the  work  of  the  ministry  with 
zeal,  but  took  sick  with  la  grippe  and 
died  at  Billings,  Montana,  Jan.  29, 
1901. 

ATKINSON,    Thomas,    one    of    the 

Elders  of  the  Church  who  died  while 
away  from  home  on  a  mission,  was 
born  Sept.  9,  1810,  in  Mansfield,  Bur- 
lington county.  New  Jersey,  the  son 
of  Collin  and  Nancy  Atkinson.  He 
received  the  gospel  in  1845  and  was 
baptized  by  Elder  Wm.  I.  Appleby. 
Having  been  ordained  to  the  Priest- 
hood, he  was  set  apart  under  the 
hands  of  Apostles  John  Taylor  and 
Wilford  Woodruff,  March  1,  1863, 
for  a  mission  to  the  Sandwich  Islands 
and  left  for  his  field  of  labor  with 
Elder  Hiram  S.  Kimball  the  follow- 
ing day.  They  were  both  killed  while 
on  board  the  steamer  "Ada  Hancock" 


in  the  harbor  of  San  Pedro,  by  the 
explosion  of  the  ship's  boiler,  April 
27,  1863,  on  the  way  to  the  steamer 
"Senator,"  which  was  in  deep  water, 
five  miles  from  the  shore.  At  the 
time  of  his  death  Elder  Atkinson 
was  a  member  of  the  13th  quorum  of 
Seventy. 

ATWOOD,  Leslie  C,  an  Elder  of 
the  Church  who  died  while  filling  a 
foreign  mission,  was  born  Nov.  10, 
1877,  at  Spanish  Fork,  Utah  county, 
Utah,  the  son  of  Charles  B.  Atwood 
and  Louisa  Brown.  He  moved  to 
Vernal,  Uintah  county,  Utah,  with  his 
parents,  received  a  common  school 
education  and  was  baptized  when 
about  eight  years  of  age.  Subse- 
quently he  was  ordained  an  Elder  and 
in  1900  he  was  called  on  a  mission 
to  New  Zealand.  To  fill  this  mission 
he  left  Vernal  Aug.  20,  1900,  was 
ordained  a  Seventy  Aug.  29,  1900, 
by  George  Teasdale  in  Salt  Lake  City 
and  set  apart  for  his  mission.  On 
his  arrival  in  New  Zealand  Sept.  25, 
1900,  he  was  appointed  to  labor 
among  the  English-speaking  Maoris 
of  the  Wairua  conference  one  year 
and  then  went  to  Christchurch,  where 
the  Elders  were  attacked  by  mobs  in 
September,  1901.  Elder  Atwood  was, 
on  that  occasion,  struck  with  stones 
and  sticks  and  roughly  handled.  He 
labored  continuously  in  Christchurch 
until  he  was  stricken  with  the  disease 
which  cost  him  his  life.  His  first 
symptom  of  sickness  were  violent 
headaches,  which  occurred  about  three 
weeks  before  his  death.  While  suf- 
fering severely,  medical  skill  was 
secured  and  the  sick  Elder  was  sent 
to  Auckland,  where  he  arrived  July 
18,  1902.  Here  he  was  placed  in  a 
private  hospital,  but  continued  to 
grow  worse  until  July  21,  1902,  when 
he  died.  His  body  was  embalmed 
and  shipped  home  in  care  of  return- 
ing Elders.  Elder  Atwood's  charac- 
ter was  above  reproach.  He  was  a 
zealous  and  faithful  missionary,  pos- 
sessed a  kind  and  willing  disposition 


592 


LATTER-DAY   SAINT 


and  won  the  esteem  of  all  with  whom 
he  was  associated. 

BACHMAN,  Emuel,  the  third  Bish- 
op of  Harrisville  (North  Weber  Stake) , 
Weber  county,  Utah,  was  born  Au- 
gust 17,  1862,  in  Bern,  Canton  Bern, 
Switzerland,  the  son  of  Jacob  Bach- 
mann  and  Elizabeth  Suter.  He  emi- 
grated with  his  parents  from  Swit- 
zerland to  America  as  an  infant  and 
located  with  them  in  Liberty,  Ogden 
valley,  Weber  county,  Utah;  later  the 
family  moved  to  Eden  in  the  same 
valley.  Emuel  was  baptized  when 
about  eight  years  old;  later  he  was 
ordained  a  Deacon  and  subsequently 
an  Elder,  still  later  was  made  presi- 
dent of  an  Elders  quorum.  He  took 
an  active  part  in  Church  affairs  from 
his  early  youth.  In  December,  1884, 
he  married  Mary  Jane  Henniger  (the 
daughter  of  Rees  T.  Henniger  and 
Frances  Jane  Southern),  and  the  next 
year  (1885)  he  moved  with  his  fam- 
ily to  Lewisville,  Bingham  county, 
Idaho,  where  his  first  and  only  child 
(Emuel  jun.)  was  born,  Nov.  1,  1885, 
and  his  wife  died,  Nov.  6,  1885,  in 
childbed.  In  1888  (Oct.  31st)  he 
married  Elizabeth  Taylor,  of  Farr 
West,  Weber  county,  Utah.  Soon 
afterwards  he  was  ordained  a  Seven- 
ty and  subsequently  chosen  as  a  presi- 
dent of  the  106th  quorum  of  Seven- 
ty. In  1893-1895  he  filled  a  mission 
to  the  Northern  States,  laboring  in 
West  Virginia,  Pennsylvania  and 
Maryland.  After  his  return  from  this 
mission  he  was  chosen  as  president 
of  the  Lewisville  Y.  M.  M.  I.  A.  and 
also  labored  as  a  home  missionary 
for  a  number  of  years.  In  1897  (Jan. 
3rd)  he  was  appointed  Stake  super- 
intendent of  religion  classes  in  the 
Bingham  Stake  of  Zion,  which  posi- 
tion he  held  until  June,  1904,  when 
he  again  (responding  to  call)  left 
home  to  fill  a  mission  to  Great  Britain. 
He  returned  in  1906.  During  the 
time  of  his  residence  in  Idaho  he  was 
a  farmer  and  canal  builder;  he  served 
a  number  of  times  as  a  director  and 


president  of  board  of  directors  of 
canal  companies,  was  also  water  mas- 
ter and  filled  other  positions  of  re- 
sponsibility in  Bingham  county.  In 
April,  1907,  he  moved  to  Harrisville, 
Weber  county,  Utah,  where  he  soon 
afterwards  was  appointed  superinten- 
dent of  the  Harrisville  Sunday  School, 
and  when  the  North  Weber  Stake  of 
Zion  was  organized,  in  1908,  he  was 
chosen  as  a  member  of  the  High 
Council  of  said  Stake.  In  1909  he 
was  ordained  a  Bishop  by  David  A. 
Smith  and  set  apart  to  preside  over 
the  Harrisville  Ward,  which  position 
he  held  for  nearly  five  years.  During 
the  time  of  his  administration  he 
spent  nearly  six  months  in  Nevada, 
doing  missionary  work.  Being  re- 
leased from  his  Bishopric  in  1913, 
because  of  other  duties,  he  was  again 
appointed  a  member  of  the  High 
Council.  This  position  he  held  until 
September,  1919,  when  he  moved  to 
Salt  Lake  City  to  do  Temple  work. 
Since  that  time  he  has  been  busily 
engaged  in  performing  Temple  ordi- 
nances for  the  dead.  He  is  now  a 
resident  of  the  Second  Ward,  Salt 
Lake  City,  and  acts  as  Ward  genealo- 
gist, home  missionary,  etc. 

BADGER,  Rodney,  one  of  the  ori- 
ginal pioneers  of  Utah,  was  born  Feb. 
4,  18  23,  at  Waterford,  Caledonia 
county,  Vermont,  the  son  of  Rodney 
Badger  and  Lydia  Chamberlain.  Be- 
ing converted  to  the  fullness  of  the 
gospel,  he  was  baptized  in  Iowa  Ter- 
ritory in  1839  and  ordained  an  Elder 
in  1845.  He  came  west  with  the 
exiled  Saints  in  184  6  and  the  follow- 
ing year  (1847)  was  selected  as  one 
of  the  143  pioneers  sent  out  to  seek 
a  new  home  for  the  saints  in  the 
Rocky  Mountains.  After  locating  per- 
manently in  the  Valley  he  acted  as  a 
counselor  to  Bishop  Nathanial  V. 
Jones  of  the  Fifteenth  Ward,  Salt 
Lake  City,  and,  as  a  special  agent  of 
the  Perpetual  Emigrating  Fund  Com- 
pany, to  gather  up  and  preserve  stray 
stock.      He  also  served  as  constable 


BIOGRAPHICAL  ENCYCLOPEDIA. 


593 


and  deputy  sheriff  of  Salt  Lake 
county  and  was  captain  of  a  company 
in  the  Life  Guards  of  the  Nauvoo 
Legion.  He  was  finally  drowned 
April  29,  1853,  in  the  Weber  river, 
into  which  he  fearlessly  plunged  to 
save  the  lives  of  a  California  emi- 
grant family. 

BALDWIN,     Nathan     Bennett,     a 

member  of  Zion's  Camp,  was  born 
Jan.  27,  1812,  at  Augusta,  Granville 
county.  Upper  Canada,  the  son  of 
Aaron  M.  Baldwin  and  Julia  Bishop. 
Becoming  a  convert  to  the  restored 
gospel,  he  was  baptized  April  28, 
1833,  by  John  Gould,  and  ordained  a 
Priest  Oct.  24,  1833.  Soon  after- 
wards he  went  to  Kirtland,  Ohio,  and 
in  1834,  as  a  member  of  Zion's  Camp, 
traveled  from  Kirtland  to  Missouri, 
on  which  journey  he  became  inti- 
mately acquainted  with  the  Prophet 
Joseph  Smith.  Early  in  1835  he  was 
ordained  a  Seventy  by  Sidney  Rigdon 
and  became  a  member  of  the  first 
quorum  of  Seventy.  Later,  at  Nau- 
voo, Illinois,  he  was  set  apart  as  a 
president  of  the  21st  quorum  and  he 
afterwards  became  senior  president 
of  that  quorum.  After  his  arrival  in 
Utah,  he  was  advised  by  Pres.  Brig- 
ham  Young  to  locate  in  Fillmore,  Mil- 
lard county,  where  he  resided  until 
his  death.  When  the  21st  quorum  of 
Seventy  was  located  in  Millard 
county.  Brother  Baldwin  was  con- 
tinued as  senior  president  of  the 
same,  which  position  he  held  until 
the  time  of  his  death,  which  ensued 
from  general  debility  Nov.  1,  18  91,  at 
Fillmore.  Brother  Baldwin  was  a 
faithful,  humble  man,  possessing  the 
love  and  respect  of  all  who  knew 
him,  and  died  in  full  faith  of  the 
gospel.  Only  a  few  days  after  his 
death,  his  aged  wife,  the  partner  of 
his  youth,  followed  him  to  the  ot"her 
side. 

BALLARD,  Henry  William,  Bishop 
of  the  Benson  Ward  (Cache  Stake), 
Cache  county,  Utah,  was  born  Sept. 


20,    1864,    at   Logan,    Cache    county, 
Utah,  the  son  of  Henry  Ballard  and 
Margaret  McNiel.      He  was  baptized 
by  his  father,   Henry   Ballard,   when 
about  eight  years  old,  and  ordained  a 
Deacon    June     30,     1877,    in    which 
capacity  he  later  presided  over  a  quo- 
rum of  Deacons  in  the  Logan  Second 
Ward.      He   was   ordained   an    Elder 
Oct.   1,   1884,  by  his  father  and  the 
next  day   (Oct.   2nd),  married  Elvira 
Davidson  (daughter  of  Bishop  Rotea-t 
Davidson    and    Ada    Hemmingway), 
who  was  born  in  18  65  in  Logan.  This 
marriage  has   been   blessed  with  six 
children,  namely:  Ada,  Heny  W.  jun., 
Margaret  E.,  Melvin  Joseph,  Robert. 
LeRoy  and  Leona.     Bro.  Ballard  was: 
ordained  a  Seventy  Jan.  4,  1878,  by 
his    father    and    labored   as   a   Ward 
teacher,   Sunday  School  teacher  and 


M.  I.  A.  officer  in  the  Logan  Second 
Ward  until  March  9,  18  91,  when  he 
was  ordained  a  High  Priest  and. 
Bishop  by  Moses  Thatcher  and  set 
apart  to  preside  over  the  Benson. 
Ward,  which  position  he  held  until 
1912,  when  he  was  honorably  re- 
leased. Since  that  time  he  has  pre- 
sided over  the  local  organization  of 
High  Priests  and  been  a  very  diligent 
Sunday  School  teacher  and  otherwise 
taken  a  most  active  part  in  Church 


Vol.  Ill,  No.  38. 


April  3,  192Q 


594 


LATTER-DAY   SAINT 


affairs.  He  has  also  labored  as  a 
home  missionary  in  the  Cache  Stake 
and  assisted  in  the  building  of  the 
Logan  Temple.  Among  the  many 
civil  offices  held  by  Bishop  Ballard 
at  different  times  may  be  mentioned 
that  he  has  acted  as  constable,  justice 
of  the  peace,  road  supervisor,  school 
trustee,  etc.  Bishop  Ballard  ranks  as 
a  most  successful  farmer.  He  was 
one  of  the  chief  promotors  of  the 
West  Cache  Canal  which  taps  Bear 
river  immediately  below  the  River- 
dale  bridge,  near  the  junction  of 
Mink  creek  with  Bear  river.  Together 
with  Jacob  Jorgensen  Bro.  Ballard 
built  the  upper  three  miles  of  that 
canal  which  represented  the  most  dif- 
ficult job  on  the  whole  canal  line. 
This  canal  irrigates  an  extensive  strip 
of  land  on  the  west  side  of  Cache 
Valley. 

BARXEY,  Lewis,  one  of  the  origi- 
nal Utah  pioneers  af  1847,  was  born 
Sept.  8,  1808,  in  Niagara  county.  New 
York,  the  son  of  Charles  Barney.  At 
the  age  of  three  years  Lewis  moved 
with  his  father's  family  to  Knox 
county,  Ohio,  and  later  they  resided 
in  Fayette  county,  Ohio.  In  1825 
the  family  moved  west  to  Sangamon 
county,  Illinois,  where  they  resided 
until  1839,  when  they  moved  to  Henry 
county,  Iowa,  where  they  secured  title 
to  2000  acres  of  land.  Here  they 
learned  of  the  "Mormon"  persecu- 
tions and  began  to  investigate  the 
principles  of  the  gospel,  which  led 
to  their  conversion.  Lewis  was  bap- 
tized in  the  spring  of  1840  and  was 
confirmed  by  the  Prophet  Joseph 
Smith.  He  at  once  became  an  active 
member  of  the  Church,  furnished  a 
team  and  wagon  to  haul  rock  for  the 
Nauvoo  Temple  and  donated  liberally 
also  for  the  Nauvoo  House.  He 
bought  160  acres  of  land  near  Car- 
thage and  bought  two  city  lots  of 
Hyrum  Smith  in  Nauvoo,  where  he 
spent  his  winters,  while  he  worked  on 
his  farm  in  the  summer.  After  the 
completion  of  the  Temple,  he  received 


his  endowments  and  in  February 
(1846),  he  crossed  the  Mississippi 
river  with  two  wagons  and  teams  to 
assist  the  Twelve  and  others  on  their 
way  to  the  Rocky  Mountains.  On 
Sugar  Creek,  Iowa,  Lewis  was  organ- 
ized into  the  Pioneer  camp  under  Col. 
Stephen  Markham.  After  traveling 
west  as  far  as  Garden  Grove,  he  re- 
turned to  Nauvoo  after  his  family  and 
again  joined  the  camps  of  Israel  on 
the  Missouri  river,  soon  after  the 
Mormon  Battalion  had  left.  He 
spent  the  winter  of  1846-1847  haul- 
ing provisions  from  Missouri  to  the 
Saints  in  the  wilderness,  and  in  the 
spring  of  184  7  he  crossed  the  Mis- 
souri river  to  see  the  Twelve  at  Win- 
ter Quarters,  and  he  was  then  chosen 
as  one  of  the  pioneers  to  hunt  a  new 
resting  place  for  the  Saints.  To  this 
call  he  responded  cheerfully  and 
made  the  famous  march  with  the 
pioneers  to  Great  Salt  Lake  Valley, 
arriving  there  in  July,  1847.  In 
Utah  Brother  Barney  became  an  ac- 
tive citizen,  moved  his  residence  a 
number  of  times,  and  died  Nov.  5, 
1894,  in  Mancos,  Colorado. 

BARNUM,  Charles  Davids,  one  of 

the  original  Utah  pioneers  of  1847, 
was  born  near  Brockville,  County  of 
Leeds,  Canada,  May  9,  1800,  and  was 
baptized  by  John  E.  Page  July  25, 
1836.  He  subsequently  acted  as  a 
Teacher  and  a  Priest  in  the  North 
Crosby  branch  of  the  Church.  In 
1838  he  sold  out  his  property  in  Can- 
ada and  removed  to  Indiana.  The 
following  spring  he  made  a  visit  to 
Missouri  and  assisted  in  removing  the 
Saints  from  Far  West  to  Quincy,  111. 
He  returned  to  Indiana,  where  he  left 
his  family  and  removed  to  Nauvoo  in 
the  fall  of  1839.  There  he  w^as  or- 
dained to  the  office  of  an  Elder. 
Three  years  later  his  family  con- 
sented to  join  him  in  that  place.  He 
did  the  first  rock  quarrying  for  the 
Nauvoo  Temple,  served  as  captain  in 
the  Nauvoo  Legion,  joined  the  6th 
quorum    of    Seventy    in    the    fall    of 


BIOGRAPHICAL   ENCYCLOPEDIA. 


595 


1844,  and  received  his  endowments  in 
the  Nauvoo  Temple  in  the  winter  of 
1845-46.  That  same  winter  he  labored 
in  a  wagon  shop  preparing  traveling 
outfits  for  the  Saints  who  were  about 
to  go  into  exile.  He  left  Nauvoo  in 
the  spring  of  1846,  his  family  refus- 
ing to  follow  him.  The  following 
winter,  having  arrived  at  Winter 
Quarters,  he  married  again,  and  in 
1847  came  to  G.  S.  L.  Valley  as  one 
of  the  pioneers  under  the  direction  of 
Pres.  Brigham  Young.  He  returned 
to  Winter  Quarters  the  same  year,  af- 
ter which  he  spent  three  winters  in 
Missouri  and  came  to  the  Valley  a 
second  time  in  1850,  crossing  the 
plains  in  Wm.  Snow's  company.  He 
located  in  the  Fifteenth  Ward,  Salt 
Lake  City,  where  he  resided  the  re- 
mainder of  his  life.  Having  previously 
been  ordained  to  the  office  of  a  High 
Priest,  he  acted  as  a  counselor  to  Act- 
ing Bishop  Andrew  Cunningham  in 
1852-53.  For  many  years  after  that 
he  labored  as  a  Ward  teacher.  Bro. 
Barnum  died  Sept.  9,  1894,  in  Salt 
Lake  City,  having  been  feeble  (owing 
to  old  age)  for  a  number  of  years. 
He  was  the  father  of  ten  children, 
four  of  whom  survived  him. 

BARRON,      Alexander      Franklin, 

fourth  presiding  Elder  at  Herriman, 
Salt  Lake  county,  Utah,  was  born  in 
Giles  county,  Tennessee,  Oct.  4,  1813, 
the  son  of  Alexander  and  Elizabeth 
Barron.  He  embraced  the  gospel  in 
the  year  1850,  emigrated  to  Utah  in 
1853,  resided  at  Herriman  Fort,  Salt 
Lake  county,  until  the  year  18  65 
when  he  was  called  to  the  Dixie  Mis- 
sion and  located  at  Panaca,  where  he 
lived  until  released  in  the  year  1877. 
He  then  removed  to  Washington, 
southern  Utah,  where  he  resided  un- 
til his  death,  which  took  place  at  that 
town  April  3,  1885.  Bro.  Barron 
was  a  faithful,  consistent  Latter-day 
Saint  and  left  a  large  family  and 
numerous  friends. 

BARTON,   Walter   H.,   one   of   the 

Elders    of   the    Church   who   died   in 


the  missionary  field,  was  the  son  of 
John  Barton  and  Sarah  Flint,  and 
was  born  in  Kaysville,  Davis  county, 
Utah,  April  15,  1869.  He  was  bap- 
tized Aug.  5,  1877,  by  Elder  Thomas 
F.  Rousche  and  later  ordained  to  the 
Priesthood.  He  was  set  apart  Dec. 
15,  1893,  for  a  mission  to  the  South- 
ern States  and  left  the  following  day, 
being  previously  ordained  a  Seventy. 
Elder  Barton  arrived  at  Chattanooga, 
Tennessee,  on  the  22nd  of  December 
and  was  assigned  to  labor  in  Pike 
county,  Mississippi,  with  Elder  J.  M. 
Phelps,  of  Idaho.  For  the  next  two 
weeks  immediately  following  he  ap- 
peared to  be  in  the  best  of  health 
and  numerous  remarks  were  made 
concerning  his  robust  condition. 
There  was  an  extraordinary  circum- 
stance, however,  in  connection  with 
his  condition  and  that  was  that  he 
was  gaining  flesh  at  an  unusual  rate. 
His  rapid  increase  to  corpulency  was 
the  occasion  of  numerous  good- 
natured  remarks  and  jokes  at  his  ex- 
pense, and  he  was  frequently  heard  to 
state  that  unless  there  was  a  change 
his  clothes  would  all  be  too  small 
for  him.  One  day  he  stepped  onto 
a  pair  of  scales  and  made  the  rather 
astonishing  discovery  that  he  had  not 
increased  in  weight.  That  disclosure 
was  the  occasion  of  apprehension  on 
the  part  of  his  friends  and  he  was 
asked  if  he  was  ill  and  he  repeatedly 
replied  in  the  negative.  But  the  swell- 
ing of  his  body  continued  and  drop- 
sical symptoms  developed.  Finally 
he  complained  of  not  being  well  and 
was  obliged  to  take  to  his  bed  at  the 
residence  of  John  Crane,  a  member 
of  the  Church.  There  he  received 
every  possible  attention.  On  the  8th 
of  February,  1894,  a  letter  reached 
the  Chattanooga  office,  announcing 
his  illness.  Particulars  were  immedi- 
ately telegraphed  for  and  on  the  10th 
a  dispatch  was  received  conveying  the 
alarming  information:  "We  fear  he 
will  not  improve."  Elder  Geo.  Albert 
Smith  then  took  the  next  train  from 
Chattanooga  to  McComb  City,  a  dis- 


5'96 


LATTER-DAY   SAINT 


tance  of  450  miles,  arriving  at  the 
bedside  of  the  sick  Elder  the  day 
following.  He  thought  he  found  him 
improving,  as  he  was  assured  by  the 
attending  physician.  Dr.  Grattin,  that 
he  had  passed  the  danger  line  and 
that  all  that  was  necessary  to  his 
complete  and  speedy  recovery  was 
careful  nursing.  On  the  16th  Elder 
Smith  returned  to  Chattanooga,  the 
doctor  again  informing  him  that  the 
patient  would  recover  unless  he 
should  become  the  victim  of  a  relapse. 
At  noon  on  the  18th  he  received  a 
telegram  to  the  effect  that  Elder 
Barton  had  died  that  morning  at  8 
o'clock.  He  immediately  wired  to 
have  the  body  embalmed,  a  process 
that  was  promptly  attended  to  by  a 
competent  undertaker,  and  forwarded 
in  an  air-tight  casket.  The  prelim- 
inary arrangements  were  all  attended 
to  and  the  body  brought  home  in 
charge  of  Elder  Geo.  Albert  Smith. 
Elder  Barton's  labors  were  character- 
ized by  zeal  and  energy,  and  he  was 
faithful  in  the  fulfillment  of  the  ex- 
exalted  calling  whereunto  he  had 
been  chosen. 

BEECHER,  William  Joseph,  one  of 

the  Elders  of  the  Church  who  died  in 
the  missionary  field,  was  born  Oct. 
25,  1842,  in  Nauvoo,  Hancock  county, 
111.,  the  son  of  Ransome  Asa  Beecher 
and  Sylvia  D.  Wheeler.  He  was  bap- 
tized in  the  fall  of  1854,  after  emi- 
grating to  Utah,  and  made  his  home 
in  Willard,  Box  Elder  county,  where 
he  became  a  member  of  the  59th 
quorum  of  Seventy.  On  the  16th  of 
May,  1900,  he  was  set  apart  for  a 
mission  to  California  and  left  for  that 
mission  the  following  day.  He  had 
been  in  the  city  of  Los  Angeles  a  lit- 
tle over  one  week  when,  on  the  morn- 
ing of  Sunday,  May  27,  1900,  he  was 
found  dead  in  his  room.  Elder  John 
Garner  went  to  the  room  to  call 
Brother  Beecher  to  come  to  morning 
prayers,  but  failed  to  get  a  response. 
A  few  minutes  later.  Elder  Garner 
returned    to    the    room    and    looking 


through  the  window  saw  Elder  Beech- 
er kneeling  at  his  bedside  as  if  in 
prayer,  his  head  leaning  slightly  to 
one  side.  Bro.  Garner's  first  thought 
was  that  he  was  dead,  so  he  ran  at 
once  for  another  Elder.  The  two,  on 
returning,  burst  open  the  door,  and 
on  entering  found  the  fumes  of  gas 
so  strong  as  to  almost  stifle  them; 
the  gas  jet  was  nearly  wide  open 
and  the  room  was  full  of  the  deadly 
fumes.  Bro.  Beecher  had  evidently 
been  on  his  knees  at  prayer  by  the 
bed  and  while  in  that  attitude  was 
apparently  overcome  and  sank  down, 
his  chin  catching  on  the  edge  of  the 
bed,  and  thus  he  hung.  It  appears 
that  about  daylight  he  got  up  and 
went  into  the  bathroom  and  took  a 
bath.  Elder  Garner,  who  slept  across 
the  hall  and  adjoining  the  bathroom 
had  heard  him  taking  his  bath,  after 
which  he  returned  to  his  room.  The 
Elders  called  a  physician  and  for 
some  time  worked  over  the  prostrate 
body,  but  without  effect.  The  body 
was  forwarded  in  charge  of  an  Elder 
to  his  grief-stricken  wife  in  Willard. 

BELL,  James  F.,  president  of  the 
Malta  Mission,  was  born  in  England, 
where  he  became  a  convert  to  "Mor- 
monism,"  about  the  year  1847.  Soon 
after  his  baptism  he  was  ordained  to 
the  Priesthood,  and  labored  as  a  local 
missionary  in  the  Birmingham  and 
Staffordshire  conferences.  In  1853 
he  was  called  to  labor  as  a  missionary 
on  the  island  of  Malta  and  after  the 
departure  of  Thos.  Obray  in  April, 
1853,  Elder  Bell  was  left  in  charge 
of  the  Malta  mission,  which  position 
he  held  until  he  emigrated  to  America 
in  1855.  He  crossed  the  Atlantic 
ocean  in  the  ship  "Juventa",  which 
sailed  from  Liverpool,  England,  March 
31,  1855,  and  arrived  at  Philadelphia, 
May  5,  1855,  and  while  preparing  for 
the  journey  across  the  plains,  he  died 
with  cholera  at  Mormon  Grove,  near 
Atchison,  Kansas,  June  8,  1855,  six 
days  after  the  death  of  his  wife, 
Mary  Jane.     They  were  both  on  their 


BIOGRAPHICAL   ENCYCLOPEDIA. 


597 


way  to  Zion.  While  presiding  over 
the  Malta  mission,  Bro.  Bell  kept  an 
accurate  mission  record  in  the  shape 
of  a  private  journal,  which  is  now 
among  the  precious  documents  at  the 
Historian's  office. 

BELL,  Thomas  H.,  one  of  the  El- 
ders of  the  Church  who  died  in  the 
missionary  field,  was  born  May  9, 
1864,  at  Glenwood,  Sevier  county, 
Utah,  the  son  of  Thomas  Bell  and 
Mahala  Blood,  and  was  baptized  by 
J.  K.  Peterson,  July  3,  1873.  Later 
he  was  ordained  to  the  Priesthood 
and  in  1899  (April  10th),  he  was  set 
apart  for  a  mission  to  the  Southern 
States.  According  to  his  appoint- 
ment, he  began  his  labors  in  the  State 
of  Georgia.  He  was  taken  sick  with 
malarial  fever  the  12th  of  August, 
1899,  but  the  case  was  not  considered 
dangerous  until  the  day  before  he 
died.  The  immediate  cause  of  death 
was  heart  failure,  which  carried  him 
off  Aug.  20,  1899,  only  a  short  time 
after  his  arrival  in  the  field.  Pres. 
Ben.  E,  Rich  of  the  Southern  States 
mission  wrote  a  letter  of  condolence 
to  the  faithful  and  bereaved  wife  and 
sent  the  body  home  in  charge  of  an 
Elder.  Brother  Bell  was  a  faithful 
and  consistent  Latter-day  Saint  and 
at  all  times  desired  to  do  the  will  of 
God. 

BENNION,  John,  presiding  Elder 
in  the  West  Jordan  Ward,  Salt  Lake 
county,  Utah,  from  1853  to  1863,  was 
a  son  of  John  Bennion  and  Elizabeth 
Roberts,  and  was  born  in  the  parish 
of  Hawerden,  county  of  Flint,  North 
Wales,  July  9,  1820.  He  joined  the 
Church  in  1841,  married  Esther 
Wainwright,  Feb.  15,  1842,  and  emi- 
grated to  America  that  year,  crossing 
the  Atlantic  in  the  ship  "John  Cum- 
mings,"  which  sailed  from  Liverpool, 
England,  Feb.  20,  1842.  He  arrived 
at  Nauvoo,  111.,  May  7th.  There  he 
labored  as  an  acting  Teacher  under 
Bishop  John  Murdock.  In  the  fall  of 
1844  he  was  ordained  into  the  14th 


quorum  of  Seventy,  received  his  en- 
dowments in  the  Nauvoo  Temple 
shortly  afterwards  and  left  Nauvoo 
for  the  wilderness  in  1846.  He  win- 
tered with  his  family  at  Garden 
Grove,  Iowa,  but  worked  part  of  the 
time  in  Missouri,  where  he  suffered 
considerably  from  exposure  and  sick- 
ness. His  father  died  of  bilious  fever 
Sept.  24,  1846,  and  was  buried  be- 
side Samuel  Bent  at  Garden  Grove, 
under  a  large  oak  tree.  That  same 
year  John  Bennion  left  Garden  Grove 
and  crossed  the  plains  in  Bishop  Ed- 
ward Hunter's  company,  which  ar- 
rived in  G.  S.  L.  Valley  in  October, 
1847.  In  the  spring  of  1848  he  lo- 
cated with  his  family  west  of  the 
Jordan  river  and  was  one  of  the  first 
settlers  in  that  locality,  now  known 
as  Taylorsville.  In  1853  he  was  ap- 
pointed assistant  counselor  in  the 
Bishopric  of  the  West  Jordan  Ward. 
Subsequently  he  was  ordained  to  the 
office  of  a  High  Priest  by  Patriarch 
John  Young.  In  1859  he  was  ap- 
pointed presiding  Elder  of  the  North 
Jordan  branch  of  the  West  Jordan 
Ward,  acting  under  the  direction  of 
Bishop  Archibald  Gardner.  He  occu- 
pied this  position  until  Sept.  27,  1863. 
In  18  68  he  was  called  on  a  mission 
to  Dixie  (southern  Utah).  After  a 
brief  stay  in  Long  Valley,  he  removed 
to  the  Muddy  and  subsequently  to 
Panaca.  Finally,  he  settled  more 
permanently  at  Eagleville,  where  he 
filled  the  position  of  presiding  Elder. 
About  the  year  1873  he  returned  to 
North  Jordan,  where  he  died  Sept.  1, 
1877. 

BENNION,  Samuel,  Bishop  of  the 
North  Jordan  Ward,  Salt  Lake  county, 
Utah,  is  a  son  of  John  Bennion  and 
Elizabeth  Roberts,  and  was  born  in 
the  parish  of  Harwerden,  County  of 
Flint,  North  Wales,  Dec.  11,  1818. 
In  1840  he  saw  the  first  Latter-day 
Saint  missionaries  (Elders  John  Tay- 
lor and  Joseph  Fielding)  in  a  chapel 
in  Liverpool,  where  Elder  Bennion  at 
that    time    carried    on   business   as   a 


598 


LATTER-DAY   SAINT 


baker.  He  was  baptized  Sept.  30, 
1842.  Having  made  the  necessary 
arrangements  to  gather  to  the  Saints' 
headquarters  in  America,  he  sailed 
from  Liverpool,  together  with  a  few 
saints,  March  30,  1845,  on  board  the 
ship  "Parthenon,"  landed  in  New  Or- 
leans May  12th,  and  continued  up 
the  Mississippi  river  to  Nauvoo,  111., 
where  he  arrived  May  23rd.  He 
bought  a  farm  (85  acres)  of  Daniel 
H.  Wells,  about  seven  miles  east  of 
Nauvoo,  on  the  La  Harpe  road,  where 
he  built  a  two-story  brick  building. 
The  following  spring  (May  19,  1846), 
he  was  forced  to  vacate  his  posses- 
sions because  of  the  persecutions. 
Together  with  a  small  company  of 
Saints  he  crossed  the  Mississippi  river 
at  Fort  Maddison,  stopped  at  Garden 
Grove,  Iowa,  where  he  raised  a  crop 
and  remained  there  the  following 
winter.  Early  in  the  spring  of  1847 
he  proceeded  to  the  main  camp  of  the 
Saints  on  the  Missouri  river,  and  af- 
ter having  made  a  trip  to  Missouri 
after  provisions,  he  crossed  the  plains 
in  Bishop  Edward  Hunter's  company, 
arriving  in  Salt  Lake  City  in  October, 
1847,  with  Capt.  Jos.  Home's  fifty. 
Early  in  1849  he  located  himself  and 
family  on  the  west  side  of  the  river 
Jordan,  and  thus  became  one  of  the 
first  settlers  in  that  section  of  the 
country.  In  February,  1850,  he  went 
to  Provo,  in  George  D.  Grant's  com- 
pany of  minute  men  and  participated 
in  the  battle  with  the  Indians  under 
Big  Elk,  Feb.  8th  and  9th.  The 
winter  of  1855-56  he  spent  in  Rush 
Valley,  together  with  Luke  S.  John- 
son and  others.  In  1857  he  partici- 
pated in  the  Echo  Canyon  expedition, 
and  on  Sept.  27,  1863  he  was  ap- 
pointed to  reside  over  the  North 
Branch  of  the  West  Jordan  Ward, 
which  position  he  occupied  until  the 
branch,  June  17,  1877,  was  organized 
as  a  Ward,  when  he  was  ordained  a 
High  Priest  and  set  apart  to  act  as 
Bishop  of  the  same.  He  held  this 
position  until  the  time  of  his  death, 
which  occurred  in  Taylorsville,  Sept. 


9,  1889.  Bishop  Bennion  occupied 
many  positions  of  honor  and  trust. 
For  a  number  of  years  he  acted  as 
justice  of  the  peace,  served  as  select- 
man of  Salt  Lake  county,  was  presi- 
dent of  canal  companies,  and  was 
throughout  one  of  the  leading  men 
in  Salt  Lake  county. 

BEVAN,  James,  a  member  of  the 
Mormon  Battalion,  was  born  in  Here- 
fordshire, England,  Oct.  18,  1821, 
baptized  October,  1840,  emigrated  to 
America  in  1842,  crossing  the  Atlan- 
tic in  the  ship  "Hope,"  and  arrived  at 
Nauvoo,  111.,  May  14,  1846.  He  en- 
listed as  a  private  in  Company  A  of 
the  Battalion,  at  Council  Bluffs,  and 
on  account  of  sickness  became  a 
member  of  Lieutenant  W.  W.  Willis' 
detachment,  which  wintered  at  Pue- 
blo. He  arrived  in  G.  L.  S.  Valley 
the  following  summer  under  Capt. 
James  Brown.  After  remaining  in 
the  Valley  about  fourteen  months, 
Bevan  returned  to  the  States,  in  com- 
pany with  Howard  Egan  and  others, 
but  came  back  to  the  Valley  in  the 
spring  of  1852  as  a  married  man,  and 
located  in  Tooele,  Tooele  county, 
Utah,  where  he  resided  the  remainder 
of  his  life.  He  died  Oct.  26,  1894  at 
Tooele. 

BIGELOW,  Moroni,  one  of  the  El- 
ders who  died  in  the  missionary  field, 
was  born  Sept.  1,  1840,  in  Mercer 
county,  Illinois,  the  son  of  Nahum 
Bigelow  and  Mary  Gilles.  He  was 
baptized  into  the  Church  of  Jesus 
Christ  of  Latter-day  Saints  in  1849. 
Some  years  later  he  was  ordained  to 
the  office  of  a  Seventy  and  made  his 
home  in  Provo,  Utah.  In  October, 
1869,  he  was  set  apart  by  Pres.  Geo. 
A.  Smith  for  a  mission  to  the  Eastern 
States,  where  he  performed  a  faithful 
labor.  On  the  night  of  April  13,  1870, 
as  he  was  on  the  steamer,  "Mary  Mc- 
Donald," on  the  Mississippi  river, 
homeward  bound,  he  accidentally  fell 
over  board  and  was  drowned. 


BIOGRAPHICAL  ENCYCLOPEDIA. 


599 


BIGLER,  Henry  William,  a  mem- 
ber of  the  Mormon  Battalion,  was 
born  Aug.  28,  1815,  in  Harrison  coun- 
ty, West  Virginia,  the  son  of  Jacob 
Bigler  and  Elizabeth  Harvey.  Becom- 
ing a  convert  to  "Mormonism,"  he 
gathered  with  the  saints  at  Nauvoo, 
Illinois,  and  shared  in  the  expulsion  of 
the  saints  from  Nauvoo.  He  was  one 
of  the  heroic  500  who  enlisted  in  the 
famous  Mormon  Battalion  in  1846, 
and  marched  from  the  Missouri  river 
to  the  Pacific  coast  during  the  war 
with  Mexico.  He  was  mustered  out 
in  Los  Angeles  in  July,  1847,  and 
with  other  members  of  that  command 
was  proceeding  northward,  on  his  way 
to  the  Valley  of  the  Great  Salt  Lake, 
when  word  was  received  from  the  au- 
thorities of  the  Church  advising  all 
who  could  not  bring  provisions  for 
the  winter  to  remain  in  California 
until  the  following  spring,  A  num- 
ber of  these  men,  described  by  a  Cali- 
fornia historian  as  "sober,  orderly, 
peaceful  and  industrious,"  found  em- 
ployment at  New  Helvetia  or  "Sut- 
ter's Fort,"  with  Captain  Sutter,  who 
was  building  a  flour  mill  near  the 
Fort,  also  a  sawmill  in  Coloma  val- 
ley, 45  miles  distant.  About  half  a 
dozen  of  the  Battalion  boys  were 
sent,  in  charge  of  James  W.  Marshall, 
Sutter's  partner  in  the  sawmill  ven- 
ture, to  Coloma  to  build  the  sawmill, 
young  Bigler  being  one  of  them.  At 
one  stage  in  the  proceedings  ,the  mill 
having  been  practically  completed 
and  the  water  having  been  turned 
into  the  race  by  way  of  test  and  to 
wash  out  the  loose  dirt,  etc.,  Mr.  Big- 
ler took  occasion  to  make  this  his- 
toric entry  in  his  diary:  "Monday, 
January  24  (1848).  This  day  some 
kind  of  metal  was  found  in  the  tail 
race  that  looks  like  gold,  first  dis- 
covered by  James  Marshall,  boss  of 
the  mill."  Six  days  later,  he  made 
the  next  entry  in  his  journal  as  fol- 
lows: "Sunday,  30 — Clear  and  has 
been  all  the  last  week.  Our  metal 
has  been  tried  and  proves  to  be  gold. 
It   is   thought  to  be   rich.      We   have 


picked  up  more  than  a  hundred  dol- 
lars worth  last  week."  In  a  most  in- 
teresting article  written  for  the  "Cen- 
tury Magazine"  of  February,  1891, 
by  Mr.  John  S.  Hittell,  a  photographic 
reproduction  of  this  page  of  the 
Bigler  diary  is  given,  together  with 
pictures  of  Mr.  Bigler,  Azariah  Smith 
(another  Battalion  member  of  the 
party)  and  also  the  author  of  a  diary 
which  is  confirmatory  of  Bigler's  en- 
tries), Marshall,  Sutter  and  other  per- 
sons connected  with  the  great  event. 
Hittell  says  that  Mr.  Bigler's  is  not 
only  the  first  record  that  was  made 
of  the  discovery,  but  the  only  one 
made  on  the  actual  date  of  its  occur- 
rence, and  from  it  Marshall's  own 
account  was  corrected,  he  having  var- 
iously given  the  date  as  about  the 
18th,  19th  or  20th  of  January.  Mr. 
Hittell  adds  that  the  Bigler  journal, 
"kept  during  his  service  in  the  Mor- 
mon Battalion  and  his  subsequent 
stay  in  California,  is  one  of  the  most 
valuable  historical  documents  of  the 
State."  After  spending  a  short  time 
in  Utah,  Henry  W.  Bigler  once  more 
went  to  California,  whence  he  was 
called  on  a  mission  to  the  Sandwich 
Islands,  in  1850,  together  with  Geo. 
Q.  Cannon  and  others.  While  some 
of  the  missionaries  became  discour- 
aged because  the  whites  on  the  is- 
lands would  not  embrace  the  gospel 
and  left,  Bro.  Bigler  and  others  de- 
cided to  remain  and  preach  to  the 
natives,  a  decision  which  resulted  in 
the  harvest  of  thousands  of  human 
souls.  Later,  Brother  Bigler  filled 
two  missions  to  the  United  States.  He 
was  called  oa  a  colonization  mission 
to  southern  Utah  and  thus  became 
one  of  the  pioneer  settlers  of  St. 
George,  where  he  resided  until  his 
death,  which  occurred  at  St.  George 
Nov.  24,  1900.  Bro.  Bigler  was  a 
faithful  worker  in  the  St.  George 
Temple  during  the  latter  years  of  his 
life.  He  was  an  honest,  unassuming, 
humble,  useful  man,  beloved  by  every- 
one who  knew  him,  and  died  as  a 
faithful  Latter-day  Saint. 


600 


LATTER-DAY   SAINT 


BINGHAM,    Brigham    Heber,    the 

first  Bishop  of  the  Wilson  Ward  (North 
Weber  Stake),  Weber  county,  Utah, 
was  born  Dec.  15,  1841,  at  La  Harpe, 
Hancock  county,  Illinois,  the  son  of 
Erastus  Bingham  and  Lucinda  Gates. 
With   his   parents   he   shared   in   the 
persecutions  of  the  Saints  in  Illinois 
and  came  west  with  his  father's  fam- 
ily at  the  time  of  the  general  exodus 
in  1846.     After  wintering  at  Running 
Water  in  what  is  now  the  State  of 
Nebraska,    he   crossed   the   plains   in 
1847    in    Daniel    Spencer's    hundred, 
located  in  Salt  Lake  City  and  spent 
the   winter   in   the   Old   Fort.      After 
that  the  family  became  pioneer  set- 
tlers in  the  Second  Ward,  Salt  Lake 
City.     As  a  boy  Brigham  H.  passed 
through  all  the  hardships  occasioned 
by  grasshoppers,  crickets  and  Indians 
and  often  went  short  of  food.     Still 
a  member  of  his   father's  family   he 
settled  in  Weber  county  in  1850  and 
was  among  the  first  settlers  in  Bing- 
ham's Fort,  Weber  county.     He  was 
baptized  in  December,  1850,  by  Chas. 
Hubbard  in  Farr's  mill  pond,  was  or- 
dained to  the  different  grades  of  the 
Priesthood  and  belonged  to  the  Nau- 
voo  Legion    (or  Utah   militia).        In 
1858    he    participated    in    the    move 
south  and  on  Dec.  24,  1861,  he  mar- 
ried AngelineTheresia  Aldous (daugh- 
ter of  Robert  Aldous  and  Mary  Ann 
Parkin),  who  was  born  Dec.  27,  1844. 
She  bore  her  husband  eleven  children, 
namely:  Brigham  Heber  jun.,  Edwin 
Aldous,  Angeline  Maria,  Robert,  Eli- 
jah   N.,    Edna,    Joseph,    Georgianna, 
Mary  Ann,  Lucinda  and  Erastus.     In 
1886  (June  23rd)  Bro.  Bingham  mar- 
ried Mary  Alice  Lomax  (daughter  of 
Joseph  Lomax  and  Matilda  Wignal), 
who  was  born   Dec.    10,    1861.      She 
bore  her  husband  six  children,  name- 
ly:    Ethel  Exile,  John  Brigham,   Mi- 
nerva Alice,  Maude  Ellen,  Dora  Jane, 
and    Mary   Elizabeth.        About    1860 
Bro.    Bingham    moved   to    Huntsville 
and  became  one  of  the  founders  of 
that  place.    In  18  68  he  worked  on  the 
Central    Pacific    Railroad    as    a    sub- 


contractor under  Benson,  Farr  and 
West,  doing  about  three  miles  of 
grading.  In  18  69  he  located  in  what 
is  now  the  Wilson  Ward  and  took  an 
active  part  in  building  up  that  part 
of  the  country  in  the  construction  of 
canals,  the  building  of  school  houses, 
etc.  In  his  early  youth  he  was  or- 
dained an  Elder  and  afterwards  a 
Seventy,  becoming  a  member  of  the 
38th  quorum  of  Seventy.  He  also 
acted  as  president  of  the  Ward  Y.  M. 
M.  I.  A.  and  was  active  in  all  Church 
affairs.  At  one  time,  when  he  acted 
as  a  Ward  teacher,  he  had  a  teacher's 
beat  in  his  charge  seven  miles  in 
length.  When  the  Wilson  Ward  was 
organized  in  1882  he  was  ordained  a 
Bishop  by  Franklin  D.  Richards  and 
set  apart  to  preside  over  said  Ward. 
Having  married  a  plural  wife  in  1886 
he  was  forced  to  take  the  "under- 
ground" and  in  1890  he  removed  with 
part  of  his  family  to  Mexico,  where 
he  resided  twenty-two  years,  most  of 
the  time  in  Colonia  Pacheco  and  Col- 
onia  Garcia.  In  the  latter  place  he 
was  one  of  the  founders  and  assisted 
in  erecting  school  houses  in  Garcia, 
Pacheco,  Diaz  and  Dublan.  At  the 
time  of  the  general  exodus  of  the 
Saints  from  Mexico  in  1912  he  lo- 
cated temporarily  at  Tucson,  where 
he  resided  for  seven  years  and  helped 
to  build  a  meeting  house  and  make 
many  other  improvements.  He  fi- 
nally returned  to  Utah  in  1919  and 
located  again  in  Wilson,  where  he 
still  resides. 

BINGHAM,  Erastus,  Bishop  of 
Lynne,  Weber  county,  Utah,  was  born 
March  12,  1798,  in  Concord,  Essex 
county,  Vermont,  the  son  of  Elisha 
Warner  Bingham  and  Sallie  Perry. 
He  married  Lucinda  Gates,  daughter 
of  Thomas  Gates  and  Patty  Plumly, 
which  marriage  was  blessed  with  nine 
children,  namely,  Mary,  Sanford, 
Erastus  junior,  Thomas,  Lucinda, 
Maria  Louisa,  Willard,  Edwin  and 
Jacob.  Bro.  Bingham's  father  died 
when   Erastus   was  about  four  years 


BIOGRAPHICAL  ENCYCLOPEDIA. 


601 


old  and  he  had  to  work  on  the  farm 
while  quite  young  to  help  maintain 
the  family.  He  did  not  affiliate  with 
any  religious  denomination  until  the 
spring  of  1833,  when  the  restored 
gospel  was  preached  to  him  by  Elder 
John  F.  Boynton.  He  read  the  Book 
of  Mormon,  was  converted  and  was 
baptized  November  11,  1833,  together 
with  his  wife,  in  St.  Johnsbury,  Ver- 
mont. Erastus  was  the  only  one  of 
his  father's  family  who  ever  joined 
the  Church.  In  the  spring  of  1836 
he  sold  his  farm  and  in  the  following 
June  he  started  with  his  family  (ac- 
companied by  Willard  Snow  and  oth- 
ers) for  Kirtland,  Ohio.  Here  they 
remained  until  September,  183  6,  when 
they  continued  the  Journey  to  Far 
West,  Missouri,  where  they  arrived 
Nov.  4,  1836.  Soon  afterwards  Bro. 
Bingham  rented  a  farm  on  Shoal 
Creek,  about  two  and  a  half  miles 
from  Far  West,  where  he  built  a  log 
house,  into  which  he  moved  his  fam- 
ily. The  following  spring  he  fenced 
his  farm,  which  he  cultivated  until 
the  fall  of  1838,  when  the  extermi- 
nating order  of  Governor  Lilburn  W. 
Boggs  was  issued,  and  he  and  the 
rest  of  the  Saints  had  to  leave  the 
States  in  1839.  He  was  appointed  a 
member  of  a  committee  at  Far  West 
to  dispose  of  what  furniture  and  other 
property  the  exiled  Saints  could  not 
take  with  them.  Leaving  Far  West 
in  the  latter  part  of  March,  1839, 
Brother  Bingham  arrived  in  Hancock 
county.  111.,  in  April,  1839.  He  rented 
farms  in  the  neighborhood  of  La- 
Harpe  until  the  spring  of  1845,  when 
he  bought  a  farm  a  few  miles  nearer 
Nauvoo,  where  he  resided  during  the 
summer,  but  the  next  year,  when  the 
saints  were  compelled  to  leave  the 
State,  Brother  Bingham  sold  his  farm 
for  a  very  small  sum,  in  order  to  get 
a  team  with  which  to  depart  with  his 
family  into  the  wilderness.  He  left 
Nauvoo  May  6,  1846,  and  wintered 
among  the  Ponca  Indians,  near  Run- 
ning Water,  about  one  hundred  and 


fifty  miles  above  Winter  Quarters.  In 
the  spring  of  184  7  he  went  back  as 
far  as  Winter  Quarters  and  made 
trips  to  Missouri  to  buy  provisions. 
In  June,  18  47,  he  joined  the  general 
emigration,  and  crossed  the  plains 
and  mountains  as  a  captain  of  ten  in 
Ira  Eldredge's  fifty  and  Daniel  Spen- 
cer's hundred,  arriving  in  Salt  Lake 
Valley  Sept.  Id,  1847.  Early  in  April, 
1850,  he  moved  to  the  Weber  river 
and  made  a  farm,  but  when  President 
Young  located  the  city  of  Ogden 
where  he  had  chosen  his  farm,  he 
sold  his  claim  and  moved  to  what 
was  called  Farr's  Fort,  north  of  the 
Ogden  river,  where  he  built  a  house, 
in  which  he  and  his  family  spent  the 
winter  of  1850-1851.  In  1851  (Jan. 
2  6th)  he  was  ordained  a  Bishop  and 
set  apart  to  preside  over  the  saints 
who  had  located  on  the  north  side  of 
Ogden  river,  his  Ward  extending  as 
far  north  as  the  present  north  line  of 
Weber  county.  In  the  spring  of  1851 
he  located  on  a  parcel  of  land  north- 
west of  Farr's  Fort;  this  new  loca- 
tion was  afterwards  called  Bingham's 
Fort  in  his  honor,  but  is  now  called 
Lynne.  Brother  Bingham  continued 
as  Bishop,  discharging  his  duties  to 
the  best  of  his  ability,  and  to  the  sat- 
isfaction of  the  authorities  of  the 
Church  until  the  fall  of  18  68,  when 
all  the  Bishops  of  Weber  county  were 
released,  except  Chauncey  W.  West, 
who  at  that  time  was  chosen  Bishop 
of  the  whole  Stake.  Bishop  Bingham 
held  different  positions  of  a  civil 
nature  in  the  community  and  served 
one  term  in  the  Territorial  legisla- 
ture as  a  representative  from  Weber 
county.  As  a  faithful  and  true  Lat- 
ter-day saint  he  died  at  Lynne,  Weber 
county.  May  2,  1882.  Bishop  Bing- 
ham was  an  honest,  truthful  and  tem- 
perate man,  who  never  indulged  in 
profanity  nor  drank  liquor  or  used 
tobacco,  either  before  or  after  he 
joined  the  Church.  He  was  also  in- 
dustrious and  cautious  in  his  finan- 
ci^  affairs. 


602 


LATTER-DAY   SAINT 


BJ0RKJ.UND,  Pehr  A.,  a  Latter- 
day  Saint  Elder  who  died  while  filling 
a  foreign  mission,  was  born  Jan.  30, 
1833,  in  Pnnestad  parish,  Christian- 
stad  Ian,  Sweden,  the  son  of  Anders 
Pehrson  and  Elner  Anderson.  He  was 
converted  to  "Mormonism"  in  1879 
and  was  baptized  by  Lars  P.  Nielson 
at  Ljungby,  July  7,  1879.  After 
emigrating  to  Utah  in  1880,  Brother 
Bjorklund  settled  in  Provo,  Utah, 
where  he  was  living  in  the  year  1891, 
when  he  received  a  call  to  perform 
missionary  labor  in  Scandinavia.  He 
was  set  apart  Nov.  20,  1891,  by 
George  Reynolds,  arrived  in  the  mis- 
sionary field  the  following  month, 
and  was  appointed  to  labor  in  the 
SkS,ne  conference.  For  several  years 
Elder  Bjorklund  had  not  enjoyed  the 
best  of  health,  and  after  arriving  in 
the  missionary  field  he  did  not  im- 
prove, yet,  filled  with  the  spirit  of 
his  calling,  he  was  determined  to 
press  on  in  the  gospel  work.  For 
nearly  two  years  he  labored  success- 
fully, many  times  at  a  disadvantage 
because  of  his  advanced  age  and  fail- 
ing constitution.  On  Aug.  20,  1893, 
while  he  and  a  companion  were  hold- 
ing meetings  in  the  country.  Brother 
Bjorklund  was  taken  seriously  ill  and 
was  forced  to  remain  where  he  was 
until  the  23rd,  when  he  felt  suffi- 
ciently strong  to  return  to  his  lodg- 
ings in  Helsingborg.  On  his  arrival 
there  he  again  broke  down,  and  de- 
cided to  go  to  the  hospital  for  treat- 
ment. It  is  supposed  that  while  there 
the  doctor  advised  him  to  undergo 
an  operation,  which  was  performed  on 
Sunday,  Aug.  27,  1893.  Such  was  the 
information  received  by  his  compan- 
ion who  had  made  an  unsuccessful  call 
forthe  purpose  of  seeing  him.  On  Mon- 
day, Aug.  28th,  this  companion  again 
called  and  was  told  that  Elder  Bjork- 
lund had  died  that  morning  from  the 
effects  of  the  operation.  After  some 
difficulty  the  Elders  obtained  the 
body  and  properly  clothed  it  for  buri- 
al, but  had  more  trouble  with  the 
Lutheran  priest  who  demanded  to  see 


the  dead  Elder's  baptismal  certificate 
before  they  could  inter  the  remains. 
But  the  burial  finally  took  place  on 
the  morning  of  Sept.  2,  1893,  in  a 
pleasant  plat  which  had  been  pro^ 
cured  by  the  brethren. 

BJ0RKMAN,  Andrew,  a  Latter-day 
Saint  Elder  who  died  while  filling  a 
foreign  mission,  was  born  Jan.  22, 
1838,  in  Bjorklinge,  Upsala  Ian,  Swe- 
den, the  son  of  Pehr  and  Christina 
Pehrson.  Having  become  a  convert  to 
"Mormonism"  he  was  baptized  May 
18,  1864,  by  Carl  Bjorkman.  In  186-9, 
Bro.  Bjorkman  emigrated  to  Utah 
and  made  his  residence  in  Salt 
Lake  City.  On  June  7,  1895,  he  was 
set  apart  by  Apostle  John  Henry 
Smith  for  a  mission  to  Scandinavia. 
He  arrived  in  Copenhagen,  Denmark, 
on  the  29th  of  the  same  month,  and 
was  appointed  to  labor  in  the  Stock- 
holm conference.  Arriving  in  Stock- 
holm he  was  appointed  to  labor  in 
the  Solfvarbo  branch,  where  he  re- 
mained till  the  time  of  his  death, 
which  occurred  very  suddenly  on 
Aug.  19,  1896.  On  that  day  Brother 
Bjorkman  was  with  a  family  of  Saints 
in  Solfvarbo,  and  was  in  his  usual 
health.  After  eating  a  heavy  dinner 
he  went  with  friends  out  into  the 
field  for  a  short  walk,  A  few  min- 
utes later,  he  fell  to  the  ground. 
Those  who  were  with  him  tried  to 
arouse  him,  but  in  vain.  A  doctor 
was  sent  for,  who,  when  he  came, 
stated,  after  having  examined  the 
prostrate  man,  that  the  cause  of 
death  was  the  breaking  of  a  blood 
vessel  in  his  head.  His  companion, 
Emanuel  F.  Lennberg,  was  at  the 
time  some  twenty-four  miles  away, 
and  before  the  news  reached  him  Elder 
Bjorkman  had  been  dead  nearly  two 
days.  The  Elders  purchased  a  lot  in 
the  cemetery,  had  him  properly 
clothed  and  buried  at  the  place  be- 
fore mentioned  ( Solfvarbo ) ,  about  one 
hundred  and  twenty-five  miles  north- 
west of  Stockholm,  on  Tuesday,  Aug. 
25,  1896. 


BIOGRAPHICAL   ENCYCLOPEDIA. 


603 


BLEAK,  George  O.,  an  Elder  who 
died  while  filling  a  foreign  mission, 
was  born  Feb.  10,  1887,  at  Manti, 
Sanpete  county,  Utah,  the  son  of  T. 
N.  Bleak  and  Elizabeth  Olson.  He 
was  baptized  in  1895  by  Alma  John- 
son, and  lived  with  his  parents  in 
the  22nd  Ward,  Salt  Lake  City,  in 
1910,  when  he  was  called  to  perform 
a  mission  in  Switzerland  and  Ger- 
many. He  was  set  apart  for  that 
mission  June  1,  1910,  left  Salt  Lake 
City,  June  2,  1910,  and  arrived  in 
Zurich,  Switzerland,  June  25,  1910. 
While  laboring  in  the  Breslau  con- 
ference, and  later  in  the  Dresden 
conference,  Germany,  he  gained  many 
friends.  In  July,  1911,  he  was  placed 
in  charge  of  the  St.  Gallen  branch  in 
the  Zurich  conference,  Switzerland, 
and  finally  he  was  called  to  fill  a 
most  important  position  in  the  Ham- 
burg conference,  Germany,  but  he 
took  a  slight  cold  while  en  route  to 
his  new  field,  and  the  ailment  de- 
veloped into  typhoid  fever,  from  which 
he  died  in  Hamburg,  April  18,  1912. 
His  remains  were  sent  to  Utah  in 
care  of  William  W.  Owens  (of  Wil- 
lard,  Utah),  a  returning  Elder,  and 
impressive  funeral  services  were  held 
in  the  22nd  Ward  chapel,  Salt  Lake 
City,  May  12,  1912. 

BODILY,  Robert,  a  faithful  and 
philanthropic  member  of  the  Church 
and  a  resident  of  Kaysville,  Davis 
county,  Utah,  was  born  Dec  30,  1815, 
at  Blakesley,  Northamptonshire,  Eng- 
land, the  son  of  Daniel  Bodily  and  Ann 
Page.  InDecember,  1845,  he  emigrated 
to  Cape  Colony,  Africa,  with  his  wife 
and  two  children,  landing  at  Cape 
Town,  Easter  Sunday,  1846.  Here  he 
followed  the  business  of  an  engineer 
in  the  royal  service  for  about  two 
years,  sometimes  having  one  hundred 
men  working  under  him.  During  that 
time  most  of  the  batteries  in  Cape 
Castle  were  rebuilt  and  every  gun 
reset  in  the  vicinity  of  Capetown.  Mr. 
Bodily  then  moved  to  Port  Elizabeth, 


where  he  carried  on  building  business 
and  acted  as  a  contractor;  he  also 
bought  a  fine  farm  about  forty-eight 
miles  east  of  Port  Elizabeth,  where 
he  was  living  when  the  gospel  found 
him  in  1857.  Becoming  a  convert, 
he  was  baptized  with  his  family  by 
John  Stock  in  the  Bushman  river, 
May  3,  1857.  Before  his  baptism  he 
was  opposed  to  emigrating  to  Amer- 
ica, he  being  the  owner  of  one  of  the 
finest  farms  in  the  country,  but  as 
soon  as  he  was  baptized,  he  told  the 
Elders  that  he  desired  to  emigrate  to 
Zion.  He  also  carried  on  blacksmith- 
ing  and  wagon  making,  being  on  the 
main  road  between  Port  Elizabeth 
and  Graham  Town.  He  sold  his  farm 
and  business  in  18  60  for  about  six 
thousand  dollars.  Ever  since  he 
joined  the  Church  his  home  had  been 
a  regular  rendezvous  for  the  Elders 
who  frequently  partook  of  his  hospi- 
tality for  months  at  a  time.  Emigrat- 
ing to  America  he  crossed  the  Atlan- 
tic in  the  ship  "Electric,"  Captain 
Cooper,  sailing  from  Port  Elizabeth 
and  landing  in  Boston.  From  Bos- 
ton he  traveled  inland  to  Florence, 
Nebraska,  and  thence  crossed  the 
plains  as  captain  of  the  Saints  emi- 
grating from  Africa.  The  African 
Saints  had  fifteen  wagons.  With  Ne- 
phi  Johnson  as  captain  of  the  whole 
train  and  Wm.  Budge  as  chaplain, 
the  company  arrived  in  Salt  Lake  City 
Oct.  5,  1860.  Throughout  the  long 
and  arduous  voyage  and  overland 
journey  by  ox  teams  he  showed  his 
generosity  on  numerous  occasions  by 
aiding  his  poor  brethren  and  there 
was  probably  not  one  of  that  com- 
pany who  did  not  hold  him  in  grate- 
ful remembrance.  On  one  occasion 
while  at  Florence  he  contributed  a 
thousand  dollars  to  aid  the  emigra- 
tion. Brother  Bodily  spent  the  win- 
ter of  1860-1861  in  Salt  Lake  City, 
and  in  June,  1861,  he  bought  a  farm 
in  Kaysville,  Davis  county,  where  he 
resided  until  the  time  of  his  death. 
Here  he  acted  as  a  ward  teacher  and 


604 


LATTER-DAY   SAINT 


as  a  counselor  in  the  presidency  of 
the  High  Priests  quorum.  Brother 
Bodily  died  in  Kaysville  April  15, 
1892.  His  character  was  beautiful  in 
its  rugged  simplicity  and  honesty, 
stern  and  uncompromising  in  the  pres- 
ence of  evil,  pleasant  and  genial  in 
the  society  of  friends;  he  was  a  man 
whom  to  intimately  know  was  a  pleas- 
ure, and  to  possess  his  esteem  was  an 
honor.  One  of  his  characteristics 
which  harmonized  with  the  beauty  of 
his  life  was  his  love  of  flowers.  He 
was  often  heard  to  say  jocularly  that 
if  he  could  not  have  a  flower  garden 
in  heaven,  he  did  not  care  to  go  there. 
After  joining  the  Church,  he  followed 
almost  literally  the  Savior's  injunc- 
tion, "Sell  all  that  thou  hast  and 
give  to  the  poor  and  follow  me."  Af- 
ter he  had  become  an  aged  man  he 
met  with  financial  reverses  and  had 
to  make  a  new  home  under  new  con- 
ditions and  circumstances,  but  he 
went  to  work  with  phenominal  en- 
ergy and  until  his  last  sickness  the 
history  of  his  life  was  one  of  great 
labor  under  circumstances  which  to 
many  others  would  have  been  dis- 
couraging. Through  all  he  remained 
consistent;  prosperity  could  not  spoil 
him,  and  adversity  could  not  swerve 
him.  His  course  was  straight  for- 
ward, his  objects  the  glory  of  God 
and  his  own  salvation.  Bro.  Bodily 
left  a  family  of  eleven  children,  sev- 
enty grandchildren  and  nine  great- 
grandchildren. 

BOHN,  Jacob  Johannes  Martinus, 

Scandinavian  Elder,  missionary  and 
poet,  was  born,  April  27,  1823,  in  Aal- 
borg,  Denmark,  of  religious  parents. 
He  joined  the  Baptists  as  a  youth,  but 
became  a  convert  to  "Mormonism" 
and  was  baptised  as  the  first  convert 
to  the  restored  gospel  in  Randers, 
Denmark,  Oct.  28,  1851,  by  Elder  Chr. 
Christiansen,  together  with  his  wifp 
A  few  days  later  he  was  ordained  a 
Priest  and  sent  out  to  labor  as  a  lo- 
cal missionary  in  Jylland,  in  which 
capacity   he  became   the   first   "Mor- 


mon" preacher  to  testify  of  the  di- 
vine mission  of  the  Prophet  Joseph 
Smith  in  many  of  the  cities,  towns 
and  villages  of  Denmark,  where  large 
branches  of  the  Church  subsequently 
were  raised  up.  He  was  ordained  an 
Elder  Aug.  12,  1852,  by  John  E.  Fors- 
gren.  Being  a  natural  poet,  he  com- 
posed most  of  the  hymns  which  con- 
stituted the  first  edition  of  the  Lat- 
ter-day Saints  hymn  book  in  the  Dan- 


ish language.  In  1853-1854  he  emi- 
grated to  Utah,  and  was  ordained  a 
Seventy  in  1861  by  John  Tidwell; 
later  he  was  ordained  a  High  Priest. 
Elder  Bohn  died  as  a  faithful  mem- 
ber of  the  Church  at  his  residence  in 
South  Cottonwood,  Salt  Lake  county, 
March  14,  1900. 

BOOTH,  Richard  Thornton,  jun., 

one  of  the  Elders  of  the  Church  who 
died  in  the  missionary  field,  was 
born  Jan.  6,  1862,  at  Alpine,  Utah 
county,  Utah,  the  son  of  Richard  T. 
and  Elsie  Edge  Booth.  He  was  bap- 
tized by  his  father,  July  9,  1870,  and 
afterwards  was  ordained  an  Elder. 
Elder  Booth  was  set  apart  for  a  mis- 
sion to  the  Northwestern  States  June 
2  9,  1887,  by  Apostle  Franklin  D. 
Richards  and  at  once  left  for  his  field 
of  labor.     On  arriving  at  the  mission 


BIOGRAPHICAL   ENCYCLOPEDIA. 


605 


headquarters  he  was  assigned  to  la- 
bor in  the  State  of  Kansas.  This  no 
did  faithfully,  at  all  times  defending 
the  truth  and  spreading  the  principles 
of  salvation,  until  he  was  taken  ill 
with  a  fever.  As  he  was  not  able  to 
obtain  the  attention  and  necessary 
rest  in  a  private  home,  he  decided  to 
go  to  the  hospital  and  was  received 
in  the  City  Hospital  at  Kansas  City, 
Mo.,  in  a  very  sick  condition.  At  times 
he  was  delirious  and  unconscious,  but 
for  a  while  seemed  to  improve.  While 
at  the  hospital  he  wrote  a  letter,  de- 
siring to  be  released  to  go  home,  and 
as  soon  as  his  condition  was  made 
known,  the  necessary  funds  were  for- 
warded to  a  missionary  companion. 
Elder  F.  T.  Gunn,  to  defray  Brother 
Booth's  expenses  on  the  journey  home. 
But  before  this  could  be  accomplished 
he  was  overcome  by  the  hand  of  death 
and  passed  away  Nov.  25,  1887,  after 
spending  five  months  in  the  mission- 
ary field.  The  body  was  given  into 
the  hands  of  an  undertaker  in  Kansas 
City,  who  imbalmed  it  and  placed  it 
in  proper  shape  for  transportation;  it 
was  taken  to  the  home  of  Elder 
Booth's  family  at  Alpine  in  the  care 
of  Elder  C.  N.  Porter  of  Orderville, 
Utah.  After  the  departure  of  Elder 
Booth  for  his  mission  his  only  child 
died,  and  three  days  before  his  life- 
less body  arrived  at  the  home,  his  sec- 
ond child  was  born — -six  days  after 
the  father's  death.  Elder  Booth  was 
a  conscientious  and  faithful  mission- 
ary. 

BORUP,  Peter,  junior,  Bishop  of 
the  Eureka  Ward  (Tintic  Stake),  Juab 
county,  Utah,  was  born  Nov.  15,  1869, 
at  Goshen,  Utah  county,  Utah,  the 
son  of  Peter  Borup  and  Christine 
Christensen.  He  removed  with  his 
parents  to  Panguitch  in  1878,  where 
he  was  baptized  by  Bishop  J.  C.  Davis 
when  nine  years  old.  He  received 
considerable  schooling  in  Goshen  and 
Panguitch.  His  father  died  in  Octo- 
ber, 1878,  in  Panguitch,  after  which 
Peter  returned  to  Goshen,  where  he 


resided  until  1885,  when  he  located 
in  Eureka.  In  1897  (May  12th)  he 
married  Laura  Mattinson,  who  has 
borne  him  five  children,  namely,  Leta 
L.,  Klea  Louise,  Carl  M.,  Fern  and 
Helen.  He  worked  as  an  engineer  for 
the  Bullion  Beck  Mining  Co.  for  fif- 
teen years.  Bro.  Borup's  first  office 
in  the  Priesthood  was  that  of  a  Dea- 
con; afterwards  he  was  ordained  an 
Elder  and  filled  a  mission  to  Norway 
in  1906-1908,  laboring  in  the  Bergen 
conference,  part  of  the  time  as  presi- 
dent of  the  same.  Before  going  on 
his  mission  he  acted  as  second  coun- 
selor in  the  Eureka  Ward  Y.  M.  M. 
I.  A.  In  1908  (Aug.  30th),  soon  after 
his  return  from  his  mission,  he  was 
ordained  a  High  Priest  by  Rudger 
Clawson  and  set  apart  to  preside  over 
the  Eureka  Ward,  which  position  he 
still  holds.  Bishop  Borup  has  taken 
an  active  part  also  in  secular  affairs 
and  now  acts  as  a  member  and  treas- 
urer of  the  Carnegie  Library  Board  of 
Eureka. 

BORROWIViAN,  John,  a  member  of 
the  Mormon  Battalion,  was  born  May 
13,  1816,  in  Glasgow,  Lanarkshire, 
Scotland,  the  son  of  William  and  Mar- 
ian Hannah  Borrowman.  Having  em- 
igrated to  Canada  in  his  early  child- 
hood with  his  parents,  he  became  a 
convert  to  "Mormonism,"  and  was 
baptized  June  7,  1840,  by  Samuel  Bol- 
ton. Soon  afterwards  he  was  ordained 
to  the  Priesthood  and  migrated  to 
Nauvoo  in  1843.  From  there  he  filled 
a  mission  to  Ontario,  Canada.  He 
was  with  the  Saints  during  their  exo- 
dus in  1846,  and  on  their  arrival  on 
the  Missouri  river  Bro.  Borrowman 
enlisted  in  the  Mormon  Battalion  and 
marched  to  California. as  a  private  in 
Company  B.  After  his  discharge,  he 
spent  some  time  in  California  and 
worked  at  washing  gold  near  Sutter's 
Mill,  but  arrived  in  Salt  Lake  Valley 
in  1848.  Soon  afterwards  he  married 
Agnes  Thompson  Park,  daughter  of 
Wm.  Park  and  Jane  Duncan,  which 
marriage  was  blessed  with  five  chil- 


606 


LATTER-DAY   SAINT 


dren,  namely,  William  Park,  Jane 
Duncan,  Agnes  Thompson,  John,  and 
Marian  Hannah.  In  1853  he  was 
called  on  a  colonization  mission  to 
Nephi,  Juab  county,  Utah,  to  strength- 
en that  settlement  and  there  he  spent 
the  remainder  of  his  days.  He  was 
ord^iined  a  Seventy  May  28,  1857,  by 
Jacob  Gates  at  Nephi,  and  in  1869- 
1871  he  filled  another  mission  to 
Canada.  He  died  at  Nephi  March  2, 
1898. 

BRANNAN,  Samuel,  once  a  promi- 
nent Elder  in  the  Church,  was  born 
in  the  State  of  Maine  in  1819.  He 
migrated  to  Lake  county,  Ohio,  in 
1833,  where  he  entered  upon  an  ap- 
prenticeship to  learn  letterpress  print- 
ing, and  he  also  entered  into  land 
speculation  early  in  life.  Becoming  a 
convert  to  "Mormonism,"  he  labored 
as  a  missionary  for  some  time  in  the 
East  and  at  length  was  appointed  to 
preside  over  the  branches  of  the 
Church  in  the  Eastern  States.  While 
occupying  that  position  he  published 
a  paper  in  the  interest  of  the  Church 
called  "The  New  York  Messenger."  At 
the  time  of  the  general  exodus  of  the 
Saints  from  Nauvoo,  Elder  Brannan, 
agreeable  to  instructions  from  the 
Church  authorities,  chartered  the  ship 
"Brooklyn,"  on  which  he  sailed  from 
New  York  Feb.  4,  1846,  in  charge  of 
about  two  hundred  and  thirty  Saints. 
The  shifi  doubled  Cape  Horn,  touched 
at  the  Juan  Fernandez  Islands  and  al- 
so the  Hawaiian  Islands  and  arrived 
in  the  Bay  of  San  Francisco,  Cal.,  July 
31,  1846.  In  the  spring  of  1847  El- 
der Brannan  crossed  the  Sierra  Ne- 
vada mountains  and  traveled  east  bj' 
way  of  Fort  Hall  as  far  as  Green 
river,  where  he  met  Fres.  Brigham 
Young  and  the  other  pioneers,  and 
used  every  influence  in  his  power 
with  the  president  to  have  the  Saints 
settle  in  California,  instead  of  Salt 
Lake  Valley.  Being  unable  to  change 
the  president  in  his  course,  Elder 
Brannan  returned  to  California,  dis- 
appointed, and  then  turned  his  atten- 


tion to  financial  matters.  Later  he 
speculated  very  heavily  in  town  lots 
when  the  city  of  San  Francisco  was 
surveyed,  and  at  one  time  he  owned 
nearly  all  the  property  butting  on 
Market  Street.  Prior  to  his  trip  east 
to  meet  the  pioneers  he  had  projected 
and  published  at  Yerba  Bueno  (now 
San  Francisco)  the  "California  Star," 
which  was  the  first  periodical  pub- 
lished in  San  Francisco  and  was  the 
parent  of  the  subsequent  "Alta-Cali- 
fornian."  In  the  fall  of  1847  he 
opened  up  a  store  at  Sutter's  Fort, 
the  first  establishment  of  the  kind  in 
the  Sacramento  Valley.  He  continued 
his  business  during  the  heat  of  the 
gold  excitement  and  laid  the  founda- 
tion for  great  wealth.  In  1849  he  re- 
turned to  San  Francisco  and  conduct- 
ed an  extensive  business  under  the 
firm  name  of  Osborn  and  Brannan  for 
nearly  a  year,  dealing  in  Chinese  mer- 
chandise. Later  he  served  as  a  mem- 
ber of  the  first  regular  town  council 
in  San  Francisco.  In  1851  he  visited 
Hawaii  and  bought  extensive  proper- 
ties in  Honolulu.  In  1853  he  was 
elected  State  senator  in  California, 
and  he  was  one  of  the  founders  of  the 
first  school  in  San  Francisco.  Many 
of  the  most  elegant  structures  in  the 
city  were  built  by  him  and  there  was 
scarcely  an  institution  of  public  use- 
fulness in  which  he  was  not  associ- 
ated. In  1857  he  visited  Europe, 
and  in  1868  he  purchased  from  Abel 
Stearn  extensive  land  tracts  (one  hun- 
dred and  sixty  thousand  acres  of  land) 
in  Los  Angeles  county,  which  resulted 
in  the  opening  of  extensive  tracts  of 
land  to  settlement  by  small  farmers. 
Later  he  became  owner  of  valuable 
property  in  Nevada  and  several  places 
in  California.  In  Napa  Valley,  Cali- 
fornia, he  became  the  proprietor  of  the 
Calistoga  Hot  Springs  and  a  valuable 
estate  of  three  thousand  acres  of  land 
surrounding  these  springs.  In  due 
course  of  time  Samuel  Brannan  lost 
most  of  his  property  and  died  a  poor 
man  in  or  near  San  Diego,  Southern 
California.  Bishop  Edwin  N.  Austin, 
one  of  the  passengers  who  made  the 


BIOGRAPHICAL   ENCYCLOPEDIA. 


60^ 


famous  voyage  from  New  York  to 
California  in  the  ship  "Brooklyn,"  in 
1846,  visited  San  Diego,  in  1905,  and 
soon  afterwards  wrote  the  following: 
"On  Tuesday,  May  30,  1905,  I  visited 
the  Mount  Hope  cemetery  at  San  Di- 
ego, Cal.,  for  the  purpose  of  seeking 
the  last  resting  place  of  the  renowned 
Samuel  Brannan.  *  *  *  After  exam- 
ining the  records  I  found  information 
to  the  following  effect:  Samuel  Bran- 
nan  died  May  14,  1889,  in  the  city  of 
San  Diego  in  great  poverty.  Some 
acquaintance  furnished  a  casket  for 
his  remains.  As  he  had  no  money  to 
buy  a  lot  in  the  cemetery,  his  body 
laid  in  the  receiving  vault  at  San 
Diego  city  for  more  than  a  year,  when 
Alexander  Bledon  bought  a  lot  in  the 
Mount  Hope  cemetery,  to  which  his 
remains  were  removed  in  1890.  He 
was  buried  in  division  4,  section  2, 
lot  7.  A  2x2x7  inch  stake  is  the  only 
mark  at  the  grave."  The  "Deseret 
News,"  at  the  time  of  Samuel  Bran- 
nan's  death,  wrote  the  following,  edi- 
torially: "Sam  Brannan,  the  Cali- 
fornia pioneer,  is  dead.  *  *  *  He 
breathed  his  last  *  *  *  having  suf- 
fered agonies  for  two  weeks  from  in- 
flammation of  the  bowels.  His  name 
and  career  are  familiar  to  the  people 
of  Utah.  He  was  once  a  'Mormon' 
and  obtained  some  prominence  in 
early  times,  as  he  took  a  company  by 
water  from  New  York  to  San  Fran- 
cisco, and  wanted  our  people  to  settle 
on  the  coast.  His  course  and  habits 
were  not  consistent  with  the  life  of  a 
Latter-day  Saint,  and  he  was  discon- 
nected with  the  Church  and  plunged 
into  the  speculations  and  excitements 
of  pioneer  Californian  experience.  He 
was  at  one  time  quite  wealthy,  but 
finally  drifted  into  poverty.  He  hoped 
to  recuperate  by  the  sale  of  land 
which  he  acquired  by  a  Mexican  grant 
in  Sonora,  but  never  realized  his  ex- 
pectations. He  had  some  redeeming 
qualities,  and  it  is  to  be  hoped  that 
these  will  outweigh  the  faults  which 
were  manifested  in  his  adventurous 
and  eventful  life.     Poor  Sam!  will  be 


the  general  expression  over  the  news 
of  his  departure  to  another  sphere." 

BRONSON,  Henry  Donerald,  one  of 

the  Elders  of  the  Church  who  died  in 
the  missionary  field,  was  born  Aug. 
16,  1877,  in  Willard,  Box  Elder  coun- 
ty, Utah,  the  son  of  Edward  Henry 
Bronson  and  Lydia  Ann  Cole.  He  was 
baptized  on  his  eighth  birthday  anni- 
versary by  his  father,  and  moved  with 
his  parents  to  Fairview,  Idaho,  where 
he  resided  until  he  was  called  to  fill 
a  mission  to  the  Southern  States.  El- 
der Bronson  was  set  apart  for  this 
mission  April  19,  1899,  by  Christian 
D.  Fjeldsted,  and  departed  for  his 
field  of  labor  with  a  firm  desire  to  do 
his  duty  and  discharge  every  trust 
with  honor  and  the  good  of  the  king- 
dom of  God.  He  labored  faithfully  in 
this  calling  until  Oct.  5,  1900,  when 
he  met  his  death  by  drowning,  while 
crossing  the  Oconee  river  in  Georgia. 
On  that  fatal  day  Elders  Bronson, 
Butler,  Mayhew  and  Manasseh  Smith 
were  traveling  to  their  assigned  fields 
of  labor  in  the  lower  counties  of 
Georgia,  when  they  came  to  the  Oco- 
nee river,  near  a  place  called  the  Long 
Shoals  Factory;  here  they  called  to  a 
ferryman  on  the  other  side  of  the 
river,  but  failed  to  get  a  reply.  After 
waiting  an  hour  and  a  half,  Elder 
Bronson  and  Elder  Butler  decided  to 
swim  the  river  and  bring  a  boat  over 
for  their  companions.  When  about 
one-third  of  the  way  over  Elder  Bron- 
son turned  .and  began  to  swim  back, 
saying  he  could  not  make  it.  As  he 
called  for  help,  Elder  Butler  immedi- 
ately turned  to  assist  his  companion 
and  did  all  in  his  power  to  save  him, 
but  being  so  nearly  exhausted  himself 
he  had  hard  work  to  save  his  own 
life,  and  Brother  Bronson  disappeared 
beneath  the  water.  The  body  was  not 
found  until  the  morning  of  the  9th, 
when  it  was  properly  encased  and 
taken  to  Fairview,  Idaho,  by  Elder 
John  F.  Perkins,  a  companion  of  the 
deceased.  Elder  Bronson  was  a  young 
man  who  was  respected  by  all  his 
companions.     He  was  unmarried  and 


601 


LATTER-DAY   SAINT 


left  a  loving  father  and  mother  to 
mourn  the  loss  of  a  dutiful  son.  His 
whole  desire  was  to  do  his  duty  and 
be  a  faithful  defender  of  the  gospel. 

BROWN,  Alexander,  a  member  of 
the  Mormon  Battalion,  was  born 
March  3,  1826,  near  Lexington,  North 
Carolina,  the  son  of  Captain  James 
Brown  and  Martha  Stephens.  Becom- 
ing a  convert  to  "Mormonism,"  to- 
gether with  his  father's  family,  he 
was  baptized  by  Jacob  Foutz  in  Adams 
county,  Illinois,  in  1840.  He  was  with 
the  Saints  in  their  persecutions  in  Illi- 
nois and  came  west  in  the  exodus  of 
184  6.  Having  arrived  on  the  Mis- 
souri river  in  July  of  that  year,  he 
enlisted,  together  with  his  father  and 
younger  brother  (Jesse),  in  the  Mor- 
mon Battalion,  and  marched  with  that 
body  to  Sante  Fe,  whence  he  was  as- 
signed to  the  sick  detachment  under 
his  father,  Capt.  James  Brown,  which 
spent  the  winter  of  1846-1847  on 
the  Arkansas  river.  The  following 
spring  the  journey  to  Salt  Lake  Val- 
ley was  continued  and  that  place 
reached  July  29,  1847.  Alexander  as- 
sisted in  building  the  old  fort  in  Salt 
Lake  City.  In  the  spring  of  1848, 
after  his  father  had  purchased  the 
Goodyear  claim  on  the  Weber  river, 
Alexander  went  to  that  locality  with 
his  father  and  plowed  the  first  land 
in  Weber  county.  The  place  where 
this  first  plowing  was  done  was  on  a 
piece  of  ground  lying  between  28th 
and  29th  streets  of  the  present  Ogden 
City  survey,  the  land  now  being  owned 
by  James  M.  Brown  on  Washington 
avenue.  The  first  furrow  plowed  ran 
east  and  west  about  fifty  rods  in 
lejigth.  During  the  gold  excitement  in 
1849  Bro.  Brown,  went  to  California, 
where  he,  on  May  31,  1849,  married 
Amanda  McMurtray,  in  Greenwood 
valley,  Sacramento  county.  She  bore 
her  husband  eight  children.  From 
Greenwood  valley  Bro.  Brown  moved 
to  San  Bernardino,  and  returned  to 
Utah  about  1854.  In  1856  he  was  or- 
dained a  High  Priest  and  set  apart  to 


act  as  a  second  counselor  to  Bishop 
Chauncey  W.  West  of  the  Ogden  Third 
Ward.  Alexander  Brown  continued  a 
resident  of  Weber  county  the  remain- 
der of  his  life;  he  died  in  Ogden 
April  21,  1910,  survived  by  his  wife, 
six  children,  27  grandchildren  and  26 
great-grandchildren. 

BROWN,  Ebenezer,  a  member  of 
the  Mormon  Battalion  and  a  pioneer 
of  Utah,  was  born  Dec.  6,  1802,  at 
Salisbury,  Herkimer  county.  New 
York.  Becoming  a  convert  to  "Mor- 
monism," he  was  baptized  in  1835  In 
Crawford  county,  Pennsylvania.  He 
shared  with  the  Saints  in  their  perse- 
cutions and  was  among  the  exiles  of 
Nauvoo,  Illinois,  in  1846.  When  the 
call  for  the  Mormon  Battalion  came 
to  the  camps  of  Israel  on  the  Missouri 
river  Ebenezer  Brown  was  among 
those  who  proved  their  fidelity  to 
their  country  by  volunteering  in  its 
service.  After  his  discharge  from 
military  duties,  he  located  in  Draper, 
Salt  Lake  county,  in  1849,  being  the 
first  settler  of  that  place.  In  the 
latter  part  of  1850  he  was  called,  to- 
gether with  many  others,  to  form  a 
settlement  in  Iron  county,  and  thus 
became  one  of  the  founders  of  Paro- 
wan  in  January,  1851.  Later  he 
filled  a  mission  to  Carson  Valley, 
where  he  remained  until  1858,  when 
the  Carson  Valley  missionaries  were 
released  on  account  of  the  Johnston 
army  troubles,  and  Brother  Brown 
then  returned  to  his  former  home  in 
Draper,  where  he  spent  the  remainder 
of  his  days  and  where  he  died  Jan. 
25,  1878.  Brother  Brown  was  num- 
bered among  those  who  through  the 
vicissitudes  of  an  eventful  life  never 
faltered  in  his  faith  in  the  principles 
of  the  gospel.  He  was  alive  to  the  in- 
terests of  the  Church  of  Christ  and 
always  ready  to  do  whatever  was 
necessary  on  his  part  to  sustain  it. 
He  left  a  large  family  and  a  very  wide 
circle  of  friends. 

BROWN,  George  Washington,  one 

of  the  original  Utah  pioneers  of  1847, 


BIOGRAPHICAL  ENCYCLOPEDIA. 


609 


was  born  Jan.  25,  1827,  at  Newburg, 
Cuyahoga  county,  Ohio,  the  son  of 
Nathaniel  Brown.  His  father  was  a 
hardy  frontiersman  who  penetrated 
into  the  interior  of  the  country,  felled 
the  timber  in  the  primitive  forests 
and  prepared  the  way  for  the  civili- 
zation which  was  rapidly  advancing 
westward.  He  fought  in  many  en- 
gagements during  the  war  of  1812, 
and  was  wounded  in  one  of  the  bat- 
tles. After  the  death  of  his  father,  in 
1837,  George  W.  removed  with  his 
mother  and  some  other  members  of 


the  family  to  the  State  of  New  York, 
and  settled  in  Chautauqua  county, 
where  his  mother  joined  the  "Mor- 
mon" Church.  In  1843  the  family 
moved  to  Nauvoo,  Illinois,  but  soon 
afterwards  opened  a  farm  near  Mont- 
rose, Iowa.  George  W.  was  baptized 
in  Sugar  Creek,  in  Iowa.  He  spent 
considerable  of  his  time  in  Nauvoo, 
Illinois,  where  he  served  as  a  body- 
guard to  the  Prophet  Joseph  Smith. 
During  the  exodus  of  184  6  he  came 
west  with  the  Saints  and,  after  spend- 
ing the  winter  of  1846-47  in  Winter 
Quarters,  he  was  chosen  as  one  of  the 
pioneers  who  went  to  Great  Salt  Lake 
Valley  under  the  leadership  of  Presi- 
dent Brigham  Young.  He  returned 
with  Pres.  Young  and  other  pioneers 


to  Council  Bluffs  and  in  the  spring  of 
1848  went  to  the  State  of  Missouri, 
where  he  rented  a  farm.  In  1850  he 
went  to  the  Valley,  taking  with  him 
his  mother,  his  brother  and  a  sister, 
and  in  1851  he  opened  a  farm  in 
Springville,  Utah  county.  In  Decem- 
ber, 185  2,  he  married  Elizabeth  Amy 
Hancock  (daughter  of  Levi  W.  and 
Clarissa  Hancock),  by  whom  he  had 
four  children;  she  died  July  28,  1862. 
Brother  Brown's  second  wife  was  Em- 
ma Barros,  who  bore  him  one  son.  In 
184  6  he  was  ordained  a  Seventy  and 
in  1860  he  located  in  Rhoades  Valley 
(nowKamas).  His  nomadic  proclivi- 
ties and  love  of  change  lead  him  to 
move  residence  a  number  of  times. 
In  1866  he  located  in  Wallsburg,  Wa- 
satch county,  Utah,  where  he  encoun- 
tered trouble  with  the  Indians.  In 
18  67  he  purchased  a  large  farm  at 
Charleston,  where  he  resided  the  re- 
mainder of  his  days.  In  1877  he  was 
ordained  a  High  Priest  by  President 
John  Taylor  and  set  apart  as  a  mem- 
ber of  the  Wasatch  Stake  of  Zion, 
with  which  Stake  he  had  been  identi- 
fied since  18  67.  Brother  Brown  died 
at  his  home  in  Charleston,  Wasatch 
county,  Utah,  in  190  6. 

BRUGGER,  Arnold,  an  Elder  who 
died  in  the  missionary  field,  was  born 
Jan.  15,  1887,  at  Venice,  Sevier  coun- 
ty, Utah,  the  son  of  Gottfried  Brug- 
ger  and  Ida  Cramer.  He  was  baptized 
when  eight  years  of  age  by  A.  W. 
Backman,  and  resided  at  Venice  in 
1910,  when  he  was  called  on  a  mis- 
sion to  the  Southern  States.  He  was 
set  apart  Oct.  11,  1910,  and  proceeded 
at  once  to  his  field  of  labor,  where  he 
engaged  in  the  ministry  with  dili- 
gence, but  when  he  went  to  Mont- 
gomery, Alabama,  March  27,  1911,  he 
complained  with  pains  in  his  stomach. 
He  was  immediately  taken  to  a  doctor 
who  waited  on  him  during  the  week. 
The  J]lders  also  administered  to  him 
repeatedly  and  he  seemed  to  get  bet- 
ter. Later,  however,  a  physician  was 
again    called,    who,    after    examining 


vol.  Ill,  No.  39. 


April  10,  1920 


610 


LATTER-DAY   SAINT 


him,  said  that  the  young  man  had 
walking  typhoid  fever.  Consequently 
he  was  taken  to  the  Margaretes  hos- 
pital in  Montgomery,  April  3,  1911, 
where  his  fever  registered  109  de- 
grees. The  following  day  (April  4, 
1911),  he  (unexpectedly  to  those  who 
waited  on  him)  passed  away.  The 
body  was  embalmed  and  sent  to  his 
home  in  Venice,  Utah,  where  impres- 
sive funeral  services  were  held  April 
13,  1911.  Elder  Brugger's  death 
came  as  a  shock  and  surprise  to  his 
relatives.  He  had  only  been  in  the 
mission  field  five  months,  but  he  was 
an  ideal  missionary,  always  ready  to 
obey  those  in  authority  over  him. 
He  was  universally  beloved  by  all  the 
Elders,  saints  and  friends  who  knew 
him. 

BULKLEY,  NeAvman,  a  member  of 
the  Mormon  Battalion,  was  born  Aug. 
18,  1817,  in  the  town  of  Catharine, 
Tioga  county.  New  York,  the  son  of 
Noah  Summers  Bulkley  and  Anna 
Newman.  At  the  age  of  five  years  he 
moved  with  his  parents  to  Pennsyl- 
vania, where  he  remained  until  he 
was  nearly  twenty-one  years  of  age. 
He  then  moved  to  the  State  of  Mis- 
souri, where  he  remained  five  months 
and  then  had  to  leave  because  he  and 
his  family  were  "Mormons."  He  next 
moved  to  Scott  county,  Hlinois,  and 
later  to  Pike  county,  in  the  same  State. 
Here  he  met  Jane  Draper,  whom  he 
married  Jan.  7,  1844.  In  July,  1845, 
he  moved  to  Golden's  Point  and  re- 
sided there  until  the  exodus  of  the 
Church  from  Nauvoo  took  place  in 
1846.  He  traveled  with  the  camps  of 
Israel  to  Council  Bluffs,  Iowa,  and 
when  the  call  came  for  the  Mormon 
Battalion,  he  enlisted  in  the  same  in 
defense  of  his  country's  cause,  leav- 
ing his  wife  and  a  six  months'  old 
child.  When  he  took  his  departure 
his  wife  was  so  sick  that  she  could 
scarcely  sit  up,  and  only  had  provi- 
sions to  last  her  and  child  about  one 
month.  Brother  Bulkley  marched  to 
California  and  there  received  his  dis- 


charge. Along  with  other  comrades 
he  made  his  way  to  Great  Salt  Lake 
Valley,  arriving  there  Oct.  16,  1847. 
He  remained  in  the  Valley  until  Aug. 
15,  1848,  when  he  started  for  Kanes- 
ville,  Iowa,  after  his  family,  arriving 
in  good  season,  and  found  his  wife 
working  out  to  maintain  herself  and 
child.  He  next  went  to  work  to  make 
an  outfit  with  which  to  return  to  the 
Valley.  It  took  him  four  years  to 
earn  sufficient  means  for  that  pur- 
pose, but  finally  he  crossed  the  plains 
and  arrived  with  his  family  in  the 
Valley  Oct.  9,  1852.  He  settled  in 
Springville,  Utah  county,  which  be- 
came his  permanent  home.  Brother 
Bulkley  passed  through  the  hard  ex- 
periences which  was  the  lot  of  the 
pioneers  of  Utah.  About  the  year  issu 
his  health  began  to  fail  him  and  he 
never,  after  that,  fully  regained  his 
former  strength.  His  last  illness  last- 
ed about  eighteen  days  and  he  died 
in  Springville  March  13,  1893.  Bro. 
Bulkley  never  wavered  in  the  cause 
of  truth  and  his  dying  testimony  to 
his  family  and  all  others  was  that  he 
knew  the  gospel  to  be  true,  and  en- 
joined his  children  to  be  true  to  the 
same.  His  wife  preceded  him  to  the 
Great  Beyond.  Brother  Bulkley  was 
a  hard  worker  and  produced  much 
material  for  building  purposes.  To- 
gether with  Abraham  Noe  he  opened 
the  so-called  "Slide"  (still  bearing 
his  name)  north  of  Springville,  whence 
thousands  of  feet  of  lumber  were  pro- 
cured that  entered  into  the  construc- 
tion of  the  first  houses  in  the  town. 
He  was  a  mountain  worker  for  years, 
until  his  health  failed,  owing  to  the 
extreme  exposures  to  the  mountain 
blasts  and  snow. 

BURDETTE,   Burdette  Preston,    a 

young  Elder  who  died  while  filling  a 
foreign  mission,  was  born  July  22, 
1885,  in  Salt  Lake  City,  Utah,  the  son 
of  Joseph  Burdette  and  Elizabeth  A. 
Walding.  He  received  a  good  educa- 
tion, was  baptized  March  28,  1893,  by 
Isaac  Barton,  and  ordained  an  Elder 


BIOGRAPHICAL   ENCYCLOPEDIA. 


611 


when  quite  young.  He  resided  with 
his  parents  in  the  17th  Ward,  Salt 
Lake  City,  when  he,  in  1907,  was 
called  on  a  mission  to  Switzerland 
and  Germany,  to  which  he  was  set 
apart  April  2  3,  1907.  On  his  arrival 
in  the  Swiss  and  German  mission  he 
was  appointed  to  labor  in  Konigs- 
berg.  East  Prussia,  where  he  soon  be- 


came known  as  a  faithful  and  suc- 
cessful missionary,  but  while  bathing 
in  the  Baltic  Sea,  near  Konigsberg, 
together  with  three  other  mission- 
aries and  two  friends,  July  14,  1908, 
he  was  accidentally  drowned.  He 
waded  out  quite  a  distance  into  the 
sea,  where  a  large  log  floated  as  a 
buoy,  and  while  he  was  sitting  upon 
it,  the  log  turned,  and  he  was  thrown 
into  the  water  beyond  his  depth.  Be- 
ing unable  to  swim,  he  was  drowned 
before  his  companions  could  rescue 
him.  His  lifeless  body  was  found  by 
an  expert  diver  soon  after  the  acci- 
dent. The  remains  were  shipped  to 
his  home  in  Salt  Lake  City,  where 
impressive  funeral  services  were  held 
in  the  17th  Ward  meeting  house. 
Brother  Burdette  was  an  unmarried 
man,  22  years  old.  He  had  made  many 
friends  on  his  mission  and  undoubted- 
ly would  have  become  a  very  efficient 
Elder,  had  his  life  been  spared. 


BURNHAM,  James,  one  of  the  El- 
ders of  the  Church  who  died  while  in 
the  missionary  field,  was  an  Ameri- 
can by  birth  and  became  a  convert  to 
"Mormonism"  in  the  early  days  of  the 
Church.  In  1840-42  he  filled  a  mis- 
sion to  Great  Britain,  laboring  in  Eng- 
land and  Wales,  and  in  1843  he  was 
called  on  a  mission  to  the  Eastern 
States,  where  he  was  exposed  to  the 
inclemency  of  the  weather,  which, 
coupled  with  excessive  labor,  brought 
on  quick  consumption,  with  which  he 
died  March  22,  1843,  in  Richmond, 
Mass.  He  left  a  wife  and  several 
children. 

BURT,  Albert  Cleon,  an  Elder  who 
died  while  filling  a  foreign  mission, 
was  born  Sept.  17,  1890,  at  Brigham 
City,  Box  Elder  county,  Utah,  the  son 
of  Albert  Burt  and  Lenora  Nelson. 
He  was  baptized  Sept.  17,  1898,  by 
J.  P.  C.  Johnson,  and  later  ordained 
to  the  Priesthood.  While  residing  at 
Bear  River  City,  Box  Elder  county, 
Utah,  he  was  called  on  a  mission  to 
New  Zealand.  He  was  set  apart  for 
this  mission  Nov.  21, 1911,  and  started 
immediately  for  his  appointed  field 
of  labor,  where  he  was  engaged  faith- 
fully in  missionary  work  until  he  was 
attacked  with  sickness  (typhoid  fev- 
er), from  which  he  died  at  Thames, 
near  Auckland,  Jan.  8,  1913.  His  re- 
mains were  shipped  home  by  way  of 
Vancouver,  B.  C,  in  care  of  Elder 
Ephraim  E.  Wright  (Elder  Burt's  mis- 
sionary companion).  Impressive  fu- 
neral services  were  held  at  Brigham 
City  Feb.  10,  1913. 

BUSH3IAX,  Lewis  Jacob,  an  Elder 

of  the  Church  who  died  while  labor- 
ing in  the  missionary  field,  was  the 
son  of  Martin  Benjamin  Bushman  and 
Lucinda  L.  Goodwin,  and  was  born  in 
Lehi,  Utah  county,  Utah,  July  16, 
1872.  He  was  baptized  by  Abel  John 
Evans  in  1880,  and  later  ordained  to 
the  Priesthood.  Elder  Bushman  was 
set  apart  for  a  mission  to  the  South- 
ern States  April  14,  1897,  and  after 
laboring   in   the   ministry    about    one 


612 


LATTER-DAY   SAINT 


year,  he  was  suddenly  taken  sick  with 
typhoid  fever.  He  was  sick  about 
twenty-three  days  and  gradually  grew 
worse  from  day  to  day  until  his  death, 
which  occurred  Oct.  31,  1897,  in  Rus- 
sell county,  Kentucky. 

BUTLER,  Thomas,  one  of  the  mis- 
sionaries of  the  Church  who  died 
away  from  home,  was  born  May  9, 
1851,  at  Little  Pigeon,  Pottawattamie 
county,  Iowa,  the  son  of  John  Lowe 
Butler  and  Caroline  Skeen.   In  May, 

1883,  he  was  set  apart  for  a  mission 
to  the  Eastern  States  by  Apostle  Wil- 
ford  Woodruff,  and  returned  Jan.  19, 

1884.  He  again  performed  a  mission 
to  the  States  in  1885-1887.  On  the 
3rd  of  November,  1890,  he  was  set 
apart  for  a  mission  to  the  Southern 
States,  and  left  for  his  field  the  next 
day.  He  was  assigned  to  labor  in  Vir- 
ginia, where  he  remained  almost  con- 
tinually, laboring  with  good  results 
until  1892.  He  made  many  warm- 
hearted friends,  and  labored  zealously 
for  the  cause  of  truth.  Being  released 
to  return  home  on  account  of  the  ef- 
fects of  malarial  fever,  contracted 
while  in  the  missionary  field,  he  ar- 
rived in  Salt  Lake  City  April  4,  1892. 
The  greater  portion  of  the  upper  part 
of  his  body  was  covered  with  car- 
buncles, which  for  some  reason  would 
not  heal,  although  he  received  the 
best  of  attention.  At  times  his  suffer- 
ings were  intense,  but  the  terrible 
affliction  was  borne  with  a  fortitude 
characteristic  of  the  man.  Early  in 
April  blood  poisoning  set  in,  with  fa- 
tal results.  He  died  in  Salt  Lake  City 
April  16,  1892,  before  he  could  ar- 
rive at  his  home  in  Richfield,  Sevier 
county,  Utah. 

BUTLER,  WiUiain  H.,  an  Elder  of 
the  Church  who  died  while  filling  a 
mission  to  a  foreign  land,  was  born 
April  24,  1857,  in  Kaysville,  Davis 
county,  Utah,  April  24,  1857,  the  son 
of  William  Butler  and  Emma  Harvey. 
He  was  baptized  by  his  father  at  the 
age  of  ten  years.    At  the  general  con- 


ference of  the  Church  held  in  Octo- 
ber, 1880,  he  was  called  to  fill  a  mis- 
sion to  Great  Britain,  and  left  home 
for  England  on  the  12th  of  that 
month.  On  arriving  in  Liverpool,  he 
was  appointed  by  Pres.  Wm.  Budge 
to  travel  in  the  Durham  and  Newcastle 
conference.  For  some  time  he  suf- 
fered with  rheumatism  and  was  also 
troubled  with  a  cough.  A  short  time 
before  his  death  he  was  taken  down 
with  typhoid  fever  and  was  removed 
to  Birmingham,  where  he  died  Feb. 
24,  1882.  His  father  and  brother  were 
laboring  in  the  British  Mission  at  the 
time. 

CALL,  Anson  Vasco,  one  of  the 
Elders  of  the  Church  who  died  while 
away  from  home  filling  a  foreign  mis- 
sion, was  born  July  9,  1834,  in  Madi- 
son, Geauga  county,  Ohio,  the  son  of 
Anson  Call  and  Mary  Flint.  He  was 
baptized  by  his  father  Nov.  20,  1844, 
in  Nauvoo,  Illinois,  when  ten  years 
old,  but  dated  the  first  recollection 
of  his  life  from  the  persecutions  of 
the  saints  at  Adam-ondi-Ahman,  in 
Missouri.  At  the  time  of  the  exodus 
of  the  saints  from  Nauvoo,  in  1846, 
he  journeyed  westward  with  his  par- 
ents, and  came  to  Great  Salt  Lake 
Valley  in  184  8,  where  he  married  and 
became  the  father  of  a  large  family. 
He  filled  several  offices  of  trust,  such 
as  justice  of  the  peace,  selectman, 
school  teacher,  Ward  clerk,  etc.,  and 
during  the  several  missions  which  his 
father  performed  he  took  charge  of 
his  father's  business,  sustaining  the 
family  and  contributing  to  their  hap- 
piness by  making  many  good  and  per- 
manent improvements.  He  also  la- 
bored diligently  to  improve  his  mind 
by  seeking  the  acquaintance  of  books 
and  succeeded  in  acquiring  a  fair  edu- 
cation. In  the  spring  of  1857  he  was 
appointed  a  missionary  to  the  Sand- 
wich Islands,  and  proceeded  with 
others  as  far  as  San  Francisco,  when 
they  were  called  home  on  account  of 
the  so-called  Buchanan  war.  After 
his    return    home    he   participated    in 


BIOGRAPHICAL   ENCYCLOPEDIA. 


613 


the  Echo  Canyon  expedition  and 
passed  the  winter  of  1857-1858  in 
the  mountains.  In  18  64  he  was  called 
on  a  mission  to  Great  Britain,  and 
while  in  England  he  labored  in  the 
Newcastle-upon-Tyne  conference;  sub- 
sequently he  presided  over  the  Bris- 
tol conference  and  still  later  over  the 
Sheffield  conference.  The  latter  po- 
sition he  held  at  the  time  of  his  re- 
lease. During  the  latter  part  of  his 
mission  his  labors  were  curtailed  by 
the  sickness  which  is  supposed  to 
have  caused  his  death.  He  died  while 
crossing  the  plains,  Aug.  4,  1867,  at 
Rock  Creek,  between  the  first  and 
second   crossings  of  the   Sweetwater. 

CAMPBELL,  Robert  Lang,  chief 
clerk  in  the  office  of  the  Church  His- 
torian, was  born  Jan.  21,  1825,  in 
Kilbarchan,  Renfrewshire,  Scotland, 
the  son  of  Alexander  Campbell  and 
Agnes  Lang.     Becoming  a  convert  to 


the  restored  gospel,  he  was  baptized 
Aug.  9,  1842.  Soon  afterwards  he 
was  ordained  to  the  Priesthood,  and 
was  called  to  labor  as  a  local  mission- 
ary in  July,  1843,  continuing  thus  in 
different  parts  of  Scotland  and  Wales 
until  Jan.  14,  1845,  when  he  emigrat- 
ed to  America,  sailing  from  Glasgow, 
Scotland.      Soon  after  his   arrival  in 


Nauvoo,  Illinois,  he  resumed  his  ac- 
tivities in  the  Church,  was  ordained  a 
Seventy,  April  9,  1845,  and  became  a 
member  of  the  24th  quorum  of  Sev- 
enty. During  the  years  1845  and  1846 
he  was  engaged  in  clerical  work  at 
Nauvoo  with  Patriarch  John  Smith 
and  Apostle  Willard  Richards.  In 
1845  (Nov.  20th)  he  married  Joan 
Scobie,  in  Nauvoo,  Illinois;  she  died 
in  childbirth  Oct.  16,  1846,  near  the 
Des  Moines  river,  Iowa,  through  ex- 
posture  subsequent  upon  her  expul- 
sion from  Nauvoo,  in  connection  with 
her  co-religionists.  The  child  also 
died.  Brother  Campbell  and  his  wife 
had  left  Nauvoo  Sept.  23,  1846,  and 
after  having  buried  his  wife  and  child 
he  arrived  in  Winter  Quarters  Nov. 
27,  1846.  When  the  pioneers  were 
chosen  in  the  spring  of  1847,  Brother 
Campbell  was  selected  as  one  of  them, 
but  was  detained  because  of  other 
duties  at  Winter  Quarters  until  the 
summer  of  1848,  when  he  migrated 
to  Great  Salt  Lake  Valley.  In  1850  he 
was  called  on  a  mission  to  Great  Brit- 
ain, where  he  labored  faithfully  as  a 
missionary  about  four  years.  During 
this  time  Brother  Campbell  married 
Mary   Stewart   in    Glasgow,    Nov.    14, 

1853.  She  was  the  daughter  of  Arch- 
ibald Stewart  and  Esther  Lyle  and 
was  born  Dec.  13,  1829.  She  emi- 
grated to  Utah  with  her  husband  in 

1854,  when  Brother  Campbell  acted 
as  captain  of  a  company  of  emigrat- 
ing Saints,  which  arrived  in  Salt  Lake 
City,  Oct.  24,  1854.  In  1855  (May 
6th),  obeying  the  higher  law  of  mar- 
riage, Brother  Campbell  was  united 
to  Jeanie  Miller  (daughter  of  Robert 
Miller  and  Jane  Brown),  who  was 
born  Feb.  3,  1836.  In  1854  (Nov. 
20th)  he  entered  the  service  of  the 
Church  as  a  clerk  in  the  Historian's 
office,  having  charge  of  its  clerical 
work,  and  continued  to  hold  that  po- 
sition until  his  demise.  He  was  elect- 
ed as  secretary  of  the  Deseret  Agri- 
cultural and  Manufacturing  Society 
March  15,  1856,  and  appointed  a  re- 
gent of  the  Deseret  University  of  the 


614 


LATTER-DAY   SAINT 


Legislative  Assembly  March  5,  1857. 
In  March,  1860,  he  was  elected  super- 
intendent of  schools  for  Salt  Lake 
county,  and  in  January,  1862,  he 
was  elected  superintendent  of  schools 
for  the  Territory  of  Utah,  which  po- 
sition he  held  until  the  day  of  his 
death,  which  occurred  April  11,  187  2, 
in  Salt  Lake  City,  Utah.  Bro.  Camp- 
bell served  as  chief  clerk  of  the  House 
of  Representatives  of  the  Utah  Legis- 
lature in  1872,  and  also  during  a 
number  of  previous  sessions.  He  was 
one  of  Utah's  foremost  educators  and 
the  first  promoter  of  the  free  school 
system  in  Utah.  Hospitality  was  one 
of  Bro.  Campbell's  most  noticeable 
characteristics,  and  emigrants  and 
strangers  always  found  a  welcome 
and  a  word  of  encouragement  at  his 
home.  He  was  a  public  spirited  citi- 
zen and  a  kind  husband  and  father. 
At  the  time  of  his  demise,  his  wife, 
Mary,  was  left  with  ten  children  (the 
oldest  only  eighteen  years  of  age), 
namely,  Robert  S.,  Mary  S.,  Elizabeth 
S.,  Joseph  S.,  Isabella  S.,  Annie  S.  and 
Agnes  S.  (twins),  George  A.,  Sarah 
S.  and  Alexander  S.  His  wife,  Jeanie, 
had  five  young  children,  namely,  Joan 
M.,  Arthur  M.,  Brigham  M.,  James  M. 
and  John  M.,  surviving  him. 

CANNON,  David  Hoagland,  an  El- 
der who  died  while  filling  a  foreign 
mission,  was  born  April  14,  1871,  m 
Salt  Lake  City,  Utah,  the  son  of  Geo. 
Q.  Cannon  and  Elizabeth  Hoagland. 
At  the  age  of  eight  years  he  was  bap- 
tized by  his  uncle,  Angus  M.  Cannon, 
and  grew  up  firm  in  the  faith,  hav- 
ing been  tutored  in  the  knowledge  of 
the  gospel.  He  was  a  young  man  of 
superior  gifts  and  extraordinary 
promise.  On  the  8th  day  of  April, 
1892,  he  was  set  apart  by  his  brother, 
Abraham  H.,  for  a  mission  to  Ger- 
many, and  towards  the  latter  part  of 
the  month  he  set  out  upon  this  mis- 
sion and  immediately  began  his  la- 
bors in  the  northern  part  of  the  Ger- 
man empire.  From  the  very  outset 
he  evinced  uncommon  zeal,  and  as  a 


result  of  a  persistent  striving  for  the 
spirit  that   aforetime   characterized 
the  labors  of  the  Elders,  he  resolved 
to    travel    without    purse    and    scrip. 
Writing   home,   he   declared   that   he 
felt   he   would    be    under   condemna- 
tion if  he  did  not  thus  place  his  trust 
in  God;  he  doubted  not  the  power  of 
his    Heavenly    Father    to    supply    his 
needs.      After   much   prayer,    and    in 
spite  of  the  discouraging  advice  given 
him  by  some  of  his  associates,  he  res- 
olutely entered  upon  this  line  of  ac- 
tion— this,   too,   before  he  had  mas- 
tered or  even  had  sufficient  time  to 
partially   master  the  German  lan- 
guage.    He  gave  to  the  poor  all  his 
clothes,  save  those  in  which  he  stood, 
and  to  the  same  purpose  devoted  all 
his  pocket  money.   Even  with  this  he 
was  not  content.    He  wrote  home,  re- 
questing his  father  to  cause  that  the 
money  coming  to  him  there  be  given 
in  the  same  way  and  that  the  family, 
instead  of  sending  means  to  him,  ex- 
pend   it    in    the    manner    suggested. 
Early  in  October,  1892,  while  labor- 
ing faithfully  in  the  discharge  of  his 
duties,   still  traveling  without  purse 
and  scrip,  he  was  compelled,  because 
of  illness,  to  cease  his  labors  when  at 
Sorau,    Silesia.     On    Friday,    Oct.    14, 
1892,  his  Brother  Hugh  J.,  who  was 
also  laboring  in  Germany,  was  called 
to  his  bedside;   he  found  his  brother 
David  very  sick  at  Sorau,   suffering 
from  throat  trouble,  scarcely  able  to 
speak    a    word    and    quite    delirious. 
The  people  with  whom  he  stayed,  who 
were  members  of  the   Church,   were 
very  kind  and  watched  over  him  as 
they  would  have  done  for  their  own 
son.     On  Sunday,  Oct.   16th,  he  was 
much    better   until   towards   night, 
when  he  began  to  grow  worse,   and 
the  next  morning    (Oct.    17th,   1892) 
he  quietly  passed   away.    The  imme- 
diate cause  of  his   death  was   heart- 
failure.      After    being    properly    em- 
balmed   and    enclosed,    the    remains 
were  brought   to  Salt  Lake  City   for 
burial,  under  care  of  Elder  Hugh  J. 
Cannon,   brother  of  the  deceased. 


BIOGRAPHICAL   ENCYCLOPEDIA. 


615 


Memorial  services  were  held  Nov.  13, 
18  92,  in  the  Salt  Lake  Tabernacle, 
over  the  remains,  and  in  memory  of 
all  those  who  had  died  for  the  trutn 
in  the  missionary  field,  laboring  for 
the  cause  of  Zion.  These  services  were 
of  an  unique  and  impressive  charac- 
ter and  the  congregation  was  one  of 
the  largest  ever  seen  within  the  walls 
of  the  Tabernacle,  every  available 
space  being  occupied. 

CANNON,  I/ester  Jenkins,  an  Elder 
who  died  while  filling  a  foreign  mis- 
sion, was  born  July  4,  1888,  in  Salt 
Lake  City,  Utah,  the  son  of  Abraham 
H.  Cannon  and  Sarah  Ann  Jenkins. 
He  was  baptized  July  4,  1896,  by 
George  Q.  Cannon,  and  resided  in 
Cannon  Ward,  Salt  Lake  City,  when 
he  was  called  on  a  mission  to  the 
Netherlands,  being  set  apart  for  that 
mission  July  7,  1909.  On  his  arrival 
at  mission  headquarters,  he  was  as- 
signed to  labor  in  the  French-speak- 
ing part  of  the  Netherlands  Mission, 
first  in  Belgium  and  later  in  France. 
He  became  very  proficient  in  the 
French  language  and  did  considerable 
interpreting  for  other  Elders.  Having 
been  a  worker  in  the  Sunday  school 
and  Y.  M.  M.  I.  A.  from  childhood, 
he  was  a  boy  of  strong  faith,  was  pos- 
sessed of  indefatigable  industry  and 
an  exceptionally  powerful  physique, 
on  whom  it  would  seem  that  disease 
could  make  no  attack.  Besides  this 
he  was  of  a  sunny  and  lovable  dispo- 
sition, making  friends  wherever  he 
went,  but  he  was  stricken  unexpect- 
edly during  a  visit  to  Brussels,  Bel- 
gium, May  8,  1911,  with  severe  pain. 
After  consulting  physicians,  who  pro- 
nounced the  case  to  be  appendicitis, 
complicated  with  peritonitis,  it  was 
decided  that  he  should  undergo  an 
operation.  The  young  Elder  stood  the 
ordeal  well  and  rallied,  until  he  could 
converse  freely  with  his  associates, 
but  toward  noon  the  following  day 
alarming  symptoms  appeared  and  he 
passed  peacefully  away  at  Lille, 
France,  May  6,  1911.     His  body  was 


embalmed  and  sent  home  for  burial. 
From  letters  written  to  his  mother  a 
few  days  before  his  death,  it  seems 
that  Elder  Cannon  had  recently  had 
a  number  of  very  remarkable  dreams, 
which  indicated  plainly  that  he  was 
soon  to  pass  to  another  sphere  of  ac- 
tion. His  letter  so  impressed  the 
mother  that  she  was  prepared  for  the 
news  of  his  death  before  the  sad  mes- 
sage reached  her.  Funeral  services 
were  held  over  his  remains  in  the 
Pioneer  Stake  Hall,  Salt  Lake  City, 
June  7,  1911. 

CARTER,  Gideon  Haden,  one  of  the 

martyrs  of  the  Church,  was  born  in 
1798  in  the  town  of  Benson,  Rutledge 
county,  Vermont.  Becoming  a  con- 
vert to  "Mormonism,"  he  was  bap- 
tized Oct.  25,  1831,  at  Orange,  Cuya- 
hoga county,  Ohio,  by  Joseph  Smith 
and  confirmed  by  Sidney  Rigdon.  Af- 
ter being  ordained  a  Priest  by  Oliver 
Cowdery,  he  performed  missionary  la- 
bor in  Amherst,  Brownham,  Florence 
and  New  London.  He  attended  the 
conference  held  Jan.  25,  1832,  at  Am- 
herst, Ohio,  where  he  was  ordained 
an  Elder  and  was  commanded  by  rev- 
elation (Doc.  and  Cov.  75:34)  to  la- 
bor in  the  ministry,  together  with 
Brother  Sylvester  Smith.  They  start- 
ed from  Kirtland  on  their  mission 
April  5,  1832.  In  going  through  the 
northeastern  corner  of  Pennsylvania, 
near  Lake  Erie,  they  held  four  meet- 
ings and  administered  to  a  sick  sister, 
who  recovered  immediately.  Contin- 
uing their  journey  through  western 
New  York,  they  preached  in  Westfield 
and  other  places  and  baptized  several 
persons.  They  extended  their  fields 
of  labor  into  Vermont  and  returned 
to  Kirtland  Aug.  24,  1832.  During. 
this  year  Elder  Carter's  wife  (Hilah 
Burwell)  died,  strong  in  the  faith,, 
and  subsequently  (in  1833)  he  mar- 
ried Charlotte  Woods,  who  survived 
him  and  afterwards  became  the  wife 
of  Isaac  Higbee.  In  1838  Bro.  Carter 
was  a  resident  of  Far  West,  Caldwell 
county,  Missouri.     Late  in  the  even- 


616 


LATTER-DAY   SAINT 


ing  of  Oct.  24,  1838,  news  reached 
Far  West  that  the  Rev.  Samuel  Bo- 
gart,  with  a  mob  of  about  seventy- 
five  men,  were  committing  depreda- 
tions on  Log  Creek,  destroying  prop- 
erty and  taking  prisoners.  The  trum- 
pet sounded  and  the  brethren  assem- 
bled on  the  public  square  in  Far  West 
about  midnight,  when  Capt.  David  W. 
Patten,  Parley  P.  Pratt,  Charles  C. 
Rich  and  many  others  started  for  the 
south  to  rescue  their  brethren  who 
had  been  taken  prisoners.  It  came  to 
a  pitched  battle  with  Bogart's  mobo- 
crats  early  in  the  morning  of  Oct.  25, 
1838,  in  which  Gideon  H.  Carter  and 
Patterson  O'Banion  were  killed  out- 
right and  David  W.  Patten  mortally 
wounded;  a  number  of  others,  who 
were  wounded,  afterwards  recovered. 
After  the  battle  Gideon  H.  Carter,  who 
had  been  shot  in  the  head,  was  found 
dead  on  the  ground,  so  defaced  that 
his  comrades  did  not  know  him,  but 
as  soon  as  it  was  discovered  who  he 
was,  his  body  was  brought  away  and 
buried. 

CARTER,  Hyrum,  a  Latter-day 
Saint  Elder  who  died  while  filling  a 
mission,  was  born  Sept.  5,  18  69,  in 
Round  Valley,  Morgan  county,  Utah, 
the  son  of  Samuel  and  Ellen  Mosser 
Carter.  He  was  baptized  by  Oscar 
O.  Stoddard  Oct.  21,  1877,  and  after- 
wards ordained  to  the  Priesthood. 
He  was  set  apart  for  a  mission  to  the 
Southern  States  March  3,  18d3,  and 
labored  in  the  South  Carolina  con- 
ference until  his  death,  which  oc- 
curred on  Oct.  23,  1894.  The  body 
was  brought  home  by  Pres.  Elias  S. 
Kimball  of  the  Southern  States  Mis- 
sion. Bro.  Carter  held  the  Priest- 
hood of  a  Seventy  and  was  a  member 
of  the  35th  quorum  of  Seventy. 

CARTWRIGHT,  Joseph  H.,  an  El- 
der who  died  in  the  missionary  field, 
was  born  June  7,  1887,  in  Beaver, 
Beaver  county,  Utah,  the  son  of  Thos. 
H.  Cartwright  and  Sarah  Yardley.  In 
his  youth  he  was  of  an  exemplary  dis- 
position, and  when  he  was  not  away 


at  work  he  was  always  ready  to  fill 
his  place  in  the  auxiliary  associations 
of  the  Church.  He  was  baptized  when 
about  eight  years  old  and  still  resided 
at  Beaver  in  1909,  when  he  was  called 
on  a  mission  to  the  Western  States. 
After  being  set  apart  for  that  mission 
March  9,  1909,  he  left  for  Denver, 
Colorado,  arriving  in  Denver  March 
12,  1909.  He  labored  in  that  city 
until  September  28,  1909,  making 
a  host  of  warm  friends.  From  Den- 
ver he  was  transferred  to  the  North 
Colorado  conference,  where  he  con- 
tinued his  work  in  a  faithful,  con- 
scientious manner.  After  being  in  the 
latter  place  for  some  time,  he  was 
stricken  with  typhoid  at  Lafayette, 
but  would  not  give  up  his  labors  un- 
til forced  to  do  so  by  weakness.  He 
was  taken  to  Boulder,  where  more 
efficient  attendance  could  be  given 
him,  and  after  being  confined  to  his 
bed  for  one  week,  he  died  at  Boulder 
Oct.  22,  1909.  His  remains  were 
shipped  to  his  home  in  Beaver,  where 
impressive  funeral  services  were  held 
Oct.  26,  1909.  Elder  Cartwright,  who 
was  only  twenty-three  years  of  age, 
had  only  been  in  the  mission  field 
seven  months  when  he  was  stricken 
with  the  disease  which  terminated  in 
his  death. 

CHERRY,  Jesse  Yelton,  a  Latter- 
day  Saint  Elder  who  died  while  fill- 
ing a  mission,  was  born  June  10, 
1840,  in  Adams  county,  Illinois,  the 
son  of  Aaron  B.  Cherry  and  Mary 
Yelton,  came  to  Utah  with  his  par- 
ents and  was  baptized  in  1849.  On 
April  22,  1864,  he  was  set  apart  for 
a  mission  to  England  by  Apostle  John 
Taylor  and  arrived  in  Liverpool  July 
1st,  following,  on  the  steamship  "Vir- 
ginia." He  labored  in  the  Norwich 
conference  until  the  general  confer- 
ence held  in  Birmingham  in  January, 
18  65,  when  he  was  appointed  to  la- 
bor in  the  Nottingham  conference  and 
entered  upon  his  duties  in  this  field 
Feb.  21st.  He  labored  faithfully  in 
the   land,    gaining   the   confidence   of 


BIOGRAPHICAL   ENCYCLOPEDIA. 


617 


the  saints.  He  was  seized  by  small- 
pox May  7,  1865,  but  no  immediate 
danger  was  apprehended  until  the 
15th,  when  an  unexpected  change 
took  place.  Every  effort  was  made 
to  retard  its  progress,  but  without 
avail.  Bro.  Cherry  died  May  20,  1865, 
and  was  buried  the  following  day  in 
the  Nottingham  cemetery. 

CHBISTENSEN,    Hannibal   L..,    an 

Elder  who  died  while  filling  a  for- 
eign mission,  was  born  April  5,  1846, 
in  Copenhagen,  Denmark,  the  son  of 
Anders  Christensen  and  Petrina 
Hoist.  He  was  baptized  in  January, 
1876,  by  Adolph  Johnson  as  a  con- 
vert to  the  true  gospel,  and  after 
emigrating  to  Utah  he  made  his  resi- 
dence at  Riverton,  Salt  Lake  county. 
Having  previously  been  ordained  to 
the  Priesthood,  he  was  set  apart  for 
a  mission  to  Scandinavia  March  30, 
1900,  and  arrived  in  Liverpool  April 
22,  1900,  on  the  steamship  "Penn- 
land."  On  arriving  in  Liverpool  Ei- 
der Christensen  was  suffering  severe- 
ly from  a  complication  of  ailments. 
In  his  weak  condition  it  would  have 
been  impossible  for  him  to  continue 
his  journey  toward  Scandinavia,  for 
he  had  been  afflicted  on  the  entire 
journey  since  leaving  home,  and  af- 
ter obtaining  medical  advice,  it  was 
deemed  best  that  he  be  taken  to  the 
Royal  Infirmary  in  Liverpool,  where 
he  received  the  best  of  care  and  med- 
ical treatment.  In  this  condition  he 
lingered  until  Aug.  23,  1900,  when 
he  gave  up  the  battle  of  life.  The 
brethren  and  sisters  had  been  inde- 
fatigable in  their  attentions  so  far  as 
the  hospital  rules  would  permit.  Many 
of  his  nationality  en  route  for  Scandi- 
navia called  to  see  him  and  gave  him 
all  possible  cheer.  It  was  the  great 
desire  of  Bro.  Christensen  to  gather 
all  the  family  genealogy  possible 
while  on  his  mission,  but  this  privi- 
lege was  not  granted  him,  for  it  was 
not  his  lot  to  again  visit  his  native 
land.  He  was  perhaps  called  away 
to    do    a   greater   work   in    the   spirit 


world  and  died  firm  in  the  faith  with 
a  glorious  testimony.  The  body  was 
properly  clothed  and  encased  in  an 
air-tight  metallic  casket  and  later 
shipped  to  the  home  of  his  family  in 
Riverton  in  the  charge  of  Elder  J.  B. 
Hunter. 

CHRISTOPHERSEX,  Christian 
William,  one  of  the  Elders  of  tne 
Church  who  died  while  filling  a  for- 
eign mission,  was  born  Jan.  30,  1878, 
at  Assens,  near  Mariager,  Randers 
amt,  Denmark,  the  son  of  John  Chris- 
tian Christophersen  and  Mette  Mad- 
sen.  Emigrating  with  his  parents  to 
Utah,  he  located  at  Richmond,  Cache 
county,  Utah,  where  he  was  baptized 
when  about  eight  years  old  by  Charles 
H.  Monson.  He  was  ordained  to  the 
Priesthood  while  young  and  took  quite 
an  active  part  in  Church  matters  un- 
til he  was  called  on  a  mission  to 
Scandinavia  in  1900.  He  was  ordained 
a  Seventy  by  Apostle  Francis  M.  Ly- 
man April  13,  1900,  and  set  apart  for 
his  mission.  After  his  arrival  in  Co- 
penhagen, Denmark,  he  was  appoint- 
ed to  labor  in  the  Aarhus  conference, 
and  later  appointed  to  preside  over 
the  Silkeborg  branch.  While  discharg- 
ing his  duties  as  a  missionary  to  the 
best  of  his  ability  he  was  stricken 
with  sickness  and  died  at  Silkeborg, 
Aug.  23,  1901,  as  a  victim  of  typhoid 
fever.  His  remains  were  shipped  to 
his  home  in  Utah,  in  care  of  Elder 
John  Christensen,  of  Preston,  Idaho. 
Bro.  Christophersen  died  as  an  un- 
married man,  being  only  23  years  of 
age. 

CHRISTOPHERSEN,  Martin,  pres- 
ident of  the  Scandinavian  Mission 
(1912-1914),was  born  April  13,  1850, 
in  Lommedalen,  Borum,  Akershus 
amt,  Norway,  the  son  of  Christoffer 
Pedersen  and  Ellen  Hansen.  Becom- 
ing a  convert  to  the  restored  gospel, 
he  was  baptized  June  26,  1865,  by 
Ole  Pedersen  Belte,  ordained  a  Teach- 
er in  18  67  and  appointed  to  labor  as 
a  local  missionary  in  the  Christiania 


618 


LATTER-DAY   SAINT 


branch  and  afterwards  in  the  Fred- 
erikstad  branch,  where  he  presided 
over  the  branch  and  had  good  suc- 
cess. While  there  he  was  arrested  and 
imprisoned  on  bread  and  water  diet 
for  baptizing.  He  was  ordained  an  El- 
der by  Christian  D.  Fjeldsted  in  1868, 
emigrated  to  Utah  in  1871  and  lo- 
cated in  Salt  Lake  City,  where  he  was 
employed  as  a  gardener  by  B.  F. 
Walker,  Esq.  He  was  ordained  a  Sev- 
enty in  1872  by  John  Needham.  In 
1883-1885  he  performed  a  mission  to 
Norway,    laboring    in    the    Drammen 


branch  for  a  short  time,  after  which 
he  assisted  in  the  mission  office  in 
Christiania,  and  later  took  charge  of 
the  Christiania  conference  for  about 
thirteen  months.  At  home  he  has  al- 
ways been  active  in  Church  matters, 
filling  a  number  of  important  posi- 
tions in  the  Priesthood.  For  several 
years  he  acted  as  counselor  to  Anders 
W.  Winberg  and  Janne  M.  Sjodahl  in 
the  presidency  of  the  Scandinavian 
meetings  in  Salt  Lake  City.  In  1893 
he  was  elected  county  commissioner 
for  Salt  Lake  county,  and  when  the 
Granite  Stake  of  Zion  was  organized, 
Jan.  28,  1900,  he  was  ordained  a  High 
Priest  by  Francis  M.  Lyman  and  set 
apart  as  a  High  Councilor,  which  po- 
sition he  filled  until  1914,  when  he 


was  chosen  to  act  as  first  counselor 
in  the  presidency  of  the  High  Priests' 
quorum,  which  position  he  held  until 
May,  1919,  when  he  moved  to  the 
27th  Ward,  Salt  Lake  City,  where  he 
still  resides.  In  1912-1914  he  filled 
a  second  mission  to  Europe,  this  time 
presiding  over  the  Scandinavian  Mis- 
sion, with  headquarters  at  Copenha- 
gen, Denmark.  In  1874  he  married 
Janet  Leddingham  (daughter  of  Alex- 
ander Leddingham  and  Janet  Parke), 
who  was  born  June  14,  1867,  at  Edin- 
burgh, Scotland.  This  marriage  has 
been  blessed  with  nine  children,  name- 
ly, Einor  M.,  Willard  Alexander,  Chris- 
tian Victor,  Walter,  Alvin,  Jessie,  El- 
la, Norma  and  Edna.  All  these  chil- 
dren are  alive  and  married,  and  four 
of  his  sons  have  filled  missions  to 
Scandinavia  and  one  served  four  years 
in  the  U.  S.  army.  Bro.  Christopher- 
sen  has  been  a  most  successful  florist 
and  horticulturist,  having  made  spe- 
cial efforts  to  discover  what  plants, 
shrubs  and  trees  were  best  suited  to 
the  soil  and  climatic  conditions  of  the 
State  of  Utah. 

CHURCH,  Haden  Wells,  a  member 
of  the  Mormon  Battalion  and  a  mis- 
sionary who  died  in  the  field,  was 
born  Aug.  29,  1817,  in  Franklin,  Wil- 
liamson county,  Tennessee,  the  son 
of  Abraham  Church  and  Mary  Jonas 
Emmonds.  He  received  the  gospel  and 
was  baptized  April  5,  1841,  by  Joseph 
Smith  the  Prophet.  On  Oct.  8,  1844, 
he  was  ordained  into  the  8th  quorum 
of  Seventy  by  Pres.  Joseph  Young, 
and  in  the  year  1851  was  set  apart  as 
a  president  of  that  quorum,  which 
position  he  held  during  his  life.  In 
1843  and  1844  he  filled  a  mission  to 
the  Southern  States,  and  after  the 
death  of  the  Prophet  was  called  back 
to  Nauvoo.  With  the  rest  of  the  saints 
he  was  driven  from  his  home,  and 
while  at  Council  Bluffs  he  was  en- 
rolled as  a  member  of  the  Mormon 
Battalion.  He  endured  the  privations 
of  the  journey  across  the  deserts  and 
was  discharged  from  military  service 


BIOGRAPHICAL  ENCYCLOPEDIA. 


619 


in  the  fall  of  1847  in  Salt  Lake  City. 
At  the  October  conference,  18  49,  he 
was  called  to  take  a  mission  to  Eng- 
land. He  arrived  in  Liverpool  April 
19,  1850,  and  remained  in  the  mis- 
sionary field  until  Feb.  10,  1852, 
vphen  he  was  honorably  released  to 
return  home.  In  the  spring  of  1854 
he  left  Utah  on  a  mission  to  the 
United  States,  and  he  filled  another 
mission  in  1868-1870.  In  1875,  at 
the  April  conference,  he  was  called 
on  a  mission  to  the  Southern  States, 
and  set  apart  by  Apostle  John  Taylor. 
While  filling  this  mission,  he  died 
among  relatives  in  his  old  home  at 
Shady  Grove,  Hickman  county,  Ten- 
nessee, Sept.  27,  1875,  of  typhoid 
fever.  Bro.  Church  was  a  faithful 
and  fearless  advocate  of  the  irutn 
and  died  in  full  hope  that  he  would 
come  forth  in  the  morning  of  the 
first  resurrection. 

CLARK,  Samuel  Thomas,  an  Elder 
who  died  while  filling  a  foreign  mis- 
sion, was  born  Sept.  12,  1874,  in 
Newton,  Cache  county,  Utah,  the  son 
of  Amos  Clark  and  Ann  Johnson. 
He  was  baptized  by  his  father  Sept. 
17,  1882,  and  afterwards  ordained  to 
the  Priesthood.  Being  set  apart  for 
a  mission  to  Great  Britain  Aug.   19, 

1898,  he  arrived  in  Liverpool  on  the 
6th  of  the  following  month  and  was 
appointed  to  labor  in  the  Welsh  con- 
ference. As  a  man  of  sterling  integ- 
rity in  the  cause  of  truth,  he  was 
devoted  to  his  labors  and  inspired  by 
his  love  for  humanity.  He  always 
found  a  warm  place  in  the  affections 
of  his  fellow  laborers,  the  saints  and 
all  who  knew  him.    He  died  Sept.  21, 

1899,  in  Wales,  from  an  attack  ot 
erysipelas.  The  body  was  inclosed  in 
a  hermetically  sealed  casket  and 
taken  safely  to  Utah  to  the  wife  and 
relatives  in  care  of  Elder  Herbert  L. 
James. 

CLAYSON,  William  Argent,  an  El- 
der who  died  in  the  missionary  field. 


was  born  April  3,  1873,  at  Payson, 
Utah,  the  son  of  Nathan  Clayson  and 
Annie  Harriett  Butler.  He  was  bap- 
tized in  April,  1881,  by  Thomas  Dan- 
iels, and  was  later  ordained  an  Elder. 
While  residing  in  Colonia  Juarez, 
Mexico,  he  was  called  on  a  mission  to 
the  Eastern  States,  being  ordained  a 
Seventy  by  George  Teasdale  and  set 
apart  for  that  mission  Jan.  3,  1900. 
He  was  laboring  as  a  missionary  in 
West  Virginia  when  he  took  sick  and 
died  June   30,   1901. 

COLE,  Thomas  J.,   an   Elder   who 
died  in  the  missionary  field,  was  born 
July    21,    1881,    at    Victoria,    Coffee 
county,   Alabama,   the   son  of  Daniel 
Briston  Cole  and  Margaret  Simmons. 
He   was   baptized   Jan.    11,    1902,   by 
Charles  Angle.    The  Cole  family  emi- 
grated from  Virginia  to  Arizona  about 
1897,  when  Thomas  was  fifteen  years 
old.    From  his  early  youth  he  was  ac- 
tive in   Church  circles,   being  assist- 
ant  superintendent   of   the   Thatcher 
Ward  Sunday  School,  acting  teacher, 
and  a  member  of  the  89th  quorum  of 
Seventy.     In  1912  he  was  called  on 
a  mission  to  the  Southern  States,  and 
after  being  set  apart  March  25,  1912, 
at  Thatcher,  he  left  his  Arizona  home 
to  fill  said  mission.    On  his  arrival  at 
the    headquarters    of    the    Southern 
States   Mission,   he   was   assigned   to 
labor  in  the  State  of  Georgia,  where 
he  took  hold  of  the  work  of  the  min- 
istry with  zeal.    On  July  4,  1912,  he 
accompanied  a  picnic  party  of  Elders 
and   saints  of  the  Buchanan   branch 
to  the  Tallapoosa  river,  near  Buchan- 
an, Georgia.    The  party  had  chosen  a 
beautiful    spot    on   the    bank   of   the 
river  for  their  outing,  and  Elder  Cole, 
in   company    with    others,    attempted 
to  drag  a  seine  in  the  river  for  a  fish 
fry.     They   went  into  the   river   with 
this  seine  at  a  point  where  the  water 
was    shallow    and    waded    down    the 
stream  until  they  came  to  a  hole  near 
the  bank  where  the  water  was  deep. 
It  being  only  a  few  feet  away  from 


620 


LATTER-DAY   SAINT 


shallow  water.  Elder  Cole  decided  to 
swim  across  the  deep  place.  Casting 
away  his  end  of  the  seine,  he  struck 
out  for  the  place  where  he  could  re- 
sume wading,  but  he  had  made  only 
a  few  strokes,  when  his  feet  caught 
in  the  seine  and  despite  his  efforts 
and  the  efforts  of  three  of  the  Elders 
and  the  local  brethren,  he  sank  to  the 
bottom  of  the  river  under  ten  feet  of 
water.  The  fish  seine  was  held  down 
with  an  iron  chain  or  weight  to  keep 
it  close  to  the  river  bottom.  The  river 
at  this  point  is  about  seventy  feet 
wide.  The  body  of  the  unfortunate 
Elder  was  in  the  water  about  fifteen 
or  twenty  minutes,  and  for  more  than 
an  hour  afterwards  the  brethren  em- 
ployed every  means  known  to  them 
to  revive  him,  but  all  in  vain.  One 
of  the  local  brethren  was  nearly 
drowned  in  attempting  to  save  Elder 
Cole.  As  soon  as  Pres.  Charles  A. 
Callis  learned  of  the  shocking  acci- 
dent, he  obtained  the  services  ot  an 
undertaker  and  went  to  the  place 
where  the  accident  occurred.  The 
body  was  embalmed,  brought  to  Chat- 
tanooga, prepared  for  burial,  and  sent 
home  to  Arizona  in  care  of  Elder 
Cole's  missionary  companion,  Elder 
Lee,  who  lived  in  the  same  town.  El- 
der Cole  left  a  wife  and  two  children, 
the  older,  a  son,  seven  years  of  age, 
and  the  younger,  a  daughter,  four- 
teen months  old.  His  parents  and 
three  married  sisters  were  also  liv- 
ing in  Thatcher,  Ariz.,  at  the  time  of 
his  demise. 

COLLETT,  Sylvester  Daniel,  one  of 

the  Elders  of  the  Church  who  died 
while  filling  a  foreign  mission,  was 
born  Dec.  15,  1866,  in  Smithfield, 
Cache  county,  Utah,  the  son  of  Reu- 
ben Collett  and  Elthara  Rosetta  Mer- 
rill. He  was  baptized  Aug.  2,  1878, 
by  Andrew  P.  Scow.  In  1887  he  was 
called  on  a  mission  to  the  Republic 
of  Mexico,  being  ordained  a  Seventy 
and  set  apart  under  the  hands  of 
Apostle  Franklin  D.  Richards,  April 
1,  1887.    He  died  from  an  attack  of 


typhoid  fever,  while  in  the  discharge 
of  his  duties  in  Mexico  City  May  5, 
1889,  only  twenty-two  years  old. 

COOK,  Washington  N.,  one  of  the 
Elders  of  the  Church  who  died  in  the 
missionary  field,  was  born  Oct.  4, 
1804,  in  Greenville  county,  Virginia, 
the  son  of  Edwin  and  Winnifred 
Cook.  He  joined  the  Church  at  an 
early  day,  being  baptized  in  Decem- 
ber, 1843,  by  Benjamin  L.  Clapp,  and 
ordained  a  Seventy  in  Nauvoo,  Illi- 
nois, Oct.  8,  1844.  He  participated 
in  the  general  exodus  of  the  saints  in 
1846  and  crossed  the  plains  in  1847 
in  Willard  Snow's  fifty  and  Jedediah 
M.  Grant's  hundred.  Soon  after  his 
arrival  in  Great  Salt  Lake  Valley,  he 
moved  to  Palmyra,  Utah  county, 
Utah,  being  one  of  the  founders  of 
that  place.  At  the  general  conference 
of  the  Church  held  in  April,  1855,  he 
was  called  on  a  mission  to  the  Indian 
Territory,  and,  together  with  a  num- 
ber of  other  Elders,  he  left  Great  Salt 
Lake  City  in  May,  1855,  and  arrived 
at  St.  Louis,  Mo.,  June  25,  1855.  From 
St.  Louis  he  continued  the  journey  to 
the  Indian  Territory,  where  he  com- 
menced successful  missionary  labor 
among  the  various  Indian  tribes  or 
nations.  Under  date  of  June  4,  1856, 
he  wrote  from  the  Choctaw  Agency, 
that  he  had  found  the  Indians  very 
friendly;  many  had  received  his  tes- 
timony and  he  had  been  much  blessed 
in  his  administrations  to  the  sick.*  At 
a  conference  held  at  Prior's  Creek, 
Cherokee  Nation,  Oct.  6,  1856,  he  was 
sustained  as  president  of  the  mission 
among  the  Creek  and  Cherokee  na- 
tion, which  practically  meant  all  of 
the  Indian  Territory,  and  he  was  dis- 
charging his  duties  as  a  missionary 
and  presiding  officer  when  he  was 
stricken  with  sickness  (quick  con- 
sumption), with  which  he  died  Sept. 
4,  1858,  in  the  Western  Cherokee 
Nation. 

CUMMINGS,  Benjamin  Franklin,  an 

early  Elder  in  the  Church  and  a  Utah 


BIOGRAPHICAL   ENCYCLOPEDIA. 


621 


pioneer,  was  born  March  3,  1821,  in 
Farmington,  Franklin  county,  Maine, 
and  moved  with  his  parents  to  Nau- 
voo,  Illinois,  in  1840.  He  had  never 
joined  any  church  and  had  a  dislike 
for  all  religious  sects  until  he  heard 
Latter-day  Saint  Elders  preach.  Their 
message  at  once  impressed  him  as  be- 
ing true.  He  was  baptized  by  John 
Kempton,  April  12,  1840,  and  con- 
firmed bj'^  him  the  same  day.  He  was 
ordained  a  Priest  by  Samuel  Phelps 
Oct.  20,  1840,  and  an  Elder  by  Wil- 
lard  Richards  in  April,  1842.  He  was 
on  a  mission  in  the  Eastern  States 
when  the  news  of  the  martyrdom  of 
the  Prophet  and  Patriarch  reached 
him.  With  other  Elders  he  returned 
immediately  to  Nauvoo  and  partici- 
pated in  the  trying  scenes  that  took 
place  after  that  great  crime.  He  spent 
the  winter  of  1846-47  at  Winter  Quar- 
ters, where  both  of  his  parents  died 
from  exposure,  and  where  he  suffered 
a  long  and  severe  illness.  In  fact, 
when  the  company  which  he  desired 
to  join  was  about  ready  to  depart 
from  Winter  Quarters,  they  decided 
that  he  was  too  ill  for  such  a  journey, 
being  badly  afflicted  with  chills  and 
fever.  With  characteristic  faith  and 
determination  he  crawled  unobserved 
into  the  hind  end  of  one  of  the  wag- 
ons, and  did  not  let  his  presence  be 
known  until  the  train  was  a  long  way 
on  its  journey  westward.  He  was  then 
cared  for  as  well  as  the  conditions 
permitted  and  soon  recovered  his 
health.  Being  a  carpenter  by  trade, 
he  proved  to  be  a  valuable  member  of 
the  company  on  that  long  and  diffi- 
cult journey,  repairing  broken  wag- 
ons, building  bridges,  etc.  He  reached 
Salt  Lake  City  as  a  member  of  the 
"first  fifty"  of  Daniel  Spencer's  com- 
pany in  September,  1847.  This  was 
the  first  company  to  arrive  after  the 
one  led  by  President  Brigham  Young. 
Bro.  Cummings  was  ordained  a  Sev- 
enty and  organized  with  the  10th 
quorum  in  Nauvoo,  Oct.  8,  1844.  He 
was  set  apart  as  senior  president  of 
the   3  8th   quorum   of  Seventy  at  Og- 


den,  Utah,  Dec.  30,  lS53,  by  Pres. 
Joseph  Young,  and  held  that  position 
till  he  was  ordained  a  High  Priest  by 
Joseph  E.  Taylor  Feb.  24,  1894,  in 
Salt  Lake  City.  As  a  carpenter  and 
millwright  he  helped  to  build  some  of 
the  first  houses  and  sawmills  ever 
built  in  Utah.  On  arriving  from  Nau- 
voo he  lived  in  Salt  Lake  City  several 
years  and  then  moved  to  Ogden,  where 
he  served  as  county  recorder,  assessor 
and  collector,  sheriff  and  colonel  in 
the  militia.  He  also  taught  a  military 
school  and  played  a  fife  in  the  mili- 
tary band.  He  took  part  in  the  Sal- 
mon River  Mission,  acting  as  presi- 
dent part  of  the  time,  in  the  early 
fifties,  and  while  so  engaged  he  "ran 
the  level"  for  the  first  irrigation  ditch 
ever  made  in  Idaho.  An  incident  of 
this  mission  was  related  by  Elder  Le- 
vi W.  Richards  to  the  writer  showing 
conditions  at  that  time  and  the  char- 
acter of  the  men  who  had  to  meet 
them:  One  of  the  Elders,  Bailey  Lake, 
had  been  killed  by  the  Indians,  who 
were  quite  hostile.  Elder  Cummings 
and  several  companions,  all  on  horse- 
back, were  emerging  from  a  canyon, 
when  his  quick  eye  caught  the  bright 
flash  of  the  sunshine  reflected  from  a 
polished  rifle  barrel  up  on  the  moun- 
tain side.  Instantly  interpreting  me 
flash  he  cried  to  his  companions, 
"Down  in  your  saddles,  boys!"  All 
duck3d  in  their  saddles  instantly,  but 
none  too  soon,  as  a  volley  of  bullets 
went  whizzing  over  their  heads,  from 
some  ambushed  Indians,  but  no  one 
was  hurt.  Putting  spurs  to  tneir 
horses,  they  were  soon  out  of  the 
canyon  and  into  the  open  country. 
Knowing  that  the  Indians,  who  great- 
ly outnumbered  them,  would  follow, 
they  made  for  the  shelter  of  a  grove 
of  trees  at  some  distance.  Thus  shel- 
tered, the  Indians  dared  not  approach 
within  rifle  range  as  the  bretnren 
could  shoot  them  from  cover.  For  a 
long  time  they  kept  out  of  range,  but 
lingered  there.  At  last  the  thought 
struck  the  savages  to  set  fire  to  tne 
tall,  dry  grass  that  covered  the  prai- 


622 


LATTER-DAY   SAINT 


rie,  and  burn  the  brethren  out.  Ac- 
cordingly, getting  on  the  windward 
side  of  the  grove,  they  set  fire  to  the 
grass  and  the  wind  drove  the  flames 
very  rapidly  toward  the  retreat  of  the 
missionaries.  Things  began  to  look 
very  dangerous  as  no  escape  seemed 
to  present  itself,  when  Elder  Cum- 
mings  directed  that  they  make  an  ap- 
peal to  the  Lord  for  Divine  aid.  When 
the  fire  had  almost  reached  the  grove 
it  went  out  and  the  Indians  found 
themselves  in  no  better  position  than 
at  first.  They  finally  went  away  and 
the  brethren  under  cover  of  approach- 
ing night  made  good  their  escape.  In 
1865  Elder  Cummings  moved  back  to 
Salt  Lake  City,  where  he  remained  the 
rest  of  his  life.  During  the  last  decade 
of  his  life  he  spent  most  of  his  time 
working  in  the  Logan  and  Salt  Lake 
Temples.  He  died  in  Salt  Lake  City 
Oct.  22,  18&d,  after  having  performed 
a  successful  mission  to  Iowa  and  Ne- 
braska in  1878.  Bro.  Cummings  was 
the  possessor  of  a  fine  mind,  was  a 
deep  thinker,  and  had  the  power  to 
express  himself  in  clear  and  forceful 
language.  Although  of  a  retiring  na- 
ture, he  enjoyed  a  wide  acquaintance 
and  was  esteemed  as  a  friend  and 
citizen  of  the  utmost  probity  and 
steadfastness.  He  married  Catharine 
Hall  Feb.  19,  1852,  Lemual  Mallory 
performing  the  ceremony,  and  was 
sealed  to  her  in  the  Council  House  by 
Geo.  A.  Smith  June  29,  1854.  He  also 
married  Mary  Jane  Yearsley  May  27, 
1856.  He  was  the  father  of  six  sons 
and  three  daughters. 

CUMMINGS,  Benjamin  FrankUn, 
jimior,  an  active  Elder,  journalist  and 
genealogist,  was  born  Aug.  22,  1855, 
in  Ogden,  Weber  county,  Utah,  the 
son  of  Benjamin  Franklin  Cummings 
and  Catherine  Hall.  While  he  was 
still  a  boy,  his  family  moved  from  his 
birthplace  in  Ogden  and  took  up  their 
residence  in  the  Fourteenth  Ward, 
Salt  Lake  City.  A  year  or  two  in  the 
common  shools  and  a  few  months  in 
a    business    college    constituted    his 


scholastic  training.  He  entered  the 
mechanical  department  of  the  "Des- 
eret  News"  before  he  was  in  his  teens 
and  held  the  positions  of  reporter,  ed- 
itorial writer,  manager  of  the  eastern 
advertising  department  and  State  ed- 
itor. When  a  young  man  he  resided 
for  several  years  in  Logan,  where  he 
founded  the  "Logan  Leader"  (later 
the  "Logan  Journal").  After  study- 
ing law  he  was  admitted  to  the  bar 
in  Logan  and  held  the  office  of  jus- 
tice of  the  peace  for  several  terms. 
He  also  served  in  two  or  three  ses- 
sions of  the  State  Legislature.     Dur- 


ing his  life  he  filled  three  missions, 
two  to  the  Eastern  States,  and  one  to 
the  Central  States  as  editor  of  the 
"Liahona,"  published  in  Independ- 
ence, Mo.  Besides  his  writing  and 
missionary  work  at  home  and  abroaa, 
his  most  conspicuous  service  was  in 
the  field  of  genealogy  and  Temple 
work.  He  was  the  first  Latter-day 
Saint  to  travel  extensively  in  search 
of  family  records  and  he  compiled  his- 
tories of  many  prominent  Utah  fam- 
ilies. He  was  known  both  in  the  East 
and  West  as  an  expert  genealogist. 
Particularly  in  the  late  years  of  his 
life  he  devoted  himself  to  the  further- 
ance of  Temple  work,  holding  the  po- 


BIOGRAPHICAL   ENCYCLOPEDIA. 


623 


sition  of  Stake  genealogist  and  secre- 
tary of  the  Genealogical  Board  of 
Granite  Stake  at  the  time  of  his  death, 
which  occurred  March  11,  1918,  in 
Salt  Lake  City,  Utah.  Bro.  Cummings 
was  a  teacher  of  the  gospel.  First  of 
all  he  lived  it — inflexibly  convinced 
of  its  divinity,  humbly  reverent  of  its 
grandeur,  faithfully  obedient  to  its 
laws,  and  then,  with  a  rare  gift  of  pen 
and  speech,  he  patiently,  intelligently 
and  earnestly  explained  its  principles 
to  all  who  sought  the  truth.  To  the 
fullest  extent,  which  opportunity  per- 
mitted, he  brought  every  secular  ac- 
tivity in  which  he  engaged  to  bear  di- 
rectly or  indirectly  on  the  mission  of 
teaching  the  gospel.  He  traveled  ex- 
tensively, both  in  his  home  State  and 
throughout  the  country,  earning  his 
livelihood.  But  wherever  he  went  he 
was  the  disciple  of  Christ,  modest  and 
unassuming,  yet  watchful  and  persist- 
ent in  searching  out  fertile  spots  on 
which  to  drop  the  seeds  of  truth.  This 
dominating  motive  of  his  life  can  oe 
seen  in  every  trace  he  has  left.  In 
his  writings,  in  the  memories  held  of 
him  by  his  children,  in  the  record  of 
a  long  and  varied  ecclesiastical  career, 
there  is  found,  as  the  deepest  and 
noblest  impression,  his  fidelity  to  his 
people  and  his  God.  He  wrote  clearly 
and  forcibly,  yet  with  a  warm,  human 
touch.  His  delicacy  of  thought  and 
expression  were  intuitive,  and  trained 
almost  entirely  by  his  own  efforts,  for 
he  had  but  little  schooling.  He  exer- 
cised this  talent  as  a  writer  on  the 
"Deseret  News"  for  many  years,  as 
author  of  numerous  articles  in  Church 
magazines  and  as  founder  and  first 
editor  of  the  "Liahona."  While  the 
greater  part  of  his  work  was  prose, 
he  wrote  several  poems  that  rank  with 
the  finest  produced  by  "Mormon" 
writers  for  their  purity  of  rhytnm  ana 
diction,  loftiness  of  thought  and  deep 
poetic  feeling.  Elder  Cummings  mar- 
ried Emily,  daughter  of  Bishop  David 
and  Sarah  Williams,  who  for  many 
years  were  residents  of  Price,  Sco- 
field  and  Winter  Quarters,  Utah.  Fol- 


lowing are  the  names  of  the  children 
who  survived  him:  Benjamin  Frank- 
lin jun.,  David  Williams,  Nephi  Wil- 
lard,  and  James  Moroni.  Four  chil- 
dren (Benoni,  Alma,  Emily  and  Wil- 
ford)    died  in  infancy. 

DAVIS,  William  Ray,  an  Elder  who 
died  while  filling  a  foreign  mission, 
was  born  Feb.  26,  1892,  at  Samaria, 
Oneida  county,  Idaho,  the  son  of  Wil- 
liam G.  Davis  and  Margaret  A.  Hawk- 
ins. He  was  baptized  March  4,  1900, 
by  William  Rodrick  and  subsequently 
ordained  an  Elder.  He  resided  at 
Burley,  Cassia  county,  Idaho,  when 
he  was  set  apart  for  a  mission  to  Aus- 
tralia Oct.  16,  1912.  There  he  became 
known  as  a  diligent  and  capable  mis- 
sionary, greatly  beloved  by  his  asso- 
ciates. His  health  failed  him  while  in 
the  missionary  field,  in  consequence 
of  which  he  was  released  to  return 
home,  but  on  the  voyage  he  grew 
much  worse  and  on  his  arrival  at  San 
Francisco,  California,  he  was  imme- 
diately taken  to  a  hospital,  where  he 
died  of  heart  failure  Jan.  18,  1915. 
His  father,  William  G.  Davis,  who  was 
with  him  at  the  time  of  his  demise, 
accompanied  the  remains  to  the  fam- 
ily home  in  Burley,  Idaho. 

EDWARDS,  William,  fourth  Bishop 
of  Greenville  (Beaver  Stake),  Beaver 
county,  Utah,  was  born  Oct.  21,  1841, 
in  England,  the  son  of  Samuel  J.  Ed- 
wards and  Ann  Robinson.  He  emi- 
grated to  Utah  with  his  parents  in 
1851,  crossing  the  Atlantic  in  the  ship 
"Ellen,"  and  the  plains  in  Hiram  B. 
Clawson's  company,  which  arrived  in 
Salt  Lake  City  in  September,  1851. 
William  was  baptized  in  the  winter 
of  1852  by  Mark  Preece  and  in  1857 
he  moved  to  Parowan  and  later  set- 
tled in  Beaver  county,  Utah.  In  1861 
(April  8th),  he  married  Helen  Miller 
(daughter  of  Charles  Miller).  This 
union  was  blessed  with  twelve  chil- 
dren, eight  of  whom  died  in  infancy. 
Bro.  Edwards  was  an  active  Church 
worker  from  his  early  youth  and  be- 


624 


LATTER-DAY   SAINT 


came  associated  with  every  important 
move,  ecclesiastically  and  otherwise, 
in  early  pioneer  days  in  Beaver  coun- 
ty. He  sent  teams  to  the  Missouri  river 


quorum  of  Elders.  In  1902  (March 
4th)  he  was  ordained  a  Seventy  by 
Apostle  Geo.  Teasdale  and  afterwards 
served  as  one  of  the  presidents  of  the 
second  quorum  of  Seventy.  From  1902 
to  1903  Bro.  Elder  filled  a  mission  to 
the  Southern  States,  laboring  princi- 
pally in  Ohio  and  Georgia.  He  was  or- 
dained a  High  Priest  Nov.  24,  1907, 
by  Nephi  L.  Morris  and  ordained  a 
Bishop  April  13,  1919,  by  Charles  W. 
Penrose  and  set  apart  to  preside  over 
the  Second  Ward,  Salt  Lake  City, 
which  position  he  still  (1920)  holds. 
While  a  resident  of  the  Fifteenth 
Ward,  Bro.  Elder  acted  as  superin- 
tendent of  the  Ward  Sunday  school 
for  a  number  of  years  and  acted  in  a 
similar  capacity  for  some  time  while 
a  resident  of  the  Fourteenth  Ward. 
When  Religion  Classes  were  first  or- 
ganized in  the  new  Salt  Lake  Stake, 
he  was  chosen  as  Stake  superinten- 
dent and  continued  in  that  position 
(laboring  with  great  fidelity  for 
twelve  years)  until  he  removed  to  the 
Liberty  Stake  in  1912.  Bro.  Elder 
was  engaged  in  the  contracting  and 


for  emigrating  the  poor,  served  as 
constable  in  Beaver  for  a  number  of 
years  and  acted  as  postmaster  of  that 
town  for  forty  years.  In  his  early 
youth  he  was  ordained  a  Deacon  and 
afterwards  an  Elder.  In  1885  (May 
10th)  he  was  ordained  a  High  Priest 
and  set  apart  to  act  as  first  counselor 
to  Bishop  Joseph  S.  Morris,  which  po- 
sition he  held  until  1898,  when  he 
was  ordained  a  Bishop  and  set  apart 
to  preside  over  the  Greenville  Ward, 
which  position  he  held  until  1913. 


ELDER,  Henry  Benson,  ninth 
Bishop  of  the  Second  Ward  (Liberty 
Stake),  Salt  Lake  City,  Utah,  was 
born  Nov.  18,  1863,  in  Salt  Lake  City, 
Utah,  the  son  of  Joseph  Benson  Elder 
and  Margaret  Elizabeth  Joiner.  He 
was  baptized  in  May,  1872,  by  his 
father;  ordained  a  Deacon  Feb.  8, 
1878,  and  a  Teacher  April  1,  1881 
(both  ordinations  beng  performed  by 
Bishop  Thos.  Taylor).  Later  he  was 
ordained  a  Priest.  In  1888  (Sept.  building  business  for  fifteen  years, 
10th)  he  was  ordained  an  Elder  by  having  been  previously  in  the  employ 
Geo.  M.  Cannon  and  subsequently  of  the  Taylor,  Romney  &  Armstrong 
served  in  the  presidency  of  the  fifth    Lumber  Co.  for  twenty  years.    During 


BIOGRAPHICAL  ENCYCLOPEDIA. 


625 


the  World  War  he  served  the  govern- 
ment on  the  draft  board  for  one  year. 
In  1888  (Oct.  31st)  Bro.  Elder  mar- 
ried Alice  J.  Fenton  (daughter  of 
ThomasFenton  and  Clarissa  Combes), 
who  was  born  Feb.  12,  1866,  in  Salt 
Lake  City,  Utah.  The  following  named 
children  were  born  to  them:  Alice 
Loise,  Lilian  Sibyl,  Clayburn  Combes, 
Henry  Fenton,  Ernest  Alfred  and 
Clarissa  Evelyn.  Bishop  Elder  is  a 
man  of  great  faith,  unostentatious  in 
his  manners  and  known  for  his  sym- 
pathy and  kindness.  He  has  been  es- 
pecially successful  in  his  labors  among 
children,  over  whom  he  has  always 
wielded  an  influence  for  good. 

ERNSTSEN,  Ernest  Mark,  an  El- 
der who  died  in  the  missionary  field, 
was  born  Jan  .23,  1876,  in  Aarhus, 
Denmark,  the  son  of  Hans  Ernstsen. 
He  was  baptized  in  1887  by  E.  C. 
Nielsen,  and  later  ordained  a  Seventy. 
He  resided  at  Loa,  Wayne  county, 
Utah,  in  1914,  when  he  was  called  on 
a  mission  to  Denmark,  being  set  apart 
April  7,  1914;  but  he  was  transferred 
to  the  Northern  States  Mission  when 
the  European  war  broke  out,  and  was 
assigned  to  labor  in  Wisconsin,  where 
he  distinguished  himself  as  a  faithful 
and  energetic  Elder.  While  in  the  full 
discharge  of  his  missionary  duties,  he 
was  attacked  with  pneumonia  and 
after  suffering  for  about  two  weeks, 
he  died  at  Racine,  Wisconsin,  April 
9,  1915.  His  remains  were  sent  home 
for  interment,  in  charge  of  Elder 
Alma  Bangerter.  Elder  Ernstsen  left 
a  wife  (Mrs.  Gertrude  Bastian  Ernst- 
sen) and  three  children;  also  a  fath- 
er, mother,  brothers  and  sisters,  near- 
ly all  of  whom  lived  in  Wayne  coun- 
ty, Utah,  when  Elder  Ernstsen  died. 

ESPLIN,  William  Cox,  an  Elder 
who  died  in  the  missionary  field,  was 
born  March  14,  1883,  in  Orderville, 
Kane  county,  Utah,  the  son  of  Henry 
W.  Esplin  and  Philena  Cox.  He  was 
baptized  April  2,  1891,  by  William  W. 
Adair,  and  still  resided  in  Orderville 


when  he  was  called  and  set  apart 
Nov.  20,  190  6,  for  a  mission  to  Cali- 
fornia. While  laboring  in  Oakland 
he  was  taken  sick  Aug.  23,  1907,  with 
what  appeared  to  be  la  grippe.  His 
condition  soon  became  so  alarming 
that  a  doctor  was  called  in  who  pro- 
nounced the  malady  to  be  pneumonia. 
The  patient  grew  rapidly  worse  and 
died  at  Oakland  Aug.  26,  1907.  Elder 
Esplin  had  been  in  the  California 
Mission  nine  months,  during  which 
time  he  proved  himself  as  an  ener- 
getic and  humble  worker  in  the  Lord's 
vineyard,  having  labored  in  Los  An- 
geles and  Oakland.  He  was  survived 
by  a  wife  and  a  babe,  the  latter  four 
months  old. 

EVANS,  Abel,  one  of  the  Latter- 
day  Saint  Elders  who  died  while  fill- 
ing a  foreign  mission,  was  born  June 
24,  1813,  at  Carmarthenshire,  South 
Wales.  His  boyhood  and  early  life 
were  spent  in  the  coal  mines  of  his 
native  land,  and  he  never  joined  any 
of  the  religious  denominations,  al- 
though he  always  lived  an  honest, 
moral  and  upright  life.  Becoming  a 
convert  to  "Mormonism,"  he  was  Dap- 
tized  Feb.  10,  1844,  by  William  Hen- 
shaw  and  is  believed  to  be  the  second 
person  baptized  by  divine  authortiy  in 
Wales.  Soon  afterwards  he  was  or- 
dained to  the  Priesthood,  traveling  as 
a  successful  missionary  and  opening 
up  blanches  which  subsequently  grew 
into  conferences.  He  devoted  about 
six  years  to  the  ministry,  traveling  in 
South  and  North  Wales  and  labored 
with  great  success.  Under  the  hands 
of  Orson  Pratt  and  Dan  Jones  he  was 
ordained  a  High  Priest  Feb.  7,  1849. 
He  was  a  man  of  strong  faith,  the 
Lord  working  many  miracles  through 
his  instrumentality,  many  being  heaiea 
of  their  maladies  through  his  faith 
and  prayers,  among  others  several 
cases  of  cancer  and  cholera.  He  emi- 
grated to  America  in  1850,  and  while 
crossing  the  ocean  he  became  ac- 
quainted with  Mary  Jones,  whom  he 
married    after    landing    in    America. 


Vol.  Ill,  No.  40. 


April   17,   1920 


626 


LATTER-DAY   SAINT 


The  next  two  years  were  spent  in  Pot- 
tawattamie county,  Iowa,  where  he 
was  chosen  as  a  High  Councilor.  In 
1852  he  and  his  wife  crossed  the 
plains  with  ox  teams  in  Captain  Mor- 
gan's company  and  soon  after  his  ar- 
rival in  the  Valley  he  located  in  Lehi, 
Utah  county,  where  he  was  chosen 
captain  of  militia,  marshal  of  the  city, 
deputy  sheriff  of  the  county,  etc.,  and 
also  acted  as  a  counselor  to  Bishop 
David  Evans.  Thus  he  continued  very 
active  as  a  local  officer  until  the  April 
conference,  18  65,  when  he  was  caiieu 
on  a  mission  to  his  native  country. 
He  arrived  in  Liverpool  July  28,  1865, 
and  after  laboring  as  a  traveling  El- 
der in  Wales  he  was  appointed  presi- 
dent of  the  Welsh  district,  where  he 
labored  with  unceasing  diligence  as 
long  as  the  powers  of  life  were  con- 
tinued to  him.  He  became  ill  with  a 
cough  while  assisting  some  Saints  to 
embark  on  the  ship  'John  Bright"  at 
Liverpool  in  May,  1866,  and  while  at- 
tending a  conference  in  Birmingham 
the  following  September,  he  slept  In 
a  damp  bed,  which  renewed  the  cold 
and  coughing  upon  him.  Although  his 
condition  was  serious,  he  continued 
his  preaching,  both  indoors  and  out, 
being  exposed  from  time  to  time,  un- 
til he  became  so  weak  that  he  could 
not  stand  and  until  the  day  of  his 
death,  which  occurred  at  Merther 
Tydfil,  Wales,  Nov.  30,  1866,  he  did 
not  seem  to  realize  his  condition.  Bro. 
Evans  was  the  husband  of  three  wives, 
namely,  Mary  Jones,  Martha  Morgan 
and  Jane  Davis.  He  was  the  father  of 
sixteen  children,  nine  of  whom  reached 
maturity,  namely,  Abel  John,  Wil- 
liam, Samuel,  Mary,  Sarah,  Catherine, 
Hyrum  Edward,  Martha  and  Jane. 
Abel  Evans  was  a  man  of  consider- 
able ability  and  was  especially  en- 
dowed with  the  gift  of  healing  and 
discernment  of  spirits. 

EVANS,  Abel  John,  second  coun- 
selor in  the  presidency  of  the  Alpine 
Stake  and  a  resident  of  Lehi,  Utah 
county,  Utah,  was  born  Dec.  20,  1852, 


at  Lehi,  the  son  of  Abel  Evans  and 
Mary  Jones.  At  the  age  of  twelve 
years  his  father  went  on  a  mission  to 
Great  Britain,  and  in  November,  1867, 
died  there,  thus  becoming  a  martyr 
for  the  cause  of  his  Master,  and  leav- 
ing Abel  John,  the  eldest  of  nine  chil- 
dren, to  take  the  lead  in  all  the  hard- 
ships which  the  people  of  that  time 
were  forced  to  undergo.  He  had  had 
but  very  little  time  to  attend  school, 
and  indeed  the  opportunities  of  those 
days  were  but  poor  for  those  able  to 


go.  He  worked  on  the  farm  and  in 
the  canyons,  and  at  other  manual  la- 
bor, such  as  he  could  find  to  do.  At 
the  age  of  twenty-one  years,  on  Jan. 
2  6,  18  74,  he  was  ordained  to  the  of- 
fice of  an  Elder,  under  the  hands  of 
Andrew  Smith  Johnson,  and  on  me 
same  day  married  Louisa  Emeline 
Zimmerman  in  the  Endowment  House 
in  Salt  Lake  City.  He  afterwards  be- 
came the  father  of  eleven  children, 
three  boys  and  eight  girls,  seven  of 
whom  are  still  (1920)  living,  namely, 
Harriet  Mind  well  (Mrs.  HeberWebb), 
William  Erastus,  Robert  James,  Rose 
Ethel  (Mrs.  Angus  Elmer  Peterson), 
Hazel  Julia  (Mrs.  George  F.  Holm- 
stead),  Vervene  June,  and  Winifred 
Erma.  Soon  after  becoming  an  Elder, 
he  was  chosen  as  one  of  the  counsel- 
ors to  Lot  Russon,  who  was  president 
of   the    Elders    quorum    at    Lehi;    on 


BIOGRAPHICAL   ENCYCLOPEDIA. 


627 


Dec.  30,  1883,  he  was  ordained  a  Sev- 
enty under  the  hands  of  Andrew  A. 
Peterson:  and  in  1889  filled  a  short 
mission  to  Great  Britain.  On  Jan.  15, 
1893.  he  was  ordained  a  High  Priest, 
UTifler  the  hands  of  Abraham  H.  Can- 
non, and  called  to  the  High  CounKii 
in  the  Utah  Stake  of  Zion.  He  acted 
in  that  position  until  the  Alpine  Stake 
of  Zion  was  organized,  Jan.  13,  1901, 
at  which  time  he  was  made  one  of  the 
Stake  presidency,  the  position  he  now 
occupies.  In  the  industrial  line,  Bro. 
Evans  has  always  been  a  strong  ad- 
vocate of  home  industry  and  local  in- 
stitutions, being  a  stockholder  in  the 
following  companies:  Provo  Woolen 
Mills,  Utah-Idaho  Sugar  Company, 
Utah  Banking  Company,  State  Bank 
of  Lehi,  Bank  of  American  Fork, 
American  Pork  Co-op.,  Intermountain 
Life  Insurance  Company,  Provo  Res- 
ervoir Company,  Utah  Lake  Irrigation 
Company,  Salt  Lake  &  Utah  Railroad 
Company,  and  many  other  minor  en- 
terprises. Bro.  Evans  was  a  member 
of  the  city  council  at  Lehi  four  terms, 
1881-1888;  during  the  last  three 
terms  he  was  alderman,  which  includ- 
ed the  duties  of  justice  of  the  peace, 
and  in  18  91  he  was  elected  mayor, 
this  time  running  on  a  Democratic 
ticket,  being  the  first  election  since 
the  division  of  the  people  on  national 
party  lines.  He  served  as  a  member 
of  the  county  court  for  four  years, 
1892-1896,  at  which  time  he  was 
elected  a  member  of  the  Utah  Consti- 
tutional Convention  and  there  took  a 
prominent  part  in  framing  the  State 
constitution.  He  served  as  a  senator 
in  the  first,  second,  third  and  fourth 
State  legislatures  of  the  State  of  Utah, 
and  at  the  last  session  was  chosen 
president  of  the  senate  by  the  unan- 
imous vote  of  his  party.  Although 
Elder  Evans  had  very  few  educational 
opportunities  in  his  youth,  by  deter- 
mination and  study,  pursued  ^t  odd 
times,  he  has  risen  into  the  ranks  of 
professional  men.  Although  he  never 
attended    a    high    school    nor    a    law 


school  a  day  in  his  life,  yet  on  May 
13,  1901,  he  was  the  happy  recipient 
of  a  certificate  from  the  Supreme 
Court  of  the  State  of  Utah,  which  en- 
titles him  to  practice  law  in  all  of  the 
courts  of  the  State. 

EVANS,  David,  Bishop  of  Lehi, 
Utah  county,  Utah,  from  18  52  to 
1879,  was  born  Oct.  27,  1804,  in  Ce- 
cil county,  Maryland,  the  son  of  Is- 
rael and  Abigail  Evans.  His  early 
training  in  life  was  on  the  frontiers 
in  Pennsylvania.  His  rugged  charac- 
ter qualified  him  for  the  events  which 
were  to  follow.  In  1826  he  married 
Mary  Beck  and  moved  to  Richland 
county,  Ohio.  Here  he  bought  and 
opened  up  a  new  farm,  where  he  lived 
until  he  was  baptized  into  the  Church 
of  Jesus  Christ  of  Latter-day  Saints, 
April  6,  1833.  On  the  11th  of  the 
same  month  he  was  ordained  a  Priest 
and  immediately  commenced  travel- 
ing and  preaching,  selling  his  farm  to 
enable  him  to  perform  his  missionary 
labors.  Being  ordained  an  Elder  July 
21,  1833,  he  went  with  Zion's  Camp 
from  Ohio  to  Missouri  in  1834,  and 
received  ordination  to  the  first  quo- 
rum of  Seventy  under  the  hands  oi 
the  Prophet  Joseph  Smith  and  Sidney 
Rigdon,  April  29,  1835.  He  attended 
the  "School  of  the  Prophets"  in  Kirt- 
land,  and  then  left  Ohio  for  Missouri 
in  charge  of  a  company  of  saints, 
most  of  whom  he  had  baptized  himself. 
Here  he  bought  land  and  again  made 
a  home.  He  was  with  the  Saints 
through  all  their  persecutions  in  Mis- 
souri, among  which  was  the  terriDie 
massacre  at  Haun's  Mill.  In  Decem- 
ber, 1838,  he  and  family  were  com- 
pelled to  flee  from  the  State  of  Mis- 
souri, leaving  all  their  property  be- 
hind. He  then  went  to  Adams  coun- 
ty, Illinois,  and  commenced  preaching 
and  baptizing  many.  He  lost  his  wife, 
after  which  he  moved  to  Nauvoo  and 
married  Barbara  Ann  Ewell  in  No- 
vember, 1841.  In  1842  when  Nauvoo 
was  organized  into  Wards  he  was  or- 
dained Bishop  of  the  Eleventh  Ward. 


628 


LATTER-DA  f   SAINT 


He    remained    in    Nauvoo    until    the 
Saints  were  driven  out,  when  he  was 
appointed    captain   of  a   company   to 
cross  the  plains,  and  arrived  in  the 
Valley  Sept.   15,  1850.    He  moved  to 
Lehi    the    following    February,    over 
which  place  he  was  appointed  to  pre- 
side as  Bishop,  the  duties  of  which  he 
faithfully  performed  for  twenty-eight 
years.   He  tendered  his  resignation  on 
account  of  old  age  and  failing  health, 
Aug.    24,    1879.     Bro.    Evans   located 
the  city  of  Lehi  and  laid  it  off  into 
blocks  and   lots  with  a  pocket   com- 
pass, tape  line,  and  square.    He  was 
elected  to  the  first  legislature  of  Utah 
and  acted  for  many  years  as  a  mem- 
ber of  that  body.    He  was  colonel  of 
militia,  served  as  major  of  the  Lehi 
Military   District   several    terms    and 
was  mayor  of  Lehi  city  three  terms. 
He  married  Climena  Gibson  in  1854, 
Rebecca  Coleman  in  1856,  and  Christ- 
ina Holm  in  1861,  was  the  father  of 
forty-one   children   and   a   good   pro- 
vider for  all  his  family.   His  death  oc- 
curred  June   23,    1883,   and   the   fol- 
lowing day   a  special  train   was  dis- 
patched from  Salt  Lake  City,  which 
brought  President  Wilford  Woodruff, 
Bishop   Edward   Hunter   and   several 
other  leading  men  to  attend  the  fu- 
neral.   The  cortege  to  the  cemetery 
was  the  largest  ever  formed  in  Lehi, 
115    vehicles   being   in    line.     Bishop 
Evans  was  remarkable  for  his  great 
industry,  frugality  and  charity  to  the 
poor,  his  public  spiritness  and  broad 
self-acquired  education. 

FIFE,  John  Jacob,  a  missionary 
who  died  in  the  field,  was  born  Jan. 
20,  1882,  at  Riverdale,  Weber  coun- 
ty, Utah,  the  son  of  John  Fife  and 
Phoebe  Spracken.  He  was  baptized 
Aug.  7,  1890,  by  Alexander  Patter- 
son and  later  ordained  an  Elder.  He 
resided  with  his  parents  at  Clinton, 
Davis  county,  Utah,  when  called  on  a 
mission  to  the  Southern  States.  He 
was  set  apart  Oct.  15,  1901,  and  left 
Salt  Lake  City  the  same  day,  full  of 
hope   and   enthusiasm   for   his   work. 


and  was  doing  well,  when  he  was 
stricken  with  a  contagious  disease 
and  died  Dec.  8,  1902,  near  Camden, 
Wilcox  county,  Alabama.  Brother 
Fife  was  a  faithful  young  Latter-day 
Saint,  highly  esteemed  by  a  large  cir- 
cle of  acquaintances.  The  remains 
were  taken  to  Selma,  Alabama  (a  dis- 
tance of  about  fifty  miles)  in  a  wagon, 
and  there  interred,  the  health  author- 
ities believing  that  Elder  Fife  had 
died  with  diphtheria  and  consequently 
would  not  allow  the  remains  to  be 
shipped  to  Utah. 

FITZGERALD,   Perry,   one   of   the 

original  Utah  pioneers  of  1847,  was 
born  Dec.  22,  1815,  in  Fayette  coun- 
ty, Pennsylvania,  the  son  of  John 
Fitzgerald  and  Leah  Phillips.  He  re- 
ceived the  gospel  in  Illinois  in  1842, 


was  ordained  an  Elder  in  184  6  and  a 
High  Priest  in  1856.  In  the  spring  of 
184  6  he  broke  up  his  home  in  Illinois 
and  removed  westward  to  Winter 
Quarters.  There  he  remained  until 
the  following  spring,  when  he  con- 
tinued the  westward  journey  across 
the  plains  as  one  of  the  pioneers  un- 
der President  Brigham  Young,  which 
arrived  in  the  Valley  July  24,  1847. 
He   first    located    in   Salt    Lake    City, 


BIOGRAPHICAL   ENCYCLOPEDIA. 


629 


where  he  assisted  in  building  the  fort. 
In  1849  he  removed  to  Mill  Creek, 
Salt  Lake  county,  and  thence  removed 
to  Draper,  where  he  resided  until  his 
death.  The  wife  of  his  youth  died  in 
1851,  and  subsequently  he  married 
two  other  wives.  By  his  three  wives, 
Bro.  Fitzgerald  was  the  father  oi 
twenty  children,  twelve  sons  and  eight 
daughters.  In  the  Walker  Indian  "War 
he  showed  much  valor  in  executing 
the  commands  of  his  superior  officer. 
He  was  ever  faithful  in  the  discharge 
of  his  duties  as  a  Latter-day  Saint, 
and  scrupulously  honest  in  all  of  his 
dealings.  For  thirty  years  he  acted 
as  a  Ward  teacher  in  Draper,  where 
he  died  Oct.  4,  1889,  after  a  lingering 
illness  of  three  and  a  half  years.  Dur- 
ing the  last  eighteen  months  of  his 
life  he  was  confined  to  his  bed  with 
bright's  disease  of  the  kidneys.  He 
was  seventy-four  years,  ten  months 
and  thirteen  days  old  when  he  passed 
away.  At  the  time  of  his  death  he 
had  fifty  grandchildren  (forty-two  of 
whom  were  living)  and  eight  great 
grandchildren,  all  members  of  the 
Church.  At  a  reunion  of  the  Fitz- 
gerald family  held  recently,  two  hun- 
dred and  ten  direct  descendants  of 
Perry  Fitzgerald  were  accounted  for. 
Bro.  Fitzgerald's  first  wife  was  Mary 
Ann  Cosat,  a  native  of  Kentucky,  who 
died  in  Utah  in  April,  1851.  She  was 
the  mother  of  five  children,  namely, 
John,  who  was  born  March  2  5,  1840, 
in  Vermillion  county,  Illinois,  and 
died  in  February,  1892;  Daniel,  born 
Feb.  16,  1843,  and  died  in  1844;  Al- 
va, born  May  28,  1845,  in  Illinois, 
and  died  in  1847;  Manassah,  born 
Feb.  11,  1849,  in  Utah,  and  Perry, 
born  Jan.  22,  1851,  in  Utah,  and  died 
Feb.  13,  1865,  in  Draper,  Utah.  Bro. 
Fitzgerald's  second  wife  was  Ann 
Wilson,  who  was  born  Nov.  10,  1812, 
in  Oldcoats,  Nottinghamshire,  Eng- 
land, and  died  Nov.  21,  1870,  in  Utah. 
She  bore  her  husband  two  children, 
namely,  Mary  Ann,  who  was  born 
Sept.  16,  1852,  in  Draper,  Salt  Lake 


county,  Utah,  and  married  James  V. 
Allen  of  Smithfield,  Cache  county, 
Utah,  and  Alfreda  Ann,  born  Oct.  1, 
185  4,  in  Draper,  and  married  J.  D. 
H.  McAllister  of  Salt  Lake  City.  Bro. 
Fitzgerald's  third  wife  was  Agnes 
Wadsworth,  who  was  born  July  29, 
183  6,  in  Manchester,  England,  and 
died  March  23,  1902,  in  Draper,  Utah. 
She  became  the  mother  of  thirteen 
children,  namely,  Julia  Ann,  who  was 
born  March  24,  1854,  in  Draper,  Utah, 
and  married  James  Z.  Stewart  of  Lo- 
gan; Lurena  Elizabeth,  who  was  born 
Aug.  10,  1855,  at  Draper,  marrieo 
John  E.  Dalley  of  Logan,  and  died  at 
Logan  in  November,  1914;  James 
Walter  Wadsworth,  born  June  Id, 
1857,  in  Draper,  Utah;  Benjamin 
Franklin,  born  Feb.  2,  1859,  in  Dra- 
per, Utah;  Pamelia  Agnes,  born  Nov. 
30,  1860,  in  Draper,  Utah,'  and  mar- 
ried Dick  Wetzell  of  Salt  Lake  City; 
Mary  Jane,  born  Sept.  29,  1862,  in 
Draper,  Utah,  and  married  Joshua  B. 
Stewart  of  Salt  Lake  City;  Aurelius 
W.,  born  Oct.  29,  1864,  in  Draper, 
Utah;  Phedora  Margaret,  born  June 
2  3,  18  67,  in  Draper,  Utah,  and  mar- 
ried Joseph  Mousley  of  Draper;  Isaac 
May,  born  May  20,  1869,  in  Draper, 
Utah,  and  now  a  resident  of  Kamas, 
Summit  county,  Utah;  Richard  Riley, 
born  March  14,  1871,  in  Draper  and 
now  a  resident  of  Woodland,  Utah; 
Effie  Isanell,  born  Aug.  28,  1873,  in 
Draper,  Utah,  and  married  Joy  Dun- 
yon  of  Salt  Lake  City;  Melvin  Fay- 
ette, born  April  26,  1876,  in  Draper, 
and  Royal  Truth,  born  Oct.  28,  1879, 
in  Draper. 

FJEIiD,  Andrew,  Bishop  of  the  Le- 
hi  Fifth  Ward  (Alpine  Stake),  Utah 
county,  Utah,  was  born  May  30,  1856, 
in  Lehi,  son  of  Carl  J.  E.  Fjeld  and 
Anna  Olsen.  He  was  the  only  child  of 
his  mother  growing  to  maturity.  After 
receiving  his  education  in  the  public 
schools  of  Lehi,  he  learned  the  mason 
trade,  at  whici^  he  has  labored  suc- 
cessfully most  of  his  life.    Being  bap- 


630 


LATTER-DAY   SAINT 


tlzed  when  about  eight  years  of  age, 
he  was  ordained  to  the  lesser  Priest- 
hood and  as  a  young  man  he  took  an 
active  part  in  several  kinds  of  Church 
work,  occupying  the  positions  of  coun- 
selor to  Michael  Vaughan,  president 
of  the  Priests  quorum,  later  hold- 
ing the  office  of  president  of  the  quo- 
rum with  Andrew  Peterson  and  Wal- 
ter L.  Webb  as  counselors.  In  the 
Y.  M.  M.  I.  A.  he  at  various  times 
held  the  office  of  treasurer,  counselor 
and  president.  He  was  a  teacher  in 
the  Sunday  school  for  some  time  and 
on  Jan.  9,  1893,  he  became  a  member 
of  the  first  class  to  take  the  Sunday 
school  course  in  the  Brigham  Young 


University  at  Provo.  The  following 
year  he  was  again  called  to  attend  the 
University.  On  his  return  he  intro- 
duced the  new  idea  and  methods  into 
the  Sunday  school  in  Lehi  and  was 
called,  on  Nov.  18,  1894,  to  succeed 
William  Yates  as  the  superintendent 
of  the  school,  with  James  Kirkham 
and  Joseph  S.  Broadbent  as  assist- 
ants. Under  his  management  the 
school  grew  and  prospered  until  it 
was  the  largest  in  the  Church,  having 
an  enrollment  of  1250  members.  Be- 
ing called  to  Australia  on  a  mission, 
he    was    released    from    the    Sunday 


school  Jan.  9,  1899,  and  set  sail  from 
San  Francisco  on  the  26th  of  the 
month  on  the  S.  S.  "Mariposa,"  land- 
ing in  Sydney,  Australia,  Feb.  19, 
189*9.  He  labored  as  traveling  Elder 
in  the  New  South  Wales  conference 
for  thirteen  months  and  as  president 
of  the  Queensland  conference  until 
Nov.  28,  1900,  when  he  was  called  by 
President  Lorenzo  Snow  topresideover 
the  Australian  Mission.  In  this  capac- 
ity he  visited  all  the  principal  cities 
of  Australia  and  Tasmania  and  was 
relieved  by  James  Duckworth,  who 
had  come  to  preside  over  the  mis- 
sion, Aug.  4,  1901.  He  set  sail  from 
Sydney,  Australia,  on  the  steamship 
"Ventura"  Aug.  13,  1901,  calling  en 
route  at  Auckland,  Pago  Pago,  and 
Honolulu.  Landing  in  San  Francisco, 
he  was  met  by  his  wife  and  her  fath- 
er and  mother,  Sept.  3,  1901,  and  ar- 
rived in  Lehi  on  the  13th  day  of  the 
month.  He  was  set  apart  as  a  presi- 
dent of  Seventy  in  the  sixty-eighth 
quorum  Sept.  21,  1902,  and  on  the 
23rd  of  the  following  November  he 
was  ordained  a  High  Priest  and  set 
apart  as  second  counselor  to  Bishop 
Thomas  R.  Cutler.  Upon  the  division 
of  the  Lehi  Ward,  Dec.  20,  1903,  he 
was  ordained  a  Bishop  and  set  apart 
to  preside  over  the  Lehi  First  Ward 
with  Robert  John  Whipple  and  Geo. 
Schow  as  counselors.  When  the  Lehi 
Fifth  Ward  was  organized,  Feb  29, 
1920,  he  was  released  from  presiding 
over  the  First  Ward  and  set  apart  to 
preside  over  the  Fifth  Ward  with 
Morgan  S.  Lott  and  William  L.  Worl- 
ton  as  counselors,  which  position  he 
still  holds.  He  was  a  member  of  the 
school  board  for  one  term  and  as  a 
member  of  the  Lehi  Pioneer  Commit- 
tee was  one  of  the  chief  promoters  of 
the  History  of  Lehi.  He  spent  the 
greater  part  of  four  winters  gather- 
ing data  for  this  work,  interviewing 
old  settlers  and  reading  old  records. 
In  1890  (Feb.  19th),  Bro.  Fjeld  mar- 
ried Eliza  Ann  Broadbent,  a  daughter 
of   Joseph    and    Sarah    Dixon    Broad- 


BIOGRAPHICAL   ENCYCLOPEDIA. 


631 


bent,  who  was  born  Aug.  17,  1870. 
He  is  the  father  of  nine  children,  six 
of  whom  are  living,  namely,  Virgil 
Andrew,  Leona  Sarah,  Edna  Amanda, 
June,  Allan  Edward,  and  Velma. 

FLANIGAX,  James  Henry,  one  of 

the  Elders  of  the  Church  who  died 
while  filling  a  foreign  mission,  was 
the  son  of  Daniel  and  Nancy  Flani- 
gan,  and  was  born  in  Down  county, 
Ireland,  in  September,  1822.  He  be- 
came a  convert  to  "Mormonism,"  emi- 
grated to  America  and  became  a  resi- 
dent of  Nauvoo,  Hancock  county,  Illi- 
nois, where  he  was  ordained  a  Seven- 
ty. At  a  special  conference  held  in 
Nauvoo,  in  April,  1843,  he  was  called 
on  a  mission  to  Virginia.  In  1848 
he  was  callen  on  a  mission  to  Great 
Britain  and  after  a  passage  of  28 
days,  he  arrived  in  England  Oct.  4, 
1848.  He  was  assigned  to  labor  in 
the  Bedfordshire  conference,  over 
which  he  presided  until  October,  1849, 
when  he  was  called  to  preside  over 
the  Birmingham  conference.  He  la- 
bored in  this  field  faithfully  and  effi- 
ciently, as  it  was  his  nature,  until  he 
was  stricken  down  with  small  pox, 
with  which  disease  he  died  Jan.  2  9, 
1851.  His  remains  were  interred  in 
the  old  Birmingham  cemetery  Jan.  31, 
1851.  Brother  Flanigan  was  a  prom- 
ising young  man  full  of  faith  and 
love  for  the  gospel  and  possessed  wis- 
dom far  beyond  his  years. 

FORSYTH,  James  Arzy,  an  Elder 
in  the  Church  who  died  while  filling 
a  mission,  was  born  Dec.  1,  1896,  in 
Pine  Valley,  Washington  county,  Utah, 
the  son  of  Thomas  Robert  Forsyth 
and  Fredonia  Malissa  Goheen,  and 
was  baptized  May  7,  1884,  by  Thomas 
Robert  Forsyth.  He  was  a  member 
of  the  112th  quorum  of  Seventy  and 
a  resident  of  Teasdale,  Wayne  coun- 
ty, Utah,  when  he  was  set  apart  for 
a  mission  to  the  Eastern  States,  but 
he  had  only  labored  in  the  field  a 
few  months  when  he  was  stricken 
with  typhoid  fever,  of  which  he  died 


at  Allegheny,  Penn.,  Feb.  6,  1903. 
His  remains  were  shipped  to  Teas- 
dale,  Wayne  county,  Utah  (in  charge 
of  Elder  Heber  Russ),  where  impres- 
sive funeral  services  were  held.  Bro. 
Forsyth  left  a  wife  and  three  chil- 
dren. 

FRANKLAND,  Jolm  Dye,  an  Elder 
of  the  Church  who  died  while  filling 
a  mission,  was  born  Jan.  4,  1874,  at 
Levan,  Juab  county,  Utah,  the  son  of 
Wm.  Richard  Frankland  and  Eliza- 
beth Ann  Anderson.  He  was  bap- 
tized by  Eric  Peterson,  when  eight 
years  of  age  and  later  ordained  to  the 
Priesthood.  Being  set  apart  for  a 
mission  to  the  Southern  States  by 
Heber  J.  Grant,  April  9,  1900,  he 
reported  for  duty  at  the  mission  head- 
quarters at  Chattanooga,  Tenn.,  a  few 
days  later.  He  was  assigned  to  labor 
in  the  South  Alabama  conference,  lu 
this  field  he  entered  upon  his  labor 
of  love,  working  with  a  will  to  spread 
the  gospel  truths  until  the  beginning 
of  September  following.  At  that  lime 
he  was  laboring  near  Ansley,  Pike 
county,  Alabama,  with  his  traveling 
companion.  Elder  A.  L.  Mecham.  On 
Monday  evening,  Sept.  3,  1900,  Elder 
Frankland  was  suffering  with  a  severe 
headache,  and  at  times  suffered  great- 
ly. His  companion  administered  to 
him,  and  the  pain  left  him,  but  was 
soon  afterwards  followed  by  a  burn- 
ing fever  which  gradually  overpow- 
ered him.  Wednesday  evening,  Sept. 
12,  1900,  at  8:40,  without  a  struggle, 
his  spirit  took  its  flight.  Elder  Frank- 
land,  who  left  a  loving  wife,  was  of 
a  studious  nature,  bright,  quick  wit- 
ted,  and  ever  ready  to  defend  the 
truth. 

FRECKLETON,    Wilford    Orr,    an 

Elder  who  died  while  filling  a  foreign 
mission,  was  born  Nov.  20,  1896,  at 
Eureka,  Juab  county,  Utah,  the  son 
of  Wilford  W.  Freckleton  and  Emily 
J.  Kaopp.  He  was  baptized  when 
eight  years  old  by  Jacob  Christensen, 
and  later  ordained  an  Elder.     While 


632 


LATTER-DAY   SAINT 


still  residing  at  Eureka,  he  was  called 
on  a  mission  to  Great  Britain.  He 
was  set  apart  Oct.  17,  1916,  and  left 
home  three  days  later  (Oct.  2  0th). 
On  his  arrival  in  Liverpool  he  was 
assigned  to  labor  in  the  Hull  con- 
ference, where  he  performed  mission- 
ary labor  to  the  satisfaction  of  those 
who  presided  over  him,  but  while  in 
the  discharge  of  his  duties,  he  was 
attacked  with  cerebrospinal  meningi- 
tis. He  had  the  best  of  medical  care, 
and  when  it  became  evident  that  his 
condition  was  grave,  he  was  removed 
to  a  hospital,  where  everything  pos- 
sible was  done  for  his  comfort.  But 
he  gradually  grew  worse  and  died  at 
the  hospital  Feb.  27,  1917.  His  body 
was  shipped  in  charge  of  returning 
Elders,  to  Eureka,  Utah,  for  inter- 
ment. 

PUCHS,  Charles  P.,  an  Elder  of 
the  Church  who  died  while  filling  a 
foreign  mission,  was  born  in  Febru- 
ary, 1875,  in  Ludwigshafen,  Rhein- 
falz,  Germany,  and  emigrated  to 
America  with  his  parents  as  an  in- 
fant. Early  in  life  he  learned  the 
trade  of  a  blacksmith  and  machinist 
and  by  this  avocation  was  enabled  to 
render  considerable  assistance  to  his 
parents,  who  were  poor.  While  his 
interest  in  church  matters  was  some- 
what limited,  yet  he  responded  will- 
ingly when  the  call  came  to  him  in 
the  latter  part  of  1898  to  bring  the 
gospel  message  to  his  native  country, 
and  after  his  arrival  in  the  mis- 
sionary field  he  put  his  whole  soul 
and  energy  into  his  work  and  conse- 
quently became  a  most  successful  mis- 
sionary, gaining  friends  wherever  he 
traveled.  Being  exposed  to  a  heavy 
rainstorm,  he  got  soaking  wet  and 
was  at  once  taken  down  with  pneu- 
monia. The  progress  of  the  disease 
was  very  rapid  and  he  died  at  Elber- 
feld,  'A^estphalia,  in  the  Frankfurt 
conference  of  the  German  Mission, 
March  10,  1901.  Elder  Fuchs  was  an 
unassuming,  devoted  and  true  man; 
quietly,  yet  faithfully,  he  pursued  his 


labors,  never  swerving  from  the  path 
of  duty.  By  his  honest,  sincere  course 
as  a  missionary  he  won  his  way  into 
the  hearts  of  many,  and  abroad  was 
highly  respected  by  all  who  knew  him. 
Up  to  the  last  hour  he  performed  his 
duties  conscientiously.  His  remains 
were  shipped  to  his  home  in  Idaho. 

FUNK,  Willard  Richard,  Jun.,  an 

Elder  who  died  in  the  missionary 
field,  was  born  April  30,  1883,  in 
Richmond,  Cache  county,  Utah,  the 
son  of  Willard  Richard  Funk  and 
Sarah  Ann  Bell.  He  was  baptized 
Nov.  5,  1891,  by  Reuben  Belnap  and 
later  ordained  an  Elder.  He  resided 
with  his  parents  in  Claresholm,  Al- 
berta, Canada,  when  he  was  called  on 
a  mission  to  the  Northwestern  States 
in  March,  1909.  He  was  set  apart 
March  9,  1909,  and  assigned  to  labor 
in  the  Portland  conference  and  quick- 
ly developed  to  be  one  of  the  best 
Elders  in  the  mission,  manifesting  a 
beautiful  spirit  of  humility  and  de- 
votion to  duty.  Often,  after  holding 
a  successful  meeting,  he  would  be  so 
overjoyed  that  he  would  gather  his 
companion  into  his  arms  and  they 
would  weep  together  like  children. 
While  laboring  in  the  city  of  Salem, 
Oregon,  an  epidemic  of  typhoid  fever 
became  prevalent  at  that  place,  in 
consequence  of  which  he  was  removed 
to  Roseburg,  Oregon,  but  he  had  al- 
ready contracted  the  disease,  and  was 
immediately  brought  to  the  Good 
Samaritan  Hospital  in  Portland,  Ore- 
gon, where  he  received  the  most  care- 
ful nursing  and  attention  for  three 
weeks.  All  efforts  to  save  his  lite 
seemed  to  be  in  vain,  for  he  gradu- 
ally weakened  and  on  Dec.  20,  1909, 
his  spirit  took  its  flight  to  the  Great 
Beyond.  Pres.  Melvin  J.  Ballard  ac- 
companied the  remains  from  Port- 
land to  the  home  of  his  parents  in 
Claresholm,  Alberta,  Canada,  where 
the  funeral  services  were  held  Dec. 
23,  1909.  Brother  Funk  was  the  only 
son  of  an  esteemed  family  consisting 
of  his  parents  and  six  living  sisters. 


BIOGRAPHICAL   ENCYCLOPEDIA. 


633 


GARDNER,  Henry  Archibald,  first 
counselor  in  the  presidency  of  the 
Nebo  Stake  of  Zion,  Utah  county, 
Utah,  was  born  Sept.  21,  1887,  in 
Spanish  Fork,  Utah  county,  Utah,  the 
son  of  Henry  Gardner  and  Elizabeth 
Martell.  After  his  education  in  the 
common  schools  of  Spanish  Fork  he 
attended  the  Brigham  Young  Univer- 
sity at  Provo  for  two  years.  He  spent 
the  early  part  of  his  life  on  his  fath- 
er's farm,  and  later  labored  three 
years  in  the  sugar  business  as  fore- 
man. He  was  baptized  Oct.  13,  1895, 
by  Henry  Tilley;  ordained  a  Deacon 
Nov.   4,   1899,  by  George  H.  Jex  and 


set  apart  as  president  of  the  first  quo- 
rum of  Deacons  in  the  Spanish  Fork 
First  Ward,  Dec.  4,  1901;  ordained  a 
Priest  March  8,  1903,  by  George  H. 
Jex,  and  ordained  an  Elder  in  No- 
vember, 1906,  by  Henry  Gardner  (his 
father).  In  190  6,  when  only  nineteen 
years  of  age,  he  was  called  on  a  mis- 
sion to  the  Southern  States,  during 
which  he  labored  in  the  Alabama  con- 
ference, part  of  the  time  as  president 
of  said  conference.  After  his  return 
home  in  June,  1909,  he  was  chosen 
as  a  member  of  the  Stake  Board  of 
Y.  M.  M.  I.  A.,  which  position  he  held 
for  two  years,  and  also  labored  as  a 


home  missionary.  He  was  ordained  a 
Seventy  Dec.  8,  1910,  by  Jonathan  G. 
Kimball  and  ordained  a  High  Priest 
and  Bishop  May  27,  1917,  by  Apostle 
Orson  F.  Whitney  and  set  apart  to 
preside  over  the  Spanish  Fork  Second 
Ward,  succeeding  the  late  Bishop  Ben- 
jamin Argyle.  Although  he  only  act- 
ed as  Bishop  one  year,  he  won  the 
love  and  esteem  of  the  Saints  in  his 
Ward,  who  supported  him  loyally. 
When  the  Nebo  Stake  presidency  was 
reorganized  Feb.  2  4,  1918,  Bro.  Gard- 
ner was  chosen  as  first  counselor  in 
the  Stake  presidency,  which  position 
he  still  holds.  In  January,  1919,  he 
left  the  sugar  business  to  accept  a 
position  as  assistant  cashier  in  the 
Commercial  Bank  of  Spanish  Fork, 
which  position  he  still  occupies.  He 
has  held  a  number  of  positions  oi  a 
civil  nature,  and  acted  as  city  council- 
man of  Spanish  Fork  two  terms.  He 
was  one  of  the  promoters  of  the 
Spanish  Fork  Building  and  Loan  As- 
sociation, which  was  organized  in 
1512  for  the  purpose  of  encouraging 
young  men  and  assisting  them  to  be- 
come owners  of  their  own  homes,  and 
now  acts  as  the  treasurer  of  this  asso- 
ciation. In  1910  (Sept.  28th)  Bro. 
Gardner  married  Grace  Brockbank 
(daughter  of  Samuel  Brockbank  and 
Mary  Jane  Thomas  of  Spanish  Fork), 
who  was  born  at  Spanish  Fork,  Utah, 
Jan.  18,  1889.  This  union  has  been 
blessed  with  two  children  (Grace  and 
Wallace  Henry).  Bro.  Gardner  is  an 
active  and  energetic  young  man  with 
a  great  future  before  him.  His  integ- 
rity to  the  Church  is  unquestioned, 
and  in  his  business  affairs  he  has  won 
the  confidence  and  good  will  of  the 
community  in  which  he  resides. 

GILES,  George  Elmo,  an  Elder  who 
died  while  filling  a  foreign  mission, 
was  born  Dec.  11,  18'd4,  in  Provo, 
Utah  county,  Utah,  the  son  of  George 
William  Giles  and  Fannie  Elizabeth 
Syme.  He  was  baptized  Dec.  12,  1902, 
by  Chauncey  C.  Thomas,   was  after- 


634 


LATTER-DAY   SAINT 


wards  ordained  an  Elder,  and  resid- 
ed in  the  Bonneville  Ward  (Provo), 
when  he  was  called  on  a  mission  to 
Samoa.  After  being  set  apart  for  his 
mission  April  7,  1915,  he  proceeded 
on  his  long  voyage  to  the  islands  of 
the  South  Pacific,  and  on  his  arrival 
in  Samoa  he  commenced  missionary 
labors,  in  which  he  was  successful 
and  energetic  until  he  was  stricken 
with  severe  sickness.  He  died  April  4, 
1918,  with  ptomaine  poisoning  and 
pneumonia.  The  steamship  "Sierra" 
was  sailing  for  the  United  States  a 
day  or  two  later  and  the  mission  of- 
ficials succeeded  in  making  arrange- 
ments to  send  the  body  home  on  that 
steamer.  A  sailor's  casket,  intended 
for  the  body  of  one  of  the  allies' 
fighting  force  and  suitable  for  a  long 
voyage,  served  to  convey  home  the  re- 
mains of  the  deceased  Elder.  Wil- 
liam O.  Lee,  who  arrived  in  Salt  Lake 
City  April  26,  1918,  with  the  body  of 
the  late  Elder,  reported  that  stran- 
gers and  government  officials  lent 
the  dead  man's  companions  every 
possible  aid  in  the  sad  affair.  Eiaer 
Giles  was  a  successful  missionary 
and  had  gained  the  love  and  good- 
will of  his  fellow  laborers.  Funeral 
services  were  held  in  Provo  April  28, 
1918. 

GILES,  Taylor,  an  Elder  who  died 
in  the  missionary  field,  was  born  Jan. 
21,  1898,  in  Heber  City,  Wasatcn 
county,  Utah,  the  son  of  John  W. 
Giles  and  Rachel  A.  Taylor.  He  was 
baptized  when  eight  years  old  by  John 
E.  Moulton,  and  later  ordained  an  El- 
der. He  resided  with  his  parents  in 
the  Heber  Second  Ward  in  1917,  when 
he  was  called  and  set  apart  for  a 
mission  to  the  Northern  States  Marcn 
13,  1917.  Arriving  in  the  mission 
field  March  17,  1917,  he  was  assigned 
to  the  Minnesota  conference,  wbere 
he  entered  into  the  missionary  work 
with  full  purpose  of  heart.  He  soon 
developed  into  an  efficient  missionary 
and  his  nineteen  months  in  the  mis- 
sion field  were  spent  in  whole-souled 


devoted  service  to  God  and  his  fellow- 
men.  He  won  the  love,  the  confidence 
and  respect  of  his  companions  and  the 
people  among  whom  he  labored.  While 
in  the  faithful  discharge  of  his  duties, 
he  was  stricken  with  pneumonia,  fol- 
lowing influenza,  and  died  Nov.  4, 
1918,  at  St.  Paul,  Minnesota,  twenty 
years  old. 

GILL,  Joseph  S.  B.,  a  missionary 
who  died  in  the  field,  was  born  Oct. 
9,  1870,  in  Weston,  Oneida  county, 
Idaho,  the  son  of  William  Gill  and 
Elizabeth  Brown.  He  was  baptizea 
Oct.  4,  1877,  by  Rasmus  Nielsen,  and 
was  a  member  of  the  142nd  quorum 
of  Seventy  and  a  resident  of  Weston 
in  190  4,  when  he  was  called  on  a 
mission  to  the  Eastern  States.  After 
being  set  apart  for  his  mission  Nov. 
1,  1904,  he  left  for  his  field  of  labor 
a  few  days  later,  but  was  stricken 
with  sickness  soon  after  commencing 
his  missionary  career.  He  died  on  Fri- 
day, June  2,  1905,  from  typhoid  fever 
in  a  hospital  at  Pittsburg,  Pa.  His 
remains  were  shipped  home  in  charge 
of  Elder  J.  H.  Archibald.  Elder  Gill 
left  a  wife  and  several  children. 

GILLET,  Collins  Moore,  an  Elder 
of  the  Church  who  died  while  filling 
a  mission,  was  born  Nov.  4,  1837,  at 
Neversink,  Sullivan  county.  New 
York,  the  son  of  Horace  Gillet  and 
Sarah  E.  Moor.  In  the  year  1854  he, 
with  the  family  moved  to  Great  Salt 
Lake  Valley,  where  he  was  baptized 
Nov.  19,  1854,  by  Elder  Seth  Taft. 
While  on  the  journey  to  the  Valley 
his  father  sickened  and  died,  leaving 
Collins,  who  was  then  only  in  his  sev- 
enteenth year,  to  assume  the  respon- 
sibility of  looking  after  his  surviving 
mother  and  the  family  younger  than 
himself.  To  his  mother  he  was  all 
that  a  son  could  be,  his  affection  and 
unvarying  kindness  to  her  and  the 
family  going  far  to  mitigate  the  be- 
reavement which  they  had  suffered 
in  the  loss  of  the  husband  and  father. 
At  the  April  co'nference  in  1863,  Col- 
lins M.  was  called,  with  many  other 


BIOGRAPHICAL   ENCYCLOPEDIA. 


635 


young  men,  to  take  a  mission  to  Eu- 
rope. Arriving  in  Liverpool  July  2;), 
1863,  he  was  appointed  to  labor  as  a 
traveling  Elder  in  the  Southampton 
district,  and  afterwards  appointed 
president  of  the  Reading  conference. 
From  the  latter  conference  he  was 
shortly  afterwards  removed  to  the 
Sheffield  district,  his  trustworthiness, 
sound  judgment  and  other  qualities 
designating  him — though  with  limit- 
ed experience  at  that  time  in  the  min- 
istry— as  suitable  to  fill  the  impor- 
tant position  of  president  of  the  dis- 
trict. Over  the  district  he  continued 
to  preside  until  the  time  of  his  depar- 
ture from  England,  giving  perfect 
satisfaction  to  those  who  presided 
over  him,  and  securing  the  love  and 
confidence  of  the  saints.  On  the  30th 
of  April,  18  66,  he  sailed  from  Liver- 
pool on  the  ship  "John  Bright,"  as 
president  of  the  company  of  emigrat- 
ing saints,  which  numbered  7  64  souls. 
In  the  discharge  of  his  new  duties  on 
shipboard,  and  also  from  New  York 
to  the  frontiers,  he  continued  to  ex- 
hibit the  wisdom,  faithfulness  and 
zeal  which  had  characterized  his  pre- 
vious labors.  While  crossing, the 
plains,  together  with  other  returning 
missionaries,  he  took  sick  and  died 
Aug.  20,  1866,  twenty-three  miles 
west  of  Fort  Kearney.  Elder  George 
Q.  Cannon  writes:  ''I,  with  many  oth- 
ers who  had  opportunities  of  becom- 
ing acquainted  with  the  studious  dis- 
position and  exemplary  habits  of  El- 
der Collett  anticipated  a  long  career 
of  usefulness  for  him.  His  future 
seemed  to  be  unusually  rich  with 
promise.  But  in  the  providence  of 
our  Almighty  Father  he  has  been 
called  away  from  us.  His  labors, 
however,  are  not  lost.  In  the  sphere 
to  which  he  has  gone  he  will  find 
ample  opportunity  for  the  exercise  oi 
his  talents  in  forwarding  the  great 
work  which  during  his  mortal  life 
he  loved  so  well." 

GrOLD,    Abraham    John,    an    Elder 
who  died  while  filling  a  foreign  mis- 


sion, was  born  Oct.  16,  1882,  in  Salt 
Lake  City,  Utah,  the  son  of  Cyrus  H. 
Gold  and  Mary  W.  Willis.  He  was 
baptized  Nov.  4,  1890,  by  Joseph  Ked- 
dington  and  later  ordained  a  Priest. 
From  his  earliest  youth  he  took  great 
interest  in  Church  affairs  and  was 
universally  known  as  a  good  boy. 
After  attending  the  public  schools,  he 
entered  upon  a  four  years'  business 
course  at  the  L.  D.  S.  University  in 
Salt  Lake  City.  He  had  completed 
about  three  years'  study  in  that  insti- 
tution and  was  residing  in  the  Can- 


non Ward,  Salt  Lake  City,  when  he 
was  called  on  a  mission  to  the  Neth- 
erlands. After  being  set  apart  for  his 
mission  Sept.  2,  1904,  he  left  for  his 
field  of  labor  Sept.  10,  1904,  and  was, 
on  his  arrival  in  Holland,  Oct.  2, 
1904,  appointed  to  labor  in  the  Arn- 
hem  conference.  In  February,  1906, 
his  field  of  labor  was  changed  to 
Groningen.  At  that  place  he  was  zeal- 
ously engaged  in  missionary  work, 
when  it  fell  to  his  lot  to  wait  on  a 
fellow  missionary  (  Hugh  W.  Welker) , 
who  suffered  with  black  small-pox, 
and  while  engaged  in  this  benevolent 
work,  he,  himself,  was  attacked  by  a 
malignant  form  of  that  dreadful  dis- 
ease,   which    terminated    his    life    at 


636 


LATTER-DAY   SAINT 


Groningen,  Holland,  May  14,  1906. 
He  was  buried  at  the  cemetery  at 
Groningen,  by  the  side  of  Hugh  M. 
Welker,  who  had  died  with  small-pox 
two  weeks  previously.  Both  graves 
are  inclosed  with  an  iron  fence  and 
the  ground  is  owned  and  taken  care 
of  by  the  Church.  A  monument  is 
erected  on  the  graves.  Elder  Gold 
had  required  the  Dutch  language  to 
a  high  degree  of  perfection  and  was 
a  very  efficient  and  energetic  mis- 
sionary. 

GOODWIN,  Isaac,  a  prominent  Elder 
in  the  Church,  was  born  June  18, 
1810,  in  New  Hartford,  Connecticut, 
the  son  of  Isaac  Goodwin  and  Rhoda 
Richards.     He   was   a   descendent   of 


Ozias  Goodwin,  who  came  to  America 
from  England  and  settled  in  Connect- 
icut in  1632.  Isaac  married  Laura 
Hotchkiss  Feb.  2,  1833,  from  which 
union  seven  children  were  born  (four 
boys  and  three  girls),  namely  Isaac, 
Lewis,  Edwin  A.,  Albert  S.,  Emmerett. 
Nancy  and  Lucinda.  Becoming  a  con- 
vert to  the  restored  gospel,  Isaac 
Goodwin  and  family  were  baptized  in 
18  44.  Two  years  later,  in  company 
with  other  saints,  they  concluded  to 
go  west  and  took  passage  at  New 
York  on  the  sailing  vessel  "Brook- 
lyn," destined  for  California.  The  ship 
sailed  from  New  York  Feb.   4,  184  6, 


doubled  Cape  Horn  and  arrived  at 
Yerba  Buena,  on  the  Bay  of  San  Fran- 
cisco, California,  July  31,  1846,  the 
voyage  consuming  a  little  less  than 
six  months.  At  the  beginning  of  the 
voyage  Mrs.  Goodwin  met  with  an  ac- 
cident and  being  in  delicate  health 
she  never  recovered  from  the  shock, 
but  passed  away  May  6,  1846,  shortly 
after  the  ship  had  rounded  Cape  Horn. 
She  was  buried  on  Goat  Island,  one  of 
the  Juan  Fernandez  group  (Robinson 
Crusoe's  famed  islands).  Bro.  Good- 
win and  his  family  lived  for  some 
time  in  San  Francisco  and  later  moved 
to  San  Bernardino,  where  he  met  and 
married  Mary  Cox  of  New  Haven, 
England,  Dec.  22,  1855.  She  had  re- 
ceived the  gospel  Jan.  10,  1850,  emi- 
grated to  America  and  accompamea 
Charles  C.  Rich's  company  to  Cali- 
fornia in  1851.  She  died  childless 
Dec.  13,  1898,  at  Lehi,  Utah.  Isaac 
Goodwin,  after  living  in  San  Bernar- 
dino for  several  years,  decidea  to 
move  to  Utah  with  his  family.  They 
traveled  the  so-called  "southern 
route,"  making  a  short  stay  in  Utah's 
Dixie  and  other  places  and  finally  be- 
came permanent  settlers  in  Lehi,  Utah 
county,  in  1859.  Isaac  Goodwin  was 
the  first  to  introduce  alfalfa  (lucerne) 
into  Utah,  the  hay  that  has  been  such 
an  important  factor  in  the  Utah  moun- 
tain region.  He  was  elected  mayor  of 
Lehi  Feb.  13,  1865,  was  appointed  to 
the  same  office  Oct.  31,  1874  (to  fill 
the  vacancy  caused  by  the  resignation 
of  Wm.  F.  Winn),  was  again  elected 
mayor  Feb.  8,  1875,  and  filled  the  of- 
fice with  honor  and  fidelity  on  each 
occasion.  Bro.  Goodwin  held  many 
other  positions  of  trust,  both  secular 
and  religious.  In  1872  he  filled  a 
short  mission  to  the  Eastern  States. 
Beloved  and  respected  by  all  who 
knew  him,  he  died  at  Lehi  April  25, 
1879,  as  a  faithful  Latter-day  Saint. 
GOODWIN,  Samuel  Isaac,  the  sec- 
ond Bishop  of  Lehi  Second  Ward  (Al- 
pine Stake),  Utah  county,  Utah,  was 
born  at  Lehi  March  20,  1869.  the  son 


BIOGRAPHICAL   ENCYCLOPEDIA. 


637 


of  Edwin  A.  Goodwin  and  Anna  Har- 
wood.  He  was  baptized  when  about 
eight  years  old,  received  a  common 
school  education  in  his  native  town 
and  was  ordained  to  the  office  of  a 
Priest  when  still  quite  young.  Later 
he  was  ordained  an  Elder  by  Thos.  F. 
Trane  and  became  active  in  the  Wara 
Y.  M.  M.  I.  A.;  subsequently  he  was 
chosen  as  first  counselor  in  the  Al- 
pine Stake  organization  of  Y.  M.  M. 
I.  A.  In  1901  (Jan.  20th),  when  the 
Alpine  Stake  of  Zion  was  organized, 
he  was  ordained  a  High  Priest  oy 
James  H.  Clarke  and  set  apart  as  an 
alternate  member  of  the  High  Coun- 
cil of  the  Alpine  Stake;   later  he  be- 


came a  regular  High  Councilor,  which 
position  he  held  until  July  1,  1*917, 
when  he  was  ordained  a  Bishop  by 
James  E.  Talmage  and  set  apart  to 
preside  over  the  Lehi  Second  Ward, 
succeeding  James  H.  Gardner,  who 
had  resigned.  Bishop  Goodwin  has 
also  held  a  great  many  secular  offi- 
ces. Thus  he  has  served  on  several 
occasions  as  a  member  of  the  Lehi 
city  council,  school  trustee  and  now 
acts  as  president  of  the  Alpine  Shool 
District  Board.  His  main  avocation 
in  life  has  been  that  of  a  merchant. 
He  commenced  to  clerk  in  the   Peo- 


ple's Co-op  in  Lehi  about  thirty  years 
ago  and  has  been  manager  of  that  in- 
stitution for  seventeen  years.  In  18  91 
(Nov.  25th)  he  married  Olena  Ander- 
son (daughter  of  Andrew  R.  Ander- 
son and  Mariane  Nielsen),  who  was 
born  July  7,  1872,  in  Salt  Lake  City, 
Utah.  Nine  children  (three  boys  and 
six  girls)  have  blessed  this  marriage, 
namely,  Harold  Isaac,  Wanda,  Myrl, 
Thelma,  Arema,  Stanley  Edwin,  Ar- 
leen,  Ralph  Andrew  and  La  Priel. 
Bishop  Goodwin  ranks  as  one  of  Le- 
hi's  foremost  citizens,  whose  wisdom 
and  integrity  are  acknowledged  by 
all  his  associates. 

GRANT,     Rachel    Ridgway    Ivins, 

wife  of  Jedediah  Morgan  Grant,  was 
born  March  7,  1821,  at  Hornerstown, 
N.  J.,  the  daughter  of  Caleb  Ivins  and 
Edith  Ridgway.  Her  parents  died  be- 
fore she  reached  the  age  of  woman- 
hood, and  she  made  her  home  with 
her  cousin,  Joshua  Wright,  at  Tren- 
ton, N.  J.  Some  time  later  than  her 
eighteenth  year,  while  residing  with 
a  relative  at  Hornerstown,  N.  J.,  she 
attended  a  meeting  at  which  she  heard 
for  the  first  time  "Mormon"  Eld- 
ers preach.  She  related  that  she  went 
home  and  prayed  that  the  Lord  would 
forgive  her  for  doing  such  a  thing  on 
the  Sabbath.  However,  her  soul  was 
too  receptive  to  the  voice  of  truth  not 
to  recognize  the  sound  thereof;  and 
she  continued  to  attend  the  Latter- 
day  Saint  meetings,  even  though 
threatened  with  being  disfellow- 
shipped  from  her  church,  the  Baptist, 
for  so  doing.  Eventually  she  was  bap- 
tized, and  later  became  personally 
acquainted  with  the  Prophet  Joseph 
Smith.  She  emigrated  to  Utah,  in 
company  with  her  sister  Anna  and  a 
number  of  other  people  who  had  been 
former  residents  of  her  neighborhood 
and  who  had  joined  the  Church.  The 
company  in  which  she  traveled  ar- 
rived in  Salt  Lake  City  Aug.  10,  1853. 
Two  years  later  she  married  Presi- 
dent Jedediah  Morgan  Grant,  second 


638 


LATTER-DAY   SAINT 


counselor  to  President  B  r  i  g  h  a  m 
Young.  Toward  the  end  of  the  fol- 
lowing year,  her  son  Heber  Jeddy, 
now  the  seventh  President  of  the 
Church  of  Jesus  Christ  of  Latter-day 
Saints,  was  born.  Nine  days  later 
her  husband  died,  and  she  found  her- 
self in  very  poor  circumstances,  but 
with  characteristic  courage  and  ae- 
termination  she  bore  her  sorrow 
bravely,  and  started  to  earn  a  liveli- 
hood for  herself  and  child  by  sewing 
and  keeping  boarders.  With  devoted 
care  she  guided  the  steps  of  her  boy 
through  the  days  of  infancy  and  child- 
hood, instilling  into  his  mind  the 
■principles  of  faith,  honesty,  and  stead- 
fastness of  purpose,  and,  above  all, 
devotion  to  the  gospel  and  loyalty  to 
the  Church.  For  thirty-five  years  Sis- 
ter Grant  served  as  president  of  the 
Relief  Society  of  the  Thirteenth  Ward, 
Salt  Lake  City,  and  always  manifest- 
ed great  interest  in  the  Relief  Society 
as  a  body,  knowing  it  to  be  an  organi- 
zation that  had  been  instituted  by  the 
Prophet  Joseph  Smith  for  the  devel- 
opment of  the  women  in  Israel,  and 
for  their  service  in  ministration  to 
the  afflicted.  During  the  later  years 
of  her  life  Sister  Grant  suffered  from 
deafness,  which  affliction  was  a  source 
of  great  sorrow  to  her,  as  she  loved 
music  and  found  in  the  association  of 
her  friends  one  of  the  supreme  joys 
of  her  life.  Notwithstanding  this  af- 
fliction, no  murmuring  word  ever 
passed  her  lips,  and  the  sunny  smile 
was  ever  fresh  upon  her  face.  Sub- 
lime resignation  was  among  her 
prominent  characteristics.  Sister 
Grant,  who  was  affectionately  known 
as  "Grandma  Grant,"  died  at  the  res- 
idence of  her  granddaughter,  Mrs. 
George  J.  Cannon,  in  Salt  Lake  City, 
Jan.  27,  1909,  as  a  result  of  pneu- 
monia. 

GREENHALGH,    Joseph    William, 

Bishop  of  the  Layton  Ward  (St.  Jo- 
seph Stake),  Graham  county,  Ari- 
zona, was  born  Sept.  23,  18  75,  at 
Santaquin,    Utah    county,    Utah,    the 


son  of  Joseph  Greenhalgh  and  Lucre- 
tia  McBride.  He  moved  with  his  par- 
ents to  Pima,  Arizona,  in  1883,  was 
baptized  March  30,  1884,  by  Joseph 
K.  Rogers,  ordained  a  Deacon  and 
received  a  common  school  education 
at  Pima,  was  ordained  an  Elder  by 
John  Welker  Jan.  31,  1898,  and  on 
the  same  day,  at  Thatcher,  Arizona, 
he  married  Loney  Branch  (daughter 
of  Augustus  H.  Branch  and  Dorcas 
Ann  Morris),  who  was  born  Aug.  2, 
1878.  Apostle  John  Henry  Smith  per- 
formed the  marriage  ceremony.  Three 
children  has  blessed  this  marriage, 
namely:  Wilford,  Pearl  and  Grant. 
Bro.  Greenhalgh  was  ordained  a  Sev- 
enty Jan.  9,  1906,  by  George  Teasdale 
and  filled  a  mission  to  the  Central 
States  from  1911  to  1913;  he  pre- 
sided one  year  over  the  St.  Johns 
conference  and  afterwards  presided 
over  the  St.  Louis  (Missouri)  confer- 
ence. He  was  ordained  a  High  Priest 
and  Bishop  Nov.  25,  1917,  by  George 
Albert  Smith  and  set  apart  to  pre- 
side over  the  Layton  Ward,  which  po- 
sition he  still  holds.  Bishop  Green- 
halgh is  a  farmer  by  occupation,  a 
public  spirited  man  and  wields  an  in- 
fluence for  good  with  all  his  asso- 
ciates,  in  life. 

GREENWOOD,  Joseph,  a  mission- 
ary who  died  while  away  from  home, 
laboring  for  the  Church,  was  born 
March  10,  1844,  on  the  Ohio  river, 
the  son  of  William  and  Alice  Green- 
wood. He  was  expelled  from  Nauvoo, 
Illinois,  in  1846,  and  arrived  in  Salt 
Lake  Valley  in  1847.  Together  with 
his  parents  he  became  a  resident  of 
American  Fork,  Utah  county,  Utah, 
where  he  still  lived  in  1862,  when  he 
was  called  to  go  back  to  the  Mis- 
souri river  as  a  Church  teamster 
in  Captain  Joseph  Home's  company. 
In  1864  he  w^ent  to  the  Missouri  river, 
agreeable  to  call  from  Church  au- 
thorities, as  a  night  guard  in  Cap- 
tain Joseph  S.  Rawling's  ox  train, 
and  was  on  his  way  home  when  he 
took  sick  and  died  of  lung  disease  on 
Bear  river,  Sept.  14,  1864. 


BIOGRAPHICAL   ENCYCLOPEDIA. 


639 


GROUARD,  Benjamin  Franklin,  one 

of  the  first  Latter-day  Saint  mis- 
sionaries to  the  Society  Islands,  was 
born  Jan.  4,  1819,  in  Stratham  town- 
ship (near  Portsmouth),  Rockingham 
county.  New  Hampshire,  the  son  of 
Francis  and  Sophronia  Grouard.  He 
left  his  home  when  only  fourteen 
years  of  age,  going  to  sea.  Becoming 
a  convert  to  "Mormonism,"  he  was 
baptized  into  the  Church  at  an  early 
day  and  ordained  to  the  Priesthood. 
Being  called,  together  with  Addison 
Pratt,  Noah  Rogers  and  Knowlton  F. 
Hanks  to  fill  a  mission  to  the  Pacific 
Islands,  he  was  ordained  a  Seventy 
and  left  Nauvoo  to  fill  said  mission 
June  1,  1843.  After  a  long  and  tedi- 
ous passage,  during  which  one  of  his 
missionary  companions  (Hanks)  died, 
he  reached  the  island  of  T  u  b  u  a  i 
(south  of  the  Society  Islands)  in  May, 
18  44.  Soon  afterwards  he  went  to  the 
Island  of  Tahiti,  where  he  raised  up  a 
branch  of  the  Church  and  later  per- 
formed a  glorious  missionary  work 
among  the  natives  on  the  Tuamotu 
Islands.  With  the  assistance  of  the 
natives  he  built  a  vessel  on  the  Island 
of  Tubuai,  which  was  used  for  some 
time  in  carrying  the  missionaries  from 
island  to  island.  Not  hearing  from  his 
family  in  America  for  a  long  time,  he 
married  a  native  wife  on  the  Island 
of  Anaa.  In  1852  he  returned  to 
America  and  settled  in  southern  Cali- 
fornia. He  made  his  home  in  San  Ber- 
nardino, where,  at  that  time,  there 
was  a  considerable  body  of  the  saints. 
He  finally  left  the  Church  and  be- 
came a  Spiritualist.  After  residing 
in  San  Bernadino  and  Los  Angeles  for 
several  years,  he  moved  to  the  Santa 
Ana  Valley,  where  he  died  March  19, 
18  94,  seventy-five  years  of  age,  leav- 
ing a  son  and  four  daughters. 

GUDMUNDSON,    G  u  d  m  u  n  d,    the 

first  Latter-day  Saint  missionary  sent 
to  Iceland,  was  born  March  23,  1825, 
in  Iceland,  the  son  of  Gudmund  and 
Gudrun    Gudmundson.      His    parents 


were  poor,  but  devout  and  pious  peo- 
ple. Gudmund  was  the  youngest  child 
of  ten  brothers  and  sisters.  When 
about  sixteen  years  of  age  he  went  to 
Copenhagen,  Denmark,  where  he 
learned  the  trade  of  a  goldsmith, and 
after  having  served  his  apprenticeship 
he  worked  at  that  trade  for  about 
seven  years.  While  thus  engaged  he 
heard  of  a  religious  sect  called  "Mor- 
mons," recently  introduced  into  Den- 
mark, and  Gudmund,  being  of  a  re- 
ligious turn  of  mind,  went  one  Sab- 
bath to  hear  them.  He  writes,  "It 
was  then  that  I,  for  the  first  time, 
heard  and  saw  our  beloved  Apostle 
Erastus  Snow.  I  understood  and  be- 
lieved the  doctrines  taught  by  him 
and  his  companions,  and  I  was  bap- 
tized in  the  most  devoted  sincerity 
and  repentance  Feb.  15,  1851.  by  Pe- 
ter O.  Hansen.  I  testify  before  God 
and  men  that  my  heart  was  renewed, 
and  I  realized  that  the  gospel  was  the 
power  of  God  unto  salvation.  At  a 
fast  meeting  held  in  Copenhagen, 
April  18,  1851,  I  was  ordained  a 
Teacher  by  Erastus  Snow  and  called 
to  preach  the  gospel  to  my  country- 
men. Having  found  the  fruits  of  the 
gospel  more  sweet  and  desirable  than 
any  other  fruit,  I  expected  that  every 
person  would  believe  my  testimony, 
especially  my  own  relatives,  but  alas, 
when  I  arrived  in  Iceland  I  preached 
to  my  brothers  and  sisters  in  vain; 
they  would  not  receive  me,  and  as  my 
pious  parents  had  died,  I  felt  myself 
left  alone,  like  'Elijah  of  old  in  the 
cave.'  However,  I  soon  found  a  few 
believing  friends,  who,  notwithstand- 
ing strong  opposition  on  the  part  of 
the  priests,  were  ready  to  embrace 
the  truth.  I  was  often  rebuked,  spit 
upon  and  mocked  by  enemies,  but  be- 
ing full  of  the  love  of  God,  I  felt  no 
anger  or  indignation  against  those 
who  persecuted  me.  I  will  mention 
one  singular  incident:  One  of  my 
most  violent  adversaries,  a  'very  wise 
man,'  like  Zeezrom  of  old,  spoke 
many   hard    words   to    me,    and    even 


640 


LATTER-DAY   SAINT 


mocked  the  Holy  Ghost,  saying  that  I 
might  just  as  well  say  that  I  had  as- 
cended a  certain  mountain  (near  our 
place)  and  there  received  the  Holy 
Ghost.  I  left  him  with  singular  feel- 
ings, without  answering  him,  but  felt 
that  God  would  judge  him  and  that 
he  was  a  hypocrite.  A  few  days  later 
this  man  ascended  the  mountain  men- 
tioned, and  when  he  had  almost 
reached  the  top,  he  took  hold  of  a 
rock,  which  seemed  to  be  solid  and 
strong,  but  the  rock  yielded  and  the 
man  rolled  downward  about  a  mile. 
He  broke  a  bone  and  his  whole  body 
was  bruised.  For  a  year  or  so  he  suf- 
fered great  pain,  but  he  finally  re- 
covered and  made  another  attempt  to 
ascend  the  mountain,  where  his  sheep 
were  pasturing.  Two  men  followeu 
him  and  two  went  before  him.  As  he 
was  climbing,  the  strength  of  his  legs 
failed  him  and  he  fell  headlong,  again 
breaking  his  leg.  Afterwards  he  be- 
gan to  examine  what  we  published, 
and  he  told  his  sister  that  he  would 
never  forget  the  harsh  words  he  had 
spoken  against  me."  Soon  after  land- 
ing on  Iceland,  Bro.  Gudmundson's 
missionary  companion  was  accident- 
ally drowned,  leaving  him  alone  with- 
out the  authority  to  baptize,  as  he 
only  held  the  office  of  a  Teacher.  Bro. 
Gudmundson  remained  on  Iceland  up- 
wards of  three  years  (from  April, 
1851,  to  July,  1854).  In  the  mean- 
time he  had  been  joined  by  Elder 
John  P.  Lorensen,  who  ordained  him 
an  Elder  and  after  baptizing  nine  per- 
sons he  returned  to  Denmark  and 
then  spent  about  eighteen  months  as 
a  missionary  on  Sjaelland.  While  do- 
ing missionary  labors  in  the  city  of 
Kallundborg,  he  was  arrested  and  im- 
prisoned for  about  seven  weeks,  and 
when  the  prosecutors  were  unable  to 
prove  anything  against  him.  except 
that  he  had  baptized  some  persons 
and  preached  the  gospel,  he  was  lib- 
erated, but  was  immediately  drafted 
into  service  as  a  soldier,  much  against 
his  will,  for  four  years.    He  was  con- 


ducted by  the  police  to  Copenhagen, 
forced  to  put  on  military  attire  and 
given  a  gun  and  a  sabre.  Being  weak- 
ened from  confinement  in  prison,  he 
found  the  military  training  exceed- 
ingly hard,  and  besides  he  was  con- 
stantly exposed  to  the  ridicule  and 
sneers  of  his  fellow-soldiers  because 
of  his  being  a  "Mormon."  These  were 
trying  experiences  for  Bro.  Gudmund- 
son, who  at  times  thought  that  the 
Lord  had  forsaken  him;  yet  he  con- 
tinued to  pray  for  deliverance.  After 
he  had  been  in  the  military  service 
thirteen  months,  his  friends  contrib- 
uted 300  rigsdaler  to  buy  him  free 
from  further  military  service,  but  as 
the  effort  proved  ineffectual,  he  gave 
the  money  to  the  poor.  Finally  he 
took  sick  and  was  placed  in  the  hos- 
pital, where  he  preached  the  gospel 
to  his  room-mates;  among  his  co  ■ - 
verts  was  a  corporal,  who  was  b> ••  i 
tized  before  he  left  the  hospital.  B'--.'' 
Gudmundson  writes:  "After  I  had 
been  in  the  hospital  a  long  time,  ifi 
was  presented  to  the  physicians  a-  .ii 
the  general  of  the  battalion,  who  p/  -t 
nounced  me  unfit  for  military  serv.  je 
on  account  of  weakness  in  the  lun^f-e. 
They  then  gave  me  a  passport  anc  I 
appeared  in  a  conference  of  the  saints 
in  Copenhagen,  to  the  astonishment 
of  everyone,  and  I  was  really  aston- 
ished myself,  because  I  knew  that  my 
lungs  were  as  healthy  as  they  could 
possibly  be.  I  realized  then  that  it 
was  the  work  of  the  Lord,  in  fulfill- 
ment of  certain  promises  made  to  me, 
that  if  I  kept  the  commandments  of 
God  and  did  my  duty,  I  should  be  lib- 
erated. Brothers  Hector  C.  Haight 
and  Ola  N.  Liljenquist  and  others  re- 
joiced exceedingly  to  see  me  free  and 
it  was  proposed  that  I  should  emi- 
grate to  Zion.  Together  with  a  large 
company  of  saints  I  left  Copenhagen 
April  18,  1857,  crossed  the  Atlantic 
in  the  ship  'Westmoreland'  and  ar- 
rived in  Salt  Lake  Valley  Sept.  13, 
1857."  Among  Bro.  Gudmundson's 
converts  in  Iceland   was  a  family  of 


BIOGRAPHICAL  ENCYCLOPEDIA. 


641 


the  name  of  Garff,  well-to-do  people 
and  highly  respected,  but  as  soon  as 
they  joined  the  Church  they  became 
objects  of  special  hatred  on  the  part 
of  their  nearest  relatives  and  their 
neighbors  generally.  The  Garffs  de- 
cided to  leave  for  Utah  in  1857  on  the 
same  ship  with  Elder  Gudmundson. 
Sister  Garff  went  to  bid  her  parents 
goodbye,  but  none  of  her  relatives,  of 
whom  there  were  many,  would  have 
anything  to  do  with  her,  except  her 
mother,  who  came  to  the  wharf  and 
bade  her  daughter  farewell  with  all 
the  feelings  of  a  loving  mother.  Sister 
Garff  was  at  that  time  in  a  delicate 
condition  and  in  embarking  the  fam- 
ily took  with  them  a  nurse  and  mid- 
wife. Sister  Garff  gave  oirth  to  a  baby 
boy  in  mid-ocean.  May  3,  1857,  and 
by  »quest  of  the  captain  of  the  ship, 
tl  ..nfant  was  given  the  name  of 
Dc  ri  Westmorelanel  Garff,  the  given 
na'nes  being  the  names  of  the  cap- 
ta  and  of  the  ship.  After  landing  in 
Ai  ica,  Bro.  Gudmundson,  with  the 
Ge  family,  started  across  the  con- 
tin  t.  On  the  way  Bro.  Garff  took 
fair  ly  ill.  Calling  Elder  Gudmund- 
son to  his  death  bed,  he  requested 
him  to  take  care  of  his  wife  (Marie) 
and  the  children,  consisting  of  four 
boys  and  one  girl,  and  gave  speclai 
instructions  that  he  should  not  allow 
her  to  go  back  to  her  people  in  Ice- 
land. "I  want  her  to  go  to  Zion  and 
be  with  God's  people,"  was  his  dying 
request.  Bro.  Garff  was  buried  along 
the  pioneer  trail,  and  just  a  few  days 
later  Sister  Garff  buried  her  only 
daughter,  a  few  miles  further  along. 
In  185  8,  soon  after  the  company  ar- 
rived in  Utah,  Bro.  Gudmundson  mar- 
ried Sister  Marie  Garff,  and  from  that 
union  was  born  three  sons,  who  were 
named  respectively  Abraham,  Isaac 
and  Jacob.  Jacob  died  at  the  age  oi 
three  years,  Abraham  is  following  tne 
trade  of  his  father,  that  of  a  gold- 
smith. Isaac  entered  the  mercantile 
business  and  acted  until  a  recent  date 
as  Bishop  of  the  Burley  Second  Ward, 


Cassia  county,  Idaho.  Bro.  Gudmund- 
son resided  for  many  years  in  Lehi, 
Utah  county,  Utah,  where  he  followed 
his  trade  as  a  goldsmith.  The  last 
part  of  his  life  he  spent  at  Logan, 
Cache  count,  Utah,  and  worked  at  his 
trade  until  a  few  days  before  his 
death,  which  occurred  Sept.  21,  1883. 
He  died  in  full  faith  of  the  gospel, 
leaving  a  wife  and  several  children. 

HAACKE,  Rulon  C,  an  Elder  who 
died  while  filling  a  foreign  mission, 
was  born  Jan.  15,  18d0,  in  Salt  Lake 
City,  Utah,  the  son  of  Charles  C. 
Haacke  and  Hedvig  L.  Grellet.  He 
was  baptized  in  April,  1898,  by  Elder 
Christensen,  and  resided  in  the  Sec- 
ond Ward,  Salt  Lake  City,  when  he 
was  called  on  a  mission  to  New  Zea- 
land, being  set  apart  for  that  mission 
May  14,  1909.  He  became  a  diligent 
and  efficient  Elder  and  labored  in 
the  field  one  year  and  ten  months, 
when  he  was  stricken  with  diabetes. 
Prominent  physicians  of  Auckland, 
who  were  called  in,  pronounced  the 
case  a  hopeless  one.  Consequently 
Elder  Haacke  was  released  from  his 
missionary  labors  and  in  compau,, 
with  nine  other  Elders  started  for 
home  Feb.  15,  1911,  on  board  the 
steamer  "Aorangi."  Elder  HaaCKe 
seemed  to  improve  until  the  ship  had 
left  the  Society  Islands,  and  as  the 
vessel  had  to  lay  by  for  repairs,  the 
sick  Elder  began  to  decline  rapidly, 
owing  to  the  excessive  heat  of  the 
tropics  and  because  he  lost  heart  at 
the  delay.  He  became  unconscious 
Feb.  24,  and  died  the  following  after- 
noon, Feb.  25,  1911.  A  consultation 
was  held  among  the  Elders,  and  the 
captain  of  the  ship  was  offered  three 
fares  if  he  would  allow  the  body  of 
Elder  Haacke  to  be  taken  to  San 
Francisco,  Cal.,  but  as  the  maritime 
law  only  allowed  a  dead  body  to  be 
kept  on  a  vessel  twenty-four  hours, 
the  captain  could  not  grant  the  re- 
quest, as  the  ship  could  not  reach 
port  for  ten  days  at  best.  Consequent- 
ly, a  funeral  service  was  held  on  the 


Vol.   III.  No.  41. 


April   24.  1920 


642 


LATTER-DAY    SAINT 


after  deck  of  the  ship,  which  all  the 
passengers  attended,  Elder  Oscar  B. 
Evans  conducting  the  exercises.  In 
preparing  the  body  for  burial  at  sea 
it  was  wrapped  in  strong  canvas  with 
two  hundred  pounds  of  iron  so  placed 
around  the  body  as  to  keep  the  feet 
lower  than  the  head.  Elder  Haacke 
was  a  talented  young  man  with  a 
seemingly  bright  future,  being  espe- 
cially proficient  as  a  violinist.  He 
had  many  friends,  both  at  home  and 
abroad.  His  father  waited  in  San 
Francisco,  Cal.,  for  his  son's  return, 
and  had  no  knowledge  of  his  death 
until  the  arrival  of  the  ship. 

HAAG,  Adolph,  one  of  the  Elders 
of  the  Church  who  died  while  filling 
a  foreign  mission,  was  born  Feb.  19, 
1865,  in  Stuttgart,  Wurttemberg, 
Germany,  the  son  of  Adolph  Haag 
and  Louisa  M.  Molt.  He  was  baptized 
April  19,  1881,  by  C.  C.  Schramm. 
After  emigrating  to  Utah,  he  settled 
in  Payson,  Utah  county,  Utah,  where 
he  resided  in  1892,  when  he  was 
called  on  a  mission  to  Turkey,  being 
set  apart  Feb.  19,  1892.  He  had  pre- 
viously been  ordained  a  Seventy.  On 
his  arrival  in  Liverpool,  England,  his 
health  was  not  the  best,  but  he  never- 
theless proceeded  to  the  headquarter" 
of  the  Swiss  and  German  Mission, 
where  he  remained  for  some  time  and 
then  proceeded  to  Constantinople, 
where  he  joined  Elder  Don  C.  W. 
Musser,  who  had  also  been  called  to 
Turkey  on  a  mission.  Elders  Haag 
and  Musser  remained  in  Constantin- 
ople until  August,  1892,  when  they 
started  for  Haifa,  Palestine.  On  the 
way  they  visited  Smyrna  (Asia  Mi- 
nor), Athens  (Greece),  and  Alexan- 
dria, Cairo  and  Port  Said  in  Egypt; 
thence  they  proceeded  to  Palestine, 
arriving  at  Haifa  Aug.  31,  1892.  Af- 
ter his  arrival  in  Haifa  Bro.  Haag's 
state  of  health  became  worse  and  his 
heart  was  very  much  affected.  When 
his  condition  was  reported  to  mission 
headquarters  in  Switzerland,  he  was 
promptly    released    to    return    home, 


but  a  few  days  later  (Oct.  3,  1892) 
he  died  at  the  home  of  Brother  and 
Sister  Hilt  at  Haifa  with  typhus  fe- 
ver. Although  Brother  Haag  had  been 
in  Haifa  only  a  short  time,  he  had 
made  a  host  of  friends,  as  evidenced 
by  the  large  concourse  of  people  who 
attended  his  funeral,  among  them  be- 
ing the  German  consul  and  his  wife, 
who  had  been  very  kind  to  the  El- 
ders. The  mayor  of  Haifa,  who  had 
also  entertained  the  Elders,  listened 
to  the  testimonies  of  the  brethren, 
and  in  fact,  nearly  every  one  in  the 
colony  was  in  attendance  at  the  fu- 
neral. Subsequently  a  monument  was 
erected  on  Elder  Haags  grave  in  the 
German  cemetery  at  the  foot  of  Mount 
Carmel.  It  consists  of  a  neat  cube  of 
rock  supporting  a  white  broken  mar- 
ble column.  Elder  Haag  was  an  able 
and  faithful  missionary.  He  was 
tewnty-seven  years  of  age  when  he 
died  and  left  a  wife  and  two  children. 

.\  HALE,  Aroet  Lucius,  an  Elder  who 
died  in  the  missionary  field,  was  born 
Sept.  19,  1887,  at  Perry,  Idaho,  the 
son  of  Jonathan  H.  Hale  and  Eliza 
Clegg.  He  was  baptized  by  his  father 
when  about  eight  years  old,  and 
while  residing  with  his  parents  in 
Perry  (Mound  Valley),  Bannock  coun- 
ty, Idaho,  he  was  called  on  a  mission 
to  the  Central  States,  being  set  apari 
Sept.  17,  1907,  when  about  twenty 
years  old.  After  his  arrival  at  mis- 
sion headquarters  Sept,  21,  1907,  he 
was  assigned  to  labor  in  Arkansas, 
where  he  attended  to  his  duties  in 
the  ministry  until  May,  1908,  when 
he  was  stricken  with  sickness  and 
taken  to  the  St.  Joseph's  Hospital  in 
Kansas  City,  Mo.  (a  Catholic  institu- 
tion). He  was  provided  with  a  special 
nurse,  and  neither  pains,  effort  or 
expense  were  spared  for  his  welfare. 
Elders  and  saints  from  Independence 
visited  him  and  he  was  administered 
to  repeatedly,  but  it  seemed  that 
Providence  had  destined  him  for  a 
greater  field  than  this  world  affords, 
and  on  June  11,  1908,  his  brave  and 


BIOGRAPHICAL   ENCYCLOPEDIA. 


643 


noble  spirit  obeyed  the  call.  His  re- 
mains were  duly  forwarded  to  his 
home  in  Idaho,  in  care  of  two  return- 
ing Elders.  Brother  Hale  was  a  cap- 
able and  promising  young  man,  a 
good  and  kind-hearted  Elder,  and 
highly  beloved  and  respected  by  his 
associates. 

HALE,   Solomon  Eliphet,  jun.,   an 

Elder  who  died  in  the  missionary 
field,  was  born  July  1,  1881,  in  Gentile 
Valley,  Oneida  county,  Idaho,  the  son 
of  Solomon  E.  Hale  and  Helen  Lou- 
isa Hunter,  and  baptized  by  E.  M. 
Lee  July  6,  1889.  The  greater  part 
of  his  life  was  spent  in  the  town  of 
Oakley,  Idaho.  The  people  of  all 
classes  and  creeds  learned  to  love  the 
young  man  for  his  noble  traits  oi 
character.  For  a  number  of  years  he 
attended  the  Cassia  Stake  Academy, 
and  in  18  99  he  went  to  Salt  Lake 
City,  where  he  attended  the  L.  D.  S. 
Business  College  and  while  there 
made  rapid  progress  in  his  chosen 
studies.  In  the  spring  of  1900  he 
was  called  home  to  take  a  position  as 
bookkeeper  in  the  People's  Union 
Store  of  Oakley  and  remained  in  that 
position  till  he  was  called  to  take  a 
mission  to  the  Eastern  States.  He 
was  set  apart  for  this  mission  Aug. 
8,  1900,  and  left  Salt  Lake  City  the 
following  day.  Shortly  after  arriv- 
ing in  his  field  of  labor  he  was  taken 
sick,  but  continued  to  do  the  work  to 
which  he  had  been  called  until  tne 
body  refused  to  obey  the  spirit,  and 
on  fhe  23rd  day  of  October,  1900, 
"he  was  transferred  from  the  Eastern 
States  Mission  to  the  Great  Beyond, 
there  to  continue  his  missionary  work 
for  the  good  of  his  fellow-men."  He 
died  at  Great  Falls,  Maryland,  while 
serving  as  an  ambassador  of  the 
Church  of  Jesus  Christ  of  Latter-aay 
Saints.  The  remains  were  sent  home, 
funeral  services  held  in  Oakley,  Ida- 
ho, Oct.  30,  1900,  and  reverently  laid 
in  the  silent  tomb  in  the  presence  of 
parents,  kindred  and  a  host  of  sym- 
pathetic  friends.     Elder    Edward    H. 


Snow,  who  at  that  time  was  president 
of  the  Eastern  States  Mission,  wrote 
of  the  deceased  as  follows:  "Elder 
Hale  had  been  in  the  field  but  two 
months,  but  in  that  time  endeared 
himself  to  all  whom  he  had  met.  He 
was  cheerful,  hopeful  and  entered  in- 
to the  spirit  of  the  work  with  faith 
and  zeal.  He  died  battling  for  the 
right;  his  end  was  peaceful  and  ap- 
parently painless  as  if  he  had  fallen 
asleep." 

HALL,  Cliarles  Scott,  an  Elder  who 
died  in  the  missionary  field,  was  born 
Nov.  10,  1845,  at  Addington,  Buck- 
inghamshire, England,  the  son  of 
Walter  Scott  Hall  and  Ann  Neal.  He 
was  baptized  in  1853  by  Elder  George 
Hall  and  set  apart  May  10,  1895,  for 
a  mission  to  the  Southern  States,  be- 
ing a  member  of  the  52nd  quorum 
of  Seventy.  He  was  assigned  to  labor 
in  the  Texas  conference,  where  he  ar- 
rived May  14,  1895,  in  apparently 
good  health  and  feeling  well  in  spir- 
its. Early  in  July  he  had  some  trou- 
ble with  boils,  and  after  recovering 
from  these  he  was  taken  sick  with 
chills  and  fever,  the  attacks  lasting 
for  several  hours  at  a  time.  About 
four  o'clock  in  the  morning  on  Aug. 
3,  1895,  he  arose  from  his  bed  and 
walked  as  far  as  to  the  porch,  when 
he  fell  to  the  ground,  face  down.  He 
was  assisted  by  those  in  the  house, 
who  conveyed  him  to  his  bed,  but  he 
never  regained  consciousness  and  ex- 
pired in  about  half  an  hour.  He  was 
stopping  two  miles  from  Mineola  at 
the  time  of  his  death,  where  proper 
medical  aid  could  not  be  procured. 
Elder  Hall  seemed  to  have  a  broken- 
down  constitution,  and  in  the  latter 
part  of  May  had  a  fainting  spell,  but 
seemed  to  leave  no  injurious  effects 
upon  him.  The  body  was  brought  to 
Utah  by  Elder  Elias  Kimball,  presi- 
dent of  the  Southern  States  Mission, 
and  taken  to  his  home  in  West  Port- 
age, Box  Elder  county,  for  inter- 
ment. 


644 


LATTER-DAY   SAINT 


HALiLi,  Lester  LeRoy,  an  Elder 
who  died  in  the  missionary  field,  was 
born  Feb.  25,  1885,  at  Rockville, 
Washington  county,  Utah,  the  son  oi 
Alfred  Lorenzo  Hall  and  Julia  Han- 
son. He  was  baptized  July  12,  1893, 
by  Hosea  F.  Stout  jun.,  and  still  re- 
sided with  his  parents  in  Rockville 
when  he  was  called  on  a  mission  to 
the  Southern  States,  being  set  apart 
for  the  same  Dec.  3,  1907.  On  his 
arrival  at  the  headquarters  on  the 
Southern  States  Mission  he  was  as- 
signed to  labor  in  Kentucky,  and 
while  thus  engaged  in  Carter  county 
he  was  stricken  with  sickness  and  in 
a  very  weak  condition  taken  to  the 
Good  Samaritan  Hospital  in  Lexing- 
ton, Ky.,  where  he  lingered  until 
April  29,  1908,  when  he  succumbed 
to  the  ravages  of  typhoid  fever.  Dur- 
ing his  sufferings  all  was  done  lor 
him  that  tender  nurses  could  per- 
form. His  body  was  sent  home  in  a 
copper-lined  air-tight  casket,  in  cai«? 
of  returning  Elders.  Brother  Hall, 
who  was  an  ambitious  Elder,  did  not 
like  to  admit  that  he  was  sick,  but 
labored  diligently  until  he  finally  had 
to  admit  his  condition.  He  died  an 
unmarried  man,  highly  respected  by 
his  missionary  companions;  he  was 
making  excellent  progress  as  a  mis- 
sionary when  he  was  attacked  by  his 
last  sickness. 

HALLIDAY,  AVillard  Henry,  an  El- 
der of  the  Church  who  died  while  la- 
boring in  the  missionary  field,  was 
born  Feb.  8,  1857,  in  Salt  Lake  City, 
Utah,  the  son  of  George  Halliday  and 
Sarah  Ann  Kendall.  At  an  early  age, 
with  his  parents,  he  made  his  home 
in  Pleasant  Grove,  Utah  county,  where 
he  was  living  when  he  was  called  to 
take  a  mission  to  the  Southern  States. 
He  was  a  member  of  the  44th  quorum 
of  Seventy  and  was  set  apart  for  his 
mission  Nov.  5,  1888,  and  left  the 
same  day  for  his  field  of  labor.  He 
worked  faithfully  for  the  truth  until 
Feb.  19,  1890,  when  he  was  taken 
sick,  but  as  he  felt  much  better  on 


the  21st,  he  walked  that  day  a  dis- 
tance of  fifteen  miles.  The  weather 
being  raw  and  chilly,  he  caught  cold, 
which  turned  to  pneumonia.  He  died 
near  Mocksville,  Davie  county.  North 
Carolina,  March  11,  1890.  The  body 
was  sent  to  Pleasant  Grove  and  there 
placed  in  its  last  resting  place.  Bro. 
Halliday  left  a  wife  and  four  chil- 
dren. 

HAMSON,  Hyriun  Koswald,  an  El- 
der who  died  in  the  missionary  field, 
was  born  Feb.  13,  1880,  in  Brigham 
City,  Box  Elder  county,  Utah,  the  son 
of  Hyrum  Hamson  and  Eliza  Collins 
Beckstead.  He  was  baptized  in  April, 
1893,  by  Nephi  Clements,  and  set 
apart  for  a  mission  to  the  Eastern 
States  July  7,  1897.  On  this  mission 
he  labored  successfully  for  about  two 
years  and  made  many  friends.  On 
the  morning  of  June  20,  1899,  he  and 
his  missionary  companion.  Elder  Bel- 
nap,  walked  down  to  Lake  Kenka,  in 
Steuben  county.  New  York,  where  El- 
der Hamson  insisted  on  bathing, 
against  the  mild  persuasion  of  his 
companion,  who  could  not  swim. 
While  Elder  Belnap  sat  at  the  waters 
edge,  bathing  his  feet,  Elder  Hamson 
undressed  and  plunged  into  the  wa- 
ter. He  made  his  way  a  short  dis- 
tance from  the  edge,  when  the  water 
suddenly  became  very  deep  and  he 
sank,  unexpectedly  to  himself,  and 
therefore  strangled  to  some  extent. 
Coming  up  to  the  surface  he  cried 
for  help,  when  Elder  Belnap  obtained 
a  stick  and  plunged  In  trying  to  rescue 
him.  The  water  being  deep,  he  was 
also  precipitated,  lost  his  stick,  and 
with  the  utmost  difficulty,  after  al- 
most strangling,  regained  the  shore. 
He  then  procured  another  stick,  but 
before  he  could  be  of  any  assistance, 
his  companion  went  down  to  death. 
Almost  distracted.  Elder  Belnap 
rushed  to  the  village  to  procure  as- 
sistance to  recover  the  body.  The 
people  turned  out  with  boats  and  by 
dragging  the  lake  recovered  the  body 
in  the  afternoon.    The  remains  were 


BIOGRAPHICAL   ENCYCLOPEDIA. 


645 


properly  prepared  for  burial  and  for-  with  his  brother  Peter  C,  he  founded 

warded   to  Oxford,   Idaho,   the  home  the   Sevier   Valley   Planing   Mill   and 

of  the  deceased,   where  they  arrivea  Lumber  Co.,  which  carried  on  a  suc- 

June    26,    1899,    in    charge    of    Elder  cessful  business   until   1917.    During 

John    S.    Hyde    of    Kaysville,    Davis  that  year  they  disposed   of  the  con- 


trolling interest  in  this  business, 
which  was  then  incorporated  and  is 
now  known  as  the  Citizen's  Lumber 
Company.  In  February,  1919,  togeth- 
er with  his  four  brothers,   he  incor- 


county,  Utah. 

HANSEN,  Hans  James,  third  Bishop 
of  the  Richfield  Third  Ward  (Sevier 
Stake),  Sevier  county,  Utah,  was  born 
Nov.  6,  1873,  in  Richfield,  the  son  of  porated  Hansen  Bros.  Planing  Mill, 
Hans  N.  Hansen  and  Caroline  Marie  which  is  still  doing  a  good  business 
Hansen.  He  was  baptized  when  about  in  Richfield.  Bro.  Hansen  has  also 
eight  years  old  and  subsequently  or-  been  active  in  civil  affairs  and  served 
dained  to  the  offices  of  Deacon,  Teach-  eight  years  as  treasurer  of  Richfield 
er  and  Elder.  In  his  youth  he  took  an  and  one  term  as  a  member  of  the 
active  part  in  Sunday  school  work, 
being  teacher  and  secretary  in  the 
Richfield  Sunday  school  for  several 
years.  He  also  acted  as  secretary  of 
the  Richfield  Y.  M.  M.  I.  A.  and  later 


namely,  James  Orvin,  Ireta  Marie, 
Norman  Utah,  Teddie  Carlos,  Sarah 
Lue,  Mildred,  Don  Lamar,  Elbert  De- 
Wane  and  LaVonda. 

HANSEN,    Oliver    A„    one    of    the 

Latter-day  Saint  Elders  who  died 
while  filling  a  mission,  was  born  Oct. 
29,  1886,  in  Bear  River  City,  Box 
Elder  county,  Utah,  the  son  of  Peter 


Richfield  city  council.  In  1895  March 
13th),  he  married  Sarah  Christensen 
(daughter  of  Lars  Peter  Christensen 
and  Anna  Marie  Lee),  who  was  born 
March  17,  1876.  This  marriage  has 
as  secretary  of  the  Stake  organization  ^^^^  blessed  with  nine  children, 
of  Y.  M.  M.  I.  A.  In  1902  he  was 
called  on  a  mission  to  Scandinavia, 
and  was  ordained  a  Seventy  by  Sey- 
mour B.  Young,  when  he  was  set 
apart  for  that  mission.  On  his  arrival 
in  Copenhagen,  Denmark,  he  was  ap- 
pointed to  labor  in  the  Trondhjem 
conference,  Norway,  where  he  presid- 
ed a  part  of  the  time  over  the  Trond- 
hjem branch.  He  was  present  when 
the  mission  houses  were  dedicated  in 
Copenhagen,  Denmark,  and  Stock- 
holm, Sweden.  After  his  return  home 
in  December,  190  4,  he  was  called  to 
act  as  second  assistant  in  the  Stake 
superintendency  of  the  Sunday  schools 
and  later  as  Stake  superintendent.  He 
also  labored  as  a  home  missionary  in 
the  Sevier  Stake,  acted  as  clerk  of 
Richfield  Third  Ward  and  officiated 
as  one  of  the  presidents  of  the  thirty- 
sixth  quorum  of  Seventy.  On  June  28, 
1919,  he  was  ordained  a  High  Priest 
and  Bishop  by  Anthony  W.  Ivins,  and 
set  apart  to  preside  over  the  Rich-  M.  Hansen  and  Hannah  M.  Anderson. 
field  Third  Ward,  which  position  ne  He  was  baptized  Nov.  1,  18  94,  and 
still  holds.  Bishop  Hansen  has  fol-  was  ordained  to  the  Aaronic  Priest- 
lowed  farming  as  an  avocation,  but  hood  Sept.  6,  1904  and  became  active 
he  learned  the  carpenter  trade  as  a  as  a  Church  member.  He  was  or- 
you-ng    man    and    in    1900,    together    dained  an  Elder  and  called  on  a  mis- 


646 


LATTER-DAY   SAINT 


sion  to  Scandinavia,  being  set  apart 
Nov.  26,  1907.  After  his  arrival  in 
Copenhagen,  Denmark,  he  was  ap- 
pointed to  labor  in  Norway  and  spent 
most  of  his  time  in  the  Moss  and 
Predrikshald  branches.  Being  ex- 
posed to  cold,  he  contracted  a  dis- 
ease which  made  it  necessary  for  him 
to  be  released  from  his  labors  in  the 
fall  of  190  8.  He  sailed  from  Liver- 
pool, England,  homeward  bound,  Nov. 
14,  1908,  crossing  the  Atlantic  on  the 
steamship  "Republic."  On  his  arrival 
in  Boston  he  was  quite  sick,  and  when 
he  reached  Chicago  he  was  placed  in 
a  hospital,  where  he  died  Nov.  2  8, 
1908.  The  immediate  cause  of  his 
death  was  leakage  of  the  heart.  Bro. 
Hansen  was  only  twenty-two  years  of 
age  when  he  died,  and  unmarried. 
He  was  a  good  young  man  and  highly 
respected  by  all  who  knew  him,  both 
at  home  and  in  the  missionary  field. 

HAWS,  Caleb  W.,  an  Elder  of  the 
Church  who  died  while  filling  a  for- 
eign mission,  was  born  Oct.  7,  1838, 
in  Wayne  county,  Illinois,  the  son  of 
Gilbert  Haws  and  Hannah  Whitcomb. 
He  was  baptized  when  eight  years  of 
age  and  emigrated  to  Utah  with  his 
parents  two  years  later.  Early  in  life 
he  became  a  member  of  the  45th  quo- 
rum of  Seventy.  For  ten  years  he 
was  a  captain  in  the  Nauvoo  Legion 
at  Provo.  He  married  Eliza  Snow, 
daughter  of  James  C.  Snow,  and  was 
set  apart  for  a  mission  to  England 
April  22,  1871.  On  bis  arrival  in 
Liverpool  May  22nd,  he  was  assigned 
to  the  Manchester  conference,  where 
he  labored  faithfully  and  well  until 
the  departure  of  Elder  Thomas  G. 
Woolley,  when  he  was  appointed  to 
succeed  him  in  the  presidency  of  the 
Sheffield  conference.  "In  this  capac- 
ity he  continued  his  labors  of  love 
until  called  by  our  Heavenly  Father 
to  a  holier  abode."  He  was  striCKen 
down  by  small-pox,  and  after  a  brief 
sickness  died  Nov.  20,  1871.  Elder 
Haws  was  beloved  by  all  because  of 
his  kindness,  modesty  and  other  vir- 


tues,  characteristic  of  the  true  Lat- 
ter-day Saint. 

HENDRICKS,  Ralph  H.,  an  Elder 
who  died  while  filling  a  foreign  mis- 
sion, was  born  Oct.  25,  1887,  at  Rich- 
mond, Cache  county,  Utah,  the  son 
of  Samuel  C.  Hendricks  and  Eliza 
Abigail  Hendricks.  He  was  baptized 
Nov.  17,  1896,  by  Milton  D.  Ham- 
mond, and  resided  with  his  parents 
at  Richmond  in  1912,  when  he  was 
called  on  a  mission  to  Great  Britain. 
After  being  set  apart  for  his  mission 
April  2,  1912,  he  left  Salt  Lake  City 
for  England  April  3,  1912,  and  ar- 
rived at  Liverpool  April  21,  1912. 
He  was  assigned  to  the  Newcastle 
conference,  where  he  labored  faith- 
fully and  successfully  until  he  was 
seized  with  the  illness  which  termi- 
nated fatally,  in  a  hospital  at  Sun- 
derland, England,  shortly  before  mid- 
night on  Monday,  Feb.  24,  1913.  The 
immediate  cause  of  death  was  hem- 
orrhage of  the  lungs  and  stomach. 
He  had  been  ailing  for  about  two 
months,  gradually  becoming  worse. 
The  body  was  embalmed  and  shipped 
to  his  home  in  Utah  in  charge  of  re- 
turning Elders,  and  reached  Rich- 
mond March  16,  1913.  Impressive 
funeral  services  were  held  in  the 
Richmond  Tabernacle  March  17,  1913. 
The  deceased  Elder,  who  was  a  mem- 
ber of  the  3  9th  quorum  of  Seventy, 
was  survived  by  two  brothers  and 
three  sisters.  Both  his  parents  were 
dead.  Elder  Hendricks  was  highly 
esteemed  by  his  brethren  in  the  min- 
istry, as  well  as  by  the  saints  and 
people  among  whom  he  labored.  He 
was  a  young  man  of  much  promise, 
being  only  in  his  twenty-fifth  year 
when  he  died.  Being  unmarried,  he 
had  lived  with  his  brother  at  Rich- 
mond. 

HESS,  Arthur,  first  Bishop  of  North 
Farmington  (South  Davis  Stake  j, 
Davis  county,  Utah,  was  born  May  2  2, 
1861,  at  Farmington,  the  son  of  John 
W.  Hess  and  Julia  Petersen.    He  was 


BIOGRAPHICAL   ENCYCLOPEDIA. 


647 


baptized  when  about  eight  years  old 
and  early  in  life  ordained  a  Teacher. 
He  received  a  common  school  educa- 
tion and  was  raised  on  a  farm.  In  his 
early  boyhood  days  he  became  a  sheep 
and  cattleman,  and  when  only  eighteen 
years  of  age  he  assisted  in  pioneering 
Bear  River  Valley,  Box  Elder  county, 
Utah,  making  a  success  of  dry  farm- 
ing long  before  the  Bothwell  Canal 
was  built.  For  about  twenty  years  he 
divided  his  time  between  his  Farm- 
ington  home  and  the  farm  in  Bear 
River  Valley.  When  twenty-seven 
years  old  he  married  Elnora  Moon, 
which  union  has  been  blessed  with 
seven  children,  namely,  Arthur  V., 
Ruth,  Louise,  Glen,  Newell,  Tracy  and 
Milda.  When  Farmington  was  divided 
into  two  Wards,  in  1917,  Bro.  Hess 
was  chosen  as  Bishop  of  the  North 
Farmington  Ward,  being  ordained  a 
High  Priest  and  Bishop  March  25, 
1917,  and  set  apart  to  preside,  as 
stated.  Bishop  Hess  is  still  a  farmer 
by  avocation  and  is  a  natural  pioneer 
and  a  hard  working  man,  who  by  ex- 
ample as  well  as  precept  becomes 
qualified  for  the  responsible  position 
which  he  holds. 

HIGOIXS,  Nelson,  a  member  of 
Zion's  Camp,  captain  of  Company  D 
Mormon  Battalion,  Bishop,  etc.,  was 
born  Sept.  1,  1806,  at  Milford,  Otse- 
go county.  New  York,  the  son  of  Dan- 
iel Higgins  and  Mary  Dagget.  When 
the  boy  was  ten  years  old,  his  father 
moved  to  Ohio,  leaving  the  boy  with  a 
married  sister.  In  the  course  of  a  year 
the  sister  died  and  the  boy  started 
out  on  foot  on  a  journey  of  about  four 
hundred  miles  to  find  his  family  in 
Huron  county,  Ohio.  At  the  age  of 
twenty-one  he  married  Sarah  Black- 
man,  by  whom  he  had  ten  children. 
Becoming  a  convert  to  "Mormonism,'" 
he  was  baptized  in  1834  and  was 
shortly  after  ordained  a  Priest  and 
appointed  to  preside  over  a  branch  of 
the  Church  where  he  resided.  As  a 
member  of  Zion's  Camp  in  1834  he 
marched  to  Missouri  under  the  direc- 


tion of  the  Prophet  Joseph  Smith.  He 
was  ordained  an  Elder  at  the  time  oi 
the  dedication  of  the  Kirtland  Tem- 
ple and  soon  afterwards  ordained  a 
Seventy,  becoming  a  member  of  the 
first  quorum  of  Seventy.  In  1837  he 
moved  to  Missouri  and  there  passed 
through  the  mobbings  and  persecu- 
tions endured  by  the  Saints  in  that 
State.  Subsequently  he  located  in 
Nauvoo,  Hancock  county,  Illinois,  and 
left  there  in  the  general  exodus  with 
the  Saints  in  1846.  Having  arrived 
on  the  Missouri  river,  he  enlisted  in 
the  Mormon  Battalion  and  was  elect- 
ed captain  of  Company  D.  He  spent 
the  winter  of  18  46-1847  with  the  sick 
detachment  of  the  Battalion  at  Pueb- 
lo, and  arrived  in  Salt  Lake  Valley 
July  29,  1847.  In  1849,  together  with 
others,  he  was  called  to  Sanpete  Val- 
ley to  assist  in  establishing  a  settle- 
ment there  and  thus  he  became  one 
of  the  founders  of  Manti.  Later  he 
moved  to  Moroni,  where  he  also  be- 
came one  of  the  first  settlers.  In  1855 
he  was  called  to  Carson  Valley,  now 
in  Nevada,  to  assist  in  establishing  a 
colony  of  Saints  there,  and  remained 
there  until  1857.  In  1864  he  was 
called  to  go  to  Richfield  to  preside 
over  that  infant  settlement,  being  or- 
dained a  Bishop  under  the  hands  of 
President  Brigham  Young  and  Heber 
C.  Kimball.  Richfield  was  temporar- 
ily abandoned  in  18  67  because  of 
Indian  troubles,  but  in  1871  when 
the  place  was  resettled,  Bro.  Higgins 
again  returned  to  his  post  in  Rich- 
field as  Bishop  and  labored  in  that 
capacity  until  1873,  when  he  was  hon- 
orably released  and  moved  to  Brook- 
lyn, a  small  settlement  between  Els- 
inore  and  Monroe.  Here  he  spent  the 
remainer  of  his  life.  Brother  Higgins 
was  successively  captain,  major  and 
colonel  in  the  Nauvoo  Legion  and 
served  as  general  in  the  absence  of 
Charles  C.  Rich.  He  was  successively 
captain,  major  and  colonel  during  the 
Walker  war  while  living  in  Sanpete, 
and  was  a  major  and  commanding  of- 
ficer all  during  the  Black  Hawk  Ind- 


648 


LATTER-DAY   SAINT 


ian  war.  Amidst  these  trying  fron- 
tier conditions  he  reared  a  large  fam- 
ily. In  1852  he  married  Margaret 
Duncan,  and  in  1856  he  married  Nan- 
cy Meribab  Behmin,  by  whom  he 
raised  eight  children.  His  whole  life 
was  one  of  unusual  activity,  and  he 
exhibited  courage,  devotion  and  faith- 
fulness in  everything  with  which  he 
was  associated.  In  the  latter  part  of 
his  life  he  was  very  feeble  and  scarce- 
ly able  to  move  about.  He  died  at 
Elsinore,  Sevier  county,  Utah,  Nov. 
20,    1890. 

HILL,  John  Leonard,  an  Elder  who 
died  in  the  missionary  field,  was  born 
Aug.  23,  1889,  at  Newton,  Cache 
county,  Utah,  the  son  of  Leonard  A. 
Hill  and  Mabel  Haskell.  He  was  bap- 
tized June  5,  1898,  by  John  F.  An- 
derson, and  resided  with  his  parents 
at  Mapleton,  near  Springville,  Utah 
county,  Utah,  when  called  on  a  mis- 
sion to  the  Eastern  States.  He  was 
set  apart  for  this  mission  Oct.  25, 
1910,  and  on  his  arrival  at  mission 
headquarters  was  appointed  to  labor 
in  West  Virginia.  While  he  was  re- 
turning home  from  the  post  office  at 
Dickson,  West  Virginia,  and  was 
walking  on  a  double  railroad  track 
in  a  snowstorm,  a  short  distance  from 
where  he  and  his  companion  were 
staying,  he  was  struck  by  an  ap- 
proaching train  and  killed  instantly 
Jan.  8,  1912.  The  train  which  hit  him 
was  a  fast  passenger  train,  which 
sped  on;  the  engineer,  being  on  the 
opposite  side,  did  not  see  the  acci- 
dent. When  the  body  was  found  soon 
afterwards,  there  were  only  two 
slight  bruises  on  the  same,  one  on 
the  left  leg  and  the  other  on  the  same 
side,  on  the  breast.  The  remains  were 
properly  embalmed  and  shipped  to 
his  home  in  Mapleton,  where  impres- 
sive funeral  services  were  held  in  the 
meeting  house  Jan.  16,  1912.  Elder 
Hill  had  been  in  the  mission  field 
about  fourteen  months  when  he  met 
his  death.  He  was  a  faithful  and 
energetic  Elder. 


HOGAN,  Joseph,  jun.,  an  Elder  who 
died  while  filling  a  foreign  mission, 
was  born  Jan.  11,  1876,  at  Bountiful, 
Davis  county,  Utah,  the  son  of  Jo- 
seph Hogan  and  Sarah  A.  Ellis,  and 
was  baptized  by  his  father  Jan.  11, 
1884.  Early  in  the  year  1897  he  was 
called  on  a  mission  to  the  Nether- 
lands and  was  set  apart  April  23, 
1897.  He  arrived  in  his  field  of  labor 
in  May  following  and  immediately 
set  about  to  master  the  Dutch  lan- 
guage and  to  make  himself  useful  in 
the  missionary  field.  He  was  very 
energetic  and  whatever  he  did  was 
done  with  his  whole  soul  and  strength. 
Through  his  industry  and  humility 
he  won  the  hearts  of  all  his  fellow- 
laborers  and  the  saints  and  was  able 
to  find  many  friends  among  stran- 
gers. He  had  been  in  the  missionary 
field,  "spreading  the  light  of  truth 
and  dispelling  darkness"  for  more 
than  two  years,  when  he  met  his  sad 
and  sudden  death.  He  was  laboring 
at  that  time  in  the  Arnhem  confer- 
ence under  the  direction  of  Confer- 
ence President  William  W.  Francis, 
when  he  was  accidentally  drowned  in 
the  river  Rhine.  The  following  de- 
tailed account  of  his  death  wes  relat- 
ed by  Pres.  Francis,  who  was  with 
him  when  the  accident  occurred:  "We 
have  made  it  a  practice  of  late,  since 
the  warm  weather  set  in  and  the 
Rhine  lowered,  of  taking  a  bath  in 
what  we  had  always  considered  a 
very  safe  place  in  the  river,  between 
two  cribs  extending  into  the  river 
about  twenty  yards,  leaving  shallow 
water  where  one  could  get  any  depth 
of  water  to  swim  or  bathe  without 
swimming.  Today  after  dinner,  at 
the  suggestion  of  Elder  Hogan,  he 
and  I  went  to  this  usual  bathing 
place,  outside  the  limits  of  the  city 
of  Arnhem,  while  Elder  Weston  pre- 
ferred returning  to  the  office.  We 
had  been  bathing  some  seven  min- 
utes in  the  shallow  water,  when  I 
took  a  swim  a  little  further  out  near- 
er the  main  body  of  the  river,  while 
Elder  Hogan  remained  in  the  shallow 


BIOGRAPHICAL  ENCYCLOPEDIA. 


649 


water,  making  his  way  toward  the 
crib,  as  he  was  unable  to  swim.  I 
turned  my  head  and  saw  that  Elder 
Hogan  had  lost  footing  and  was 
struggling  to  get  out.  I  was  eight 
or  ten  yards,  at  least,  from  him,  and 
swam  with  all  the  strength  I  had 
to  reach  him  before  he  should  sink 
out  of  sight,  and  succeeded  in  get- 
ting to  him  as  he  came  up.  I  threw  my 
arm  around  his  neck  and  began  swim- 
ming ashore  with  him,  but  found  the 
suction  of  the  water  against  me,  as 
he  Jiad  in  his  struggling  surged  with 
the  current  into  deeper  water.  For 
want  of  strength,  I  having  swum  vig- 
orously a  long  distance  in  still  wa- 
ter, or  through  entanglement,  we  both 
went  down  to  the  bottom.  On  strik- 
ing the  bottom,  depth  about  two  leei 
over  my  head,  I  grabbed  him  around 
the  legs  with  my  arms,  shoving  his 
head  above  water,  and  attempted  to 
walk  out  with  him,  wading  under 
water  myself;  but  I  soon  lost  my 
strength  through  my  efforts  under 
water  without  breath.  Giving  him  a 
shove  towards  the  shore,  I  came  uy 
half  drowned  myself,  and  could  get 
no  sight  again  of  Brother  Hogan.  i 
called  for  help  at  once,  and  within 
eight  minutes  the  boatsmen  from  irie 
other  side  were  on  the  spot,  and  by 
two  minutes'  searching  he  was  found. 
We  worked  with  him  for  half  an 
hour,  but  without  a  sign  of  life.  I 
sent  a  messenger  to  the  city  at  once 
for  Elders  Lau,  Weston  and  Pistorius, 
and  also  to  the  head  police  station 
for  assistance,  as  they  said  it  would 
be  unlawful  to  remove  the  body  with- 
out an  officer.  On  the  arrival  of  an 
officer  it  was  decided  that  the  acci- 
dent had  taken  place  within  the  lim- 
its of  Oosterbeek,  and  Arnhem  offi- 
cers could  do  nothing  without  per- 
mission from  the  mayor  of  Ooster- 
beek. By  this  time  Brothers  Weston 
and  Lau  had  arrived.  Brother  Lau 
and  I  went  to  the  nearest  point,  the 
sugar  factory,  with  the  officer,  and 
telephoned  to  Oosterbeek,  but  could 
get  no  permission.    We  then  had  to 


await  an  officer  from  Oosterbeek. 
The  officer  arrived  about  half  past 
seven  with  a  vehicle  and  took  the  re- 
mains to  Oosterbeek,  while  two  of  us 
made  every  effort  to  get  them  trans- 
ferred to  Arnhem  for  embalming.  Not 
being  able  to  succeed  in  Arnhem  or 
by  telephone.  Elders  Weston,  Pisto- 
rius and  I  took  the  car  to  Oosterbeek, 
where  we  worked  and  plead  until 
11:30  o'clock  p.  m.,  giving  security 
and  signing  papers,  when  we  got 
possession  of  the  body,  at  least  to 
bring  it  to  Arnhem  to  get  it  em- 
balmed; but  being  disappointed  at 
the  city  hospital,  where  we  were 
recommended  to  go,  we  took  the  re- 
mains with  the  same  carriage  with 
which  we  brought  them  to  Arnhem, 
to  Brother  Lau's  residence,  where 
they  are  guarded  until  we  can  pro- 
ceed further  in  the  morning."  The 
remains  of  Elder  Hogan  were  prop- 
erly embalmed  and  brought  to  Utah 
in  the  care  of  a  returning  Elder. 

HOKANSON,    William    Edgar,    an 

Elder  who  died  in  the  missionary 
field,  was  born  Feb.  22,  1877,  at  St. 
Charles,  Bear  Lake  county,  Idaho, 
the  son  of  Ola  Hokanson  and  Ingar 
Hokanson.  He  was  baptized  Sept.  6, 
1885,  by  Lorenzo  D.  Yarsud,  and  later 
ordained  an  Elder.  While  residing  at 
Freedom,  Wyoming,  he  was  called  on 
a  mission  to  the  Southern  States  in 
1904.  He  was  set  apart  for  this  mis- 
sion Feb.  16,  1904,  and  was  laboring 
in  the  ministry  when  he  was  taken 
sick  Jan.  3,  1905,  at  the  home  of  Bro. 
E.  C.  Rolph,  at  Foxport,  Ky.  The  ap- 
parent cause  of  the  trouble  was  a 
small  boil  in  the  nasal  passage,  and 
the  irritation  and  swelling  finally  ex- 
tended over  one  side  of  the  face,  clos- 
ing the  eye  and  causing  considerable 
pain.  He  gradually  grew  worse  until 
Jan.  14,  1905,  when  he  became  un- 
conscious and  a  doctor  was  called, 
who  declared  the  case  blood  poison- 
ing and  erysipelas.  Everything  that 
kindness,  consideration  and  medical 
aid   could   do   was   done   to   save   his 


650 


LATTER-DAY   SAINT 


life,  but  all  in  vain;  he  died  on  Mon- 
day, Jan.  16,  1905.  The  body  was 
embalmed  and  taken  to  Lewisvllle, 
Ky.,  and  one  of  the  Elders  (P.  a. 
Larson)  was  released  to  accompany 
the  remains  home.  "Elder  Hokanson 
was  faithful  and  energetic  in  his  mis- 
sionary work;  he  was  humble  and 
prayerful  before  the  Lord,  congenial 
and  affable  with  his  companions  and 
loved  by  all  who  made  his  acquaint- 
ance." 

HOIiDEN,  Elijah  E.,  a  member  of 
the  Mormon  Battalion,  was  born 
March  27,  1826,  in  Pendleton  county, 
Kentucky,  the  son  of  Edward  and 
Sarah  Holden.  His  father  died  March 
26,  1827,  after  which  Elijah  and  his 
mother  moved  to  Shelby  county,  Ohio, 
where  they  lived  for  four  years  and 
then  moved  to  Stark  county,  Illinois, 
where  Elijah  lived  until  he  was 
eighteen  years  old.  The  family  then 
moved  to  Hancock  county,  where  Eli- 
jah joined  the  Church.  Before  that 
time  he  had  never  professed  any  re- 
ligious conviction.  In  1845  he  was 
ordained  a  Seventy  and  became  an 
exile  with  his  co-religionists  in  1546. 
After  arriving  at  Council  Bluffs,  he 
enlisted  as  a  member  of  the  Mormon 
Battalion,  and  served  in  that  organ- 
ization until  it  was  disbanded  He  ar- 
rived in  the  Valley  soon  after  the  pio- 
neers in  1847.  In  1848  (.October  5th) 
he  married  Catherine  Mary  Thatcher 
and  moved  to  Provo,  Utah  county,  in 
1849,  where  he  remained  until  he  was 
sent  to  Fillmore.  During  the  Indian 
war  of  1853  he  served  as  a  captain 
of  militia  and  rendered  efficient  mili- 
tary service  in  that  capacity.  Being 
called  on  a  mission  to  England  he  left 
home  April  13,  185  6.  A  few  days  after 
his  departure  his  wife  died,  April  28, 
1856.  After  his  arrival  in  England, 
he  was  appointed  to  labor  in  the  Lon- 
don pastorate,  and  on  the  1st  of  Jan- 
uary, 1857,  he  was  appointed  to  take 
pastoral  charge  of  the  Southampton 
and  Dorsetshire  conferences.  He  re- 
turned home  the  following  summer. 


In  1857  (October  12th),  he  married 
Eliza  Hallet.  He  left  Nephi,  Juab 
county,  for  his  home  in  Holden,  Mill- 
ard county,  Sept.  5,  1858,  in  company 
with  Thomas  Bailey,  a  young  man 
whom  he  had  hired.  Soon  after  start- 
ing, a  heavy  storm  came  on,  rain  fell 
all  night  and  the  next  day  it  snowed. 
The  boy  was  found  dead  about  four 
miles  from  the  Sevier  river,  near  the 
Round  Valley  Ridge,  and  on  the  12th 
Elder  Holden  was  also  found  dead, 
about  seven  miles  north  of  Cedar 
Springs.  As  there  was  no  mark  of 
violence  upon  either  of  the  bodies, 
the  coroner  returned  a  verdict  of  ac- 
cidental death  from  fatigue  and  cold. 
It  appeared  from  circumstances  that 
Bro.  Holden  at  the  time  the  boy  tired 
out,  took  off  his  over  shirt  and 
wrapped  it  around  the  boy,  leaving 
himself  with  only  shirt  and  pantaloons 
on.  In  this  condition  he  started  home 
for  help,  but  lost  his  way  in  the  dark- 
ness of  the  night  and  storm  and  per- 
ished. Bro.  Holden  left  a  wife  and 
four  children. 

HOOKS,  Klnier,  an  Elder  who  died 
while  filling  a  foreign  mission,  was 
born  April  9,  1881,  at  Provo,  Utah 
county,  Utah,  the  son  of  George 
Hooks.  He  was  baptized  in  April, 
1892,  by  Joseph  F.  McEwan  and  af- 
terwards ordained  an  Elder.  While 
residing  in  the  Provo  Fifth  Ward,  he 
was  ordained  a  Seventy  June  9,  1903, 
by  J.  Golden  Kimball  and  set  apart 
for  a  mission  to  Mexico.  He  arrived 
in  his  field  of  labor  in  June,  1903, 
and  after  making  his  first  missionary 
tour  out  from  the  City  of  Mexico,  he 
returned,  complaining  of  headache 
and  stomach  trouble.  Pres.  Harris, 
who  at  that  time  presided  over  the 
Mexican  Mission,  deemed  it  wise  to 
consult  a  physician,  who  pronounced 
Elder  Hooks  to  be  suffering  from 
walking  typhoid  fever.  He  was  im- 
mediately taken  to  the  American  Hos- 
pital, where  he  died  on  the  night  of 
Aug.  17,  1903.  The  body  was  proper- 
ly   dressed    and    given   a   respectable 


BIOGRAPHICAL   ENCYCLOPEDIA. 


651 


burial  in  the  American  cemetery  in 
the  City  of  Mexico.  Elder  Hooks  had 
commenced  his  missionary  labors 
with  zeal  and  had  already  gained  the 
love  and  good-will  of  his  fellow-la- 
borers. 

HUBBARD,  John,  an  Elder  who 
died  in  the  missionary  field,  was  born 
Oct.  22,  1843,  in  Nauvoo,  Hancock 
county,  Illinois,  the  son  of  Charles 
W.  Hubbard  and  Mary  Ann  Bosworth. 
He  was  baptized  in  1851  by  his  fath- 
er and  was  set  apart  for  a  mission  to 
England  April  22,  1864.  He  arrived 
in  Liverpool  July  17,  1864,  and  ac- 
quitted himself  as  a  diligent  and  ef- 
ficient Elder.  After  receiving  an  hon- 
orable release  in  1866,  he  returned  to 
his  home  in  Willard,  Box  Elder  coun- 
ty, Utah,  where  he  continued  to  per- 
form active  duties  for  the  welfare  of 
the  kingdom  of  God  and  the  salva- 
tion of  mankind.  Early  in  the  year 
18  77  he  was  again  called  to  do  mis- 
sionary labor,  this  time  being  ap- 
pointed to  the  Indian  Territory;  he 
was  set  apart  March  9,  1877.  The 
summer  following  his  arrival  in  that 
field  he  was  severely  attacked  with 
the  chills  and  fever,  so  prevalent  in 
that  section  of  the  country,  and  after 
an  intermittent  illness  of  about  seven 
weeks  he  passed  away  Sept.  12,  1877. 
Brother  Matthew  W.  Dalton,  his  mis- 
sionary companion,  states  that  on  a 
certain  occasion  it  became  necessary 
for  Brother  Hubbard  to  get  some 
horses,  preparatory  to  hitching  them 
up  for  travel.  In  doing  this,  he  tried 
to  head  off  the  animals  in  order  to 
stop  them,  but  had  hardly  taken  six- 
teen steps  when  he  suddenly,  with- 
out a  moment's  warning,  fell  down 
and  instantly  expired.  Brother  Dal- 
ton sprang  to  his  side  in  a  moment 
and  did  all  he  could  to  revive  him, 
thinking  that  perhaps  he  had  just 
fainted  or  become  suddenly  uncon- 
scious, but  all  his  efforts  were  irun- 
less.  In  order  to  pay  proper  respect 
to  the  body  of  his  companion,  Brother 
Dalton  procured  the  best  casket  that 


money  could  Vuy  in  the  neighborhood 
and  had  it  lined  with  metal,  prepara- 
tory to  having  the  body  shipped  to 
Utah  for  interment.  He  had  complet- 
ed all  necessary  preparations  to  this 
end,  when  he  received  instructions 
from  home  to  have  the  remains  oi 
Elder  Hubbard  buried  in  the  Indian 
Territory,  which  consequently  was 
done.  He  was  buried  on  an  elevated 
spot  near  Wichita.  Elder  Hubbard 
was  an  honest,  humble,  and  unas- 
suming young  man  with  a  profound 
love  for  the  principles  of  the  ever- 
lasting gospel.  At  the  time  of  his 
death  he  was  a  member  of  the  59th 
quorum  of  Seventy. 

HUBER,  Emil  Julius,  an  Elder  who 
died  while  filling  a  foreign  mission, 
was   born    March    7,    1885,    at    Paris, 


France,  the  son  of  Emil  Kaspar  Hu- 
ber  and  Marie  Moor.  He  moved  with 
his  parents  to  Zurich,  Switzerland, 
where  he  was  converted  to  "Mormon- 
ism"  and  was  baptized  Sept.  27,  1901, 
emigrated  to  Utah  in  the  spring  of 
1905,  and  became  a  resident  or  tne 
Third  Ward,  Salt  Lake  City.  Having 
graduated  from  a  technical  school  in 
Winterthur,  Switzerland,  he  was 
known  to  have  unusual  skill  in  engi- 
neering lines  and  became  an  employe 


652 


LATTER-DAY   SAINT 


at  the  city  engineer's  office  in  Salt 
Lake  City.  Being  called  on  a  mission 
to  Turkey,  he  was  set  apart  for  the 
same  July  23,  1907,  and  started  for 
Europe.  After  a  short  visit  with  his 
parents  in  Switzerland,  he  proceeded 
to  Athens,  Greece,  and  thence  trav- 
eled via  Alexandria,  Egypt,  to  Alep- 
po, Syria,  in  March,  1908.  Soon  after 
his  arrival  in  Aleppo  he  began  to  com- 
plain of  pain  in  his  back,  neck  and 
lungs.  The  best  physicians  in  the 
town  were  consulted,  but  in  the  all- 
wise  providence  of  God,  the  young 
Elder  was  not  to  recover.  He  died 
May  16,  1908,  in  Aleppo,  from  lung 
trouble,  typhus  and  other  complica- 
tions. His  funeral  was  attended  by 
about  seven  hundred  persons,  includ- 
ing the  American  consul  and  many 
other  prominent  citizens  with  whom 
Elder  Huber  had  become  acquainted. 
Bro.  Huber  was  a  gifted  and  ener- 
getic Elder  and  judging  from  all  ap- 
pearance would  have  become  a  star 
in  the  community,  had  his  life  been 
spared.  While  in  Salt  Lake  City  he 
became  engaged  to  Miss  Martha  Gun- 
ther,  a  native  of  Leipzig,  Germany. 
At  the  last  Sunday  services  which  El- 
der Huber  attended  in  Aleppo,  he 
spoke  with  a  trembling  voice  under 
the  power  of  the  Holy  Spirit,  bore  his 
last  testimony  and,  among  other 
things,  addressing  his  audience,  said: 
"I  know  the  gospel  is  true  and  you 
cannot  deny  it,  having  heard  it 
preached  by  a  humble  servant  of  the 
Lord."  That  sentence  is  inscribed  on 
the  base  of  a  beautiful  monument, 
which  has  been  erected  to  his  honor 
in  the  Christian  cemetery,  northwest 
of  the  city  of  Aleppo. 

HUNSAKER,   Enoch   Coleman,    an 

Elder  who  died  in  the  missionary 
field,  was  born  July  22,  1892,  at 
Honeyville,  Box  Elder  county,  Utah, 
the  son  of  Enoch  Hunsaker  and  Mar- 
tha Helen  May.  He  was  baptized  July 
22,  1900,  and  later  ordained  an  El- 
der. He  attended  the  district  schools 
of  the  village  of  his  birth  and  after- 


wards the  Box  Elder  High  School  at 
Brigham  City.  In  1916  (Jan.  11th), 
while  still  residing  at  Honeyville,  he 
was  set  apart  for  a  mission  to  the 
Eastern  States,  where  he  labored  with 
zeal  and  success  in  the  Brooklyn  con- 
ference nearly  twenty  months,  and 
while  thus  engaged  he  was  stricken 
with  typhoid  pneumonia  and  taken  to 
Brooklyn,  where  he  was  placed  in  a 
hospital,  where  he  died  Sept.  27,  1917. 
Everything  within  human  power  was 
done  for  him,  the  missionaries,  saints 
and  friends  having  fasted  and  prayed 
unceasingly  in  his  behalf.  His  body 
was  prepared  for  burial  and  shipped 
to  his  home  in  Honeyville,  Utah. 
"Elder  Hunsaker  left  a  record  worthy 
of  emulation;  his  one  great  gift  was 
his  perseverance  and  fearlessness  in 
bearing  testimony  to  the  truth  of  the 
gospel.  No  man  was  strong  enough 
to  confound  him.  In  his  calm,  digni- 
fied manner,  his  great  pleasant  per- 
sonality seemed  always  to  impress 
those  who  opposed  or  spoke  evii  oi 
the  cause  he  represented.  No  temp- 
tation was  great  enough  to  overcome 
him  or  lead  him  away  from  the  path 
of  duty.  He  seemed  immune  to  the 
wiles  of  the  evil  one  and  his  one  de- 
termination was  to  serve  God  with 
all  the  strength  of  his  powerful  body 
and  mind.  His  record  as  a  mission- 
ary was  a  credit  to  his  parents,  to 
his  Church  and  to  his  God.  Brother 
Hunsaker  died  an  unmarried  man." 

HLSKINSOX,  John  Irving,  an  El- 
der who  died  in  the  missionary  field, 
was  born  Aug.  9,  1896,  in  Salt  Lake 
City,  Utah,  the  son  of  John  Huskin- 
son  and  Mary  E.  Bush.  He  was  bap- 
tized July  2,  1905,  by  George  Wm. 
McKinlay,  and  afterwards  ordained 
an  Elder.  He  resided  at  Sugar  City 
(Teton  Ward),  Madison  county,  Ida- 
ho, when  he  was  called  on  a  mission 
to  the  Southern  States,  being  set 
apart  Oct.  17,  1916.  He  died  with  in- 
fluenza-pneumonia in  a  hospital  at 
Durham,  Durham  county.  North  Car- 
olina, on  Sunday,  Dec.  15,  1918.    EI- 


BIOGRAPHICAL  ENCYCLOPEDIA. 


653 


der  Huskinson  was  twenty-two  years 
old  and  unmarried.  Three  Elders, 
who  had  been  his  missionary  com- 
panions, accompanied  the  body  home. 

HYDE,  Joseph  E.,  a  Latter-day 
Saint  Elder  who  died  while  filling  a 
foreign  mission,  was  born  March  8, 
1841,  in  London,  England,  the  son  of 
John  Hyde  and  Martha  Marmay.  He 
was  baptized  in  1849  by  his  father. 
When  but  a  youth  he  emigrated  to 
Zion  in  company  with  his  brother, 
John,  who  a  few  years  afterwards 
apostatized  and  left  the  country. 
Young  Joseph  had  then  to  look  out 
for  himself  and  at  an  early  day  lo- 
cated in  Logan,  Cache  county,  where 
he  became  a  very  useful  man  in  the 
growing  community.  He  was  set  apart 
for  a  mission  to  England  by  Aposiie 
Orson  Pratt  April  6,  1878,  and  ar- 
rived in  his  field  of  labor  June  8th, 
following;  but  through  sickness  he 
was  compelled  to  leave  the  land  of 
his  nativity  and  sailed  June  29th  in 
care  of  Elder  Bernard  H.  Schettler 
on  board  the  steamship  "Nevada." 
He  died  July  3,  1878,  when  about 
twelve  hundred  miles  from  New  York. 
The  body  was  washed,  dressed  and 
carefully  incased  in  a  coffin  and  tak- 
en to  his  family  in  Logan,  Utah. 

ISRAELSOX,  Andrew  Martin,  first 
counselor  in  the  Hyrum  Stake  presi- 
dency, was  born  Jan.  9,  1857,  at  Kas- 
fjorden,  near  Harstad,  Tromso  ami, 
Norway,  the  son  of  Tellef  J.  Israelsen 
and  Maren  Dorthea  Marcusen.  He 
emigrated  to  Utah  with  his  parents 
(who  had  been  converted  to  the  gos- 
pel) in  1864,  crossing  the  Atlantic  in 
the  ship  "Monarch  of  the  Sea"  and 
the  plains  in  Captain  Christoffersen's 
freight  train.  The  family  settled  in 
Hyrum,  Cache  county,  Utah,  where 
Andrew  M.  has  resided  ever  since.  He 
was  baptized  when  nine  years  old  and 
ordained  an  Elder  when  only  sixteen 
years  of  age.  He  took  an  active  part 
in  Church  affairs  from  his  earliest 
youth  and  acted  for  many  years  as  a 


Ward  teacher.  He  also  presided  over 
the  Hyrum  Ward  Y.  M.  M.  I.  A.  In 
1882  (Nov.  23rd)  he  married  Boletta 
Wilson  (daughter  of  John  G.  Wilson 
and  Lucy  Benson),  who  was  born 
March  16,  1863,  at  Hyrum,  Utah. 
This  union  has  been  blessed  with  ten 
children,  namely,  John  Andrew,  Or- 
son Winso,  Elizabeth  Frances,  Agnes 
Lucy,  Victor  Eugene,  Edith  Elverett, 
Vernon  Lycurgus,  Mary  Boletta,  Eil- 
ert  Kenneth  and  Alice.  In  1883-1884 
Elder  Israelson  filled  a  mission  to  the 
Southern  States,  laboring  in  Alabama; 
later  he  was  ordained  a  Seventy  by 
Seymour  B.  Young,  and  still  later 
chosen  as  a  president  of  the  sixty- 
second  quorum  of  Seventy,  which  po- 
sition he  held  until  he  was  ordained  a 
High  Priest.  In  1891-1893  he  filled 
a  mission  to  Norway,  laboring  prin- 
cipally in  Drammen,  Tromso  and 
Christiania,  the  latter  part  of  the  time 
as  president  of  the  Christiania  con- 
ference. After  his  return  from  that 
mission  he  was  chosen  as  a  member 
of  the  Stake  board  of  religion  classes 
in  the  Cache  Stake  and  assisted  in  or- 
ganizing religion  classes  in  many  of 
the  Wards  in  Cache  Valley.  He  also 
labored  as  a  home  missionary.  When 
the  Hyrum  Ward  was  divided  into 
three  Wards  in  1901,  Bro.  Israelson 
was  ordained  a  High  Priest  by  Wil- 
liam C.  Parkinson  and  set  apart  as 
first  counselor  to  Bishop  Harold  F. 
Liljenquist  of  the  Hyrum  First  Ward. 
He  held  that  position  until  Dec.  30, 
1904,  when  he  was  chosen  as  first 
counselor  to  President  William  C. 
Parkinson  in  the  Hyrum  Stake  presi- 
dency, which  position  he  still  holds. 
Bro.  Israelson,  whose  main  avocation 
is  that  of  a  farmer  and  stock  raiser, 
has  also  held  a  number  of  secular  po- 
sitions. Thus  he  has  acted  as  a  mem- 
ber of  the  Hyrum  city  council,  and  as 
justice  of  the  peace  in  the  Hyrum 
precinct,  etc.  He  has  also  served  four 
years  as  a  county  commissioner,  be- 
ing chairman  of  the  board.  While  oc- 
cupying that  position  he  took  a  lead- 
ing   part    in    amalgamating    all    the 


654 


LATTER-DAY   SAINT 


schools  of  Cache  county  into  one  dis- 
trict. Twice  he  was  nominated  on 
the  Republican  ticket  for  a  repre- 
sentative to  the  State  legislature,  but 
his  party  was  defeated  in  both  In- 
stances. Bro.  Israelson  is  a  good  sam- 
ple of  a  genuine  Norseman.  Standing 
over  six  feet  tall,  he  commands  re- 
spect from  his  personal  appearance 
and  is  known  in  public  affairs  as  a 
forceful  and  logical  speaker.  Both  at 
home  and  abroad  he  has  had  oppor- 
tunities to  show  his  ability  as  a  de- 
bater, having  defended  the  truths  of 
the  gospel  in  discussions  with  a  num- 
ber of  opponents,  in  which  he  has  al- 
ways come  off  victorious.  Of  Bro.  Is- 
raelson's  sons  three  have  filled  suc- 
cessful missions,  and  another  one 
(Orson  W.)  now  acts  as  the  head  of 
the  irrigation  and  draining  depart- 
ment of  the  Agricultural  College  at 
Logan. 

JACKSON,  Aaron  Wm.,  an  Elder 
who  died  in  the  missionary  field,  was 
born  Nov.  29,  1884,  at  Ogden,  Weber 
county,  Utah,  the  son  of  Aaron  Jack- 
son and  Eliza  Jane  Rawson.  He  was 
baptized  June  18,  1893,  by  R.  H. 
Chambers.  After  leaving  the  public 
schools  he  took  a  two  years'  course 
In  the  Weber  Stake  Academy.  When 
not  in  school,  he  found  employment 
In  various  mercantile  houses  and  was 
at  different  times  in  the  service  of 
Scowcroft  &  Sons,  Z.  C.  M.  I.  and 
Wm.  H.  Wright  &  Co.  While  residing 
in  the  Ogden  Fourth  Ward  he  was 
called  on  a  mission  to  the  Nortnern 
States,  being  set  apart  for  that  mis- 
sion Oct.  31,  1905.  He  left  his  home 
Nov.  1,  1905,  and  as  soon  as  he  had 
been  assigned  to  his  missionary  dis- 
trict (in  Wisconsin),  he  commenced 
his  labors  in  earnest,  endearing  him- 
self to  a  host  of  friends  by  his  gentle- 
manly deportment.  Together  with 
two  missionary  companions  (Elders 
Marion  C.  Clark  and  Lawrence  Se- 
crist)  he  went  bathing  in  Black  rlvei 
(a  tributary  of  the  Mississippi  river), 
at  La  Crosse,  Wisconsin,  Aug.  3,  190  6. 


While  swimming  In  the  river,  he  was 
taken,  as  is  supposed,  with  cramps, 
or  was  completely  tired  out.  He  called 
for  help  and  Elder  Secrist  came  near 
sacrificing  his  own  life  in  his  endeav- 
or to  save  his  companion,  he  being 
almost  faint  from  exhaustion  when 
he  returned  to  the  pier.  Several  ef- 
forts were  made  by  Elders  Secrist 
and  Clark  to  recover  the  body  by  div- 
ing, but  without  success.  They  final- 
ly rowed  ashore  and  called  for  assist- 
ance. The  matter  was  reported  to  the 
police  and  steps  taken  to  recover  the 
body,  which  proved  successful,  and 
the  remains  were  subsequently 
shipped  to  his  home  in  Ogden.  Elder 
Jackson  was  popular  among  his  fel- 
low-missionaries and  among  the  saints 
generally.  He  was  quiet  and  unas- 
suming, but  made  many  friends  in 
the  field,  and  though  he  was  only 
about  twenty-two  years  of  age  and 
unmarried,  he  was  throughout  a  suc- 
cessful missionary. 

JAMES,  Henry  Robert,  an  Elder 
in  the  Church  who  died  while  filling 
a  foreign  mission,  was  born  March 
29,  1877,  at  Bury,  Lancashire,  Eng- 
land, the  son  of  Henry  A.  James  and 
Elizabeth  A.  Urnsworth.  He  was  bap- 
tized in  March,  1885,  and  later  or- 
dained a  Priest.  He  resided  In  the 
Logan  Fifth  Ward,  Cache  county, 
Utah,  June  11,  1901,  when  he  was 
ordained  a  Seventy  by  Seymour  B. 
Young  and  set  apart  for  a  mission  to 
the  Netherlands.  He  arrived  in  Liver- 
pool, England,  June  27,  1901,  and 
after  reporting  in  the  Netherlands  he 
was  assigned  to  labor  in  Belgium,  and 
while  faithfully  pursuing  his  duties 
as  a  missionary  in  that  country  he 
was  suddenly  seized  with  cramp  in 
the  stomach,  Sept.  29,  1901.  He 
gradually  grew  worse  and  died  at 
Liege,  Belgium,  Oct.  10,  1901,  with 
typhoid  pneumonia.  During  his  sick- 
ness he  was  given  medical  aid  and 
all  the  attention  possible.  His  re- 
mains were  placed  in  a  zinc  case, 
which    was    hermetically    sealed    and 


BIOGRAPHICAL   ENCYCLOPEDIA. 


655 


shipped  to  his  home  in  Logan,  Utah. 
During  his  short  term  in  the  mis- 
sionary field  Brother  James  demon- 
strated his  fidelity  to  the  cause  of 
truth  and  won  the  love  and  admira- 
tion of  his  fellow-missionaries  and 
the  saints  generally.  He  was  twenty- 
three  years  of  age  at  the  time  of  his 
demise  and  unmarried. 

JENSEN,  Christen.  (Continuation 
from  Vol.  1:550.)  Brother  Jensen 
continued  his  labors  faithfully  as 
Bishop  of  the  Eastdale  Ward  until 
that  settlement  was  broken  up  by  the 
advice  of  the  Church  authorities  in 
1909.  He  then  located  at  Manassa, 
Conejos  county,  Colorado,  where  he 
has  resided  ever  since.  In  1909  (Oct. 
24th)  he  was  set  apart  as  a  member 
of  the  High  Council  of  the  San  Luis 
Stake,  which  position  he  still  holds, 
and  on  Aug.  2  0,  1911,  he  was  or- 
dained a  Patriarch  by  Apostle  Orson 
P.  Whitney.  For  a  number  of  years  he 
has  acted  as  Stake  representative  of 
the  Genealogical  Society  of  the  San 
Luis  Stake  and  as  secretary  and  treas- 
urer of  the  San  Luis  Stake  Academy. 
Bro.  Jensen  has  also  filled  many  po- 
sitions of  a  secular  nature.  Thus  he 
has  acted  as  justice  of  the  peace,  po- 
lice magistrate,  school  trustee,  mem- 
ber of  the  Manassa  town  board,  presi- 
dent of  the  Colonial  State  Bank  of 
Manassa,  etc.,  and  has  always  been 
active  in  the  growth  and  development 
of  the  settlements  of  the  saints,  both 
in  Utah  and  Colorado.  His  son.  Chris- 
ten Israel  Jensen,  died  while  faith- 
fully filling  a  mission  in  the  Central 
States  in  1910.  Two  other  sons  and 
a  daughter  have  also  filled  missions 
for  the  Church  in  the  Central  States. 
His  wife,  Helena  Sophia,  died  at  East- 
dale  Sept.  31,  1902;  his  wife,  Mary 
Sophia,  died  in  Manassa,  March  5, 
190;),  and  his  wife,  Carrie,  died  at 
Manassa  August  23,  1919.  Thus 
Elder  Jensen  is  left  without  a  wife, 
and  is  now  laboring  as  an  ordinance 
worker  in  the  Salt  Lake  Temple,  be- 
ing blessed  and  set  apart  for  that  pur- 


pose May  11,  1920.  Since  1862,  when 
Patriarch  Jensen  first  became  a  con- 
vert to  "Mormonism,"  he  has  spent 
at  least  half  his  time  in  the  interest 
of  the  Church  and  for  the  public  good, 
but  he  realizes  that  he  has  been 
abundantly  blessed  by  the  Lord  for 
his  efforts,  both  spiritually  and  tem- 
porally. He  is  naturally  spiritually- 
minded  and  a  man  of  strong  faith. 
Up  to  date  he  has  given  a  great  num- 
ber of  Patriarchal  blessings. 

JENSEN,  Christen  Israel,  an  Elder 
who  died  in  the  missionary  field,  was 
born  Oct.  6,  1886,  in  Moroni,  Sanpete 
county,  Utah,  the  son  of  Christen  Jen- 
sen and  Helena  Sophia  Rundquist.  He 
was  baptized  Oct.  6,  18  95  by  his  fath- 
er and  received  a  common  school  edu- 
cation in  Eastdale,  Castilla  county, 
where  his  father  acted  as  Bishop. 
From  his  earliest  youth  he  took  an 
active  part  in  the  auxiliary  organiza- 
tions of  the  Church,  and  was  known 
as  a  good,  honest  boy  who  had  the 
love  and  confidence  of  his  associates. 
In  due  course  of  time  he  was  ordained 
an  Elder  and  in  the  breaking  up  of 
the  Eastdale  settlement  he  moved 
with  his  parents  to  Manassa,  where 
he  resided  in  1909,  when  he  was 
called  on  a  mission  to  the  Central 
States.  He  was  set  apart  for  his  mis- 
sion in  Salt  Lake  City  Oct.  19,  1909, 
being  then  on  his  way  to  his  field  of 
labor.  On  his  arrival  at  mission  head- 
quarters in  Independence,  Mo.,  he 
was  assigned  to  Little  Rock,  Arkansas, 
and  while  in  the  discharge  of  his 
duties  as  a  minister  of  the  gospel, 
early  in  1910,  he  complained  with 
pains  in  his  head,  but  after  a  few 
days'  treatment  in  a  hospital  at  Lit- 
tle Rock,  he  resumed  his  missionary 
labors.  He  was  thus  engaged  at  Lit- 
tle Rock,  Jan.  24,  1910,  when  he  dis- 
appeared mysteriously,  and  for  quite 
a  while  no  trace  of  him  could  be 
found.  His  father,  Bishop  Christen 
Jensen  of  Manassa,  Colorado,  went  to 
Little  Rock  as  soon  as  the  news  of  his 
disappearance  reached  him  and  with 


656 


LATTER-DAY   SAINT 


the  aid  of  the  Elders  of  that  mission, 
together  with  the  police,  detectives 
and  fishermen  hunted  the  river  for 
six  weeks,  endeavoring  to  get  trace 
of  the  missing  man,  without  success. 
But  six  weeks  later,  news  came  that  a 
negro  boy  had  found  the  body  strand- 
ed on  a  sand  bar  in  the  Arkansas 
river,  eight  miles  below  Little  Rock, 
April  17,  1910.  The  coroner  and  un- 
dertaker were  notified  and  they  im- 
mediately secured  the  body.  Presi- 
dent Samuel  O.  Bennion  of  the  Cen- 
tral States  Mission  took  the  first  train 
to  Little  Rock  and  identified  the 
corpse,  which  was  remarkably  well 
preserved,  and  accompanied  the  body 
home.  In  the  clothing  of  the  young 
missionary  were  found  his  testament, 
journal,  map  of  Arkansas,  personal 
cards  and  photographs,  all  well  pre- 
served. The  supposition  is  that  he 
was  sandbagged  by  some  thug  and 
thrown  into  the  Arkansas  river,  where 
fro  three  months  his  body  was  prob- 
ably caught  in  a  whirlpool  and  cov- 
ered with  sand.  The  remains  of  Elder 
Jensen  were  laid  to  rest  in  the  Man- 
assa  cemetery.  Elder  Jensen  died  un- 
married. 

JENSEN,    Joseph    Martin    Elijah, 

Bishop  of  the  Vermillion  Ward  (1917- 
1919),  Sevier  Stake,  Sevier  county, 
Utah,  was  born  March  27,  1880,  in 
Pleasant  Grove,  Utah  county.  Utah, 
the  son  of  James  C.  Jensen  and  Annie 
W.  Christensen.  He  was  baptized  Oc- 
tober 14,  1888,  by  his  father,  and  was 
ordained  successively  to  different  of- 
fices in  the  Priesthood.  From  Glen- 
wood,  Sevier  county,  Utah,  he  filled  a 
mission  to  the  Northern  States  in 
1904-1906.  After  locating  in  Vermil- 
lion he  was  ordained  a  High  Priest 
Jan.  12,  1913,  and  set  apart  to  act  as 
a  counselor  to  Bishop  John  I.  Gled- 
hill  of  the  Vermillion  Ward,  which 
position  he  held  until  Sept.  2  2,  1917, 
when  he  was  ordained  a  Bishop  by 
James  E.  Talmage  and  set  apart  to 
preside  over  the  said  Ward.  He  held 
this  position  until  September,   r919, 


when  he  was  honorably  released.  Bro. 
Jensen's  general  occupation  in  life  is 
that  of  farming  and  dairying.  In  1906 
(June  27th)  he  married  Caroline  Jen- 
sen, which  union  has  been  blessed 
with  four  children,  namely,  Mildred, 
Ardell,  Elijah  Lee  and  Elsie. 

.JENSEN,  Ole  Christian,  a  Latter- 
day  Saint  Elder  who  died  while  fill- 
ing a  foreign  mission,  was  born  May 
7,  1830,  in  Ringkjobing,  Denmark, 
the  son  of  Morten  Jensen  and  Hedvig 
Olsen.  Becoming  a  convert  to  "Mor- 
monism"  he  was  baptized  in  1871  by 
Niels  Jepsen  and  after  emigrating  to 
Utah  he  located  in  Mayfield,  Sanpete 
county.  Being  called  on  a  mission  to 
Scandinavia,  he  was  ordained  a  Sev- 
enty by  George  Reynolds,  Dec.  3, 
1897,  and  set  apart  for  his  mission. 
He  arrived  in  Copenhagen,  Denmark, 
Dec.  25,  1897,  and  was  appointed  to 
labor  in  the  Aarhus  conference.  His 
labors  were  mostly  confined  to  the 
Grenaa  branch,  where  he  had  some 
relatives.  His  general  health  was  very 
good  for  a  man  of  his  age,  and  he  was 
very  energetic  in  his  labors.  He  took 
an  extensive  trip  to  the  west  of  Jut- 
land in  company  with  Elders  Marius 
Mickelson  and  Jens  C.  Breinholt,  and 
although  urged  by  his  brethren  to 
spare  himself,  he  would  perform  his 
part  of  the  work,  and  seemed  to  feel 
quite  well,  excepting  a  little  fatigue. 
Upon  their  return  they  stopped  a  few 
days  in  Randers.  Brother  Jensen  at- 
tended Sunday  school  May  22,  1897, 
and,  not  feeling  right  well,  stepped 
into  the  yard.  Here  he  was  seized 
with  a  violent  attack  of  illness  and 
would  have  fallen  but  for  the  assist- 
ance of  a  brother  who  was  with  him. 
He  remained  at  the  rooms  of  the 
brethren  for  several  days,  but  in  order 
that  he  might  have  better  care  and 
more  comfort,  he  was  moved  to  the 
home  of  a  Sister  Andersen  near  by, 
and  this  family  did  all  in  their  power 
to  alleviate  his  sufferings.  The  Saints 
in  general,  and  many  strangers,  were 
very    solicitous    of    his    welfare.      He 


BIOGRAPHICAL   ENCYCLOPEDIA. 


657 


was  administered  to  repeatedly  by  the 
Elders,  and  also  had  the  care  of  a 
physician,  but  he  sank  steadily  and 
passed  away  peacefully  on  the  after- 
noon of  May  30,  1S98,  the  doctor  pro- 
nouncing his  case  "inflammation  of 
the  lungs.  "  Bro.  Jensen  was  about  68 
years  old  when  he  died;  he  left  a  wife 
and  several  grown-up  children. 

JENSOX,  Joseph  Henry,  a  Latter- 
day  Saint  Elder  who  died  while  fill- 
ing a  foreign  mission,  was  born  Oct. 
22,  1870,  in  South  Cottonwood,  Salt 
Lake  county,  Utah,  the  son  of  Peter 
Jenson  and  Ellen  Johnson.  He  was 
baptized  in  September,  1880,  and  was 
set  apart  for  a  mission  to  Scandinavia 
May  22,  1896,  by  Seymour  B.  Young. 
He  arrived  in  Copenhagen,  Denmark, 
on  his  mission,  June  16,  1896,  and 
was  appointed  to  labor  in  the  Gote- 
borg  conference,  Sweden,  where  he 
did  successful  missionary  work  in 
Jonkoping,  Halmstad  and  Trolhattan, 
and  lastly  in  Vestervik,  where  he  pre- 
sided over  the  branch.  He  seemed  to 
enjoy  good  health  until  the  middle  of 
February,  1898,  when  he  took  sick. 
It  began  with  pain  in  the  stomach 
and  frequent  vomiting.  For  a  couple 
of  weeks  he  was  in  bed  most  of  the 
time  at  the  branch  headquarters;  men 
his  companion.  Elder  Charles  M.  Ol- 
son, concluded  that  it  would  be  best 
to  take  him  to  Goteborg,  where  he 
could  receive  better  treatment.  They 
started  on  March  4th,  and  arrived  at 
Goteborg  on  the  5th,  after  riding  on 
the  train  about  180  miles.  Here  they 
were  received  by  Elder  H.  M.  Pear- 
son, president  of  the  Goteborg  con- 
ference, and  Elder  Jenson  was  taken 
to  the  home  of  a  Brother  Sbderberg, 
where  he  was  given  the  best  possible 
care,  Brother  and  Sister  Soderberg 
dong  all  in  their  power  to  alleviate 
his  suffering.  A  physician  was  called 
in,  who  at  once  pronounced  his  con- 
dition very  critical,  stating  that  he 
had  inflammation  of  the  bowels.  Bro. 
Jenson  was  administered  to  by  his 
brethren    from    time   to    time   during 


his  illness,  and  after  his  arrival  in 
Goteborg  the  brethren  and  the  Saints 
fasted  and  prayed  for  him  and  ad- 
ministered to  him,  and  he  seemingly 
rallied,  but  failing  again,  passed  away 
on  Tuesday  morning,  March  8,  1898. 
He  retained  his  consciousness  to  the 
last.  Elder  Johnson  (a  resident  of 
Union,  Salt  Lake  county,  Utah),  was 
unmarried.  He  was  a  good,  faithful 
man,  had  labored  in  the  mission  field 
nearly  two  years  and  bore  an  excel- 
lent character. 

JOHNSON,  Richard  Eli,  an  Elder 
in  the  Church  who  died  while  labor- 
ing in  the  missionary  field,  was  born 
May  9,  1877,  at  Monroe,  Sevier  coun- 
ty, Utah,  the  son  of  King  B.  Johnson 
and  Mary  Ellen  Harris.  He  was  bap- 
tized Aug.  6,  1885,  by  Samuel  W. 
Goold,  and  later  ordained  an  Elder. 
He  resided  at  Monroe  when  he  was 
set  apart  for  a  mission  to  the  South- 
western States  June  9,  1903,  but  he 
had  scarcely  entered  upon  his  duties 
in  the  ministry  when  he  was  stricken 
with  sickness,  from  which  he  died  at 
Hot  Springs,  Arkansas,  Aug.  24,  1903. 

JOHNSON,  Wallace  Lars,  an  Elder 
who  died  in  the  missionary  field,  was 
born  May  3,  1887,  in  Illinois,  the  son 
of  Gustave  Johnson  and  Myrtle  E. 
Cooper.  He  was  baptized  Aug.  6, 
1898,  by  James  H.  Walker  and  was 
living  with  his  parents  in  Lindon, 
Utah  county,  Utah,  when  he  (beiug 
only  eighteen  years  of  age)  was  called 
and  set  apart  for  a  mission  to  iTie 
Eastern  States  April  11,  1905.  After 
laboring  upwards  of  seventeen  months 
in  the  field,  he  took  sick  and  died  at 
the  homeopathic  hospital  in  Albany, 
New  York,  Aug.  6,  1906,  with  appen- 
dicitis. His  remains  were  sent  home 
in  charge  of  Elder  Jesse  Beal.  Elder 
Johnson,  considering  his  youth,  was 
a  very  successful  missionary — one 
who  was  always  ready  and  willing  to 
do  all  in  his  power  to  help  spread  the 
gospel;  by  his  zealous  work  and  jo- 
vial, pleasant  disposition,  he  had  en- 


voi. Ill,  No.  4: 


May   1.  1920 


668 


LATTER-DAY   SAINT 


deared  himself  to  a  host  of  saints  and 
friends. 

JONES,  Dan,  familiarly  known  as 
Capt.  Dan  Jones,  and  recognized  as 
the  founder  of  the  Welsh  Mission, 
was  born  Aug.  4,  1811,  in  Flintshire, 
Wales,  the  son  of  Thomas  and  Ruth 
Jones.  He  received  a  college  educa- 
tion, emigrated  to  the  United  States 
about  1840  and  located  in  the  West- 
ern States,  where  he  became  the  own- 
er and  captain  of  a  little  river  steam- 
er called  "The  Maid  of  Iowa."  He  is 
first  mentioned  in  Church  history 
when  he  brought  a  company  of  Saints 
(in  charge  of  Parley  P.  Pratt  and  Levi 
Richards)  to  Nauvoo,  111.,  in  April, 
1843,  these  Saints  having  been  de- 
tained during  the  previous  winter  at 
St.  Louis,  Mo.,  and  other  places,  after 
their  arrival  from  England.  It  was  on 
this  occasion  Dan  Jones  first  met  the 
Prophet  Joseph  Smith,  who,  in  step- 
ping up  to  him,  said:  "God  bless  this 
little  man."  Soon  afterwards  he  be- 
came a  convert  to  "Mormonism,"  and 
was    baptized    in    the    early    part    of 

1843.  In  May,  1843,  the  Prophet  Jo- 
seph Smith  purchased  a  half  interest 
in  the  "Maid  of  Iowa,"  and  Capt. 
Jones  commenced  running  the  boat 
between  Nauvoo  and  Montrose  as  a 
ferry  boat.  When  the  Prophet  Jo- 
seph was  arrested  at  Dixon,  the  fol- 
lowing June,  Capt.  Jones  with  a  force 
of  armed  men  navigated  the  rivers 
for  the  purpose  of  intercepting  steam- 
boats which  might  be  engaged  in  kid- 
naping the  Prophet  Joseph  into  Mis- 
souri. In  May,  1844,  the  Prophet 
bought  out  the  interest  of  Dan  Jones 
in  the  "Maid  of  Iowa."  When  the 
Prophet  started  for  Carthage  June  24, 

1844,  Dan  Jones  was  one  of  the  breth- 
ren who  accompanied  him,  and  from 
Carthage  he  was  sent  with  two  others 
with  an  important  message  to  Gov. 
Thomas  Ford.  He  spent  the  night  ol 
June  26-27,  1844,  with  Joseph  and 
fellow-prisoners  in  Carthage  jail,  and 
when  all  were  apparently  fast  asieep, 
Joseph  whispered  to  Dan  Jones:  "Are 


you  afraid  to  die?"  Dan  answered: 
"Has  that  time  come,  think  you?  En- 
gaged in  such  a  cause,  I  do  not  think 
that  death  would  have  many  terrors." 
Joseph  replied:  "You  will  yet  see 
Wales  and  fulfill  the  mission  appoint- 
ed you  before  you  die."  In  the  morn- 
ing of  June  2  7th,  Joseph  requested 
Dan  Jones  to  descend  and  inquire  of 
the  guard  the  cause  of  a  certain  in- 
trusion which  had  taken  place  during 
the  night.  Frank  Worrell,  the  offi- 
cer of  the  guard,  who  was  one  of  the 
Carthage  Greys,  said  in  a  very  bitter 
spirit:  "We  have  had  too  much  trou- 
ble to  bring  'Old  Joe'  here  to  let  him 
ever  escape  alive,  and_  unless  you  want 
to  die  with  him,  you  had  better  leave 
before  sundown,  and  you  are  not  a 
damned  bit  better  than  him  for  tak- 
ing his  part  and  you  will  see  that  I 
can  prophecy  better  than  'Old  Joe,' 
for  neither  he  nor  his  brother  nor 
any  one  who  will  remain  with  them 
will  see  the  sun  set  today."  Joseph 
directed  Jones  to  go  to  Gov.  Ford  and 
inform  him  what  he  had  been  told  by 
the  officer  of  the  guard.  While  Jones 
was  going  to  Gov.  Ford's  quarters, 
he  saw  an  assemblage  of  men  and 
heard  one  of  them,  who  was  appar- 
ently a  leader,  making  a  speech,  say- 
ing: "Our  troops  will  be  discharged 
this  morning  in  obedience  to  orders 
and  for  a  sham  we  will  leave  the 
town,  but  when  the  governor  and  the 
McDonough's  troops  have  left  for 
Nauvoo  this  forenoon,  we  will  return 
and  kill  those  men  if  we  have  to  tear 
the  jail  down."  This  sentiment  was 
applauded  by  three  cheers  from  the 
crowd.  Capt.  Jones  went  to  the  gov- 
ernor, told  him  what  had  occurred  in 
the  night,  what  the  officer  of  the 
guard  had  said,  and  what  he  had 
heard  while  coming  to  see  him,  and 
earnestly  solicited  him  to  avert  the 
danger.  His  Excellency  replied:  "You 
are  unnecessarily  alarmed  for  the 
safety  of  your  friends,  sir;  the  peo- 
ple are  not  that  cruel."  Irritated  by 
such  a  remark,  Jones  urged  the  nec- 
essity of  placing  better  men  to  guard 


BIOGRAPHICAL.  ENCYCLOPEDIA. 


659 


them  than  professed  assassins,  and 
said,  "The  Messrs.  Smith  are  Amer- 
ican citizens,  and  have  surrendered 
themselves  to  your  Excellency  upon 
your  pledging  your  honor  for  their 
safety;  they  are  also  master  masons, 
and  as  such  I  demand  of  you  the  pro- 
tection of  their  lives."  Governor 
Ford's  face  turned  pale,  and  Jones  re- 
marked, "If  you  do  not  do  this,  I 
have  but  one  more  desire,  and  that 
is,  if  you  leave  their  lives  in  the  hands 

of  those  men  to  be  sacrificed ." 

"What  is  that,  sir?"  he  asked  in  a 
hurried  tone.  "It  is,"  said  Jones, 
"that  the  Almighty  will  preserve  my 
life  to  a  proper  time  and  place,  that 
I  may  testify  that  you  have  been  time- 
ly warned  of  their  danger."  Jones 
then  returned  to  the  prison,  but  the 
guard  would  not  let  him  enter.  He 
again  returned  to  the  hotel,  and  found 
Governor  Ford  standing  in  front  of 
the  McDonough  troops,  who  were  in 
line  ready  to  escort  him  to  Nauvoo. 
The  disbanded  mob  retired  to  the 
rear,  shouting  loudly  that  they  were 
only  going  a  short  distance  out  of 
town,  when  they  would  return  and 
kill  "Old  Joe"  and  Hyrum  as  soon  as 
the  governor  was  far  enough  out  of 
town.  Jones  called  the  attention  of 
the  governor  to  the  threats  then  made, 
but  he  took  no  notice  of  them,  al- 
though it  was  impossible  for  him  to 
avoid  hearing  them.  Jones  then  re- 
quested the  governor  to  give  him 
jorts  for  himself  and  friends  to 
pcibo  in  and  out  of  the  prison,  accord- 
ing to  his  promise  made  to  the  pris- 
oners. He  refused  to  give  them 
passes,  but  he  told  General  Deming 
to  give  one  to  Dr.  Willard  Richards, 
Joseph  Smith's  private  secretary. 
While  obtaining  this,  Jones'  life  was 
threatened,  and  Chauncey  L.  Higbee 
said  to  him  in  the  street,  "We  are  de- 
termined to  kill  Joe  and  Hyrum,  and 
you  had  better  go  away  to  save  your- 
self." Afterwards  Almon  W.  Babbitt 
met  Dan  Jones  in  the  street  and  in- 
formed him  that  Joseph  wanted  to 
see  him,  but  not  being  allowed  to  pass 


the  guard,  Brother  Babbitt  brought  a 
letter  from  Joseph,  which  he  handed 
to  Dan  Jones  with  directions  to  take 
it  to   Quincy  forthwith.    The  guard, 
being  aware   of  the   letter,   told   the 
mob  that  "Old  Joe"  had  sent  orders 
to  raise  the  Nauvoo  Legion  to  come 
and  rescue  him.    The  mob   gathered 
around  Jones  and  demanded  the  let- 
ter.   Some  of  them  wanted  to  take  it 
from  him  by  force  and  said  that  Jones 
should  not  get  out  of  Carthage  alive, 
as  a  dozen  men  had  started  out  with 
their    rifles    to    waylay    him    in    the 
woods.  Having  previously  ordered  his 
horse,  Jones  took  advantage  of  their 
disagreement  and  started  off  at  full 
speed.    By  mistake  he  took  the  War- 
saw  road,   and   so   avoided   the   men 
who  were  lying  in  wait  for  him.     In 
18  45    Dan   Jones,    complying    with   a 
former  call,  left  Nauvoo  on  a  mission 
to  Great  Britain,  and  on  his  arrival 
in    Liverpool,    England,    he    was    as- 
signed to  labor  in  Wales,  his  native 
country.     He    proceeded    at    once   to 
Merthyr  Tydfil,   where  he  organized 
himself   and   family   into   the   Welsh 
conference  and  commenced  preaching 
the  gospel  with  such  success  that  in 
the  course  of  a  couple  of  years  he  be- 
came the  means  of  baptizing  and  add- 
ing to  the  Church  about  two  thousand 
souls   in   Wales.     He   also   circulated 
thousands  of  pamphlets  in  the  Welsh 
language.    Persecution  raged  against 
him,  but  the  more  his  opponents  per- 
secuted   him,    the    better   success    he 
had.     Elder    Jones    also    published    a 
monthly  periodical  in  Welsh,  entitled 
"Phophwyd  y  Jubili"    (The  Prophet 
of   the    Jubilee).     Among    his    other 
publications  was  the  "Compendium," 
or  book  of  reference  (288  pages),  il- 
lustrative   of    the    doctrines    of    the 
Church.    All  the  publishing  was  done 
in  Merthyr  Tydfil.     Having  finished 
his    mission    in    Wales,    Capt.    Jones 
sailed  from  Liverpool  Feb.  26,  1849, 
with  2  49  emigrating  saints  on  board 
the   ship    "Buena   Vista."     The   com- 
pany arrived  in  Kanesville,  Iowa,  lu 
May,    1849,    and    crossed    the    plains 


660 


LATTER-DAY   SAINT 


with  Dan  Jones  as  captain,  in  twenty- 
five  wagons.    Under  date  of  Aug.  12, 
1849,    Geo.    A.    Smith    wrote    as    fol- 
lows,   while    crossing    the    plains: 
"Capt.    Dan    Jones    understands    his 
duty  and  surely  he  has  done  nobly  in 
building   up   the  kingdom   of  God   in 
his  native   land   and   conducting   the 
company   he   has   across   the   mighty 
deep."     The    Welsh    Saints    were    in- 
cluded  in   Geo.   A.    Smith's  company. 
After  the  arrival  in  the  Valley  the  so- 
called  Welsh  settlement  was  rormeo 
on  the  west  side  of  the  river  Jordan, 
but  most  of  the  Welsh  Saints  subse- 
quently became  residents  of  the  Fif- 
teenth and  Sixteenth  Wards,  Salt  Lake 
City.    The  arrival  of  the  Welsh  com- 
pany under  Capt.  Jones  was  practical- 
ly the  introduction  of  the  Welsh  ele- 
ment into  the  Church.    In  the  fall  of 
1849  Dan  Jones  was  called  to  accom- 
pany Parley  P.   Pratt  and  others  on 
an  exploring   expedition   to   southern 
Utah.     On    this   journey    the    captain 
rendered  efficient  aid  to  the  expeai- 
tion  and  was  closely  associated  with 
Elder  Pratt.    The  company  returned 
to  Salt  Lake  City  early  in  1850.  After 
that  we  find  Dan  Jones  prominently 
associated  with  public  affairs  in  the 
city  until  he,  later  in  the  year,    v%us 
called    to    locate    in    Manti,    Sanpete 
county,  where  he  was  elected  mayor 
of  the  city  April  7,  1851.    There  also 
he  ran  a  threshing  machine  and  took 
part  in  all  kinds  of  pioneer  labor.    In 
August,  1852,  he  was  called  on  a  sec- 
ond mission  to  Wales,  during  which 
he  again  did  a  splendid  work  in  his 
native  country  and  published  the  "Ud- 
gorn  Seion."  Returning  from  this  mis- 
sion in  1856,  he  had  charge  of  a  large 
company  of  Saints    (703  souls),  who 
crossed  the  Atlantic  in  the  ship  "Sam- 
uel Curling,"  which  sailed  from  Liv- 
erpool July  6,  1856.    He  crossed  the 
plains  together  with  a  number  of  oth- 
er missionaries,  who  passed  the  dif- 
ferent emigrating  companies  of  saints 
which   crossed    the   plains   that   year. 
Early  in  1857  Capt.  Dan  Jones  com- 
menced   navigating    the    Great    Salt 


Lake  in  the  "Timely  Gull,"  a  small 
boat  built  and  owned  by  Gov.  Brig- 
ham  Young.  The  little  vessel  was  an- 
chored in  Black  Rock  harbor  Feb.  13, 
1857,  with  a  general  cargo,  mainly 
composed  of  cedar  wood,  fine  salt  and 
flagging  for  sidewalks,  yards  and  cel- 
lar floors,  which  articles  were  offered 
for  sale.  The  "Timely  Gull"  was  the 
first  vessel  of  any  consequence  ever 
launched  upon  the  waters  of  the  Great 
Salt  Lake.  In  1859  it  was  suggested 
that  the  stone  coal  which  had  just 
been  discovered  in  Wales,  Sanpete 
Valley,  should  be  hauled  from  that 
place  to  the  head  of  Utah  Lake,  from 
which  point  Capt.  Jones  would  boat 
it  across  the  lake  to  supply  the  citi- 
zens of  Salt  Lake  City  with  fuel,  but 
this  enterprise,  seemingly,  did  not 
prove  a  success.  In  the  meantime 
Capt.  Jones  moved  to  Provo,  where 
he  resided  until  the  time  of  his  death, 
which  took  place  there  Jan.  3.  1861. 
Capt.  Jones  married  three  wives  dur- 
ing his  life  time  and  when  he  died  he 
left  six  children,  two  by  each  wife 
Dan  Jones  as  a  missionary  was  known 
as  a  most  eloquent  and  rapid  speaker, 
having  both  the  English  and  Welsh 
languages  completely  at  his  command, 
and  with  his  earnestness  and  force 
he  could  hold  his  audience  spellbound 
for  hours  together. 

JON'KS,  Shaclrach,  an  Elder  who 
died  while  filling  a  foreign  mission, 
was  born  Nov.  17,  1832,  in  Breck- 
nockshire, Wales,  the  son  of  David 
Jones  and  Ann  Lawrence,  and  was 
baptized  by  Meshach  Williams  Jan. 
13,  1850.  After  emigrating  to  Utah 
he  made  his  home  in  Willard  City, 
Box  Elder  county,  where  he  was  very 
much  respected.  He  was  set  apart  by 
Apostle  Orson  Pratt  April  10,  1876, 
for  a  mission  to  the  Indians,  and  on 
April  9,  1883,  he  was  set  apart  for 
a  mission  to  Great  Britain  and  ar- 
rived in  the  missionary  field  on  the 
28th  day  of  the  same  month..  He  was 
assigned  to  the  Welsh  conference  and 
after  his  arrival  in  his  field  of  labor 


BIOGRAPHICAL   ENCYCLOPEDIA. 


661 


displayed  considerable  energy  in  seek- 
ing to  spread  a  knowledge  of  the  gos- 
pel. He  took  cold,  however,  through 
sleeping  in  a  damp  bed,  was  affected 
with  a  very  bad  cough  and  soreness 
of  the  lungs,  and  after  lingering 
about  three  weeks  (  during  which  time 
everything  was  done  to  relieve  him 
that  kindness  could  suggest),  he  suc- 
cumbed to  death.  He  died  June  24, 
1883,  at  Swansea,  Wales,  within  two 
months  after  his  arrival  in  Great 
Britain.  Elder  Jones  had  always  lived 
a  most  worthy  and  exemplary  life 
and  had  devoted  much  of  his  time  in 
later  years  working  in  the  Logan 
Temple.  He  was  a  member  of  the 
59th   quorum   of   Seventy. 

KAY,  John  Moburn,  an  Elder  of 
the  Church  who  died  while  returning 
from  a  foreign  mission,  was  born  Oct. 
6,    1817,    in    Bury,    Lancashire,    Eng- 


land, the  son  of  James  Kay  and  Betty 
Moburn.  His  father,  James  Kay,  was 
a  foundry  man,  and  the  boy  himself, 
at  the  early  age  of  six  years,  entered 
his  uncle's  iron  and  brass  foundry  in 
Bury,  mastering  the  trade  and  get- 
ting journeyman's  wages  at  seven- 
teen. His  musical  ability  was  mani- 
fest at  an  early  day,  both  vocally  and 
instrumentally.  He  had  a  fine,  heauny 


physique,  and  was  so  agile  in  jump- 
ing and  in  other  manly  sports  that  he 
was  called  the  "India  rubber  man." 
The  only  schooling  he  received  was 
in  Sunday  school.  His  jovial  nature 
and  keen  sense  of  humor,  frequently 
displayed  in  harmless,  practical  jokes, 
made  him  one  of  the  most  entertain- 
ing of  men.  His  spirit  was  chivalrous 
and  he  would  always  defend  the  op- 
pressed. It  was  partly  due  to  his  ais- 
position  that  he  became  a  Latter-day 
saint.  One  of  his  fellow  employees 
(Samuel  Croyer)  at  St.  Helens,  to 
which  town  he  had  removed  to  work 
in  a  foundry,  was  a  member  of  the 
"Mormon"  church,  and  being  a  small, 
timid  man,  he  was  ridiculed  by  his 
shopmates,  who  went  so  far  as  to  of- 
fer him  violence.  Without  knowing 
anything  about  his  religion,  John  Kay 
defended  him  and  thrashed  his  lead- 
ing assailant.  Curiosity  then  led  him 
to  inquire  into  the  little  man's  faith. 
The  result  was  his  conversion  and 
baptism  in  the  fall  of  1841.  He  was 
immediately  ordained  an  Elder,  and 
for  some  time  labored  in  the  min- 
istry, but  in  September,  1842,  he 
sailed  for  America,  reaching  Nauvoo, 
111.,  in  the  ensuing  spring  (1843). 
There  he  became  a  major  in  the  fa- 
mous Nauvoo  Legion;  also  a  member 
of  the  Nauvoo  brass  band  and  the 
police  force.  Owing  to  his  musical 
talent  and  his  genial  social  qualities, 
he  was  often  invited  by  the  Prophet 
Joseph  Smith  to  assist  in  the  enter- 
tainment of  visitors.  In  the  exodus 
from  Illinois,  he  was  with  Presmenc 
Young's  company,  which  he  and  oth- 
ers helped  to  sustain  by  going  into 
Missouri  and  giving  concerts,  from 
the  proceeds  of  which  supplies  for 
the  destitute  people  and  hungry  ani- 
mals were  obtained.  He  afterwards 
joined  Bishop  Miller's  company  and 
spent  the  winter  of  1846-47  among 
the  Ponca  Indians.  On  the  way  back 
to  Winter  Quarters  he  came  near 
starving,  and  the  cold  was  so  intense 
that  his  feet  were  badly  frozen.  He 
and  another  messenger  had  been  sent 


662 


LATTER-DAY   SAINT 


after  provisions  for  the  hungry  peo- 
ple at  Ponca.  John  Kay  crossed  the 
plains  with  his  own  teams,  but  trav- 
eled in  the  company  led  by  President 
Young  in  the  emigration  of  1848,  ar- 
riving in  Salt  Lake  Valley  on  the  20th 
of  September,  1848.  He  settled  per- 
manently on  the  corner  of  South 
Temple  and  Fourth  East  streets, 
where  a  portion  of  his  family  still 
resides.  His  trade  of  moulding  an(i 
pattern-making  in  iron  and  brass 
came  at  once  into  play,  and  In  the 
winter  of  1848-1849  he  made,  by  re- 
quest of  President  Young,  the  para- 
phernalia of  the  mint,  which  he  was 
instructed  to  operate.  The  steel  for 
the  dies  was  furnished  by  Joseph  L. 
Heywood,  and  Bro.  Kay  was  assisted 
in  the  blacksmithing  work  by  Alfred 
Lambson.  Says  Mr.  Heywood,  who 
was  Utah's  first  United  States  mar- 
shal: "In  1850  I  presented  some  of 
the  Utah  coins  at  the  United  States 
Mint  in  Philadelphia,  where  the  me- 
chanical work  of  John  M.  Kay  was 
highly  praised."  Bro.  Kay  is  said  to 
have  made  the  first  brass  casting  in 
Utah,  also  the  first  iron  casting,  as- 
sisted by  Phillip  Margetts  and  an- 
other worker.  He  rendered  service  in 
the  early  Indian  wars,  sometimes  act- 
ing as  surgeon,  for  he  had  studied 
surgery  and  dentistry,  which  he  prac- 
ticed during  the  remainder  of  his  life. 
In  1855-1858  he  was  absent  upon  a 
mission  to  Europe,  from  which  he  re- 
turned in  company  with  Orson  Pratt 
and  other  Elders  by  way  of  the  Isth- 
mus of  Panama  and  the  State  of  Cali- 
fornia, arriving  in  Salt  Lake  City  in 
January,  1858.  He  saw  service  in 
Echo  Canyon,  as  one  of  Governor 
Cumming's  escort  to  Salt  Lake  City, 
appointed  specially  to  entertain  his 
Excellency;  and  was  on  guard  in  the 
city  when  Johnston's  army  passed 
through.  In  the  fall  of  18  60  he  went 
upon  another  mission  to  Europe, 
where  he  labored  as  before  in  his  na- 
tive land,  though  on  the  former  occa- 
sion he  l^ad  traveled  some  on  the  con- 
tinent.    This    last    mission    extended 


through  four  years.  Honorably  re- 
leased, he  set  out  to  return  to  Utah, 
but  did  not  reach  home  alive.  It  was 
at  the  head  of  a  company  of  emigrat- 
ing saints  that  he  sailed  from  Lon- 
don June  3,  1864,  on  the  ship  "Hud- 
son." After  reaching  New  York  July 
19th,  his  labors  were  very  arduous.  He 
was  a  large  man,  weighing  about  two 
hundred  and  fifty  pounds,  and  the 
weather  was  extremely  warm.  The 
Civil  War  was  closing,  and  some  of 
the  troops  encountered  by  the  emi- 
grants on  the  way  to  the  outfitting 
camps  at  Wyoming,  Neb.,  manifested 
much  bitterness  towards  them.  At 
one  point  they  drove  them  through  a 
river,  with  the  rain  descending  in  tor- 
rents, which  exposure  caused  much 
sickness  and  some  deaths  in  the  com- 
pany. Expostulating  with  the  soldiers 
on  their  conduct.  Elder  Kay  said:  "If 
you  have  no  respect  for  the  living, 
will  you  not  look  with  mercy  on  the 
sick  and  dying,  and  consider  the  sa- 
cred dead?"  In  reply  one  of  the  sol- 
diers said,  "If  you  say  another  word, 
I  will  rip  you  up,  if  you  were  Jesus 
Christ  himself."  After  reaching  the 
point  where  he  was  relieved  of  his 
command  by  the  arrival  ol  the  Church 
teams  from  Salt  Lake  Valley,  the  de- 
voted Elder  fell  sick — some  said  with 
mountain  fever.  He  traveled  on  with 
the  rest,  however,  and  seemed  to  im- 
prove up  to  the  evening  before  his 
death,  when  he  stood  in  his  tent  door 
and  sang,  as  he  had  often  sung,  to 
cheer  the  hearts  of  his  fellow  pil- 
grims to  Zion.  He  died  suddenly  and 
apparently  without  pain,  at  2  o'clock 
in  the  morning  of  Sept.  27,  1864,  at  a 
point  seven  miles  west  of  Little  Lar- 
amie, in  what  was  then  the  Territory 
of  Colorado.  They  buried  him  at  the 
foot  of  the  Black  Hills,  taking  a  board 
from  each  wagon  until  sufficient  lum- 
ber was  procured  to  make  a  coffin  in 
which  to  enclose  his  remains.  His 
death  caused  profound  sorrow  in  Utah 
and  England,  and  wherever  he  was 
known.  John  M.  Kay  was  not  only  a 
man  of  gifts.;   he  was  also  a  man  of 


BIOGRAPHICAL  ENCYCLOPEDIA. 


663 


integrity.  A  fitting  epitaph  to  his  no- 
ble life  is  found  in  his  own  words,  ut- 
tered to  a  friend  on  leaving  England. 
"With  all  my  faults,  I  never  saw  a 
moment  since  I  knew  the  truth  that 
I  did  not  love  it,  and  was  not  willing 
to  place  my  body  in  the  gap  to  save 
my  brethren  from  danger."  By  voca- 
tion a  foundryman  and  by  nature  a 
musician  of  marked  ability,  John  M. 
Kay  was  one  of  the  picturesque  fig- 
ures of  early  times  in  Salt  Lake  City. 
He  was  a  born  master  of  song,  the 
possessor  of  a  melodious  and  stentor- 
ian voice,  and  his  soul-stirring  vocal- 
ism  in  the  sacred  songs  of  Zion  not 
only  charmed  the  fireside  circle  and 
larger  social  gatherings,  but  glad- 
dened the  hearts  of  thousands  of 
homeless  pilgrims,  plodding  their  way 
over  barren  plains  and  bleak  moun- 
tains to  the  haven  of  their  hopes  in 
the  West.  As  a  singer  and  an  actor  he 
appeared  frequently  upon  the  stage  of 
the  Social  Hall  and  was  known  as  a 
comedian  of  rare  merit.  Scarcely  sec- 
ond to  his  musical  and  dramatic  gifts 
was  his  skill  as  a  mechanic,  a  worker 
in  metals.  He  made  the  dies  and  the 
tools  with  which  the  dies  were  made 
for  the  mint  which  coined  in  1849 
out  of  California  gold  dust,  the  first 
gold  coins  used  in  the  intermountain 
region.  When  only  nineteen  years  of 
age,  Bro.  Kay  married  Ellen  Cock- 
roft,  an  English  girl,  who  bore  him 
six  children,  namely,  Sarah  (who  mar- 
ried Leo  Hawkins),  Elizabeth  (who 
married  William  H.  Shearman),  Ma- 
riah  (who  died  on  the  plains  in  1848), 
Ellen  (who  married  Dr.  J.  K.  Robin- 
son), and  two  boys  who  died  in  in- 
fancy. While  in  Nauvoo,  Illinois,  he 
married  Susan  Miller  as  a  plural  wife, 
but  had  no  children  by  her,  and  after 
his  arrival  in  the  Valley  he  marneu 
Ellen  Partington,  who  bore  him  four 
children,  namely,  James  Willard,  who 
died  seventeen  years  of  age  as  a  re- 
sult of  an  accident,  Annie  (who  mar- 
ried Rufus  H.  Hardy),  §usan  4melia 
(who  married  Heber  Brewer  Aldous), 


and  Leo  (who  died  in  infancy).  Bro. 
Kay  also  married  Martha  Royal,  who 
died  soon  after  her  marriage  and  left 
no  children.  Notwithstanding  the 
strenuous  efforts  which  have  been 
made,  by  his  family,  the  exact  loca- 
tion of  the  grave  of  Bro.  Kay  is  still 
unknown. 

KELLHOLZ,  Adolph  W.  C.  L.,  an 

Elder  who  died  while  filling  a  for- 
eign mission,  was  born  Nov.  7,  1844, 
in  Altona,  Holstein,  Germany,  the 
son  of  Frederick  Keilholz  and  Anna 
M.  Law%  and  was  baptized  by  Elder 
Neuteboom  July  21,  1888.  After  emi- 
grating to  Utah  he  became  a  resident 
of  Salt  Lake  City.  He  was  set  apart 
for  a  mission  to  the  Netherlands  Oct. 
14,  1898,  and  arrived  early  the  fol- 
lowing month  in  that  mission,  accom- 
panied by  his  wife.  Elder  Keilholz 
and  his  wife  performed  a  good  work 
in  the  Netherlands,  bearing  testimony 
to  all,  and  at  all  times,  of  the  way 
of  salvation  to  mankind.  He  was  a 
humble  servant  of  God  and  nobly 
contended  for  the  truth,  until  claimed 
by  the  hand  of  death  Jan.  25,  1900. 
The  body  was  properly  prepared  and 
forwarded  to  the  home  in  Salt  Lake 
City,  under  the  care  of  Elder  J.  G.  S. 
Abies. 

lOMBAIiL,     Brigham     Willard,     a 

Latter-day  Saint  Elder  who  died  while 
returning  from  a  foreign  mission,  was 
born  in  January,  1845,  at  Nauvoo, 
Hancock  county,  Illinois,  the  son  oi 
Heber  C.  Kimball  and  Vilate  Murray. 
He  was  baptized  when  about  eight 
years  of  age  and  in  his  boyhood  days 
was  an  acknowledged  leader  among 
the  companions  of  his  youth,  partici- 
pating in  numerous  sports  and  ath- 
letic exercises.  In  1864  he  was  called 
on  a  mission  to  Great  Britain  and  he 
soon  became  the  leader  of  men  the 
same  as  he  had  formerly  been  a  lead- 
er of  boys,  but  the  English  climate 
affected  his  health,  in  consequence 
of  which  he  was  honorably  released 


664 


LATTER-DAY   SAINT 


to  return  home.  On  the  plains  he  was 
met  by  his  brother,  Heber  P.  Kim- 
ball, one  of  the  most  prominent 
freighters  of  early  days,  who  had 
gone  out  to  hasten  his  brother's  re- 
turn and  make  his  journey  more  com- 
fortable, but  Brigham  W.  grew  worse 
and  finally  died  July  24,  1867,  on 
Pole  Creek,  about  seventy-five  miies 
west  of  Julesburg,  where  his  remains 
were  also  interred.  The  "Millennial 
Star"  speaks  editorially  of  Brotnfir 
Kimball  as  a  young  man  of  great 
promise,  and  one  whose  labors  had 
been  effectual  in  doing  much  good. 

KIMBALL,  Jeremiah  Heber,  an  El- 
der who  died  on  his  way  out  to  fill  a 
foreign  mission,  was  born  Aug.  15, 
1857,  in  Salt  Lake  City,  Utah,  me 
son  of  Heber  Chase  Kimball  and 
Amanda  Trimball  Gheen,  and  was 
baptized  by  Robert  Smith  in  1865. 
He  was  set  apart  for  a  mission  to 
Germany  May  20,  1887,  by  Horace 
S.  Eldredge,  and  a  few  days  later 
left  Salt  Lake  City  with  a  company 
of  Elders  for  his  field  of  labor.  On 
the  way  he  was  taken  sick,  and  while 
traveling  on  the  railway  train  near 
Hammond,  Kansas,  about  12  o'clock 
at  night.  May  26,  1887,  he  stepped 
out  onto  the  platform  of  the  car, 
where  he  was  seized  with  a  fainting 
spell  and  fell  from  the  car,  receiving 
fatal  injuries.  His  body  was  picked 
up  by  section  men,  boxed  and  shipped 
to  Salt  Lake  City  for  burial,  being 
met  on  the  way  by  his  brothers  Al- 
bert and  Andrew.  Brother  Kimball 
left  a  wife  and  several  children.  He 
was  a  resident  of  the  Seventeenth 
Ward,  Salt  Lake  City,  and  a  member 
of  the  3rd  quorum  of  Seventy. 

KIRKMAN,  John  Edward,  an  El- 
der who  died  while  filling  a  foreign 
mission,  was  born  March  29,  1886,  in 
Salt  Lake  City,  Utah,  the  son  of  John 
Kirkman  jun.  and  Elizabeth  Braby. 
He  was  baptized  April  2,  1894,  by 
William  McLachlan.  His  early  educa- 
tion was  secured  in  the  public  schools 


in  Salt  Lake  City,  and  when  but  six- 
teen years  old,  he  engaged  in  the 
grocery  business.  In  1910,  while  re- 
siding in  the  Thirty-third  Ward,  Salt 
Lake  City,  he  was  called  on  a  mis- 
sion to  Hawaii,  and  after  being  set 
apart  June  2,  1910,  he  left  for  his 
field  of  labor.  He  was  doing  well  in 
the  ministry,  showing  tact  and  abil- 
ity, but  one  day  (Jan.  10,  1911),  the 
young  Elder  was  riding  a  mule  along 
one  of  the  trails  that  follow  the  very 
edge  of  a  towering  cliff  beside  the 
surging  ocean  on  the  island  of  Maui, 
the  mule  slipped  and  both  animal  and 
rider  fell  down  into  the  deep   water 


below.  The  cliff  incompasses  the  place 
for  miles  around  and  is  of  such  height 
that  the  water  cannot  be  reached  by 
boat  without  a  long  detour.  A  search 
for  the  body  was  immediately  begun, 
but  it  was  not  found  until  Jan.  15th, 
five  days  after  the  accident  occurred. 
Elders  who  have  labored  in  Hawaii 
say  that  sharks  are  not  very  numer- 
ous in  that  particular  locality,  and 
that  was  probably  the  reason  why  the 
body  of  the  unfortunate  Elder  was 
finally  recovered.  The  remains  were 
buried  at  Kipehulu,  on  the  island  of 
Maui.  Six  months  later  they  were 
exhumed  and  shipped  to  Utah.  Elder 
Kirkman  was  engaged  to  Miss  Sarah 


BIOGRAPHICAL   ENCYCLOPEDIA. 


665 


Rhinefleisch,  who  had  been  taking  a 
course  in  the  missionary  class  at  the 
L.  D.  S.  University  and  had  expected 
to  go  on  a  mission  to  Hawaii  and  re- 
turn about  the  same  time  as  her  fi- 
ance. Young  Kirkman  was  a  vocalist 
of  exceptional  ability  and  was  a  mem- 
ber of  the  Tabernacle  and  the  Thirty- 
third  Ward  choir  in  Salt  Lake  City. 

KNUDSEX,  Wilford  J.,  one  of  the 

Elders  of  the  Church  who  died  while 
filling  a  foreign  mission,  was  born 
Jan.  7,  1883,  in  Provo,  Utah  county, 
Utah,  the  son  of  Herman  Knudsen 
and  Amanda  Everett.  Wilford  re- 
ceived a  common  school  education  in 
his  native  town,  first  in  the  common 
schools  and  afterwards  in  the  high 
school.  He  was  baptized  July  25, 
18  91,  by  Christian  Johnson.  Being 
ordained  an  Elder,  he  was  called  on  a 
mission  to  Scandinavia  in  1904.  On 
his  arrival  in  Copenhagen,  Denmark, 
May  14,  1904,  he  was  appointed  to 
labor  in  the  Trondhjem  conference, 
Norway,  where  he  became  an  effi- 
cient worker  and  gained  many  friends. 
His  health  failing  him,  he  was  sent 
to  Copenhagen,  Denmark,  on  his  way 
home,  but  his  sickness  assumed  a 
more  serious  aspect,  which  disabled 
him  to  continue  his  journey.  He  was 
consequently  placed  in  the  St.  Joseph 
hospital  in  Copenhagen  March  16, 
1905.  There  he  suffered  with  tuber- 
culosis patiently  and  hopeful  until 
Nov.  3,  1905,  when  he  passed  away. 
His  remains  were  shipped  to  his  home 
in  Utah.  Bro.  Knudsen  was  an  unmar- 
ried man;  he  was  a  favorite  among 
his  companions  and  bid  fair  to  have 
become  a  man  of  prominence  in  the 
Church. 

KNUTTI,  Godfred,  an  Elder  who 
died  while  filling  a  foreign  mission, 
was  born  Jan.  27,  1877,  at  Diemtigen, 
Canton  Bern,  Switzerland,  the  son  of 
Michael  Knutti  and  Elizabeth  Intze- 
ler.  He  was  baptized  in  1886  and 
later  ordained  an  Elder.  He  was  a 
Seventy    and    resided    in    Montpelier, 


Idaho,  in  1901,  when  he  was  called 
on  a  mission  to  Germany,  being  set 
apart  Oct.  29,  1901.  He  arrived  in 
Berlin  Nov.  18,  1901.  After  laboring 
for  some  time  in  the  Leipzig  confer- 
ence, Germany,  his  health  commenced 
to  fail  and  he  was  sent  to  Switzer- 
land to  continue  his  missionary  work 
there,  hoping  that  the  higher  alti- 
tude and  healthier  climate  would 
prove  beneficial.  While  in  the  dis- 
charge of  his  duties  as  a  messenger 
of  truth  and  salvation  in  that  land, 
he  was  stricken  with  severe  sickness 
and  died  Aug.  19,  1903,  in  the  canton 
hospital  in  Zurich,  Switzerland.  Bro. 
Knutti  was  a  faithful  and  zealous  El- 
der; he  gained  many  friends  and  won 
the  love  and  respect  of  his  fellow- 
missionaries. 

KUNZLER,  Arnold  J.,  an  Elder 
who  died  in  the  missionary  field,  was 
born  March  2,  1896,  in  Switzerland, 
the  son  of  Jacob  Kunzler.  His  par- 
ents left  their  native  country  for  tne 
gospels  sake  in  1873.  Arnold  J.  was 
educated  in  the  public  schools  of 
Rosette  and  the  Weber  Stake  Acad- 
emy at  Ogden.  Utah.  From  his  earli- 
est youth  he  took  an  active  part  in 
Church  affairs  and  was  a  diligent 
worker  in  the  local  Sunday  school 
and  Y.  M.  M.  I.  A.  His  father  was 
engaged  in  agricultural  pursuits  all 
his  life  and  was  ever  ready  and  will- 
ing to  act  in  any  religious  capacity 
to  which  he  was  called.  For  two  years 
he  acted  as  Bishop  of  Rosette  Ward. 
The  steadfastness  of  the  father  was 
reflected  in  the  lives  of  his  children, 
another  son  having  honorably  filled 
a  mission  in  Switzerland.  Arnold  J. 
was  set  apart  for  a  mission  to  the 
Central  States,  and  after  his  arrival 
in  the  mission  April  13,  1917,  he  la- 
bored a  short  time  in  Kansas  City 
and  St.  Joseph,  Mo.,  and  later  in 
Springfield,  Mo.  From  the  first  he, 
displayed  much  earnestness  in  the 
work  of  the  Lord  and  up  to  the  time 
he  became  ill  in  the  middle  of  Au- 
gust, 1917,  he  won  many  friends  and 


666 


LATTER-DAY   SAINT 


made  a  good  impression  on  those 
whom  he  met,  by  his  humble  testi- 
mony. When  it  was  found  that  he 
had  typhoid  fever,  he  was  removed  to 
a  Springfield  hospital,  where  the  best 
of  medical  attention  was  given  him. 
His  father  arrived  at  his  bedside  Oct. 
6,  1917,  and  for  some  time  hopes 
were  entertained  for  his  recovery, 
but  he  grew  worse  and  finally  passed 
away  Oct.  8,  1917.  His  body  was  ac- 
companied home  by  his  father  and 
funeral  services  were  held  at  Rosette 
on  Sunday,  Oct.  15,  1917.  Elder 
Kunzler  was  always  jovial  and  kind, 
but  there  was  no  frivolity  in  his  na- 
ture. He  looked  for  the  best  in  man- 
kind and  gave  his  best  in  return.  Obe- 
dient to  those  in  authority  over  him 
in  the  Priesthood,  he  was  always 
ready  to  do  his  duty  and  could  be  de- 
pended upon  in  any  emergency.  He 
left  many  friends  and  investigators 
as  evidence  of  his  diligence  as  a  mis- 
sionary in  Springfield,  Missouri. 

LAMOREAUX,  Andrew  L.,  presi- 
dent of  the  French  Mission,  was  born 
in  Scarborough,  Upper  Canada,  in 
1813,  the  son  of  John  McCord  Lam- 
oreaux  and  Ann  Losley.  He  joined 
the  Church  in  Canada  and  migrated 
to  Nauvoo,  Illinois,  where  he  became 
well  acquainted  with  the  Prophet  Jo- 
seph Smith,  and  migrated  to  the 
mountains  at  an  early  day.  At  a  spe- 
cial conference  held  in  Salt  Lake  City 
Sept.  15,  1852,  he  was  called  and  ap- 
pointed to  preside  over  the  French 
Mission.  After  his  arrival  on  the 
Island  of  Jersey  in  April,  1853,  he 
entered  immediately  upon  the  duties 
of  his  mission,  and  during  the  short 
period  of  his  presidency  he  labored 
indefatigably  to  promote  the  interest 
of  the  mission.  He  translated  and 
published  some  very  valuable  and 
useful  works  into  the  French  lan- 
guage, assisted  by  Louis  Alphonzo 
Bertrand.  Among  the  works  trans- 
lated were  the  "Voice  of  Warning," 
"The  Book  of  Doctrine  and  Cove- 
nants,"   extracts    from    "The    Seer," 


treating  upon  plural  marriage,  etc. 
He  selected  some  two  hundred  hymns, 
which  with  other  manuscript  copy 
and  publications  were  placed  in  the 
hands  of  the  presidency  of  the  Brit- 
ish Mission.  Returning  from  his  mis- 
sion. Elder  Lamoreaux  crossed  the 
Atlantic  with  a  company  of  saints 
from  the  French  Mission  numbering 
seventy-four  souls,  most  of  whom  had 
been  brought  into  the  Church  through 
his  perseverance  and  indefatigable 
energy.  Going  inland  Elder  Lamor- 
eaux arrived  in  St.  Louis,  Mo.,  June 
2,  1855,  with  several  hundred  passen- 
gers, who  had  crossed  the  Atlantic  in 
the  ships  "Chimborazo"  and  "Samuel 
Curling,"  including  the  French  com- 
pany. On  arriving  at  St.  Louis  he 
took  up  his  residence  with  James  H. 
Hart,  his  co-adjutor  and  counselor 
during  the  first  twelve  months  of  his 
presidency  of  the  French  Mission. 
Elder  Lamoreaux  spent  Sunday,  June 
10th,  at  the  camp,  instructing  and 
counseling  the  saints  under  his 
charge.  In  the  evening  he  addressed 
the  congregation  in  a  large  church 
with  considerable  spirit  and  energy 
and  every  soul  appeared  to  rejoice 
under  his  spiritual  and  excellent  re- 
marks. Elder  Lamoreaux  had  been 
suffering  several  days  with  the  diar- 
rhoea and  remarked  that  what  on  all 
former  occasions  had  relieved  him 
appeared  to  have  no  effect  upon  him 
this  time.  He  continued  to  grow 
worse,  sickness  and  cramps  seizing 
upon  his  robust  frame,  causing  a 
gradual  and  certain  decline.  The  El- 
ders and  some  of  the  sisters  were  very 
attentive  to  him  during  his  suffer- 
ings and  administered  to  him  repeat- 
edly, but  his  spirit  finally  took  its 
flight  on  Wednesday,  June  13,  1855, 
the  immediate  cause  of  his  death  be- 
ing the  so-called  Asiatic  cholera.  The 
St.  Louis  "Luminary,"  a  periodical 
published  in  the  interest  or  me 
Church  at  St.  Louis,  Mo.,  at  that 
time,  spoke  very  highly  of  the  faith- 
fulness and  integrity  of  Elder  Lam- 
oreaux, who  was  held  in  great  esteem 


BIOGRAPHICAL   ENCYCLOPEDIA. 


667 


by  all  who  knew  him.  The  following 
is  quoted  from  a  letter  written  to 
George  A.  Smith  by  Erastus  Snow  in 
Salt  Lake  City  Sept.  3,  1865:  "I  have 
just  learned  from  the  family  of  the 
late  Andrew  L.  Lamoreaux  that  Joseph 
Smith,  during  his  tour  to  Washington 
in  183  9,  stopped  with  them  in  Day- 
ton, Ohio,  and  before  leaving  laid  his 
hands  on  Elder  Lamoreaux  and 
blessed  him,  and  prophecied  upon  his 
head,  that  he  would  go  on  a  mission 
to  France,  learn  another  tongue  and 
do  much  good,  but  that  he  would  not 
live  to  return  to  his  family,  as  he 
would  fall  by  the  way  as  a  martyr. 
The  Prophet  wept,,  as  he  blessed  him 
and  told  hitai  these  things,  adding 
that  it  was  pressed  upon  him  and  he 
could  not  refrain  from  giving  utter- 
ance to  it.  Elder  Lamoreaux  talked 
with  his  family  about  it  when  he  left 
them  in  1852,  and  endeavored  to  per- 
suade them  that  this  was  not  the 
time  and  mission  upon  which  he 
should  fall,  but  to  believe  that  he 
would  at  this  time  be  permitted  to 
return  again.  When  the  "Luminary" 
brought  the  tidings  of  his  death,  they 
exclaimed,  'Surely,  Brother  Joseph 
was  a  Prophet,  for  all  his  words  have 
come  to  pass.'  Thinking  this  an  in- 
cident that  should  not  be  lost,  I  have 
penned  it  from  the  mouth  of  his  eld- 
est daughter  and  submit  it  to  you 
and  would  add  that  his  excessive  la- 
bor and  toil  in  providing  for  the  com- 
pany under  his  charge  during  the  hot 
weather  in  June,  in  the  unhealthy  cli- 
mate of  St.  Louis,  predisposed  him  to 
that  terrible  scourge  that  laid  him 
low,  and  thus  he  fell  a  sacrifice  for 
his  brethren." 

LANGTON,  William  S.,  an  Elder 
who  died  while  doing  missionary 
work  in  the  Eastern  States,  was  born 
Feb.  2  6,  1872,  at  Smithfield,  Cache 
county,  Utah,  the  son  of  Seth  Lang- 
ton  and  Sarah  Kane.  He  received  his 
early  education  in  the  Cache  county 
schools  and  later  graduated  from  the 
University  of  Utah.    He  was  set  apari 


for  a  mission  to  the  Eastern  States 
Jan.  15,  1910,  and  while  serving  in 
the  mission  office  at  New  York,  he 
attended  the  Columbia  University  and 
succeeded  in  gaining  his  master's  and 
doctor's  degree,  especially  in  mathe- 
matics, and  later  taught  at  the  Cooper 
Union.  For  five  years  he  acted  as  an 
attache  of  the  office  of  the  Eastern 
States  Mission.  He  was  stricken  with 
sickness  and  died  in  New  York  Feb. 
21,  1915,  after  a  serious  operation 
performed  on  him  about  three  weeks 
before.  Elder  Langton  was  survived 
by  his  widow  (Mrs.  Nell  Bullen  Lang- 
ton)  and  one  son  (15  years  of  age), 
two  brothers  and  two  sisters. 

LARSOX,  Mens  Peter,  an  Elder 
who  died  while  filling  a  foreign  mis- 
sion, was  born  Oct.  14,  IS'dl,  in 
Spring  City,  Sanpete  county,  Utah, 
the  son  of  Lars  Larsen  and  Petrea 
Monson.  He  was  baptized  in  Novem- 
ber, 18  99.  While  residing  with  his 
parents  in  Spring  City  he  was  called 
on  a  mission  to  New  Zealand  and  was 
set  apart  Nov.  21,  1911.  On  his  ar- 
val  in  New  Zealand  he  took  hold  of 
missionary  labor  in  earnest  and  was 
doing  well  in  the  ministry  when  he 
was  stricken  with  typhoid  fever,  from 
which  he  died  at  Wellington,  New 
Zealand,  April  21,  1912.  The  body 
was  embalmed  and  sent  to  his  home 
in  Utah,  in  care  of  Alpheus  L.  Raw- 
lins. Impressive  funeral  services  were 
held  in  Spring  City  June  3,  1912.  Bro. 
Larson  was  an  unmarried  man  and 
was  survived  by  his  parents  and  three 
sisters.  At  the  funeral  the  deceased 
was  referred  to  in  loving  terms  as  an 
energetic  and  earnest  worker  in  the 
various  positions  he  had  occupied  in 
the  Church. 

LAURENCE,  William  Randolph,  an 

Elder  who  died  in  the  missionary 
field,  was  born  July  31,  1887,  at  Rich- 
mond, Cache  county,  Utah,  the  son  of 
Orson  Laurence  and  Elizabeth  Dob- 
son.  He  was  baptized  Aug.  1,  1895, 
by  Wm.   Merrill   and   afterwards   or- 


668 


LATTER-DAY   SAINT 


dained  an  Elder.  He  still  resided  in 
Richmond  in  190  9,  when  he  was  called 
on  a  mission  to  the  Western  States. 
He  was  set  apart  for  this  mission  Nov. 
9,  1909,  but  was  soon  stricken  with 
sickness,  which,  though  in  the  begin- 
ning was  not  considered  serious,  went 
suddenly  to  his  heart,  with  fatal  re- 
sults, as  he  died  from  rheumatism  of 
the  heart  at  Delta,  Colorado,  May  9, 
1911,  at  the  home  of  Dr.  O.  P.  Mc- 
Cartney, a  member  of  the  Church  and 
a  skilled  physician.  The  remains  were 
shipped  home  and  funeral  services 
held  at  Richmond,  Cache  county, 
Utah,  May  13,  1911.  Elder  Laurence 
had  been  a  diligent  and  successful 
missionary  and  had  excelled  in  the 
distribution  of  Church  literature. 

LAYTON',  John  H.,  a  prominent 
Utah  pioneer  and  Church  member, 
was  born  Dec.  6,  1855,  at  Grantsville, 
Tooele  county,  Utah,  the  eldest  son  of 


Christopher  Layton  and  Isabelle  Go- 
lightly.  He  was  baptized  by  Edward 
Phillips,  Nov.  4,  1866,  and  was  after- 
wards ordained  to  the  Priesthood. 
While  yet  a  youth  he  came  to  Davis 
county,  with  his  parents,  and  resided 
there  the  remainder  of  his  life.  At 
the  age   of  nineteen   he   was   sent  to 


Church  Island  in  the  Great  Salt  Lake 
to  take  care  of  large  herds  of  sheep 
and  cattle,  a  part  of  which  belonged 
to  the  Church.  He  owned  a  160-acre 
farm  and  a  house  on  that  island. 
Later  he  became  one  of  the  pioneers 
of  the  northern  part  of  Davis  county, 
having  moved  to  Layton  in  1879  with 
his  wife,  Hannah  M.  Phillips  (daugh- 
ter of  Edward  Phillips  and  Hannah 
Simmons),  who  was  born  April  5, 
1859,  at  Kaysville,  Utah,  and  who 
was  married  to  Bro.  Layton,  by  Dan- 
iel H.  Wells,  Jan.  23,  1879.  This 
union  was  subsequently  blessed  with 
thirteen  children,  namely,  Heber  John, 
Hannah  Isabel,  Delbert  P.,  Lottie 
Jane,  Chloe  Louise,  Edward  P.,  Lu- 
ella  and  Leo  (twins),  Leona,  Harold 
Christopher,  Richard  Glenn,  Frankie 
Josephine  and  Norma  Gladys.  Bro. 
Layton  purchased  a  portion  of  that 
barren  desert  land  of  sand  hills  and 
sage  brush  for  which  the  so-called 
Sandridge  was  noted,  but  his  land 
became  one  of  the  finest  farms  in 
that  section  of  Davis  county,  Utah. 
Being  a  man  of  forceful  character,  he 
wielded  an  influence  among  his  neigh- 
bors and  did  perhaps  as  much  as  any 
one  man  in  that  part  of  the  State  to 
make  a  home  for  himself  and  others, 
thus  following  in  the  wake  of  his  il- 
lustrious father.  From  the  beginning 
of  his  early  boyhood  and  throughout 
life  John  H.  Layton  understood  that 
it  required  patience,  perseverance  and 
hard  work  to  establish  himself  in  the 
desert,  but  he  seemed  to  grow  greater 
as  the  years  rolled  on  and  became 
equal  to  every  task  placed  upon  him. 
He  was  not  a  believer  in  theory  but 
in  works,  and  he  was  indeed  a  man  of 
action.  Thus  he  became  both  a  suc- 
cessful farmer  and  business  man.  He 
was  a  director  and  one  of  the  organ- 
izers of  the  First  National  Bank  of 
Layton,  and  director  in  the  Ellison 
Ranching  Company  of  Nevada,  being  a 
stockholder  in  both  companies;  he 
was  also  a  stockholder  in  the  Taylor 
Sugar  Company,  the  Farmers'  Union, 
Davis  and  Weber  County  Canal  Co., 


BIOGRAPHICAL   ENCYCLOPEDIA. 


669 


and  Kay's  Creek  Irrigation  Co.  Bro. 
Layton  was  ordained  a  Seventy  Dec. 
20,  1907,  and  was  active  in  that  call- 
ing until  the  time  of  his  death,  which 
occurred  at  Layton  Feb.  3,  1920.  Bro. 
Layton  was  a  whole-souled  and  con- 
genial man,  who  made  scores  of  stead- 
fast friends.  He  was  uncompromising 
on  the  lines  of  honesty  and  equity. 
His  word  was  as  good  as  his  bond, 
and  his  promises  could  always  be  re- 
lied upon.  One  of  his  main  character- 
istics was  his  love  for  his  fellow-men. 
His  daughter  Leone  was  filling  a 
twenty-two-month  mission  in  Cali- 
fornia at  the  time  of  her  father's  de- 
mise, on  which  account  she  was  caiieu 
home.  Bro.  Layton  left  a  wife  and 
ten  living  children,  besides  ten  grand- 
children. Three  children  (Hannah 
Isabel,  Leo  and  Richard  Glenn)  pre- 
ceded him  into  the  Great  Beyond. 

LEAV^ITT,    Horton    B.,    Bishop    of 

Marysville  (  Yellowstone  Stake) ,  Bing- 
ham county,  Idaho,  was  born  May  14, 
1872,  at  Mendon,  Cache  county,  Utah, 
the  son  of  George  Leavitt  and  Jean- 
ette  Brinkerhoof.  He  was  baptized 
July  25,  1880,  by  Moroni  Stocks,  at 
Lewiston;  ordained  a  Priest  soon  af- 
terwards; ordained  an  Elder  Nov.  12, 
1899,  by  Joseph  H.  Leavitt;  ordained 
a  Seventy  April  25,  1909,  by  Joseph  W. 
McMurrin,  and  ordained  a  High  Priest 
in  April,  1916,  by  George  A.  Smith. 
In  1902-1904  he  filled  a  mission  to 
the  Central  States,  laboring  mostly  in 
the  State  of  Kansas.  At  home  he 
acted  as  president  of  an  Elders  quo- 
rum in  the  Benson  Stake  for  a  short 
time.  In  November,  1905,  he  moved 
from  Lewiston,  Utah,  to  the  Snake 
River  Valley  in  Idaho  and  located  at 
Marysville,  where  he  still  resides.    In 

1909  he  was  set  apart  as  one  of  the 
presidents  of  the  166th  quorum  of 
Seventy  and  acted  in  that  capacity 
until  Feb.  6,  1916,  when  he  was  callea 
to  act  as  Bishop  of  Marysville.    From 

1910  to  1916  he  acted  as  Sunday 
school  superintendent  in  the  Marys- 
ville Ward  and  from  1909  to  1913  he 


acted  as  a  member  of  the  Marysville 
town  board.  He  has  also  acted  as 
school  trustee  and  filled  other  posi- 
tions of  honor  and  responsibility.  In 
1899  (Nov.  15th),  he  married  Larin- 
da  Hendricks  in  the  Logan  Temple, 
which  marriage  has  been  blessed  with 
seven  children,  namely,  Cleah  (born 
Sept  16,  1900),  Drucilla  Lucille  (born 
July  30,  1902),  Lola  (born  March  22, 
1905),  Virgil  Horton  (born  Feb.  19, 
1907),  Marva  and  Mamie,  twins  (born 
June  21,  1919),  and  Dorris  Durell 
(born  April  3,  1914).  Bishop  Leav- 
itt's  main  occupation  in  life  is  that 
of  a  farmer. 

LEE,  Severin  N.,  Stake  clerk  or 
Box  Elder  Stake  and  a  resident  of 
Brigham  City,  Utah,  was  born  March 


31,  1852,  in  Vreilev  sogn,  Hjorring 
amt,  Denmark,  the  son  of  Christian 
N.  Lee  and  Inger  Mogensen.  He  was 
baptized  Aug.  31,  1864,  by  Ove  C. 
Ovesen  and  confirmed  a  member  ol 
the  Church  the  same  day  by  Niels  P. 
Lee.  Two  years  later  he  emigrated  to 
America,  with  his  widowed  mother, 
crossing  the  Atlantic  in  the  sailing 
vessel  "Kenilworth,"  which  arrived 
in  New  York  July  17,  1866.  He  trav- 
eled by  freight  trains  to  St.  Joseph, 
Missouri,  thence  by  boat  up  the  Mis- 


670 


LATTER-DAY   SAINT 


souri  river  to  the  village  of  Wyo- 
ming, Neb.,  and  crossed  the  plains  in 
Captain  Lowry's  ox  train,  but  arrived 
in  Salt  Lake  City  Oct.  6,  1866,  with 
a  mule  train,  sent  out  to  meet  the 
emigrants.  He  located  in  Milton,  Mor- 
gan county,  where  he  learned  the 
cooper's  trade.  In  1868  he  drove  one 
of  the  Church  teams  which  were  sent 
out  to  fetch  poor  emigrants  from  Fort 
Benton,  the  western  terminus  of  the 
Union  Pacific  Railroad  at  that  time. 
After  his  return,  he  started  to  manu- 
facture furniture  and  later  became  an 
expert  turner.  Having  a  good  voice 
and  considerable  talent  for  music,  he 
became  a  member  of  the  Milton  Ward 
choir  and  also  a  member  of  the  Mor- 
gan City  brass  band.  In  1872  he 
moved  to  Brigham  City,  where  he  im- 
mediately joined  the  choir  and  also 
the  band  and  soon  became  leader  of 
both  organizations.  He  joined  the 
United  Order,  which  had  been  recent- 
ly organized  in  Brigham  City,  and  re- 
mained in  that  organization  as  long 
as  it  continued  active.  In  1874  Bro. 
Lee  married  Emma  L.  Ensign  and 
three  years  later  he  married  Olivia 
Forsgren.  Twenty  children  were  born 
as  a  result  of  these  marriages,  thir- 
teen of  whom  are  still  (1920)  living. 
For  this  so-called  infringement  of  the 
Edmunds  Tucker  law  Bro.  Lee  served 
three  months  in  the  State  peniten- 
tiary and  paid  a  fine  of  $100.  In 
1885  (April  25th)  he  was  called  to 
the  position  of  Stake  clerk  in  the  Box 
Elder  Stake  and  was  ordained  a  High 
Priest  by  Rudger  Clawson.  He  was 
also  made  a  member  of  the  High 
Council,  but  finding  it  impossible  to 
hold  the  two  positions,  he  was  re- 
leased from  the  High  Council;  he  still 
retains  the  important  position  of  Stake 
clerk.  He  held  the  position  of  choir 
leader  at  Brigham  City  for  thirty-two 
years  and  at  his  own  request  was  re- 
leased March  31,  1912,  on  the  occa- 
sion of  his  sixtieth  birthday.  Bro.  Lee 
has  always  filled  with  the  utmost  fi- 
delity any  position  to  which  he  has 
been  called   in   the   Church,   and   his 


musical  ability  has  made  him  friends 
everywhere.  The  names  of  Bro.  Lee  s 
children  by  his  first  wife,  Emma  L. 
Ensign,  are  Severin  Norman,  Mary 
Lovinia,  Martin  Luther,  Camilla  Ge- 
orgiana,  Rawson  Adams,  Emma  Aaa- 
line,  Effie  May,  Amy,  Florence,  Karl 
Christian,  and  Joseph  Lloyd.  His  sec- 
ond wife  (Olivia  Forsgren)  bore  him 
the  following  children:  John  Adolph, 
Oscar  Severin,  William  Nelson, 
Charles  Peter,  Eli  Forsgren,  Olivia, 
Lula  and  Lola  (twins),  and  Victor. 

LEWIS,  Benjamin,  one  of  the  mar- 
tyrs of  the  Church  killed  at  Haun's 
Mill,  Caldwell  county,  Missouri,  was 
born  April  23,  1803,  at  Pendleton, 
South  Carolina,  the  son  of  Neriah  and 
Mary  Lewis.  In  1809  he  moved  to 
Simpson  county,  Kentucky,  where  he 
later  became  a  convert  to  "Mormon- 
ism,"  being  baptized  by  James  Em- 
mett  in  March,  1835.  Soon  afterwards 
he  was  ordained  an  Elder  by  James 
Emmett  and  John  Dustin  and  ap- 
pointed to  preside  over  the  branch  of 
the  Church  organized  In  Simpson 
county  at  that  time.  In  the  spring  of 
1836  he  moved  to  Macoupin  county, 
Illinois,  and  in  the  summer  of  1837 
he  moved  to  Caldwell  county,  Mis- 
souri, and  resided  at  Haun's  Mill, 
when  the  mob  attacked  the  place  Oct. 
30,  1838.  He  received  a  bullet  wound 
in  the  breast,  while  in  the  blacksmith 
shop,  but  managed  to  reach  his  home, 
a  distance  of  about  one  hundred  rods, 
where  he  expired  in  about  one  hour, 
after  having  vomited  up  the  ball.  His 
remains  were  not  thrown  in  the  well, 
where  a  number  of  his  fellow  martyrs 
were  buried,  as  he  was  not  killed  out- 
right, but  his  brother,  Tarlton  Lewis, 
dug  a  grave  near  the  well,  where  he 
buried  him.  Bro.  Lewis  left  a  wife 
and  six  children. 

LEWIS,  Henry,  Bishop  of  the  Lehi 
Third  Ward  (Alpine  Stake),  Utah 
county,  Utah,  was  born  April  28, 
1854,  at  Llaneley,  Wales,  the  son  of 
Philip    Lewis   and    Catherine    Evans. 


BIOGRAPHICAL  ENCYCLOPEDIA. 


671 


Becoming  a  convert  to  the  restored 
gospel,  he  was  baptized  Aug.  27,  1862, 
by  Philip  Lewis.  Soon  afterwards  he 
was  ordained  to  the  office  of  a  Dea- 
con and  labored  in  that  capacity  for 
many  years.  In  June,  1871,  he  emi- 
grated to  Utah  and  became  a  resi- 
dent of  Lehi,  Utah  county,  where  he 
was  ordained  an  Elder  June  22,  1871. 
In  1873  (June  30th)  he  married  Jane 
Sarah  Goody  (daughter  of  Henry 
Goody  and  Mary  Willshire),  who  was 


born  Feb.  15,  1856,  in  London,  Eng- 
land. This  marriage  has  been  blessed 
with  eleven  children  (seven  sons  and 
four  daughters),  namely,  William 
Henry,  Alice  Mary,  John  Samuel,  Ar- 
thur Thomas,  Orrin  Isaac,  Henry,  Su- 
san Jane,  George  Alma,  Julia,  Ira  Re- 
lief, and  Verda  Lucelle.  Bro.  Lewis 
was  appointed  acting  Deacon  in  Lehi 
March  1,  1879;  was  appointed  acting 
Priest  in  the  third  district  of  Lehi 
March  6,  1880;  was  set  apart  as  Sun- 
day school  teacher  by  Elder  William 
Yates  March  28,  1880;  was  set  apart 
as  second  counselor  to  Lott  Russon 
of  the  Elders  quorum  March  16,  1884 ; 
was  appointed  a  missionary  for  the 
Y.  M.  M.  I.  A.  Oct.  28,  1889,  and  was 
ordained  a  Seventy  March  10,  1889, 
by  Thos.  R.  Cutler.  Early  in  1893  he 
went  to  Great  Britain  on  a  mission 
and  was  there  until  the  spring  of 
1895.     Upon    his    return    he    labored 


with  the  missionary  fund  committee 
from  1896  to  1909,  and  collected 
thousands  of  dollars  to  send  to  mis- 
sionaries. At  a  meeting  held  Dec.  20, 
1903,  he  was  chosen  Bishop  of  the 
Third  Ward  of  Lehi,  and  was  ordained 
to  that  office  by  Apostle  John  Henry 
Smith.  He  was  one  of  the  building 
committee  of  the  Lehi  tabernacle  and 
was  appointed  treasurer.  He  received 
in  cash  and  merchandise  $30,913.39, 
and  paid  out  $30,938.61,  from  1900 
to  1904,  a  balance  to  his  credit  of 
$25.22.  Bro.  Lewis  has  also  held 
many  other  positions  of  trust.  He  has 
served  as  a  member  of  the  city  coun- 
cil, and  as  a  school  trustee,  and 
helped  to  promote  many  home  indus- 
tries of  Utah  county.  He  has  been  a 
director  in  the  People's  Co-operative 
Institution  about  twenty  years  and 
was  president  of  the  North  Bench  Ir- 
rigation Company. 

LEWIS,  Jane  Amanda  Stevens,   a 

missionary  sister  who  died  while  fill- 
ing a  foreign  mission,  was  born  June 
8,  1826,  the  daughter  of  Samuel  Cun- 
nabell  Stevens  and  Minerva  Althea 
Field.  She  became  a  convert  to  "Mor- 
monism,"  together  with  her  father, 
and  was  baptized  in  the  summer  of 
1843.  She  moved  with  her  father's 
family  to  Nauvoo,  Illinois,  in  18  45. 
Sister  Jane  was  delicate  from  birth, 
and  at  the  age  of  sixteen  she  walked 
on  crutches  eighteen  months.  In  1846 
(March  15th)  she  married  Kimball 
Bullock,  with  whom  she  had  one 
child.  In  1848  (Nov.  11th)  she  mar- 
ried Phillip  B.  Lewis,  at  Winter  Quar- 
ters (now  Florence,  Nebraska)  and 
accompanied  him  to  the  mountains 
that  year.  In  1851  she  left  Utah,  to- 
gether with  her  husband,  for  a  mis- 
sion to  the  Hawaiian  Islands,  where 
she  rendered  efficient  aid  in  the  mis- 
sionary work  by  teaching  a  few  pu- 
pils while  she  worked  at  needle  work 
to  earn  their  daily  sustenance,  until 
her  health  so  failed  that  a  change 
seemed  necessary.  She  re-crossed  the 
Pacific   Ocean   without   her   husband 


672 


LATTER-DAY   SAINT 


and  arrived  in  San  Francisco,  Cal., 
in  November,  1854.  Here  she  spent  a 
few  months  with  her  sister  Elvira. 
In  April,  1855,  she  went  to  southern 
California  by  sea  and  then  journeyed 
by  stage  inland  to  San  Bernardino. 
On  her  arrival  there  she  was  very 
sick,  and  by  her  request  she  was  car- 
ried into  the  mountains,  twelve  miles 
away,  to  obtain  cold  water  and  fresn 
air.  The  brethren  built  her  a  little 
room,  but  the  change  was  too  invig- 
orating and  she  died  Aug.  10,  1855, 
at  the  age  of  twenty-seven  years,  two 
months  and  two  days.  She  was  buried 
in  San  Bernardino,  where  her  son 
Wm.  Henry  (who  had  died  some  time 
before)  was  buried  by  her  side,  the 
body  being  removed  from  Los  An- 
geles. 

LEWIS,  Phillip  Be.ssom,  the  sec- 
ond president  of  the  Hawaiian  Mis- 
sion, was  born  Jan.  16,  1804,  at  Mar- 
ble Head,  Essex  county,  Mass.  He  be- 
came a  convert  to  "Mormonism  ai 
an  early  day  and  presided  over  a 
branch  of  the  Church  in  Massachu- 
setts. When  the  first  Latter-day 
Saint  missionaries  were  called  to  the 
Society  Islands  in  1843,  he  donated 
liberally  to  pay  their  passage  across 
the  ocean.  He  gathered  with  the 
saints  to  Nauvoo,  Illinois,  where  he 
boarded  with  the  Prophet  Joseph 
Smith  and  was  ordained  a  Seventy. 
After  the  martyrdom  of  Joseph  and 
Hyrum  Smith  he  was  one  of  those 
trusted  brethren  who  buried  the  re- 
mains of  the  martyrs  when  they  were 
removed  from  their  first  burial  place 
in  the  cellar  of  the  Nauvoo  House. 
Being  a  tinner  by  trade  he  covered 
the  Nauvoo  Temple  tower  with  tin. 
He  passed  through  the  persecutions 
of  the  saints  in  Illinois  and  was 
among  the  exiles  of  1846.  While  en- 
camped at  Garden  Grove,  Iowa,  his 
wife,  Maria  Theresa  Bonney,  died 
June  17,  1846.  She  was  born  March 
17,  1817,  at  New  Bedford,  Bristol 
county,  Mass.,  and  was  married  to 
Brother  Lewis  June  27^  1837.     From 


Garden  Grove  Brother  Lewis  contin- 
ued the  journey  westward,  and  while 
residing  at  Winter  Quarters,  he  mar- 
ried Jane  Amanda  Stevens,  who  was 
born  June  8,  1826.  She  bore  her  hus- 
band two  children,  namely,  Philip 
Edmund  and  William  Henry.  Two 
days  after  his  marriage  to  Jane 
Amanda  Stevens  Brother  Lewis  and 
his  wife  started  from  Winter  Quar- 
ters for  the  Rocky  Mountains,  in  Zera 
Pulsipher's  company.  While  crossing 
the  plains  Brother  Lewis  accidentally 
broke  his  arm,  but  it  was  reset,  and 
he  arrived  in  Salt  Lake  City  Sept.  20, 
1848,  sitting  in  a  rocking  chair  and 
carrying  his  arm  on  a  pillow.  In  De- 
cember, 1850,  he  was  called  to  assist 
George  A.  Smith  in  making  a  settle- 
ment in  Iron  county  and  thus  became 
one  of  the  founders  of  Parowan.  In 
1851  he  was  called  on  a  mission  to 
Hawaii,  together  with  Francis  A. 
Hammond,  John  S.  Woodbury  and 
Wm.  G.  Perkins,  taking  his  wife  with 
him.  On  his  arrival  in  California  Bro. 
Lewis  was  appointed  president  of  the 
Hawaiian  Mission  by  Parley  P.  Pratt. 
He  lost  a  child  going  out,  and  his 
wife,  who  returned  before  him  from 
Hawaii,  died  near  San  Bernardino  in 
1855.  The  Hawaiian  Mission  Denife 
still  in  its  infancy.  Brother  Phillips 
opened  a  tin  shop  in  Honolulu  and 
by  his  earnings  assisted  the  mission 
financially.  Thus  he  raised  most  of 
the  means  needed  to  buy  a  press  to 
print  books  in  the  Hawaiian  lan- 
guage. He  was  released  from  his  Ha- 
waiian mission  in  1855  and  after  re- 
crossing  the  Pacific  he  reached  San 
Bernardino  Nov.  17,  1855,  where  his 
wife  had  died  a  few  months  previous- 
ly. With  a  wagon  and  two  spans  of 
mules  Bro.  Lewis  crossed  the  desert 
and  arrived  in  Salt  Lake  City  in  the 
spring  of  1857.  During  the  winter  of 
1857-1858  Elder  Lewis  married  Mary 
Scott,  who  was  born  Oct.  29,  1817. 
They  removed  to  St.  George,  Utah, 
and  thence  to  Kanab,  Kane  county, 
Utah,  where  his  wiew  died  Nov.  14, 
1875.    Subsequently  he  married  Emily 


BIOGRAPHICAL   ENCYCLOPEDIA. 


673 


Lewis,  a  daughter  of  James  and  Emily 
Lewis,  of  Kanab,  who  bore  him  one 
son,  when  he  was  seventy-three  years 
of  age.  Elder  Lewis  died  at  the  age  of 
seventy-four  years,  from  an  attack  of 
billions  fever,  Nov.  13,  18  79,  in  Ka- 
nab, Kane  county,  Utah.  He  was  an 
active  and  energetic  man,  a  noble 
worker  and  honest  in  all  his  deal- 
ings. Before  his  death  he  was  or- 
dained a  Patriarch. 

LEWIS,  Tarlton,  the  first  Bishop 
of  Salt  Lake  City,  was  born  May  18, 
1805,  in  Pendleton  (now  Anderson), 
South  Carolina,  the  son  of  Neriah 
Lewis  and  Mary  Moss.  He  moved  with 
his  parents  to  Kentucky  in  1809,  mar- 
ried Malinda  Gimlin  March  27,  1828, 
and  moved  to  Macoupin  county,  Illi- 
nois, in  October,  1833.  Becoming  a 
convert  to  "Mormonism,"  he  was  bap- 
tized by  his  brother,  Benjamin  Lewis, 
July  25,  1836,  and  moved  to  Cald- 
well county,  Missouri,  in  1837.  There 
he  shared  the  persecutions  of  the 
saints,  being  wounded  at  Haun's  Mill 
at  the  time  of  the  massacre,  Oct.  30, 
1838.  Early  in  1839  he  moved  with 
his  family,  consisting  of  wife  and  two 
children,  to  Quincy,  Illinois.  In  Oc- 
tober, 1839,  he  moved  to  Commerce 
(afterwards  Nauvoo),  and  later  spent 
nine  months  in  the  Black  River  coun- 
try, getting  out  timber  for  the  Tem- 
ple at  Nauvoo.  Still  later  he  took 
charge  of  the  cranes  in  hoisting  ma- 
terials for  the  erection  of  the  Temple. 
He  was  ordained  a  High  Priest  and 
Bishop  and  set  apart  to  preside  over 
the  Fourth  Ward  in  Nauvoo,  under 
the  hands  of  Joseph  and  Hyrum 
Smith,  and  acted  in  that  capacity  un- 
til the  expulsion  of  the  saints  from 
Nauvoo  in  1846.  After  spending  the 
winter  of  184  6-1847  at  Winter  Quar- 
ters, he  crossed  the  plains  as  one  of 
the  original  Utah  pioneers  in  18  47, 
and  took  charge  of  the  ox-teams  on 
the  journey.  After  arriving  in  the 
Valley  he  was  appointed  to  act  as 
Bishop  of  Salt  Lake  City,  which  po- 
sition  he   held    until   Salt   Lake   City 


was  divided  into  several  Wards.  In 
the  fall  of  184  8  he  was  sent  back  to 
meet  President  Brigham  Young  and 
the  incoming  companies;  there  he  met 
his  family,  whom  he  had  left  at  Win- 
ter Quarters  the  year  previous.  When 
Salt  Lake  City  was  divided  in  Febru- 
ary, 1849,  into  nineteen  Wards,  he 
was  chosen  as  first  counselor  to  Bish- 
op Edward  Hunter  of  the  Thirteenth 
Ward.  Late  in  1850  he  was  called 
to  assist  in  locating  a  settlement  in 
Little  Salt  Lake  Valley,  and  thus  he 
became  one  of  the  founders  of  Par- 
owan,  where  he  acted  as  Bishop  until 
the  spring  of  1858,  when  he  was 
called  to  settle  at  Minersville,  Beaver 
county.  Here  he  resided  until  Janu- 
ary, 1873,  when  he  moved  to  Sevier 
county.  In  the  fall  of  18  77  he  was 
called  to  act  as  Bishop  of  the  Rich- 
field Second  Ward,  which  position 
he  held  until  he  moved  to  Teasdale, 
Piute  county,  Utah,  where  he  died 
Nov.   22,   1890. 

LIXNELL,  James  David,  one  of  the 

Elders  who  died  in  the  missionary 
field,  was  born  Sept.  3  0,  1889,  in 
Salt  Lake  City,  Utah,  the  son  of 
Henry  Linnell  and  Elizabeth  Wag- 
staff.  He  was  baptized  Nov.  2,  1896, 
by  John  Cottam  and  resided  with  his 
parents  in  the  Sixth  Ward,  Salt  Lake 
City,  in  190  9,  when  he  was  called  on 
a  mission  to  the  Southern  States.  Be- 
ing set  apart  for  that  mission  Nov. 
2,  1909,  he  proceeded  at  once  to  his 
field  of  labor  and  took  hold  of  mis- 
sionary work  with  zeal  and  integrity. 
Though  only  twenty-two  years  old, 
he  showed  signs  to  become  a  most  ef- 
ficient missionary,  but  he  was  strick- 
en with  sickness  and  died  with  appen- 
dicitis at  the  St.  Joseph  Hospital, 
Memphis,  Tenn.,  Oct.  13,  1910.  His 
remains  were  sent  in  care  of  return- 
ing Elders  to  his  home  in  Utah,  where 
impressive  funeral  ceremonies  took 
place  in  the  Sixth  Ward  meeting 
house  Oct.  23,  1910. 

IjOOSLE,  John  WiUiam,  an  Elder 
who  died  while  filling  a  foreign  mis- 


Vol.  Ill,  No.  43. 


May  8,   1920 


674 


LATTER-DAY   SAINT 


sion,  was  born  Aug.  13,  1867,  in 
Clarkston,  Cache  county,  Utah,  the 
son  of  John  Casper  Loosle  and  Anna 
Huncerbager.  He  was  baptized  April 
12,  1876,  by  his  father  and  later  or- 
dained an  Elder.  While  still  residing 
at  Clarkston,  he  was  called  on  a  mis- 
sion to  Switzerland  and  Germany,  oe- 
ing  set  apart  for  that  mission  Nov.  7, 
1905.  On  his  arrival  at  mission 
headquarters,  he  was  appointed  to  la- 
bor in  Switzerland,  where  he  became 
known  as  a  diligent  and  successful 
missionary,  but  his  health  began  to 
fail,  in  consequence  of  which  he  was 
released  to  return  home.  After  trav- 
eling as  far  as  Cologne,  Germany,  he 
got  worse,  suffering  with  stomach 
catarrh.  He  was  well  taken  care  of 
in  the  home  of  a  Sister  Hartmann, 
but  he  finally  passed  away  July  29, 
1908,  in  Cologne,  the  immediate  cause 
of  his  death  being  heart  failure.  His 
remains  were  shipped  to  Utah  in  care 
of  Elder  Archie  Wilby  and  interred 
at  Clarkston.  where  impressive  fu- 
neral services  were  held  the  follow- 
ing day.  Brother  Loosle  left  a  wife 
and  three  little  sons.  For  more  than 
thirty  months  he  had  labored  in  the 
Swiss  and  German  Mission  and  had 
been  instrumental  in  bringing  a  num- 
ber of  souls  to  a  knowledge  of  the 
truth. 

MACE,  John,  an  Elder  who  died 
while  filling  a  foreign  mission,  was 
born  May  13.  1806,  in  Stockport, 
Cheshire,  England,  the  son  of  Wil- 
liam Mace  and  Fanny  Slate.  He  re- 
ceived the  gospel  and  was  baptized 
in  October,  1842,  by  Elder  Henry 
Shaw.  In  1865  he  came  to  Utah, 
leaving  his  family  in  England,  and 
on  May  29,  1867,  he  was  set  apart 
by  President  George  A.  Smith  for  a 
mission  to  his  native  country  and  to 
gather  his  family  to  Zion.  He  labored 
faithfully  in  the  missionary  field, 
mostly  in  the  Leeds  conference.  He 
died  in  Leeds  Jan.  19,  1869,  at  the 
age  of  sixty-three  years,  being  a  High 
Priest  at  the  time  of  his  demise. 


>L\JOR,  Wni.  Warner,  an  Elder 
who  died  while  filling  a  foreign  mis- 
sion, was  born  Jan.  27.  1804,  in  Bris- 
tol, England,  the  son  of  Richard  and 
Constantina  Major.  He  was  baptized 
in  London  in  1842  and  soon  after- 
wards ordained  an  Elder  and  sent  to 
preach  the  gospel  in  Reading  and 
throughout  Berkshire.  He  continued 
to  labor  in  the  ministry  with  con- 
siderable success  until  the  winter  of 
1844,  when  he  emigrated  to  Nauvoo, 
Illinois,.  He  was  with  the  body  of 
the  Church  through  the  difficulties 
in  Nauvoo  until  the  saints  were  forced 
to  remove  to  the  West  in  1846.  In 
Winter  Quarters  he  was  appointed  a 
member  of  the  High  Council,  and  in 
1848  he  left  Winter  Quarters  in  Pres. 
Brigham  Young's  company  for  the 
Salt  Lake  Valley,  where  he  resided 
five  years.  He  traveled  through  the 
principal  settlements  of  Utah,  and, 
being  an  artist  by  profession,  he  made 
many  interesting  sketches  of  impos- 
ing scenery  in  this  western  country. 
On  April  6.  1853,  he  was  appointed 
on  a  mission  to  England,  where  he 
arrived  in  December,  following,  and 
was  appointed  to  labor  under  the 
pastor  of  the  London,  Kent,  Reading 
and  Essex  conferences.  He  was  suf- 
fering from  a  severe  cold  at  the  time, 
from  which  he  was  never  entirely 
free  afterwards.  On  the  13th  of  Au- 
gust, 1854.  while  crossing  the  river 
Thames,  he  was  suddenly  seized  with 
chills  and  vomiting.  The  saints  did 
all  in  their  power  for  him,  but  he  re- 
mained in  that  condition  from  time 
to  time  until  Oct.  2,  1854,  when  he 
died.  Elder  Major  was  a  remarkably 
kind,  patient  and  exemplary  man  and 
his  humble  disposition  won  for  him 
many  friends. 

MALIX,  Elijah  Jun.,  an  Elder  who 
died  while  returning  home  from  a 
mission,  was  born  March  11,  1808,  in 
Chester  county,  Penn.,  the  son  of 
Elijah  Malin  and  Catherine  Essick. 
In  1830  (Feb.  4th),  he  married  Sarah 
McQuicken,   in  Chester  county.      She 


BIOGRAPHICAL   ENCYCLOPEDIA. 


675 


bore  her  husband  four  children,  name- 
ly, John  McQuicken,  Margaret  Ann, 
Catherine,  and  James  Elijah.  The 
parents  having  become  converts  to 
"Mormonism,"  Elijah  and  his  family 
also  joined  the  Church,  he  being  bap- 
tized Jan.  2,  1841.  Soon  afterwards 
he  was  ordained  to  the  office  of  an 
Elder  by  Lorenzo  D.  Barnes.  Brother 
Malin  assisted  to  fit  out  the  ship 
"Brooklyn,"  which  in  February,  1846, 
sailed  from  New  York  with  a  com- 
pany of  saints,  bound  for  California 
by  way  of  Cape  Horn.  By  this  ship 
he  sent  some  very  valuable  goods, 
part  of  which  was  lost  on  the  voyage 
or  after  the  arrival  in  California;  yet 
he  had  sufficient  left  so  that  his  fam- 
ily could  secure  an  outfit  for  crossing 
the  plains.  With  his  family  Brother 
Malin  joined  the  saints  in  their  gen- 
eral exodus  from  Nauvoo  in  1846. 
On  the  journey  westward  he  lost  most 
of  his  livestock  and  suffered  with  the 
rest  of  his  co-religionists  during  those 
perilous  times.  He  resided  at  Winter 
Quarters  in  April,  1848,  when  he  was 
called  on  a  mission  to  the  Eastern 
States,  together  with  Henry  Kearns. 
His  principal  field  of  labor  was  Ches- 
ter county,  Pennsylvania,  where  he 
looked  after  some  property  which  had 
been  left  there  unsold  at  the  time  he 
first  moved  west.  After  laboring 
faithfully  as  a  missionary,  according 
to  his  appointment,  he  left  Phila- 
delphia in  April,  184  9,  to  travel  to 
the  headquarters  of  the  Church  on 
the  frontiers,  together  with  Wm.  I. 
Appleby  and  others.  On  the  journey, 
while  traveling  on  a  river  steamer 
near  Louisville,  Kentucky,  Brother 
Malin  was  stricken  with  cholera  and 
suffered  severely  on  the  rest  of  the 
journey  to  St.  Louis,  where  he  died 
May  5,  1849.  His  family  subsequent- 
ly (1851)  emigrated  to  Utah,  being 
partly  assisted  to  the  Valley  by  the 
Church.  His  son,  John  M.  Malin, 
drove  the  family  team  across  the 
plains  and  mountains. 

MANNING,  Arthur,  one  of  the  El- 
ders who  died  in  the  missionary  field. 


was  born  Oct.  3,  1885,  in  Slaterville, 
Weber  county,  Utah,  the  son  of 
Emanuel  J.  R.  Manning  and  Sarah 
Alice  Singleton.  He  was  baptized  in 
the  spring  of  1894  by  George  R.  Ben- 
nett and  resided  with  his  parents  in 
West  Point  (South  Hooper),  Davis 
county,  Utah,  when  he  was  called  on 
a  mission  to  the  Southern  States  in 
1909.  Being  set  apart  for  his  mission 
June  8,  1909,  he  proceeded  at  once 
to  his  field  of  labor,  arriving  there 
June  14,  1909.  He  labored  successive- 
ly in  Ohio,  Virginia  and  Tennessee, 
but  finally  took  sick  and  was  taken 
to  the  Lincoln  Memorial  Hospital  at 
Knoxville,  Tenn.,  where  he  died  Sept. 
22,  1910,  of  general  septic  periton- 
itis. President  Chas.  A.  Callis  came 
to  his  bedside  as  soon  as  he  heard  of 
his  sickness  and  together  with  other 
Elders  and  the  nurses  (in  addition  to 
medical  skill)  did  all  they  could  to 
save  the  Elder's  life.  The  remains 
were  shipped  to  his  home  in  Utah. 
Elder  Manning  seemed  to  anticipate 
the  end,  for  early  in  the  day  on  w^hich 
he  passed  away  he  told  the  hour  when 
he  would  go,  kissed  his  companion, 
talked  to  the  saints  present  and  pre- 
dicted prosperity  for  the  work  of  the 
Lord  in  the  South.  Bro.  Manning  was 
an  ideal  missionary,  loved  and  re- 
spected by  all  who  knew  him.  "In 
the  work  of  the  Lord  there  were  none 
more  energetic  than  he,  and  consider- 
ing his  field  of  labor  none  more  suc- 
cessful." From  his  missionary  rec- 
ord it  appeared  that  he  disposed  of 
forty-four  Books  of  Mormon  in  four 
months,  and  in  six  weeks  he  disposed 
of  107  doctrinal  books,  laboring  in 
a  sparsely  settled  region.  Although 
but  twenty-four  years  old,  Elder  Man- 
ning could  have  said  like  Paul:  "I 
have  fought  the  good  fight,  I  have 
finished  my  course,  I  have  kept  my 
faith."  His  funeral  took  place  Sept. 
28,    1910,   in   the  West   Point   Ward. 

MANTLE,  John  Willard,  an  Elder 
who  died  in  the  missionary  field,  was 
born  July  24,  1854,  in  Salt  Lake  City, 


676 


LATTER-DAY  SAINT 


Utah,  the  son  of  Llewelyn  Mantle  and 
Catharine  Watkins.    He  was  baptized 
when  eight  years  old  by  John  Ben- 
nion,  in  Taylorsville,  Salt  Lake  coun- 
ty, Utah,  and  resided  in  Taylorsville 
when   called   on   a  mission   in   1903. 
in  1882  (June  29th)  he  married  Jane 
Griddle    in    the    Endowment    House, 
Salt   Lake   City,   which    union   was 
blessed    with    five    children,    namely, 
Mary  Ann,  John  Edward,  Pearl,  Myr- 
tle C,  and  Ivy   C.     Being  set  apart 
Sept.  29,  1903,  for  a  mission  to  the 
Eastern  States,  he  left  for  his  field  of 
labor  the  following  day  (Sept.  30th). 
He  attended  faithfully  to  his  duties 
as  a  missionary  until  his  health  be- 
gan to  fail,  due  to  some  internal  com- 
plications.   After  undergoing  an  op- 
eration Nov.  18,  1904,  he  appeared  to 
be  rapidly  recovering,  but  on  the  25th 
he  was  seized  with  a  severe  spell  of 
sneezing,  which  evidently  affected  his 
heart,  and  it  being  weakened  by  the 
operation,  and  probably  by  the  anes- 
thetic, could  not  resist  the  strain.    He 
died  in  Baltimore,  Maryland,  Nov.  2  6, 
1904.  His  remains  were  brought  home 
by  Elder  Wilford  M.  Allred  of  Spring 
City,  who  arrived  in  Salt  Lake  City 
early  in  December,  1904.    Elder  Man- 
tle was  a  member  of  the  115th  quo- 
rum of  Seventy  and  left  a  wife  and 
several  children. 

MARKHAM,    Stephen,    one    of   the 

original  Utah  pioneers  of  1847,  was 
born  Feb.  9,  1800,  in  the  town  of 
Avon,  Ontario  ( now  Livingston ) 
county.  New  York,  the  son  of  David 
Markham  (born  at  Avon)  and  Dinah 
Merry.  His  father  was  a  revolution- 
ary soldier  and  was  accidentally  shot 
while  training,  when  Stephen  was  two 
years  old.  His  mother  afterwards 
moved  to  the  State  of  Ohio  and  the 
family  settled  in  Chester,  Geauga 
county,  where  Brother  Markham  first 
heard  the  gospel  and  was  baptized  by 
Elder  Abel  Lamb  in  July,  1837.  He 
was  a  well-to-do  farmer  at  the  time 
and  sold  all  his  possessions  in  Ohio 
by  the  counsel  of  the  Prophet  Joseph 


Smith    and    furnished    most    of    the 
means  to  fit  out  sixty  souls  and  took 
charge  in  emigrating  them  from  Kirt- 
land,    Ohio,    to    Far    West,    Missouri. 
After  arriving   in   Far  West  he  was 
appointed  an  agent  for  the  Church  to 
raise  means  and  assist  the  poor  saints 
in  the  days  when  trouble  and  perse- 
cution were  heaped  upon  his  people 
by  the  mobs  in  Missouri  and  Illinois. 
He  was  appointed  colonel  in  the  Nau- 
voo  Legion  and  rendered  efficient  aid 
in    1843,   when    the    Prophet   Joseph 
was  in  danger  of  being  kidnapped  by 
his  enemies   and   taken   to   Missouri. 
Prior  to  this  he  had  assisted  the  fam- 
ily of  the  Prophet  to  escape  from  Mis- 
souri into  Illinois,  and  he  afterwards 
acted  as  a  body  guard  to  the  Prophet. 
.\t  a  time  in  Nauvoo,   Illinois,   when 
the  Prophet  was  perplexed  with  vex- 
atious  law   suits,    Stephen   Markham 
sold  his  only  house,  which  was  newly 
built,   gave  Joseph  the  proceeds, 
$1200,  and  then  moved  his  own  fam- 
ily into  a  tent  until  a  cabin  could  be 
built.     This   was   in    1844,   about  the 
time   that   Joseph    and    his   brethren 
were    imprisoned    in    Carthage    jail. 
Only  a  few  hours  before  the  martyr- 
dom of  Joseph  and  Hyrum  the  blood- 
thirsty mob  put  Bro.  Markham  on  a 
horse  and  drove  him  out  of  Carthage; 
the  mobbers  probed  his  legs  with  their 
bayonets  until  his  boots   were   filled 
with  blood.    The  scars  of  these  bay- 
onet  thrusts   he   bore   to   his   grave. 
When   the   saints   were   being  driven 
from  Nauvoo,  Bro.  Markham  was  ap- 
pointed, by  President  Brigham  Young, 
captain  of  two  hundred  pioneers  and 
led   them   thence   to    Council   Bluffs, 
Iowa.    In  the  spring  of  1847  he  was 
chosen  as  one  of  the  pioneers  and  ap- 
pointed captain  of  the  first  hundred. 
He  was  also  appointed  captain  of  the 
guard  to  select  out  of  the  camp  fifty 
men  in  whom  he  could  place  implicit 
confidence.    Bro.   Markham  attended 
to  his  duties  faithfully  and  well  dur- 
ing the  journey  to  Great  Salt  Lake 
Valley,   and   after  his  arrival  in  the 
Valley  he  became  one  of  the  most  ac- 


BIOGRAPHICAL  ENCYCLOPEDIA. 


677 


live  among  the  pioneers.  He  returned 
to  Winter  Quarters  the  same  fall 
(1847)  and  then  spent  upwards  of 
two  years  on  the  frontiers.  In  Octo- 
ber, 1850,  he  returned  to  the  Valley 
in  charge  of  a  company  of  fifty  wa- 
gons. His  first  wife,  Hannah  Hogel- 
boon,  who  was  born  April  1,  1813,  at 
Manchester,  Bennington  county,  Ver- 
mont, shared  with  him  in  all  the  early 
trials  of  the  Church  in  Missouri  and 
Illinois.  Some  time  after  the  arrival 
of  the  family  in  Utah  she  left  her 
husband  and,  together  with  her  three 
sons  (Warren,  Whiting  and  David), 
went  to  California  to  the  gold  dig- 
gings. She  and  her  sons  became  per- 
manent residents  of  California,  where 
they  all  subsequently  died.  Brother 
Markham  was  ordained  to  the  Priest- 
hood in  an  early  day  and  was  hon- 
ored with  the  ordination  as  a  High 
Priest  March  30,  1842.  Soon  after  his 
arrival  in  the  Valley  he  located  in 
Utah  county,  and  in  18  53  he  was  or- 
dained a  Bishop  by  Geo.  A.  Smith  and 
set  apart  to  preside  over  the  infant 
settlement  of  Palmyra,  near  the  pres- 
ent town  of  Spanish  Fork.  He  served 
as  a  colonel  in  the  Walker  Indian 
war.  In  185  6  he  was  sent  on  a  col- 
onization mission  to  Fort  Supply,  near 
Green  river,  and  assisted  in  establish- 
ing the  first  express  line  across  the 
plains.  Beloved  and  respected  by  all 
who  knew  him  he  died  at  Spanish 
Fork  March  10,  1878.  Bro.  Markham 
was  one  of  the  greatest  pioneers  of 
this  western  country,  a  practical  ad- 
vocate of  religious  liberty  and  a  friend 
of  humanity.  He  was  ever  charitable 
to  the  poor  and  unflinching  in  his  in- 
tegrity to  the  cause  of  the  great  Lat- 
ter-day work.  Having  lived  a  most 
active  and  useful  life,  he  passed  away 
in  peace  in  the  midst  of  his  family  and 
friends.  In  1850  (Oct.  5th)  Brother 
Markham  married  Mary  Curtis 
(daughter  of  Jeremiah  Curtis  and 
Ruth  Stratton  of  Michigan  and  widow 
of  Ornon  Houghton ) ,  by  whom  she  had 
one  child  (Edgar  Stratton).  She  was 
born  Nov.  15,  1832,  and  her  children 


by  Stephen  Markham  were  the  fol- 
lowing: Orville  Sanford,  Mary  Lucy, 
William  Don  Carlos,  Sarah  Elizabeth, 
Atta  Ruth,  Hosmer  Merry,  Emily  Au- 
relia,  Margaret  Eliza,  Joseph,  Char- 
lotta,  Julina,  Ira  Mitcham,  Clarissa 
Maretta,  and  Caroline  Louisa.  About 
1853  Bro.  Markham  married  Jane 
Boyce  Wyott,  a  widow,  who  bore  him 
one  son,  who  was  named  Stephen. 
Bro.  Markham  engaged  in  farming 
and  stock  raising  most  of  his  life. 

MARTINEAU,    Lyman    Royal,    a 

member  of  the  general  board  of  Y.  M. 
M.  I.  A.,  was  born  April  21,  1859,  at 
Parowan,  Iron  county,  Utah,  the  son 
of  James  Henry  Martineau  and  Susan 
Julia  Sherman.  His  father  was  one 
of  the  early  pioneers  of  Utah  and  one 
of  the  founders  and  prominent  offi- 
cials in  the  founding  of  Parowan  In 


1851.  Lyman  R.  was  baptized  when 
about  eight  years  of  age  and  was  sub- 
sequently ordained  to  the  offices  of 
Deacon,  Teacher  and  Elder.  He  grad- 
uated from  the  Brigham  Young  Col- 
lege at  Logan,  Utah,  in  May,  1879, 
and  was  making  preparations  for  en- 
trance to  Cornell  University,  New 
York,  for  a  law  course,  when  called 
on  a  mission  to  Great  Britain.  Giving 
up  his  purpose  to  study  law,  he  left 


678 


LATTER-DAY   SAINT 


for  his  mission  in  May,  1879.  During 
the  two  years  and  a  half  in  which  he 
labored  in  Europe  as  a  missionary,  he 
spent  six  weeks  traveling  in  the  mis- 
sions and  conferences  of  Denmark, 
Norway,  Sweden,  Germany,  Holland, 
Belgium  and  France.  During  the  last 
year  of  his  mission  in  Great  Britain 
he  acted  as  secretary  to  the  European 
Mission,  the  headquarters  of  which  at 
that  time  were  at  42  Islington,  Liver- 
pool, England.  In  October,  1881,  he 
brought  to  Utah  a  company  of  396 
saints,  which  crossed  the  Atlantic  in 
the  steamship  "Wyoming,"  sailing 
from  Liverpool,  England,  Oct.  22, 
1881.  Soon  after  his  return  home  he 
was  ordained  a  High  Priest  by  Moses 
Thatcher  and  appointed  Stake  super- 
intendent of  Y.  M.  M.  1.  A.  in  Cache 
Stake.  In  1881  (Dec.  29th)  Brother 
Martineau  married  Alley  Preston 
(daughter  of  Bishop  Wm.  B.  Preston 
and  Harriet  Ann  Thatcher),  who  was 
born  March  2,  1863,  at  Logan,  Utah. 
This  marriage  was  blessed  with  eight 
children,  namely.  Alley,  Harriett  Ann, 
Lyman  R.  jun.,  Henrietta  Julia,  Pres- 
ton, Martha  Claytor,  Allen  Sherman 
and  May.  While  a  resident  of  Logan, 
Bro.  Martineau  acted  as  a  member  of 
the  Logan  city  council  (1882-1883) 
and  as  county  assessor  and  collector 
for  Cache  county  (1882-1886).  From 
1884  to  1904  he  served  as  a  member 
of  the  High  Council  of  the  Cache 
Stake,  which  position  he  held  until 
September,  1904,  when  he  moved  to 
Salt  Lake  City.  There  his  wife  died 
Sept.  15,  1907,  having  been  preceded 
in  death  by  her  children  Henrietta 
Julia  and  May.  In  1894-1895  Bro. 
Martineau  served  as  a  member  of  the 
State  Reform  School  board.  He  was 
chosen  as  a  member  of  the  Brigham 
Young  College  board  of  trustees  by 
action  of  President  Lorenzo  Snow  and 
still  occupies  that  position.  In  1908 
he  was  a  candidate  for  Congress  from 
Utah  on  the  Democratic  ticket,  but 
was  not  elected,  the  Republican  can- 
didates receiving  a  majority  of  the 
votes.    In  1905  he  was  called  to  be  a 


member  of  the  general  board  of  Y.  M. 
M.  I.  A.,  which  position  he  still  holds. 
For  some  time  he  has  acted  as  federal 
appraiser  for  Utah  for  the  Federal 
Land  Bank  of  Berkeley,  Cal.  In  ldl'6 
(Sept.  30th)  Bro.  Martineau  married 
Emmeline  Cannon  (daughter  of  John 
Q.  and  Annie  Wells  Cannon),  who 
was  born  Feb.  8,  1893,  in  Salt  Lake 
City.  This  union  has  been  blessed 
with  four  children,  namely,  Mary, 
Jeanne,  Emma  Lou  and  Vilate. 

MARTIXSEN,  Charles,  one  of  the 

Latter-day  Saint  Elders  who  died  in 


the  missionary  field,  was  born  July 
11,  1865,  in  Norway,  the  son  of  Peter 
Martinsen  and  Toline  Christensen. 
He  was  baptized  when  ten  years  of 
age  by  his  father  at  Roken  (not  far 
from  Christiania)  and  became  an 
earnest  and  efficient  Church  worker 
in  the  Roken  branch  before  he  emi- 
grated to  America,  being  ordained  to 
the  Priesthood  soon  after  his  baptism. 
Soon  after  his  arrival  in  Utah,  he  lo- 
cated in  Koosharem,  Sevier  county, 
where  he  resided  when  he  was  called 
on  a  mission,  being  then  a  member  of 
the  82nd  quorum  of  Seventy.  He  was 
set  apart  for  his  mission  April  30, 
1907,  and  on  his  arrival  in  Scandi- 
navia was  appointed  to  labor  in  the 
Bergen  conference,  Norway.  After  do- 
ing missionary  work  for  some  time  in 
the  town  of  Fiekkefjord,  he  went  to 
Stavanger    in    December,    1908,    and 


BIOGRAPHICAL   ENCYCLOPEDIA, 


679 


spent  Christmas  there  with  the  saints. 
Being  attacked  with  severe  pains,  a 
physician  was  consulted,  who  after 
diagnosing  the  case  said  it  was  a  case 
of  appendicitis.  Bro.  Martinsen  con- 
sequently underwent  an  operation, 
which  seemed  to  be  successful,  but  he 
suffered  a  relapse  and  died  Jan.  12, 
1909,  in  Stavanger.  His  remains  were 
shipped  home  in  charge  of  Elder  Al- 
bert E.  DeLange.  Elder  Martinsen  was 
an  exemplary  man,  a  faithful  Elder 
in  the  Church  and  well  respected  both 
at  home  and  abroad.  He  was  unmar- 
ried, although  forty-three  years  old, 
when  he  died. 

MAUGHAN,  HjTum,  an  Elder  who 
died  while  filling  a  mission,  was  born 
Dec.  17,  1871,  in  Weston,  Oneida 
county,  Idaho,  the  son  of  John  H. 
Maughan  and  Sarah  Maria  Daven- 
port, and  was  baptized  April  8,  1881, 
by  D.  L.  Hoops.  In  obedience  to  call 
he  was  set  apart  Dec.  1,  1897,  for  a 
mission  to  the  Northern  States,  arriv- 
ing at  Chicago  Dec.  5th.  He  was  ap- 
pointed to  labor  at  Anderson,  Indi- 
ana, together  with  Elder  Jonathan  H. 
Hale  jun.,  and  these  two  Elders  la- 
bored unitedly  together  and  made 
many  friends.  In  March,  1898,  Bro. 
Maughan  met  in  conference  at  In- 
dianapolis with  the  Elders  of  Indi- 
ana, after  which  he  was  assigned  to 
labor  in  the  same  place  with  Elder 
W.  R.  Andrew.  Elder  Maughan  la- 
bored with  a  zeal,  cheerfulness  and 
love  for  his  fellow-men  that  was  hign- 
ly  commendable.  His  great  faith  in 
the  Lord  was  fully  maintained  to  the 
last  moment.  As  early  as  April  20, 
1898,  he  felt  unwell  and  steadily 
grew  worse  with  cramps  until  he  was 
advised  by  his  brethren  to  consult  a 
doctor,  which  he  did.  Other  doctors 
were  called  in  and  all  agreed  that  his 
trouble  was  a  case  of  appendicitis  and 
advised  an  immediate  operation,  to 
which  Bro.  Maughan  willingly  sub- 
mitted, feeling  he  was  in  the  hands 
of  the  Lord,  in  whose  service  he  was 
laboring.    Accordingly  he  was  taken 


to  St.  John's  hospital,  April  22,  1898, 
and  the  operation  performed  by  five 
skilled  surgeons.  Through  the  bless- 
ings of  the  Lord  he  rallied  successful- 
ly from  the  operation  and  began  to 
improve  rapidly.  Most  of  the  Elders 
of  the  mission  made  special  mention 
of  Brother  Maughan  in  their  prayers 
that,  if  it  be  the  will  of  the  Lord,  he 
speedily  recover  from  his  affliction. 
He  so  far  recovered  that  on  May  28th 
the  doctors  advised  him  to  leave  the 
hospital  and  go  back  to  his  room. 
Here  he  ate  heartily  and  had  great 
faith  in  his  recovery.  He  was  advised 
by  many  to  return  home,  but  his  an- 
swer was,  "I  did  not  come  here  to  re- 
turn home  until  the  Lord  calls  me 
there."  June  1,  1898,  after  eating  • 
hearty  meal,  he  was  taken  with 
cramps,  and  though  everything  pos- 
sible was  done  to  relieve  him,  he  died 
Friday,  June  3,  1898.  A  premonition 
by  a  dream  was  given  him  a  short 
time  before  his  sickness,  of  his  end, 
but  he  took  no  particular  notice  of 
it.  "Elder  Maughan  was  an  energetic 
laborer  in  the  Lord's  vineyard  and 
did  as  much  as  lay  in  his  power  for 
the  advancement  of  the  cause.  He 
laid  down  his  life  in  bringing  salva- 
tion to  his  fellow-men.  He  stood  at 
his  post  a  true  hero  and  faithful 
servant  of  God.  His  reward  is  that 
of  a  martyr;  his  future  hopes  are 
great;  his  mission  of  love  is  now  in 
the  eternal  worlds."  The  remains  of 
Elder  Maughan  were  accompanied  to 
Chicago  from  Anderson  by  Elders  Jo- 
seph E.  Cardon  and  W.  R.  Andrew, 
and,  after  proper  arrangements  with 
the  railroads,  were  accompanied  to 
Weston,  Idaho,  by  President  Lewis  A. 
Kelsch. 

McBRIDE,  George,  one  of  the  mar- 
tyrs of  the  Church  ,was  born  Dec.  21, 
1826,  in  Willanova,  Chautauqua  coun- 
ty. New  York,  the  son  of  James  Mc- 
Bride  and  Betsy  Mead.  Both  his  par- 
ents were  natives  of  the  State  of  New 
York  and  having  accepted  the  gospel, 
they  were  baptized  in  1833  and  went 


680 


LATTER-DAY   SAINT 


through  all  the  trials  and  persecu- 
tions endured  by  the  saints  in  the 
early  rise  of  the  Church.  In  August, 
1839,  his  father  died,  leaving  his 
mother  in  very  poor  circumstances, 
with  seven  children.  In  the  fall  of 
1846  George  married  Abia  Ann  Smith 
(daughter  of  William  and  Nancy 
Smith),  which  marriage  was  blessed 
with  three  children,  two  sons  and  one 
daughter.  In  1849  Bro.  McBride  emi- 
grated to  Utah  and  settled  in  Farm- 
ington,  Davis  county,  where  his  wife 
died  in  1854.  In  1855  (March  27th) 
Bro.  McBride  married  Ruth  Ann  Mil- 
ler, daughter  of  Henry  W.  Miller  and 
Elmira  Hunt  of  Farmington.  Two  sons 
were  the  issue  of  this  marriage.  In 
1857  Bro.  McBride  was  called  to  as- 
sist the  missionaries  who  had  settled 
at  Fort  Limhl  (now  in  Idaho),  and 
while  engaged  in  missionary  as  well 
as  temporal  labors  in  that  place,  he, 
together  with  James  Miller,  was  killed 
Feb.  25,  1858,  by  the  Bannock  and 
Shoshone  Indians;  five  other  brethren 
were  wounded  on  the  same  occasion. 
The  brethren  who  were  killed  were 
buried  inside  of  the  fort  walls,  at  Fort 
Limhi.  (For  details,  see  Salmon  Riv- 
er Mission.) 

McBRIDE,   Thomas,   one   of   the 

martyrs  of  the  Church  (a  victim  of 
the  Haun's  Mill  massacre),  was  born 
March  12,  1776,  in  Bartley,  Logan 
county,  Virginia,  the  son  of  James 
McBride.  About  the  year  1810  he 
removed  to  the  town  of  Fairfield 
and  thence  to  Wayne  county.  Here 
he  served  as  justice  of  the  peace  for 
a  number  of  years,  and  being  con- 
verted to  "Mormonism"  he  was  bap 
tized  about  the  year  1831  by  Elder 
HarveyGreen,  but  was  never  or- 
dained to  any  office  in  the  Church. 
On  the  10th  day  of  June,  1834,  he 
crossed  the  Mississippi  river  into  Mis- 
souri, where  he  lived  two  years  in 
Bowling  Green,  Pike  county,  and  after 
residing  for  a  time  in  Ray  county,  he 
moved  to  Caldwell  county,  Missouri, 
in  1836   (Sept.  19th),  locating  about 


a  mile  from  Haun's  Mill,  where  he 
was  killed  Oct.  30,  1838.  At  the  time 
of  his  death  he  was  the  acting  justice 
of  the  peace  for  Grand  River  Town- 
ship, Caldwell  county,  Missouri.  As 
he  was  retreating  from  the  black- 
smith shop,  which  was  being  attacked 
by  the  mob,  Jake  Rogers,  a  mobber, 
overtook  him  and  demanded  his  gun, 
which  he  delivered  up.  Mr.  Rogers 
then  immediately  commenced  hewing 
at  him  with  a  corn  cutter  and  con- 
tinued till  he  fell  to  the  ground.  Rog- 
ers then  started  to  cross  the  creek, 
but  as  Bro.  McBride  raised  up  a  little. 
Rogers  returned  and  swore  he  would 
give  him  some  more,  for  "he  was  a 
damned  old  Mormon  anyhow"  and 
struck  him  repeatedly  over  the  head, 
which  killed  him.  In  warding  off  the 
blows  of  the  corn  cutter,  all  the  fin- 
gers of  his  left  hand  were  cut  off,  a 
large  gash  made  in  his  thumb  and 
one  of  his  ears  was  severed.  A  large 
wound  was  also  found  in  his  left 
breast,  supposed  to  be  caused  by  a 
bullet.  This  tragedy  occurred  on  Shoal 
Creek,  about  seventy-five  yards  be- 
low Haun's  Mill.  Bro.  McBride  was 
buried  in  a  well,  about  a  hundred 
yards  northwest  from  the  mill,  to- 
gether with  fourteen  others,  who 
were  murdered  by  the  mob  on  the 
same   day. 

McGregor,  Joseph  Franklin,  pres- 
ident of  the  Beaver  Stake  of  Zion  and 
a  resident  of  Beaver,  Beaver  county, 
Utah,  was  born  Aug.  16,  1868,  at  Par- 
owan.  Iron  county,  Utah,  the  son  of 
William  Campbell  McGregor  and  Sa- 
rah Fish.  He  attended  the  district 
school  and  worked  on  the  farm  until 
nineteen  years  of  age,  during  which 
time  he  acted  as  an  officer  in  the 
Ward  Primary  Association,  Sunday 
school  and  Y.  M.  M.  I.  A.,  having 
been  baptized  when  about  eight  years 
old  and  later  ordained  to  the  Aaronic 
Priesthood.  In  the  fall  of  1887  he 
went  to  Provo,  where  he  attended 
the  Brigham  Young  Academy  for  two 
years,  and  in  the  winter  of  1890-1891 


BIOGRAPHICAL  ENCYCLOPEDIA. 


681 


he  acted  as  principal  of  the  Beaver 
Stake  Academy.  In  the  fall  of  1892 
he  entered  the  law  department  of  the 
University  of  Michigan,  graduating 
from  this  institution  in  June,  1894, 
with  the  degree  of  LL.B.  Returning 
to  Parowan,  he  practiced  law  there 
until  the  spring  of  189  6,  when  he 
married  Isabella  Durham,  and  left  in 
April  of  that  year  for  a  mission  to  the 
Southern  States,  where  he  remained 
nearly  two  years  and  a  half,  acting 
nearly  all  of  this  time  as  president  of 
the  North  Alabama  conference.    Re- 


turning to  Utah  in  the  fall  of  1898, 
he  was  elected  county  attorney  of 
Iron  county  and  appointed  city  attor- 
ney of  Parowan  city.  During  the  win- 
ter of  1898-1899  he  acted  as  a  coun- 
selor to  the  Stake  superintendent  of 
Y.  M.  M.  I.  A.  in  the  Parowan  Stake, 
and  in  the  spring  of  1899  he  was  or- 
dained a  High  Priest  by  Francis  M. 
Lyman  and  chosen  to  act  as  superin- 
tendent of  the  last  named  organiza- 
tion. In  the  fall  of  189  9  he  was 
elected  a  representative  to  the  State 
legislature  from  Iron  county,  and  in 
the  fall  of  1901  he  entered  the  Barns 
Medical  College  at  St.  Louis,  Mo., 
continuing  his  medical  studies  sum- 
mer and  winter  until  he  graduated 
from  the  Illinois  Medical  College  in 


Chicago  in  April,  1904.  Returning 
home  he  located  at  Richfield,  Utah, 
where  he  received  the  appointment  of 
surgeon  for  the  R.  G.  W.  Ry.  Co.  and 
was  also  made  county  physician  of 
Sevier  county.  In  July,  1909,  he  re- 
turned to  Parowan,  where  (in  Sep- 
tember) he  was  chosen  as  a  member 
of  the  High  Council  of  the  Parowan 
Stake  and  as  first  assistant  in  the 
Stake  superintendency  of  Sunday 
schools.  He  also  acted  as  city  physi- 
cian and  city  attorney  of  Parowan 
city.  In  1914  (October)  he  moved  to 
Beaver,  where  he  has  acted  as  city 
physician  for  the  last  three  years.  He 
was  also  a  member  of  the  local  draft 
board  and  the  county  council  of  de- 
fense during  the  late  war,  and  at 
present  is  local  medical  examiner  for 
the  Government  for  Beaver  county. 
In  1916  (April  23rd)  he  was  chosen 
and  set  apart  as  president  of  the 
Beaver  Stake  by  Apostle  Rudger  Claw- 
son,  which  position  he  still  holds. 
His  wife,  Isabella  Durham,  was  the 
daughter  of  Thos.  Durham  and  Caro- 
line Mortensen  and  was  born  March 
12,  1875.  Se  has  borne  her  husband 
nine  children,  namely,  Franklin  D., 
Marie,  Ronald  D.,  Claude  Eldon,  Dean 
L.,  Arden  D.,  Marvin  D.,  Helen  and 
Julia. 

McGregor,     Wllliam     CampbeU, 

Patriarch  and  Bishop  of  Parowan 
(Parowan  Stake),  Iron  county,  Utah, 
was  born  April  11,  1833,  in  Glasgow, 
Scotland,  the  son  of  Alexander  Mc- 
Gregor and  Elizabeth  Campbell.  When 
a  youth  of  seventeen  years  he  heard 
the  gospel,  believed  it  and  was  bap- 
tized by  Peter  McFarlane  Sept.  1, 
1850,  at  Greenock,  Scotland.  He  was 
ordained  a  Teacher  by  Elder  John 
Lyon.  In  1854  he  emigrated  to  Utah, 
crossing  the  Atlantic  in  the  ship  "John 
M.  Wood,"  drove  an  ox  team  across 
the  plains  and  arrived  in  Salt  Lake 
City  October,  185  4.  After  remaining  in 
the  City  about  ten  months,  he  went  to 
Parowan  in  1855,  where  he  married 
Mrs.    Smith,    a   widow,    in    1857.     He 


682 


LATTER-DAY   SAINT 


was  ordained  an  Elder  in  1856,  elect- 
ed alderman  in  Parowan  in  1863;  or- 
dained a  Seventy  and  chosen  as  a 
president  of  the  69th  quorum  of  Sev- 


enty in  1865.  He  also  held  the  office 
of  school  trustee  for  fifteen  years.  In 
1876  he  labored  as  a  missionary  in 
Pennsylvania,  and  soon  after  his  re- 
turn home  was  appointed  postmaster 
of  Parowan,  which  office  he  held  four 
and  a  half  years.  When  Parowan 
was  divided  into  two  Wards,  July  29, 
1877,  Bro.  McGregor  was  ordained  a 
High  Priest  and  Bishop  and  set  apart 
to  preside  over  the  Parowan  First 
Ward  by  President  Wilford  Wood- 
ruff, which  position  he  held  about 
three  years  In  1880-1881  he  filled  a 
mission  to  Scotland.  He  acted  as  pro- 
bate judge  of  Iron  county  four  terms, 
or  six  years,  being  first  appointed  by 
President  Grover  Cleveland  Aug.  6, 
1883,  to  fill  an  unexpired  term.  Later 
he  was  regularly  elected  to  the  same 
office.  He  also  filled  many  other  po- 
sitions of  responsibility.  Thus  he  act- 
ed as  selectman  for  Iron  county  sev- 
eral terms,  and  for  ten  years  he  was 
president  of  the  Parowan  Co-op  Store. 
He  was  ordained  a  Patriarch  in  Sep- 
tember, 1901,  and  held  that  position 
at  the  time  of  his  death,  which  oc- 
curred   June    16,    1913,   at    Parowan. 


Patriarch  McGregor  was  a  highly  re- 
soected  citizen  and  a  faithful  member 
of  the  Church. 

McKAY,  Thomas  Evans,  president 
of  the  Ogden  Stake,  Weber  county, 
Utah,  was  born  Oct.  29,  1875,  In 
Huntsville,  Weber  county,  Utah,  the 
son  of  David  McKay  and  Jennette 
Evans.  He  was  raised  and  schooled 
in  Huntsville  and  graduated  from  the 
L  niversity  of  Utah  in  1899.  After  be- 
ing baptized  by  his  father  Oct.  23, 
1883,  he  was  ordained  successively  to 
the  offices  of  Deacon,  Teacher,  Priest, 
Elder  and  Seventy.  He  labored  on  the 
Weber  Stake  Sunday  School  Board, 
together  with  Supt.  Thomas  B.  Evans, 
and  in  1900  he  filled  a  mission  to 
Switzerland  and  Germany.  After  la- 
boring in  Stuttgart  three  months  and 
in  Munich  three  months,  he  presided 
over  the  Frankfort  conference  thirty 
months.  Before  going  on  his  mission 
he  was  principal  of  the  Pingree  School 
in  Ogden,  and  after  his  return  to  Utah 
he  taught  two  years  in  the  Weber 
Academy;   later  he  taught  two  years 


in  the  Agricultural  College,  after 
which  he  served  as  superintendent  of 
the  Weber  county  schools.  When  the 
original  Weber  Stake  was  divided  in- 
to three  Stakes  in  1908,  Elder  McKay 


BIOGRAPHICAL   ENCYCLOPEDIA. 


683 


was  ordained  a  High  Priest  and  chos- 
en to  act  as  second  counselor  to  Pres- 
ident Thomas  B.  Evans.  In  1909-1912 
he  filled  a  second  mission  to  Europe, 
this  time  presiding  over  the  Swiss  and 
German  Mission,  with  headquarters 
in  Zurich,  Switzerland.  After  return- 
ing from  that  mission  he  again  acted 
as  second  counselor  to  Pres.  Evans 
of  the  Ogden  Stake  and  later  as  first 
counselor,  and  when  President  Evans 
died  in  March,  1919,  Bro.  McKay  was 
chosen  as  president  of  the  Ogden 
Stake,  which  position  he  still  holds. 
President  McKay  has  also  been  active 
in  secular  matters  and  has  held  many 
positions  of  honor  and  responsibility. 
Thus  he  served  for  some  time  as  re- 
corder of  Weber  county  and  in  1919 
he  represented  Weber  county  in  the 
Utah  State  legislature.  In  1912  (Sept. 
11th)  Brother  McKay  married  Faun 
Brimhall,  daughter  of  Geo.  H.  Brim- 
hall  and  Flora  Robertson.  Mrs.  Mc- 
Kay was  born  May  16,  18  8  9,  in  Span- 
ish Fork,  Utah.  Three  children  have 
blessed  this  marriage,  namely,  Flora 
Jennette,  Faun  and  Thomas  B.  Pres. 
McKay  is  a  farmer  and  stock  raiser. 

MORRIS,  Joseph  Smith,  the  third 
Bishop  of  Greenville  Ward  (Beaver 
Stake) ,  Beaver  county,  Utah,  was  born 
Jan.  5,  1849,  in  Wales,  the  son  of 
John  Morris  and  Mary  Ormond.  He 
emigrated  to  Utah  with  his  parents 
in  1850  and  settled  in  North  Ogden, 
Weber  county,  and  at  the  time  of  the 
general  move  in  1858  he  settled  in 
Kanosh,  Millard  county,  and  became 
a  resident  of  Greenville,  Beaver  coun- 
ty, in  1858.  In  1868  (Nov.  5th)  he 
married  Mary  Easton  (daughter  or 
Robert  Easton  and  Mary  Miller),  who 
was  born  Dec.  2,  1850,  in  Salt  Lake 
City,  her  parents  having  emigrated 
the  previous  spring  from  Scotland. 
This  union  was  blessed  with  eleven 
children,  namely,  John  R.,  Mary  E., 
Joseph  H.,  Lillie  J.,  Esther  B.,  Lettia 
J.,  Zealand  S.,  Clara  E.,  Lulu  A.,  Alice 
V.  and  Frank  A.  In  1883-1884  Bro. 
Morris   filled  a  mission  to  New  Zea- 


land, and  after  his  return  home  from 
that  mission  he  was  ordained  a  High 
Priest  and  Bishop  April  26,  1885,  and 
set  apart  to  preside  over  the  Green- 
ville Ward,  which  position  he  held 
until  18  98.  Bishop  Morris  died  Aug. 
9,  1904,  in  Greenville. 

AfERRILL,   Katie  Elizabeth   Hale, 

the  first  Latter-day  Saint  missionary 
sister  who  died  while  filling  a  foreign 
mission,  was  born  Dec.  10,  1871,  at 
Grantsville,  Tooele  county,  Utah,  the 
daughter  of  Alma  H.  Hale  and  Sarah 
Anne  Clark.  She  was  baptized  by  her 
father  when  about  eight  years  of  age 
and  became  an  active  worker  in  the 
Ward  Sunday  school  and  Y.  L.  M.  I. 
A.  After  her  marriage  to  Elder  Joseph 
Harris  Merrill,  she  became  a  resident 
of  Smithfield,  Cache  county,  Utah, 
and  in  1891  she  was  set  apart  to  go 
with  her  husband  on  a  mission  to 
Samoa.  She  arrived  in  Samoa  March 
23,  1891,  and  was  at  the  mission 
headquarters  at  Fagalii  on  the  island 
of  Opolu,  when  she  died  in  childbed 
June  29,  1891.  Her  infant  baby  boy 
died  the  same  day.  They  were  both 
buried  in  the  same  coffin.  By  permis- 
sion of  the  manager  of  the  German 
plantation,  the  brethren  buried  them 
on  the  brow  of  a  hill,  about  two  hun- 
dred yards  from  the  mission  house  at 
Fagalii. 

MIJjLER,  Lewi.s  Edgar,  an  Elder 
who  died  in  the  missionary  field,  was 
born  March  4,  1882,  in  Riverton,  Salt 
Lake  county,  Utah,  the  son  of  Charles 
E.  Miller  and  Christine  G.  McAllister. 
He  was  baptized  May  1,  1890,  by 
Samuel  L.  Howard  and  later  ordained 
an  Elder.  He  was  set  apart  for  a  mis- 
sion to  the  Northern  States  May  12, 
1908,  and  left  Salt  Lake  City  May  15, 
190  8,  to  take  up  his  labors  in  the 
missionary  field.  While  discharging 
the  duties  of  his  calling  in  Chicago, 
111.,  he  was  taken  by  a  violent  chill 
at  the  close  of  a  meeting  held  March 
29,  1910.  Pneumonia  developed  the 
next  day  and  he  was  immediately 
sent  to  the  Rhodes'  Avenue  Hospital, 


684  LATTER-DAY   SAINT 

where  he  was  attended,  but  died  on  arrived  at  Apia  July  5,  1908,  and  for 

Thursday,  April  8,  1910.   His  remains,  four  months  labored  on  the  island  of 

accompanied  by  Elder  Alvln  F.  Wade,  Upolu  and  was  then  assigned  to  ac- 

were  sent  to   his  home  in   Riverton,  company  Elder  William  Kennison  to 

where   impressive   funeral   services  the  island  of  Savaii.    En  route  to  the 

were  held  April   13th.     Elder  Miller  latter  island   in  a  sailing  vessel,   he 

was  twenty-eight  years  old  and   un-  was  overcome  with  heat;    he  lapsed 

married.    Besides  his  parents,  he  left  into   unconsciousness  and   his  condl- 

two  brothers  and  four  sisters.  tion  became  so  serious  that  his  com- 
panion chartered  a  steamer  and  took 

MOODY,  Ella  Adelia,  a  missionary  him  to  the  mission  headquarters  at 
sister  who  died  while  filling  a  for-  Apia.  There  he  received  medical  at- 
elgn  mission,  was  born  Oct.  31,  1874,  tention  and  tender  nursing  on  the 
in  Spanish  Fork,  Utah  county,  Utah,  part  of  his  colleagues,  but  he  died 
the  daughter  of  David  D.  Williams  Dec.  12,  1908,  five  weeks  after  the 
and  Rosina  Allen.  She  was  baptized  sun-stroke.  The  funeral  occurred  the 
in  the  winter  of  188  2  by  William  next  day  and  the  remains  were  in- 
Solomon,  and  married  William  Airrert  terred  in  the  Apia  cemetery.  His 
Moody  of  Thatcher,  Graham  county,  missionary  companions  spoke  of  El- 
Arizona.  In  obedience  to  a  call  from  der  Morris  in  the  highest  terms, 
the  Church  authorities  she  accom- 
panied her  husband  on  a  mission  to  >rUTR,  David  M.,  an  Elder  who  died 
Samoa.  She  was  set  apart  by  Elder  while  filling  a  foreign  mission,  was 
Abraham  H.  Cannon  Oct.  12,  1894,  born  April  26,  1862.  in  Beaver,  Beav- 
and  arrived  in  Samoa  Nov.  2nd  of  the  er  county,  Utah,  the  son  of  John 
same  year.  On  the  journey  she  was  Walter  and  Grace  Muir.  He  was  set 
quite  sick,  in  fact  her  health  had  not  apart  for  a  mission  to  Great  Britain 
been  good  for  a  number  of  years,  and  Aug.  26.  1898,  by  Elder  Heber  J. 
she  did  not  improve  after  arriving  in  Grant,  and  arrived  In  Scotland,  where 
the  mission.  She  gave  birth  to  a  he  had  been  appointed  to  labor,  Sept. 
daughter  May  3,  1895,  and  for  two  17,  1898.  After  staying  in  the  city  of 
or  three  days  she  appeared  to  be  pro-  Glasgow  eight  days,  making  some  pre- 
gressing  favorably,  but  then  fever  set  liminary  preparations  for  active  mls- 
in,  which  prevented  her  from  obtain-  sionary  work,  he  addressed  the  saints 
ing  sleep.  As  a  consequence  she  be-  In  the  Glasgow  branch  on  Sunday, 
came  delirious,  her  vitality  began  to  Sept.  25th,  taking  for  his  subject 
ebb,  and  on  the  evening  of  May  24,  "The  Atonement  of  Christ."  On  the 
18  95,  she  passed  peacefully  away  at  Tuesday  following,  according  to  his 
the  mission  house  at  Fagalii,  on  the  appointment,  he  went  to  Fifeshire, 
island  of  Upolu.  his  field  of  labor.  He  stayed  In  Dun- 
fermline about  a   week,  visiting  the 

MORRIS,  George  Edwin,  one  of  the  saints  and  attending  to  other  duties 

Elders  who  died  while  filling  a  for-  in  company  with  Elders  Robert  Mc- 

eign  mission,  was  born  Dec.  6,  1887,  Kinlay  and  Joseph  Wickens.      From 

at   Rockville,   Washington   county,  here   he   wrote   a   letter  to   Glasgow, 

Utah,   the   son   of  Hyrum   B.   Morris  stating  that  he  had  arrived  safely  and 

jun.  and  Eliza  Smith.    He  was  bap-  ordering  several  hundred  tracts.  This, 

tlzed  Dec.  6,  1895,  by  his  father  and  it  Is  believed,  was  the  last  letter  he 

later  ordained  an  Elder.  While  resid-  ever  wrote.     When  he,  accompanied 

Ing  with  his  parents  at  Mesa,  Marl-  by  Elder  Wickens,  went  to  Lochgelly 

copa  county,  Arizona,  he  was  called  on  the  7th  of  October,  he  was  ill,  and 

on    a   mission    to    Samoa,    being    set  on   the   following   day   he   was   com- 

apart  for  the  same  May  14,  1908.    He  pelled  to  go  to  bed.    As  soon  as  his 


BIOGRAPHICAL  ENCYCLOPEDIA. 


CSS 


I 


condition  became  known,  Elder  Mc- 
Knight,  laboring  in  the  neighboring 
field,  went  to  render  assistance,  and 
two  days  later  Elder  Edward  went 
from  Glasgow.  The  seriousness  of 
Brother  Muir's  condition  then  became 
fully  known,  but  after  the  adminis- 
tration and  prayers  of  the  Elders,  his 
condition  seemed  to  become  some- 
what improved,  until  Wednesday,  Oct. 
19,  1898,  when  another  change  came, 
and,  "that  night  his  spirit  took  its 
flight  from  this  world  of  care  and 
sorrow  to  dwell  in  peace  with  the 
righteous  who  have  gone  before." 
The  attending  physician.  Dr.  Frank 
Dendle,  did  all  in  his  power  to  give 
relief,  on  several  days  making  two  or 
three  visits;  and  after  all  was  over 
tendered  his  services  gratuitously,  re- 
fusing any  remuneration,  save  the 
thanks  and  appreciation  of  the  fellow- 
laborers  and  friends  of  the  deceased. 
Bro.  Muir's  mission  in  Scotland  was 
short;  but  during  the  time  he  was 
there,  he  won  the  love  of  every  one 
who  had  the  pleasure  of  meeting  him. 
His  quiet,  unselfish  manner  and  gen- 
erous, uncomplaining  nature  won  him 
immediate  friends.  Previous  to  his 
mission  to  Scotland  he  filled  a  three 
years'  mission  in  New  Zealand  (1887- 
1890).  At  home  he  was  an  active 
worker  in  the  local  Sabbath  school 
and  Improvement  Association,  and 
once  presided  over  the  Y.  M.  M.  I.  A. 
of  Beaver.  He  was  also  one  of  the 
seven  presidents  of  the  12th  quorum 
of  Seventy  in  the  Beaver  Stake. 

NELSON,  John  E.,  an  Elder  who 
died  in  the  missionary  field,  was  born 
April  16,  1878,  at  Spanish  Fork,  Utah 
county,  Utah,  the  son  of  Andrew  Eke- 
lund  Nelson  and  Johanna  M.  C.  Rig- 
trup.  He  was  baptized  Aug.  5,  1886, 
by  A.  R.  M.  Beck,  and  afterwards 
ordained  to  the  Priesthood;  later  he 
was  ordained  a  Seventy,  and  was  a 
resident  of  the  Spanish  Fork  First 
Ward  April  3,  1906,  when  he  was  set 
apart  for  a  mission  to  California.  He 
was    prosecuting    his    labors    in    the 


ministry  in  that  State  when  he  died 
Oct.  15,  1907,  in  Oakland,  with  ma- 
laria fever  and  pneumonia.  Two 
weeks  later  his  remains  were  shipped 
to  his  home  in  Spanish  Fork,  arriv- 
ing there  Oct.  24,  1907,  in  care  of 
Pres.  Joseph  E.  Robinson.  The  board 
of  health  in  California,  fearing  that 
the  Elder  had  died  with  a  contagious 
disease,  had  caused  the  delay  in  shTp- 
ping  the  body  home.  Elder  Nelson 
was  a  faithful  missionary,  devoted  to 
his  work,  and  left  a  wife  and  several 
children.  At  the  funeral  held  in 
Spanish  Fork,  five  brothers  and  one 
nephew  of  the  deceased  acted  as  pall- 
bearers. 

NESLEN,  Samuel  FYancis,  an  El- 
der who  died  while  filling  a  mission, 
was  born  Sept.  30,  1831,  in  Lowes- 
toft, county  of  Suffolk,  England,  the 
son  of  Samuel  Neslen  and  Eunice 
Francis.  He  was  baptized  in  1852, 
ordained  to  the  office  of  a  Priest  soon 
afterwards  and  labored  in  the  local 
ministry  until  he  emigrated  to  Utah, 
together  with  his  father  and  family, 
sailing  from  Liverpool,  England,  in 
the  ship  "Golconda,"  Jan.  23,  1853. 
Soon  after  his  arrival  in  Utah  he  was 
ordained  a  Seventy  and  became  a 
member  of  the  3  9th  quorum  of  Sev- 
enty. In  the  summer  of  1855  he  was 
one  of  a  number  of  Elders  who  were 
sent  as  an  escort  to  Apostle  Orson 
Hyde,  when  he  went  as  judge  to  Car- 
son Valley.  In  August  following,  El- 
der Neslen  returned  to  Utah  as  an  es- 
cort to  Apostle  P.  P.  Pratt,  returning 
from  a  mission  to  California.  In  the 
fall  of  185  6  he  was  called  on  a  mis- 
sion to  England.  The  first  night  after 
leaving  Salt  Lake  City  he  campeu  m 
the  mountains  all  alone,  being  unable 
to  overtake  his  company  which  had 
started  ahead  of  him.  This  brought 
on  a  severe  cold,  which  finally  termi- 
nated in  consumption  and  death.  Af- 
ter his  arrival  in  Liverpool,  in  De- 
cember, 1856,  he  was  appointed  by 
Apostle  Orson  Pratt  to  labor  in  the 
South  pastorate,  under  the  direction 


686 


LATTER-DAY   SAINT 


of  his  brother,  Robert  F.  Neslen;  af- 
terwards he  presided  over  the  Wilt- 
shire conference,  occupying  that  posi- 
tion until  Jan.  21,  1858,  when  he 
sailed  from  Liverpool,  together  with 
his  brother  Robert  and  other  Elders. 
He  had  been  sick  all  the  time  while 
laboring  in  England,  and  when  he  ar- 
rived in  New  York  he  was  unable  to 
proceed  any  further,  being  so  weak 
that  he  could  not  even  walk  ashore. 
His  brother  remained  with  him  and 
waited  upon  him  until  he  died,  May 
13,  1858,  in  Williamsburg.  He  was 
buried  in  Cypress  Hill  cemetery. 

NIBLEY,  Preston,  a  member  of  the 
General  Board  of  Y.  M.  M.  I.  A.,  was 
born  May  26,  1884,  in  Logan,  Utah, 
the  son  of  Charles  W.  Nibley  and 
Ellen  Ricks.  He  was  baptized  May 
26,    18i)2,    by    John    Rouche     in     the 


Logan  Temple;  ordained  a  Deacon  by 
Henry  Ballard;  ordained  an  Elder 
March  31,  1903,  by  Anthon  Ander- 
son and  filled  a  mission  to  Germany 
in  1903-1906,  laboring  for  eighteen 
months  as  president  of  the  Berlin 
conference.  He  passed  through 
many  peculiar  experiences  at  that 
time,  when  the  American  Elders 
were  constantly  banished  from  Ger- 
many for  preaching  the  gospel.     In 


1906-1907  Preston  Nibley  was  a 
student  at  the  University  of  Chicago, 
taking  a  general  educational  course. 
In  1908  (Sept.  18th)  he  married 
Anna  Parkinson  (daughter  of  Geo. 
C.  Parkinson  and  Lucy  Ann  Doney), 
who  was  born  Jan.  30,  1886,  at 
Franklin,  Idaho.  There  have  been 
three  children  born  to  them,  namely, 
Eleanor,  Luck  Deanne  and  Preston  P. 
While  residing  in  Logan  Bro.  Nibley 
served  as  a  member  of  the  Cache 
Stake  Sunday  School  Board.  He 
moved  to  Salt  Lake  City  with  his 
family  in  1911.  In  the  fall  of  1911 
he  was  chosen  as  second  counselor  in 
the  superintendency  of  the  Liberty 
Stake  Y.  M.  M.  I.  A.  After  moving 
into  the  Eleventh  Ward,  Salt  Lake 
City,  he  was  chosen  as  president  of 
the  Ward  Y.  M.  M.  I.  A.  and  in  1919 
he  was  chosen  as  a  member  of  the 
General  Board  of  Y.  M.  M.  I.  A.  El- 
der Nibley's  chief  occupation  is  that 
of  real  estate  and  manufacturing, 
and  by  his  business  tact  and  finan- 
cing ability  has  become  well  known 
in  the  commercial  centers  of  the 
city.  He  has  also  acted  as  a  member 
of  the  Utah  State  Historical  Society 
and  is  at  present  corresponding 
secretary  of  that  organization. 

OKELIJERRY,  Peter,  an  Elder  who 
died  in  the  missionary  field,  was  born 
Feb.  26,  1890,  at  Marion,  Cassia  coun- 
ty, Idaho,  the  son  of  Martin  Okelber- 
ry  and  Christina  Sandberg.  He  was 
baptized  Aug.  7,  1898,  by  Harvey 
Sessions  and  later  ordained  an  Elder. 
He  resided  in  the  Hazel  Ward,  Cassia 
county,  Idaho,  when  he  was  set  apart 
for  a  mission  to  California  Dec.  5, 
1916.  While  endeavoring  to  perform 
his  duties  as  a  missionary,  he  took 
sick  and  died  with  hemorrhage  of  the 
brain  at  Santa  Ana,  Orange  county, 
California,  May  22,  1917.  The  body 
was  shipped  home  to  Idaho,  accom- 
panied by  the  mother  and  a  brother 
of  the  deceased. 

OKERLUND,  Ivan  George,  an  El- 
der who  died  in  the  missionary  field. 


BIOGRAPHICAL  ENCYCLOPEDIA. 


687 


was  born  May  10,  1892,  in  Loa, 
Wayne  county,  Utah,  the  son  of  Geo. 
W.  Okerlund  and  Lida  Hunt.  He  was 
baptized  in  1900  by  Ola  Okerlund, 
and  later  ordained  to  the  Priesthood. 
While  still  residing  with  his  parents 
in  Loa,  he  was  called  on  a  mission 
to  the  Eastern  States,  being  set  apart 
for  that  mission  July  10,  1912,  and 
left  home  July  12,  1912.  He  was  duly 
set  apart  for  his  mission  and  on  his 
arrival  at  mission  headquarters  he 
was  assigned  to  West  Virginia.  He 
had  labored  in  the  mission  field  less 
than  two  months  when  he  was  strick- 
en with  typhoid  fever  and  was  placed 
in  a  hospital  in  Fairmont,  West  Vir- 
ginia, where  he  died  Oct.  11,  1912, 
after  being  in  the  hospital  ten  days. 
His  body  was  prepared  for  shipment 
and  sent  in  a  metallic  case  in  care  of 
a  returning  Elder  to  the  home  of  the 
deceased  Elder's  parents  in  Loa, 
Wayne  county,  Utah.  Brother  Oker- 
lund had  always  lived  a  pure,  up- 
right life,  was  beloved  by  his  neigh- 
bors and  the  student  body  of  the 
Snow  Academy  at  Ephraim,  for  his 
generous  nature  and  noble  character. 
The  funeral  was  held  in  the  Wayne 
Stake  Tabernacle  at  Loa  Oct.  20, 
1912.  Brother  Okerlund  was  the  sec- 
ond Elder  from  the  Wayne  Stake  oi 
Zion  who  had  died  in  the  mission 
field. 

OLDHAM,  Royal  Price,  an  Elder 
who  died  in  the  missionary  field,  was 
born  March  29,  1891,  at  Paradise, 
Cache  county,  Utah,  the  son  of  Sam- 
uel Oldham  and  Mary  Jane  Price.  He 
was  baptized  May  2,  1899,  by  S.  G. 
Spillman,  and  later  was  ordained  to 
the  Priesthood,  being  a  member  of 
the  118th  quorum  of  Seventy.  He  re- 
sided at  Paradise,  Utah,  when  he  was 
called  on  a  mission  to  the  Eastern 
States,  being  set  apart  for  that  call- 
ing June  6,  1911.  Soon  after  his  ar- 
rival at  mission  headquarters  he  com- 
menced successful  missionary  labors. 
In  company  with  Clarence  Glenn  Eld- 
redge  of  Woods  Cross,  Utah,  he  was 


out  boat-riding  near  Charleston,  West 
Virginia,  Oct.  2,  1912,  when  the  oca* 
capsized,  throwing  its  occupants  into 
the  running  stream.  Bro.  Eldredge 
succeeded  in  swimming  ashore,  but 
Elder  Oldham  was  drowned,  and  for 
some  time  his  body  could  not  be 
found.  After  a  thorough  search,  how- 
ever, it  was  secured  and  prepared  for 
shipment.  It  was  sent  home  over  the 
Union  Pacific  Railroad,  in  care  of 
Elder  Len.   R.  Bailey. 

OLSON,  Nephi  Robert,  an  Elder 
who  died  while  filling  a  foreign  mis- 
sion, was  born  Jan.  20,  1892,  at 
Fountain  Green,  Sanpete  county, 
Utah,  the  son  of  Olof  Olson  and  Car- 
rie O.  Borg,  He  was  baptized  in  July, 
1900,  by  T.  N.  Taylor,  and  resided 
with  his  parents  in  Lovell,  Big  Horn 
county,  Wyoming,  when  he  was  called 
on  a  mission  to  Sweden  in  1911,  be- 
ing then  only  nineteen  years  old.  He 
was  set  apart  for  his  mission  June 
27,  1911,  arrived  in  Malmo,  Sweden, 
July  18,  1911,  and  called  to  labor  in 
the  Sk&ne  conference.  After  laboring 
a  few  months  in  the  Christianstad 
branch,  he  was  moved  to  the  Helsing- 
borg  branch,  where  he  had  labored 
only  a  short  time  when  he  began  to 
complain  of  pain  near  his  lungs.  Af- 
ter consulting  a  physician,  he  was 
taken  to  the  hospital  in  Helsingborg, 
when  it  was  discovered  that  he  was 
suffering  with  lung  disease.  He  con- 
tinued to  grow  worse,  and  in  the 
morning  of  Feb.  13,  1912,  he  passed 
away  from  this  sphere  of  action.  His 
body  was  embalmed,  properly  dresseu 
and  placed  in  a  zinc  casket  anu 
shipped  to  his  home  in  Wyoming  for 
interment,  in  charge  of  Elder  Gustaf 
E.  Olsen,  of  Glencoe,  Idaho.  Impres- 
sive funeral  services  were  held  at 
Lovell,  Wyoming,  March  11,  1912. 
During  the  funeral  exercises,  the 
young  man's  mother  arose  from  her 
seat  among  the  mourners  and  asked 
for  the  privilege  of  speaking.  With 
her  hand  upon  the  casket,  wherein 
lay  the  mortal  remains  of  her  son, 


688 


LATTER-DAY   SAINT 


the  aged  woman,  without  a  quiver  In 
her  voice  or  a  tear  in  her  eye,  bore 
a  powerful  testimony  and  said  sne 
acknowledged  the  hand  of  God  in  all 
things. 

PARRISH,  Joseph  Alonzo,  Bishop 
of  Peterson  (Morgan  Stake),  Morgan 
county,  Utah,  was  born  Aug.  20,  1873, 
at  Centerville,  Davis  county,  Utah, 
the  son  of  Joel  Parrish  and  Emma 
Ford.  He  was  baptized  in  January, 
1881,  by  Thomas  Howells,  and  or- 
dained successively  to  the  offices  of 
Deacon,  Priest  and  Elder.  He  was  or- 
dained a  Seventy  Sept.   27,   1908,  by 


Charles  Tucker,  and  ordained  a  High 
Priest  and  Bishop  March  6,  1909,  by 
Hyrum  M.  Smith  and  set  apart  to  pre- 
side over  the  Peterson  Ward,  which 
position  he  held  until  March  10,  1912, 
when  he  was  set  apart  to  preside  over 
the  Mountain  Green  Ward,  which  po- 
sition he  still  holds.  In  1902-1903 
Bro.  Parrish  filled  a  mission  to  the 
Southern  States.  At  home  he  has  held 
several  civil  offices;  thus  he  acted 
four  years  as  a  commissioner  in  Mor- 
gan county.  His  main  occupation  is 
that  of  a  farmer  and  stock  raiser.  In 
1906  (Feb.  21st)  he  married  Ida  C. 
Cook  (daughter  of  David  S.  Cook), 
who  bore  him  eight  children,  namely, 


Ruth,  David,  Wallace,  Elizabeth,  Gor- 
don, Mary,  Joseph,  and  Josephine. 

PARRY,  Caleb,  an  Elder  who  died 
while  filling  a  foreign  mission,  was 
born  Oct.  24,  1824,  in  New  Market, 
Flintshire,  North  Wales,  the  son  oi 
John  Parry  and  Mary  Williams.  Be- 
ing converted  to  "Mormonism,"  he 
was  baptized  in  Wales  and  emigrated 
to  Utah  in  18  49,  crossing  the  Atlantic 
in  the  ship  "Bueno  Vista,"  and  lo- 
cated in  Salt  Lake  City,  where  he 
was  ordained  a  Seventy.  In  1854  he 
located  in  Marriottsville,  near  Ogden, 
Utah,  where  he  resided  in  1870,  when 
he  was  called  on  a  mission  to  Great 
Britain.  Being  set  apart  for  that  mis- 
sion by  Daniel  H.  Wells  May  8,  1870, 
he  arrived  in  Liverpool  June  5th, fol- 
lowing, and  was  appointed  to  succeed 
Elder  Levi  W.  Richards  in  the  presi- 
dency of  the  Monmouthshire  confer- 
ence, where  he  labored  with  much 
zeal,  diligence  and  faithfulness  until 
July,  1871,  when  he  proceedea  \o 
Birmingham,  to  succeed  Elder  Lot 
Smith  in  the  presidency  of  that  con- 
ference. He  was  faithfully  perform- 
ing his  duties  as  president  of  the 
Birmingham  conference  when  he  was 
fatally  attacked  by  that  dread  disease 
the  small-pox,  and  died  Sept.  19, 
1871.  He  was  buried  in  Birmingham 
In  the  same  grave  (according  to  the 
custom  in  England)  that  contains  the 
bodies  of  James  H.  Flanigan  and  Wm. 
Burton,  two  Elders  from  Utah  who 
had  previously  died  in  Great  Britain. 
Brother  Parry  married  two  wives  in 
his  life  time.  His  first  wife  was  Cath- 
erine Vaughan,  who  was  born  Dec. 
14,  1826,  in  the  parish  of  Guilds- 
field,  Montgomeryshire,  North  Wales. 
She  was  converted  to  "Mormonism" 
in  1847  and  was  married  to  Caleb 
Parry  Feb.  25,  1849.  She  bore  her 
husband  eight  children  (seven  boys 
and  one  girl),  namely,  Caleb  E.,  Bar- 
nard E.,  Llewellyn  E.,  Brigham  E., 
Myron  V.,  Leo,  Rudolph  and  Rose. 
About  1857  Bro.  Parry  married  Win- 
nifred  Parry,   who  was  born  July  4, 


BIOGRAPHICAL  ENCYCLOPEDIA. 


689 


1837,  in  Newmarket,  North  Wales, 
and  emigrated  to  Utah  in  185  6,  cross- 
ing the  plains  in  Edward  Bunker's 
hand-cart  company.  This  union  was 
blessed  with  three  children,  namely, 
Gronway,  John  and  Mary  Frances. 
His  wife  Winnifred  died  Oct.  17, 
1864,  in  Ogden,  Utah,  and  his  first 
wife,  Catherine,  died  Nov.  20,  1893, 
at  Marriott,  Utah.  Elder  Parry  was 
survived  by  his  first  wife  and  seven 
children. 

PAXTON,  Robert  Anthony,  an  El- 
der of  the  Church  who  died  in  the 
missionary  field,  was  born  Oct.  25, 
1874,  at  K  a  n  0  s  h,  Millard  county, 
Utah,  the  son  of  James  Mills  Paxton 
and  Elizabeth  Brown.  He  was  bap- 
tized May  7,  1885,  by  Elder  Ammon 
L.  Rappleye.  He  held  the  office  of  a 
Seventy  and  was  set  apart  by  Jon- 
athan G.  Kimball,  April  12,  1899,  for 
a  mission  to  the  Southern  States,  and 
arrived  in  that  field  five  days  later 
and  was  assigned  to  labor  in  the 
South  Carolina  conference.  As  a  trav- 
eling Elder  he  made  very  rapid  prog- 
ress and  was  performing  a  faithful 
work,  when  summoned  by  the  hand 
of  death.  Elder  Paxton  was  taken 
sick  with  chills  and  fever  at  Green- 
wood, Aug.  9,  1900,  but  the  attack 
was  not  regarded  as  serious.  On  the 
18th  he  went  to  Blackburg,  South 
Carolina,  where  he  could  be  among 
the  saints  and  receive  the  care  and 
attention  he  needed.  The  next  aay  a 
physician  was  summoned  and  found 
him  suffering  from  nervous  prostra- 
tion. For  a  few  days  he  appeared  to 
be  improving  and  it  was  not  until 
August  25th  that  an  opposite  change 
was  perceptible.  Nothing  was  left  un- 
done that  could  be  done  to  promote 
his  comfort  and  recovery,  but  he 
steadily  grew  weaker,  and  at  four 
o'clock  in  the  afternoon  on  the  27th 
of  Aug.,  1900,  he  was  summoned  by 
the  hand  of  death  to  the  other  side. 

PECK,  Bryan  Ward,  an  Elder  of 
the  Church  who  died  in  the  mission- 
ary field,  was  born  Dec.  31,  1877,  in 


Gentile  Valley,  Bannock  county,  Ida- 
ho, the  son  of  Hezekiah  H.  Peck  and 
Mary  S.  Nowlan.  He  was  baptized  by 
his  father  May  6,  1886,  and  ordained 
a  Seventy  June  14,  1899,  by  John 
Henry  Smith,  and  on  the  same  day 
set  apart  for  a  mission  to  the  South- 
ern States.  When  he  arrived  in  the 
mission  field  in  October,  following, 
he  was  appointed  to  labor  in  the  Mid- 
dle Tennessee  conference.  Although 
of  a  reserved  disposition,  he  was  ex- 
ceedingly earnest  and  very  faithful  in 
the  performance  of  the  many  duties 
incident  to  missionary  life.  Early  in 
February,  1900,  he  was  taken  sick 
with  a  severe  attack  of  the  measles, 
terminating  in  acute  bronchitis.  His 
sickness  was  not  considered  serious 
until  Saturday,  Feb.  24,  1900,  when 
he  took  a  change  for  the  worse.  At 
the  time  of  his  sickness  he  was  near 
Ai,  Putman  county,  Tennessee,  for- 
tunately among  friends,  who  did  all 
in  their  power  to  check  the  hand  of 
the  destroyer,  but  without  avail.  He 
died  on  the  afternoon  of  Feb.  27, 
1900.  The  body  was  taken  to  Nash- 
ville, embalmed,  and  sent  home  in 
charge  of  Elder  Joseph  H.  Belnap. 
Elder  Peck  was  a  single  man,  twenty- 
two  years  of  age,  and  lived  with  his 
parents  in  Gentile  Valley,  Idaho, 
when  called  on  his  mission. 

PERKINS,  Nephi  M.,  an  Elder  who 
died  in  the  missionary  field,  was  born 
May  1,  1867,  at  Franklin,  Oneida 
county,  Idaho,  the  son  of  Joseph 
Perkins  and  Margret  Martin.  He  was 
baptized  when  about  nine  years  of 
age  by  Robert  Croxal,  and  resided  at 
Dayton,  Oneida  county,  Idaho, in  1905. 
Having  previously  been  ordained  a 
High  Priest,  he  was  set  apart  for  a 
mission  to  the  Northern  States,  Dec. 
5,  1'905,  and  left  soon  afterwards  for 
his  field  of  labor.  He  proved  himseir 
to  be  a  very  able  and  efficient  mis- 
sionary, but  took  sick  and  died  while 
presiding  over  the  Indiana  conference 
in  October,  1906.  He  left  a  wife  and 
several  children. 


Vol.  Ill,  No.  44. 


May  15,  1920 


690 


LATTER-DAY   SAINT 


PERRY,  John,  an  Elder  who  died  foreign  mission,  was  born  June  6, 
while  returning  from  a  foreign  mis-  1847.  in  Moderup,  Odense  amt,  Den- 
sion,  was  born  June  21,  1799,  in  the  mark,  the  son  of  Rasmus  and  Anna 
parish  of  Bishop's  Froom,  Hereford-  Marie  Petersen.  Becoming  a  convert 
shire,  England.  He  was  brought  up  to  "Mormonism,"  he  was  baptized 
in  the  established  Church  of  Eng-  Nov.  16,  1860,  and  emigrated  to  Utah 
land,  but  afterwards  joined  the  in  1866.  Soon  after  his  arrival  in 
"United  Brethren,"  with  whom  he  Utah  he  married  Louisa  Jensen  and 
was  a  preacher  for  seven  years.  On  located  in  Castle  Valley,  Utah.  In 
the  8th  day  of  March,  1840,  he  was  1886  (Nov.  1st)  he  was  set  apart  for 
baptized  into  the  Church  of  Jesus  a  mission  to  the  Southern  States, 
Christ  of  Latter-day  Saints  by  Elder  where  he  labored  until  the  spring  of 
Wilford  Woodruff,  near  Froomes  1887,  when  he  was  transferred  to  the 
He  was  shortly  afterwards  or-    Scandinavian  Mission.    He  arrived  in 

Denmark  April  26,  1887,  and  was  ap- 
pointed to  work  in  the  Odense  branch 
of  the  Aarhus  conference.  Here  he 
anxiously  and  energetically  worked 
among  his  relatives  and  friends,  who 
received  him  kindly.  Towards  the 
close  of  May  his  health  began  to  fail. 


Hill. 

dained  to  the  office  of  an  Elder  un- 
der the  hands  of  Brigham  Young  and 
Wilford  Woodruff  at  Stanley  Hill. 
On  the  7th  day  of  September,  1840. 
he  emigrated,  in  company  with  John 
Benbow  and  others,  on  board  the  ship 
"North  America,"  and  arrived  in  Nau- 


voo   on    the    2  4th   day   of   November  He  suffered  from  the  chills  and  fever, 

that  same  year.     In  the  beginning  of  and  acute  pains  in  the  head,  but  ow- 

1846  he  received  his  endowments  and  ing  to  the  faith  exercised  by  himself 

was  ordained  a  Seventy  in  the  Tem-  and   the  brethren,   he   was  much  re- 

ple    at    Nauvoo.      In    the    spring    of  Heved  from  pain  when  annointed.  but 

1846  he  left  Nauvoo  and  went  with  gradually   failed   and   died    June    23, 

his  family  to  Winter  Quarters,  where  1887,  at  Odense,  where  he  also  was 

they  remained  until  June,  1847.  when  buried, 
they  started  for  the  mountains  with 

Charles  C.   Rich  and  others  and  ar-  PETERSON,  Andreas,  president  of 

rived  in  the  Valley  of  the  Great  Salt  the  Scandinavian  Mission  and  a  resi- 

Lake  in  the  fall.      In   1848   he  weni  dent  of  Logan.   Cache  county.   Utah, 

to    Session's    Settlement    (Bountiful)  was    born    June    23.    1849.    at    H&bol 

and   remained   there,   cultivating  the  Parish.    Dahlsland.    Sweden,    the   son 


soil,  until  1852.  At  a  special  con- 
ference held  in  Salt  Lake  City,  Aug. 
28,  1852,  he  was  called  to  take  a 
mission  to  England,  for  which  place 
he  started  on  September  15th  in 
company    with    Orson    Pratt,    Daniel 


of  Pehr  Janson  and  Christina  Janson. 
His  father  was  a  well-to-do  farmer. 
In  the  spring  of  1871  he  left  his  na- 
tive country  and  went  to  Christiania, 
Norway,  where  he  became  a  convert 
to    "Mormonism"    and    was    baptized 


Spencer  and  others.  He  arrived  in  May  25,  1872,  by  Niels  Isaksen.  He 
England  Jan.  24,  1853,  where  he  la-  was  ordained  a  Deacon  Dec.  3,  1872, 
bored  until  1855  and  then  returned  and  a  Teacher  Jan.  14,  1873.  In  April, 
to  America.  He  started  to  cross  me  1873,  at  a  conference  held  in  Chris- 
plains  as  captain  of  a  company  of  tiania,  he  was  called  on  his  first  mis- 
saints  and  on  the  way  was  attacked  sion  and  was  ordained  an  Elder  Aug. 
with  the  cholera  and  died  at  Mormon  3,  1873,  by  Evan  Torgersen.  He  la- 
Grove,  Kansas,  after  eight  hours  of  bored  faithfully  and  successfully  for 
sickness,  July  18,  1855.  four  years  in  the  Stavanger  and  Dram- 
men  branches,  where  he  traveled 
PETERSEN,  Jesper,  a  Latter-day  thousands  of  miles  and  held  hun- 
Saint  Elder  who  died  while  filling  a  dreds   of   public   meetings,    in   many 


BIOGRAPHICAL   ENCYCLOPEDIA. 


631 


places  where  Elders  had  not  been  be- 
fore,  and   baptized   during   this   time 
some  sixty-five  souls.    He  emigrated 
to  America  in   1877,  but  a  few  days 
before  his  departure,  while  on  a  visit 
to  his  native  home  in  Sweden,  he  had 
the  pleasure  of  baptizing  his  mother 
June    9,    1877.     After   his    arrival   in 
Salt  Lake  City,  July  14,  1877,  he  lo- 
cated temporarily  in  Spring  City,  San- 
pete county,  but  made  his  permanent 
home  in  Logan,  Utah,  Jan.   8,   1878. 
In  1878  (July  25th)  he  married  Inga 
Overn,    whom    he    had    baptized    in 
Drammen,    Norway,    April    25,    1877. 
This  union  has  been  blessed  with  five 
sons    and    four    daughters.     In    1883 
Elder  Peterson  was  called  on  a  mis- 
sion to  Scandinavia,  leaving  home  the 
16th  day  of  October.    During  the  fol- 
lowing two  years,  while  laboring  as  a 
traveling  Elder  in  the  Stockholm  con- 
ference,  Sweden,  he  walked   3208 
miles    and    held    190    meetings    with 
strangers  and  baptized   42  souls.    At 
the    fall    conference     (188  4)     he    re- 
ceived an  honorable  release  and  re- 
turned   to    his    home   Nov.    10,    1884. 
Directly  after  his  return  he  was  called 
to  preside   over  the   2nd   quorum   of 
Elders  in  the  Cache  Stake,  which  po- 
sition he  held   until   March   3,    1887, 
when  he  was  ordained  a  High  Priest 
by  Bishop  George  O.  Pitkin,  and  set 
apart  as  a  member  of  the  High  Coun- 
cil of  the  Cache  Stake.     On  the   7th 
day  of  the  same  month  he  was  called 
on  a  mission  as  ordinance  worker  in 
the    Logan    Temple,    which    labor    he 
continued  until  April  27,  1888.    From 
Dec.   15,   1889,  to  Aug.   12,   1898,   he 
acted  as  superintendent  of  the  Logan 
Fourth    Ward    Sunday    School.       In 
March,  1890,  he  was  elected  a  mem- 
ber of  the  city  council  of  Logan  City, 
which  office  he  held  for  two  years. 
He    was    elected    a    member    of    the 
School  Board  of  Logan  City  July  13, 
1891,  which  office  he  held  until  Dec. 
7,  1892,  when  he  was  elected  a  mem- 
ber of  the  Board  of  Education,  hold- 
ing this  office  for  two  years.    In  1898 
he  was  called  on  another  mission  to 


Scandinavia,  leaving  home  Aug.  12th, 
and   while   traveling  through  the 
States  en  route  for  Denmark,  he  vis- 
ited  Independence    (Missouri),   Nau- 
voo    (Illinois),   Kirtland    (Ohio),  the 
Hill  Cumorah  (New  York),  etc.  Soon 
after   his   arrival   in   Copenhagen   he 
took  charge  of  the  Scandinavian  Mis- 
sion,  and   during   the   following  two 
years  and  eight  months  he  visited  the 
different    conferences    in     Denmark, 
Norway    and    Sweden    several    times. 
In    Gillivara,    some    thirty    miles    be- 
yond the  polar  circle,  he  held  a  pub- 
lic  meeting   attended   by   about   two 
hundred  people,  which  was  the  first 
meeting   ever   held   by   a    "Mormon" 
Elder  in  that  part  of  the  world.    Be- 
ing honorably  released  from  his  mis- 
sion April  27,   1901,  he  made  a  trip 
to  the  Orient,  visiting  Constantinople 
in  Turkey,  Beirut  and  Damascus  in 
Syria,  and  other  places;  he  also  trav- 
eled through  Palestine  as  far  south 
as  Bethlehem  and  as  far  east  as  Jer- 
icho.   After  leaving  the  Holy  Land  at 
Joppa,  he  visited  Egypt,  Italy,  Switz- 
erland, France  and  Great  Britain,  and 
arrived  home  July  8,  1901.    In  1910- 
1912  he  filled  a  third  mission  from 
Utah  to   Scandinavia,  this  time  pre- 
siding over  the  Swedish  mission. 
Leaving  home  Aug.   27,  1^10.  he  ar- 
rived   in    Stockholm    Sept.    16th.     On 
this  mission  he  visited  not  only  the 
various    conferences    in    Sweden   sev- 
eral times,  but  many  of  the  branches 
in    the    mission;    he    also    visited    St. 
Petersburg  once  and  Finland   twice. 
He    traveled    34,625    miles    and    at- 
tended  500   meetings.     After   receiv- 
ing an  honorable  release  he  returned 
home,  arriving  in  Logan  Dec.  1,  1912. 
In  May,  1914,  he  was  again  called  to 
labor  as  an  ordinance  worker  in  the 
Logan   Temple,   in   which   he   contin- 
ued  for  about  three  years,   or   until 
April  25,   1917.    Elder  Peterson  is  a 
man    of    ability,    a    good    speaker,    a 
devoted  Latter-day  Saint  and  a  good 
citizen.    He  is  the  head  of  an  exten- 
sive   and    successful    boot    and    shoe 
business  in  Logan. 


692 


LATTER-DAY   SAINT 


PHELPS,  William  Wines,  a  promi- 
nent Elder  in  the  early  days  of  the 
Church,  was  born  Feb.  17,  1792,  at 
Hanover,  Morris  county,  New  Jersey. 
He  received  a  good  education  for 
those  days  and  in  1815  (April  28th) 
he  married  Sally  Waterman,  at  Smyr- 
na, Chenango  county,  New  York;  she 
bore  her  husband  several  children. 
Early  in  life  Mr.  Phelps  was  some- 
what active  in  politics.  While  a  resi- 
dent of  the  State  of  New  York  he  was 
the  editor  of  a  partisan  newspaper 
and  aspired  to  be  a  candidate  for  the 
office  of  lieutenant-governor  of  New 
York,  Wm.  W.  Phelps  is  first  men- 
tioned in  Church  history  in  connec- 
tion  with   a   letter   which   he,   under 


date  of  Jan.  15,  1831,  wrote  at  Can- 
andaigua,  New  York,  to  E.  D.  Howe, 
in  which  he  says  that  he  had  read  the 
"Book  of  Mormon,"  which  he  "could 
not  detect  as  being  an  imposition," 
and  he  had  had  a  ten  hours'  conversa- 
tion with  Sidney  Rigdon,  who  de- 
clared that  he  knew  by  the  power  of 
the  Holy  Ghost  that  the  book  was 
true.  Wm.  W.  Phelps  appeared  in 
Kirtland,  Ohio,  about  the  middle  of 
June,  1831,  just  as  the  Prophet  Jo- 
seph was  preparing  for  his  journey  to 
Missouri.  Brother  Phelps  came,  as  he 
said  "to   do  the  will   of  the  Lord," 


hence  Joseph  inquired  of  the  Lord 
concerning  him  and  received  a  revela- 
tion which  constitutes  the  55th  sec- 
tion of  the  Doctrine  and  Covenants. 
That  revelation  reads  in  part  as  fol- 
lows: "Behold,  thus  saith  the  Lord 
unto  you,  my  servant  William,  yea 
even  the  Lord  of  the  whole  earth, 
thou  art  called  and  chosen,  and  after 
thou  hast  been  baptized  by  water, 
which  if  you  do  with  an  eye  single 
to  my  glory,  you  shall  have  a  remis- 
sion of  your  sins  and  a  reception  of 
the  Holy  Ghost  by  the  laying  on  of 
hands,  and  then  thou  shalt  be  or- 
dained by  the  hand  of  my  servant 
Joseph  Smith  jun.,  to  be  an  Elder 
unto  this  Church,  to  preach  repent- 
ance and  remission  of  sins  by  way  of 
baptism  in  the  name  of  Jesus  Christ, 
the  son  of  the  living  God,  and  on 
whomsoever  thou  shalt  lay  your 
hands,  if  they  are  contrite  before  me, 
you  shall  have  power  to  give  the  Holy 
Ghost.  And  again  you  shall  be  or- 
dained to  assist  my  servant  Oliver 
Cowdery  to  do  the  work  of  printing 
and  of  selecting  and  writing  books 
for  schools  in  this  Church,  that  little 
children  also  may  receive  instruction 
before  me  as  is  pleasing  unto  me. 
And  again,  verily  I  say  unto  you,  for 
this  cause  you  shall  take  your  jour- 
ney with  my  servants  Joseph  Smith 
jun.  and  Sidney  Rigdon,  that  you 
may  be  planted  in  the  land  of  your 
inheritance  to  do  this  work."  Soon 
after  that  W.  W.  Phelps  was  baptized 
and  traveled  as  he  had  been  com- 
manded to  the  western  country,  where 
he  arrived  in  July,  1831.  In  the  His- 
tory of  Joseph  Smith,  the  following 
is  recorded:  "The  first  Sabbath  after 
our  arrival  in  Jackson  county,  Bro. 
William  W.  Phelps  preached  to  a 
western  audience  over  the  boundary 
of  the  United  States,  wherein  were 
present  specimens  of  all  the  families 
of  the  earth,  Shem,  Ham  and  Japh- 
eth.  Several  of  the  Lamanites  or 
Indians  (representatives  of  Shem), 
quite  a  respectable  number  of  ne- 
groes  (descendants  of  Ham,  and  the 


BIOGRAPHICAL  ENCYCLOPEDIA. 


693 


balance  was  made  up  of  citizens  of 
the  surrounding  country  and  fully 
represented  themselves  as  pioneers  of 
the  West."  In  a  revelation  given  in 
July,  1831,  Brother  Phelps  was  com- 
manded to  locate  as  a  printer  for  the 
Church  in  Jackson  county  (Doct.  & 
Gov.  57:11),  and  was  present  when 
Joseph  the  Prophet  dedicated  the 
Temple  lot  at  Independence,  October 
3,  1831;  he  also  attended  the  first 
conference  held  in  the  land  of  Zion 
Aug.  4,  1831,  left  Independence  Aug. 
9,  1831,  and  arrived  in  Kirtland,  Ohio, 
Sept.  1,  1831.  At  a  conference  held 
in  Kirtland  Sept.  12,  1831,  he  was 
instructed  to  stop  at  Cincinnati,  Ohio, 
on  his  way  to  Missouri,  and  purchase 
a  press  and  type  for  the  purpose  of 
establishing  and  publishing  a  month- 
ly paper  for  the  Church  at  Independ- 
ence, Jackson  county,  Missouri,  to  be 
called  the  "Evening  and  Morning 
Star,"  and  he  attended  several  special 
conferences  held  at  Kirtland  and  Hi- 
ram, Ohio,  in  August.  In  November, 
1831,  Wm.  W.  Phelps  and  others  were 
appointed  custodians  of  the  revela- 
tions to  be  printed  in  Missouri.  In 
June,  1831,  he  was  ordained  an  Elder 
by  Joseph  Smith,  and  later  the  same 
year  he  was  ordained  a  High  Priest. 
We  find  Wm.  W.  Phelps  back  in  Mis- 
souri as  early  as  January,  1832,  at- 
tending a  conference  in  Jackson  coun- 
ty. At  a  session  of  a  conference  held 
Jan.  24,  1832,  he,  together  with  Oli- 
ver Cowdery  and  John  Correll,  were 
appointed  to  superintend  schools  in 
the  branches  of  the  Church  in  Jack- 
son county.  Soon  Brother  Phelps  is- 
sued a  prospectus  for  a  monthly  pa- 
per, "The  Evening  and  Morning 
Star,"  the  first  number  of  which  ap- 
peared in  June,  1832.  He  took  an  ac- 
tive part  in  a  special  conference  held 
in  Independence  April  26,  1832,  where 
the  Prophet  Joseph,  then  on  his  sec- 
ond visit  to  Missouri,  was  present.  At 
a  council  held  May  1,  1832,  it  was 
decided  that  t^o  thousand  copies  of 
the  Book  of  Commandments  should 
be  printed,  and  Wm.  W.  Phelps,  Ol- 


iver Cowdery  and  John  Whitmer  were 
appointed  to  revise  and  prepare  such 
revelations  for  the  press  as  should  be 
deemed  proper  for  publication,  and 
print  them  as  soon  as  possible  at  In- 
dependence. Bro.  Phelps  was  attend- 
ing to  the  duties  connected  with  the 
printing  office  in  Jackson  county, 
when  the  mob  on  July  20,  1833,  at- 
tacked his  house,  which  contained  the 
printing  establishment;  the  house  was 
partly  pulled  down,  the  printing  ma- 
terials taken  possession  of  by  the 
mob,  many  papers  destroyed  and  the 
family  and  furniture  thrown  out  of 
doors.  When  the  mob  renewed  their 
depredations  July  23,  1833,  Wm.  W. 
Phelps  and  other  of  the  brethren  of- 
fered themselves  as  a  ransom  for  the 
saints,  being  willing  to  be  scourged, 
or  to  die,  if  that  would  appease  the 
anger  of  the  mob  against  the  saints. 
The  mob  would  not  accept  the  sacri- 
fice of  the  brethren,  however,  but 
renewed  their  threats  of  violence 
against  the  whole  Church.  In  Sep- 
tember, 1833,  Wm.  W.  Phelps  and 
Orson  Hyde  were  dispatched  as  mes- 
sengers to  Jefferson  City,  with  a  peti- 
tion to  Gov.  Daniel  Dunklin,  in  which 
the  saints  prayed  for  protection 
against  the  mob.  They  presented  the 
petition  Oct.  8,  1833,  and  the  gover- 
nor in  answer  said  that  the  attorney 
general  of  the  State  was  absent,  but 
that  on  his  return  he  would  inform 
them  of  his  conclusions  by  mail.  The 
brethren  then  returned  to  Independ- 
ence. Under  date  of  Oct.  19,  1833, 
the  governor  wrote  an  encouraging 
letter  to  Wm.  W.  Phelps,  in  which  he 
gave  the  saints  hope  of  redress  and 
future  protection,  whereupon  the 
saints  resumed  their  usual  labors  in 
Jackson  county  and  engaged  lawyers 
to  defend  them  in  the  courts.  This 
led  to  renewed  hostilities  on  the  part 
of  the  mobbers,  who  in  November, 
1833,  drove  the  saints  away  from 
their  homes  in  Jackson  county.  On 
that  occasion  the  mob  leaders  advised 
Brother  Phelps  and  others  to  flee  for 
their  lives,  or  they  would  be  killed. 


694 


LATTER-DAY  SAINT 


Under  date  of  Dec.  6,  1833,  Wm.  W. 
Phelps  with  others  signed  anotner 
petition  to  Governor  Daniel  Dunklin, 
asking  for  protection  against  mob 
violence — a  prayer  which  practically 
went  unheeded.  Brother  Phelps,  as 
one  of  the  leaders  of  the  Church  in 
Missouri,  continued  to  take  a  most 
active  part  in  pleading  with  the  au- 
thorities in  that  State  for  the  rights 
of  the  saints,  but  without  the  desired 
result;  the  governor's  answers  were 
favorable,  yet  evasive.  In  April,  1834, 
Bro.  Phelps,  with  114  others,  signed 
a  petition  of  the  President  of  the 
United  States,  asking  for  protection 
against  mob  violence  in  Missouri,  but 
no  such  protection  was  ever  given. 
Brother  Phelps  and  the  brethren  as- 
sociated with  him  in  Missouri  kept 
the  Prophet  Joseph  and  others  in 
Kirtland,  Ohio,  posted  in  regard  to 
what  took  place  in  Missouri.  After 
the  arrival  of  Joseph  the  Prophet, 
with  Zion's  Camp,  in  Clay  county, 
Missouri,  a  special  meeting  of  High 
Priests  was  held  July  3,  1834,  on 
which  occasion  the  saints  in  Missouri 
were  organized  Into  a  Stake  of  Zlon, 
with  David  Whitmer  as  president  and 
Wm.  W.  Phelps  and  John  Whitmer 
as  assistants  or  counselors.  After 
that  Bro.  Phelps  took  a  prominent 
part  in  the  meetings  where  matters 
of  importance  were  discussed  pertain- 
ing to  the  welfare  of  the  saints  in 
Missouri.  In  the  early  part  of  1835 
Wm.  W.  Phelps  and  his  son.  Water- 
man, made  their  home  with  the  family 
of  Joseph  the  Prophet  in  Kirtland  and 
assisted  a  committee  which  had  been 
appointed  for  compiling  the  "Book  of 
Doctrine  and  Covenants."  About  this 
time  Brother  Phelps  subscribed  $500 
toward  the  erection  of  the  Kirtland 
Temple.  When  the  Church  in  1835 
purchased  the  Egyptian  mummies  and 
papyrus  from  Michael  H.  Chandler, 
Joseph  employed  Wm.  W.  Phelps  as 
one  of  his  scribes  in  translating  the 
Book  of  Abraham.  At  the  general  as- 
sembly of  the  Church  held  in  Kirt- 
land Aug.  17,  1835,  .Presidents  Wm. 


W.  Phelps  and  John  Whitmer  ar- 
ranged the  Missouri  High  Council  of 
the  Church,  in  order  to  vote  for  the 
acceptance  of  the  "Doctrine  and  Cov- 
enants." On  this  occasion  Brotner 
Phelps  bore  record  that  the  book  pre- 
sented to  the  assembly  was  true. 
When  Emma  Smith,  the  Prophet's 
wife,  in  September,  1835,  was  ap- 
pointed to  make  a  selection  of  sacred 
hymns,  for  the  use  of  the  members  of 
the  Church,  Bro.  Phelps  was  appoint- 
ed to  revise  and  arrange  these  hymns 
for  printing.  During  1836ElderPhelps 
met  frequently  with  the  heads  of  the 
Church  in  Kirtland,  taking  an  active 
part  as  a  representative  of  the  saints 
in  Missouri  in  all  matters  pertaining 
to  the  Church.  At  the  time  of  the 
dedication  of  the  Kirtland  Temple  he 
occupied  a  prominent  seat  in  the 
building  and  took  part  in  the  proceed- 
ings. He  received  the  ordinance  of 
the  washing  of  feet  March  29,  1836, 
in  the  Kirtland  Temple.  In  April, 
1836,  Brother  Phelps  left  Kirtland  on 
his  return  to  Missouri.  On  his  arrival 
in  that  State  he  resumed  his  duties 
as  one  of  the  presidents  of  the  Stake, 
wrote  a  number  of  letters  and  direct- 
ed the  affairs  of  the  Church  in  Mis- 
souri, together  with  his  brethren  who 
were  associated  with  him.  He  also 
formulated  and  signed  petitions  and 
letters  to  Gov.  Daniel  Dunklin  of  Mis- 
souri, pleading  continually  for  the 
rights  of  the  saints,  who  had  been 
driven  from  their  homes  in  Jackson 
county  and  were  about  to  be  expelled 
from  their  possessions  in  Clay  county. 
In  the  latter  part  of  183  6  the  major- 
ity of  the  saints,  including  Brother 
Phelps,  left  Clay  county  and  located 
on  the  prairies  in  what  soon  after- 
wards became  Caldwell  county,  Mis- 
souri. When  steps  were  taken  to 
build  a  Temple  in  Far  West  in  1837, 
he  subscribed  $1000  towards  its  erec- 
tion. On  Saturday,  May  27,  1837, 
Brother  Phelps  was  appointed  post- 
master at  Far  West.  He  acted  as  post- 
master until  Aug.  6,  1838,  when  he  re- 
signed.   When  the  excavation  for  the 


BIOGRAPHICAL   ENCYCLOPEDIA. 


695 


Temple  in  Far  West  was  commenced 
July  3,  1837,  Bro.  Phelps  was  present 
and  took  a  prominent  part  in  the 
proceedings.  In  a  revelation  given  to 
the  Prophet  Joseph  Sept.  4,  1837,  W. 
W.  Phelps  and  John  Whitmer  were 
chastised  for  having  done  things 
which  were  not  pleasing  in  the  sight 
of  the  Lord.  At  a  meeting  held  in 
Far  West,  Missouri,  Feb.  6.  1838,  Wm. 
W.  Phelps  and  his  co-laborers  in  the 
presidency  were  rejected  by  the  saints 
in  the  Carter  settlement,  Missouri. 
Other  branches  of  the  Church  subse- 
quently voted  the  same  way.  During 
the  sessions  of  the  court  of  inquiry 
held  at  Richmond,  Mo.,  in  November, 
1838,  Wm.  W.  Phelps,  who  had  be- 
come bitter  in  his  feelings,  was  among 
those  who  testified  against  the  Churcn 
leaders.  He  was  finally  excommuni- 
cated from  the  Church  at  a  confer- 
ence held  at  Quincy,  Illinois,  March 
17,  1839,  but  early  in  1841  he  was 
received  back  into  fellowship  in  the 
Church  and  was  sent  on  a  mission  to 
visit  the  branches  In  the  Eastern 
States.  After  that  he  again  took  an 
active  part  in  the  affairs  of  the 
Church,  and  he  wrote  a  number  of 
poetical  compositions  during  his  resi- 
dence in  Nauvoo,  and  was  frequently 
used  by  the  Prophet  as  a  special  mes- 
senger to  carry  important  communi- 
cations to  the  governor  of  Illinois  and 
other  State  officials.  Brother  Phelps 
also  served  on  committees,  drafting 
resolutions,  etc.  The  history  of  the 
Church  shows  that  he  frequently 
drafted  and  signed  important  docu- 
ments. When  Joseph  the  Prophet  is- 
sued his  "Views  of  the  Powers  and 
Policy  of  the  General  Government," 
Bro.  Phelps  was  active  in  presenting 
the  document  to  the  public.  In  a  let- 
ter written  Feb.  23,  1844,  Willard 
Richards  explains  that  Wm.  W.  Phelps 
owned  no  property  in  Nauvoo,  but 
that  he  labored  diligently  for  the 
Church  and,  like  all  other  righteous 
men,  scarcely  received  enough  com- 
pensation to  make  a  comfortable  liv- 
ing.   In  the  difficulties  leading  up  to 


the  martyrdom  of  the  Prophet  Joseph 
and  his  brother  Hyrum,  Bro.  Phelps 
was  active  in  his  defense  of  the  rights 
of  his  people.  He  was  also  elected  a 
member  of  the  Nauvoo  city  council, 
and  as  a  member  of  that  body  he  be- 
came mixed  up  in  the  destruction  of 
the  Nauvoo  "Expositor,"  for  which  he 
was  arrested,  tried  and  acquitted. 
After  the  death  of  the  Prophet,  Bro. 
Phelps  remained  loyal  to  the  Twelve 
Apostles  and  expressed  his  views  to 
that  effect  in  the  memorable  meeting 
held  in  Nauvoo  Aug.  8,  18  44,  when 
Brigham  Young  was  acknowledged  as 
the  head  of  the  Church.  When  the 
case  of  Sidney  Rigdon  was  brought 
before  the  meeting  Oct.  8,  1844,  Wm. 
W.  Phelps  moved  that  Elder  Sidney 
Rigdon  be  excommunicated  from  the 
Church.  The  motion  was  carried  and 
Sidney  Rigdon  rejected.  At  the  gen- 
eral conference  held  in  Nauvoo  Oct. 
7,  1844,  Brother  Phelps  moved  that 
the  saints  "uphold  Brigham  Young 
as  the  president  of  the  quorum  of  the 
Twelve,  as  one  of  the  Twelve  and 
first  presidency  of  the  Church,"  which 
motion  was  also  carried.  In  the  latter 
part  of  1844  we  find  Wm.  W.  Phelps 
assisting  Willard  Richards  in  gather- 
ing material  for  the  history  of  the 
Church.  At  a  special  conference  held 
at  Nauvoo  April  7,  1845,  Wm.  W. 
Phelps  moved  that  "we  accept  the  la- 
bors of  Joseph  Smith  as  Prophet,  Seer 
and  Revelator  to  the  nineteenth  cen- 
tury and  that  the  conference  accop* 
the  Twelve  as  the  First  Presidency 
and  leaders  of  the  Church,"  which 
votes  were  carried  unanimously.  In 
September,  1845,  Brother  Phelps  and 
others  of  the  brethren  were  sum- 
moned to  Carthage  to  be  tried  for 
treason.  They  were  promptly  dis- 
charged. At  a  council  meeting  held 
at  Nauvoo  Oct.  4,  1845,  Wm.  W. 
Phelps  and  others  were  appointed  a 
committee  to  write  a  pointed  docu- 
ment relating  to  the  treatment  the 
saints  had  received  from  the  govern- 
ment. Brother  Phelps  and  his  wife 
were  among  the  first  to  receive  their 


CM 


LATTER-DAY   SAINT 


•■dowHaeHti  1h   the  Nauvoo  Temple, 
in   December,    1845,    and   afterwards 
Brother  Phelps  became  an  ordinance 
worker   in    that   sacred    edifice.      He 
was  ever  active  during  the  exodus  of 
the  saints  from  Nauvoo  in  1846  and 
suffered    much   persecution   together 
with    his    co-religionists.      Traveling 
west   with   the   saints,    he    spent   the 
winter  of  1846-1847  at  Winter  Quar- 
ters.    In  April,  1847,  he  was  sent  on 
a  special  mission  to  the  saints  in  the 
East,  carrying  an  important  letter  of 
recommendation     from     the     Twelve 
Apostles.     Part    of    his    business    on 
that  occasion  was  to  procure  a  print- 
ing press  and  type  to  be  used  by  the 
gaints   in   their   exodus.      We   find 
Wm.  W.  Phelps  in  the  early  part  of 
1848    petitioning    the    legislature    of 
Iowa  for  a  county  organization  in  the 
Pottawattamie    lands.      He    took    an 
active  part  in  the   meetings  held   in 
the  log  tabernacle  at  Council  Bluffs, 
and  was  among  the  petitioners  for  a 
post  office  in  the  Pottawattamie  coun- 
try. He  crossed  the  plains  to  Salt  Lake 
Valley  in   1848,  and  on  the  journey 
he   composed    a    song    entitled    "The 
Saints  Upon  the  Prairie."     After  his 
arrival   in   the  Valley   he   became  as 
active   as  he   had   been   in   the   East. 
When  the  Provisional  Government  of 
the   State   of   Deseret   was   organized 
March  4,   1849,  Wm.  W.  Phelps  was 
appointed   to  serve   on  a  number   of 
important  committees,  and  was  also 
one  of  a  committee  appointed  to  draft 
and  report  to  the  convention  a  con- 
stitution under  which  the  inhabitants 
might    organize    and    govern    them- 
selves until  the  Congress  of  the  Uni- 
ted States  should  otherwise  provide 
by  law.     He  also  served  on  a  number 
of  canal  committees  and  was  apoint- 
ed   surveyor-general  and   chief   engi- 
neer of  the  Provisional  State  of  Des- 
eret, April  5,  1849.     At  the  celebra- 
tion held  in  Salt  Lake  City  July  24, 
1849,    Brother    Phelps   read    twenty- 
four  toasts,  given  by  the  twenty-four 
Bishops  in  the  Valley.     When  Parley 
P.  Pratt's  exploring  company  was  or- 


ganized   in    November,    184'9,    to    ex- 
plore   what    is    now    southern    Utah, 
Wm.  W.  Phelps  was  chosen  as  first 
counselor  to  Parley  P.  Pratt,  and  on 
the  journey  he  rendered  efficient  aid 
to  the  expedition,  taking  a  most  ac- 
tive part  in  every  important  matter. 
Thus,    together   with   Dan   Jones,    he 
made    astronomical    observations    in 
regard    to    latitude,    longitude,    etc. 
When  the  expedition  was  overtaken  by 
snow  storms,  Bro.  Phelps  was  among 
those  who  were  frequently  sent  ahead 
to  break  the  road.     When  the  Univer- 
sity of  Deseret  was  organized  in  Salt 
Lake  City,  Wm.  W.  Phelps  was  chosen 
one  of  the  regents  in  that  institution 
of   learning,    and    when    the    Parents 
School   opened   on   Monday,   Feb.    17. 
1851,    Bro.    Phelps    announced    that 
forty   scholars   were   enrolled   at   the 
opening.     After  that  Bro.  Phelps  took 
great  interest  in  the  school  and  was 
one  of  the  most  active  members  on 
the   board    of   regents.      In    1851    he 
was   elected   a   representative   of  the 
Utah  legislature.     He  also  practiced 
law  and  on  several  occasions  de- 
fended   the    brethren    in    their    legal 
rights.      When   the    blessings   of   the 
endowments  were  first  administered 
to  some  of  the   faithful  saints  in 
the  Valley  as  early  as  January,  1852, 
we  find  Wm.  W.  Phelps  taking  part 
as    an    ordinance    worker.      He    fre- 
quently addressed  the  assemblies  of 
the   saints   in   the   old   tabernacle   in 
Salt   Lake   City   and   was   with   the 
presidency    of   the    Church    in    many 
of   their   important    conferences   and 
council  meetings.     In  August,   1852, 
he    was    again    elected    to    the    Utah 
Legislature  as  a  representative  from 
Salt  Lake  county.     On  that  occasion 
he  served  on  the  committee  on  edu- 
cation and  election.     One  of  the  en- 
terprises   which    made    the   name    of 
Wm.  W.  Phelps  famous  in  the  early 
days  of  Utah  was  the  publication  by 
him  of  the  so-called  "Deseret  Alma- 
nac," the  first  of  which  was  issued  in 
1851.      This   meritorious   publication 
gave  astronomical  observations  suit- 


BIOGRAPHICAL   ENCYCLOPEDIA. 


697 


able  for  the  latitude  and  longitude  of 
the  Territory  of  Utah  and  much  other 
valuable  information.  Brother  PheipS 
continued  the  issuance  of  this  alma- 
nac until  about  1865.  In  1853,  1854, 
1855,  1856  and  1857  Wm.  W.  Phelps 
was  again  elected  a  member  of  the 
Utah  Legislature.  He  was  present 
when  the  Endowment  House  in  Salt 
Lake  City  was  dedicated,  May  5, 
1855,  and  afterwards  worked  for 
many  years  as  an  ordinance  worker 
in  that  edifice.  He  was  a  prominent 
member  of  the  Deseret  Theological 
Institute,  which  was  organized  in  Salt 
Lake  City  in  1855.  He  also  became 
prominently  associated  with  the  Des- 
eret Horticultural  Society  organized 
in  1855.  In  the  Utah  legislature  of 
1859  and  18  64  he  served  as  chaplain 
in  the  lower  house,  and  for  several 
years  he  acted  as  a  notary  public  in 
Salt  Lake  City.  Elder  Phelps  was  a 
prominent  member  of  the  High 
Priests  quorum,  and  died  March  7, 
1872,  at  his  home  in  Salt  Lake  City, 
Utah. 

PHILiL/IPS,  Edward,  a  prominent 
Elder  in  the  Church,  was  born  April 
2,  1813,  in  Oxenhall,  Gloucestershire, 
England,  the  son  of  Wm.  Phillips  and 
Mary  Ann  Presdee.  Edward  worked 
with  his  father  on  a  farm  at  Credley 
in  Herefordshire  and  also  learned  the 
blacksmithing  trade.  At  the  age  of 
twelve  years  he  was  left  to  the  care 
of  his  mother.  Like  his  mother  he 
was  religiously  inclined  and  associ- 
ated himself  with  the  United  Breth- 
ren under  Father  Thomas  Kingston. 
They  remained  members  of  that  con- 
gregation until  the  event  of  the  "Mor- 
mon" Elders  into  the  neighborhood. 
Edward  was  the  only  male  member  of 
his  father's  family  to  receive  the  gos- 
pel. He  first  heard  Wilford  Wood- 
ruff preach  at  Ridgeway  Cross  in 
March,  1840,  and  was  baptized  by 
that  Apostle  a  few  days  later.  His 
mother  and  his  sister,  Susan,  followed 
him  into  the  Church.  Almost  im- 
mediately he  was  ordained  a  Priest 


and  placed  in  charge  of  two  branch- 
es (Ashfield  and  Crocrut)  in  Worces- 
tershire. In  the  fall  of  the  same  year 
he  was  ordained  an  Elder  and,  in 
company  with  Elder  John  Galley, 
preached  in  the  forest  of  Dean,  Glou- 
cestershire, England.  In  1841  he  em- 
igrated to  America,  sailing  from  Bris- 
tol for  Quebec  Aug.  8,  1841,  with  a 
company  of  about  one  hundred  saints 
under  Elder  Thomas  Richardson.  By 
way  of  Montreal,  Niagara  Falls,  Buf- 
falo and  Chicago  they  reached  Nau- 
voo.  111.,  in  October,  1841.  Here  El- 
der Phillips  became  well  acquainted 
with  the  Prophet  Joseph.  He  quar- 
ried rock  for  the  Nauvoo  Temple,  and 
made  the  acquaintance  of  Miss  Han- 
nah Simons,  who  became  his  wife 
Aug.  2,  1842.  Brother  Phillips  was 
a  member  of  the  Nauvoo  Legion,  and 
took  part  in  the  movements  of  that 
body  during  the  perilous  times  at 
Nauvoo.  During  the  exodus  in  1846 
the  Phillips  family  came  west,  and 
after  residing  temporarily  at  Council 
Point  they  came  to  the  Valley  in 
1849.  In  the  spring  of  1850  Brother 
Phillips  became  the  first  settler  on 
Kays  Creek  (now  Kaysville),  which 
place  he  helped  to  survey.  He  partici- 
pated in  the  "general  move"  of  the 
saints  south  in  1858,  but  soon  after- 
wards returned  to  Kaysville,  where  he 
acted  as  first  counselor  to  Bishop 
Wm.  Kay  from  1850  to  1856.  It  was 
at  a  meeting  held  in  his  home  that 
the  Kaysville  Ward  was  first  organ- 
ized. He  helped  to  build  the  first 
meeting  house  at  Kaysville  (which 
still  stands  in  good  condition),  and 
also  the  wall  which  was  built  around 
a  quarter  section  of  land  for  protec- 
tion against  Indians.  Bro.  Phillips 
was  chosen  president  of  the  local 
High  Priests  Feb.  27,  1859.  This  of- 
fice he  held  up  to  the  day  of  his 
death,  which  occurred  at  Kaysville 
Dec.  1,  1896.  At  the  time  of  his  de- 
mise he  was  the  oldest  resident  of 
Kaysville  and  a  highly  respected  citi- 
zen. (See  History  of  Utah,  by  Orson 
F.  Whitney,  page  385.) 


698 


LATTER-DAY   SAINT 


PHILLIPS,  Walter  P.,  an  Elder  in 
the  Church  who  died  while  filling  a 
foreign  mission,  was  born  Oct.  16, 
1877,  at  Echo,  Summit  county,  Utah, 
the  son  of  Leonard  Phillips  and  Har- 
riet F.  Norton.  He  was  baptized  in 
1885  by  Elias  Asper.  While  residing 
at  Park  City,  Summit  county,  Utah, 
he  was  called  on  a  mission  to  Hawaii, 
and  was  ordained  a  Seventy  oy  J. 
Golden  Kimball  and  set  apart  for  his 
mission  July  6,  1900.  He  was  accom- 
panied by  his  wife,  Annie  R.  Phil- 
lips. They  arrived  on  the  islands  in 
the  summer  of  1900  and  were  ap- 
pointed to  labor  in  the  North  Hawaii 
conference,  where  Brother  Phillips 
took  sick  with  pneumonia  and  died 
Saturday,  Dec.  14,  1901.  Brother 
Phillips  was  president  of  the  North 
Hawaii  conference  when  he  died,  and 
his  wife  was  with  him  at  the  time  of 
his  demise. 

PRATT,  Addison,  one  of  the  Elders 
who  introduced  the  fulness  of  the 
gospel  on  the  islands  of  the  South 
PacificOcean,  was  born  Feb.  21,  1802, 
in  the  town  of  Wincester,  Cheshire 
county,  New  Hampshire,  the  son  of 
Henry  and  Rebecca  Pratt.  He  mar- 
ried Louisa  Barnes,  who  bore  him 
four  daughters,  namely,  Ellen  So- 
phronla,  born  in  February,  1832,  in 
Ripley,  Chautauqua  county.  New 
York;  Frances  Stevens,  born  Nov.  7, 
1834,  in  Ripley;  Lois  Barnes,  born 
March  6,  1837,  in  Ripley,  and  Ann 
Louisa,  born  April  6,  1840,  in  Clay 
county,  Indiana.  Together  with  Noah 
Rogers,  Benjamin  F.  Grouard  and 
Knowlton  F.  Hanks,  Addison  Pratt 
was  called  on  a  mission  to  the  Pa- 
cific Islands.  He  was  ordained  a  Sev- 
enty by  Brigham  Young  May  23,  1843, 
and  leaving  Nauvoo  June  1,  1843,  he 
traveled,  together  with  his  missionary 
companions,  to  the  Atlantic  coast, 
preaching  the  gospel  on  the  way,  till 
they  arrived  at  New  Bedford,  Mass. 
Here,  being  unable  to  find  a  ship  go- 
ing to  the  Sandwich  Islands,  they  en- 
gaged their  passage  on  the  whaling 


ship  "Timoleon"  and  sailed  from  New 
Bedford  Oct.  9,  1843.  Elder  Hanks, 
who  was  suffering  severely  from  con- 
sumption, died  at  sea  Nov.  3,  1843, 
being  the  first  Latter-day  Saint  mis- 
sionary who  was  assigned  to  a  watery 
grave.  Elders  Pratt,  Rogers  and 
Grouard  landed  on  the  island  of  Tu- 
buai  April  30,  1844,  and  while  his 
two  missionary  companions  proceed- 
ed to  Tahiti,  Elder  Pratt  commenced 
a  most  successful  missionary  labor  on 
Tuhuai  where  he  soon  raised  up  the 
first  branch  of  the  Church  organized 
on  the  islands  of  the  Pacific  Ocean. 
Subsequently  Bro.  Pratt  assisted  El- 
der Grouard  in  his  missionary  labors 
on  the  Tuamotu  group,  where  a  num- 
ber of  branches  of  the  Church  were 
raised  up.  For  many  months  the  El- 
ders heard  nothing  from  their  fam- 
ilies in  America  and  they  met  with 
much  opposition  on  the  part  of  the 
missionaries  sent  out  by  the  London 
Missionary  Society.  Noah  Rogers  soon 
returned  to  America,  but  Elders  Pratt 
and  Grouard  continued  their  labors. 
In  May,  1847,  Elder  Pratt  sailed  for 
America,  leaving  Elder  Grouard  in 
charge  of  the  mission  on  the  Society 
Islands.  On  his  arrival  in  California 
Brother  Pratt  met  a  number  of  the 
saints  from  the  Eastern  States 
who  had  doubled  Cape  Horn  in  the 
ship  "Brooklyn"  and  landed  where 
San  Francisco  now  stands.  He  also 
met  members  of  the  Mormon  Bat- 
talion and  was  appointed  by  Samuel 
Brannan  to  preside  over  the  San 
Francisco  branch  of  the  Church.     In 

1848  he  crossed  the  Sierra  Nevada 
mountains  and  the  deserts  in  what  is 
now  the  State  of  Nevada  and  arrived 
in  Great  Salt  Lake  City  Sept.  28, 
1848.  Here  he  met  his  family  who 
had  arrived  in  the  Valley  a  few  days 
before  his  own  arrival.  Elder  Pratt 
reported  his  mission  on  the  Pacific 
Islands  to  the  president  of  the  Church 
and  now  spent  about  one  year  with 
his  family  at  the  headquarters  of  the 
Church.     During  the  winter  of  1848- 

1849  he  taught  a  school  in  the  Ta- 


BIOGRAPHICAL   ENCYCLOPEDIA. 


699 


hitian  language  in  his  own  house.  He 
was  soon  called  on  another  mission 
to  the  Society  Islands,  but  before 
starting  he  was  taken  by  his  brethren 
onto  the  top  of  Ensign  Peak  July  21, 
1849,  and  given  his  endowment.  To- 
gether with  other  missionaries  he  left 
the  Valley  on  his  second  mission  to 
the  Islands,  Oct.  8,  1849,  and  traveled 
the  southern  route  to  California, 
whence  he  embarked  for  Papeete,  Ta- 
hiti, where  he  arrived  May  24,  1850. 
His  wife  and  four  daughters  followed 
with  a  company  of  Elders  six  months 
later.  Bro.  Pratt  now  resumed  his 
missionary  labors  on  the  islands,  but 
met  with  much  opposition  on  the  part 
of  the  French  authorities,  the  islands, 
through  diplomatic  negotiations  be- 
tween Great  Britain  and  France,  hav- 
ing become  a  French  colony.  As 
"Mormonism"  was  not  known  or  tol- 
erated in  France,  the  French  officials 
on  the  Society  Islands  decided  that 
it  could  not  be  recognized  in  a  French 
colony;  hence  all  the  American  El- 
ders were  banished  from  the  Islands 
in  1852.  Elder  Pratt  and  his  family 
sailed  from  Papeete  May  16,1852,  and 
reached  San  Francisco  in  safety  July 
1,  1852.  Soon  after  his  arrival  in 
America  Bro.  Pratt  became  disaffect- 
ed and  never  made  his  home  in  Utah 
after  that.  He  was  won  over  by  the 
Spiritualists  and  after  spending  the 
remainder  of  his  days  in  California, 
he  died  at  Anaheim,  Orange  county, 
California,  Oct.  14,  1872,  seventy 
years  and  eight  months  old.  His  wife, 
Louisa  Barnes,  was  born  Nov.  10, 
1802,  in  Franklin  county,  Massachu- 
setts, and  died  in  Beaver,  Utah,  in 
1879.  His  daughter  Ellen  Sophronia 
married  William  McGarry  and  died 
at  Anaheim,  California,  Aug.  9,  1885. 
His  daughter  Frances  Stevens  mar- 
ried James  Dwyer  and  died  in  Cali- 
fornia. His  daughter  Lois  Barnes 
married  John  Hunt  and  died  in  Snow- 
flake,  Arizona,  March  9,  1885.  His 
daughter  Ann  Louisa  married  Thomab 
Tilman  Willis  and  lived  in  Idaho  sev- 
eral years  ago. 


RASMUSSEN,  PeterChristian,  Bish- 
op of  Draper  (Jordan  Stake )  Salt  Lake 
county,  Utah  (continued  from  Vol.  2: 
108).  Elder  Rasmussen  acted  as 
first  counselor  to  Bishop  Willard  B. 
Ennis  until  1910,  when  Bishop  Ennis 
was  released.  In  the  spring  of  1910 
he  was  called  on  a  second  mission  to 
Scandinavia,  during  which  he  pre- 
sided over  the  Christiania  conference, 
Norway,  about  twenty  months,  and 
later  had  charge  of  the  Aarhus  con- 
ference, Denmark.  After  his  return 
from  that  mission,  in  1912,  he  was 
chosen  to  act  as  president  of  the  Dra- 
per Y.  M.  M.  I.  A.  and  later  called  to 
act  as  superintendent  of  the  Draper 
Sunday  School.  In  September,  1914, 
he  succeeded  his  brother,  Soren  Ras- 
mussen, as  Bishop  of  the  Draper 
Ward  (being  ordained  by  Orson  F. 
Whitney),  which  position  he  held  un- 
til the  spring  of  1919,  when  he  was 
honorably  released  on  account  of 
moving  away  from  the  Ward.  He  lo- 
cated at  Midvale,  where  he  is  now 
carrying  on  an  extensive  mercantile 
business.  In  January,  1920,  he  was 
chosen  as  an  alternate  member  of  the 
Jordan  Stake  High  Council,  which  po- 
sition he  still  holds.  In  August,  1880, 
Bishop  Rasmussen  married  Mette  Ma- 
ria Jensen  (daughter  of  Jens  Thom- 
sen  Moller  and  Dorthea  Maria  Peter- 
sen), who  was  born  Jan.  27,  1864. 
This  marriage  has  been  blessed  with 
eighteen  children,  namely,  Mary,  Ras- 
mus (dead),  Rasmus,  Mathilda,  Ber- 
tha M.,  Aurelius  P.,  Albert,  Joseph 
S.,  Nephi,  Meta  M.,  Rechart,  Cyril  San 
Clair,  Dagmar  V.,  Moroni,  Lionel  C, 
Owen  W.,  Bernice,  and  Afton  L. 
Seven  of  his  children  are  still  alive 
and  all  are  faithful  members  of  the 
Church. 

RAVSTEN,  Bengt  Matthias,  pre- 
siding Elder  of  the  Trenton  Ward 
(Cache  Stake),  Cache  county,  Utah, 
was  born  August  29,  1838,  at  Sax- 
torp,  Malmohus  Ian,  Sweden,  the  son 
of  Matthias  Ravsten  and  Elna  Par 
Thomassen.     Being  converted  to  the 


700 


LATTER-DAY   SAINT 


restored  gospel,  he  was  baptized  Nov. 
23,  1862,  by  John  Hagman.  He  was 
ordained  an  Elder  by  Carl  F.  Storm- 
felt,  March  15,  1863,  and  appointed 
to  preside  over  the  GS.rdst§.nga 
branch.  In  June,  1863,  his  field  of 
labor  was  changed,  he  being  called  to 
preside  over  the  Kullaberg  branch. 
He  held  this  position  until  August, 
18  64,  when  he  was  called  to  labor  as 
a  traveling  Elder  in  the  Ystad  and 
Cimbrishamn  branches.  At  a  confer- 
ence held  Aug.  27,  1865,  his  field  of 
labor   was  again   changed,   being  ap- 


pointed traveling  Elder  in  the  Lands- 
krona  and  Svalu  branches.  In  Au- 
gust, 1866,  he  was  appointed  travel- 
ing Elder  in  the  Lund  and  G^rd- 
st§.nga  branches.  Later  he  labored  in 
the  same  capacity  in  the  SmS.land  and 
Vexio  district,  and  still  later  in  the 
Karlskrona  and  Karlshamn  branches. 
In  1868  he  was  appointed  to  labor  as 
a  traveling  Elder  in  the  Christianstad 
and  Hessleholm  branches.  In  June, 
1869,  he  was  released  from  his  mis- 
sionary labors  with  permission  to  em- 
igrate to  Zion.  He  crossed  the  At- 
lantic in  the  ship  "Minnesota"  and 
arrived  in  Ogden  Aug.  6,  1869.  After 
working  for  a  short  time  on  the  rail- 
road, he  located  in  Bear  River  City, 
Box  Elder  county,  and  in  May,  1870, 


he  married  Betty  Johnson,  and  soon 
afterwards  located  in  Logan,  Cache 
county,  where  he  labored  as  a  Ward 
teacher,  and  became  a  member  of  the 
School  of  the  Prophets.  He  also  be- 
came a  Sunday  school  teacher  and  af- 
terwards assistant  superintendent  of 
the  Ward  Sunday  school  and  acted  as 
a  home  missionary  in  Cache  county. 
In  1882-1884  he  filled  a  mission  to 
Sweden,  where  he  first  labored  as  a 
traveling  Elder  and  afterwards  as 
president  of  the  Goteborg  conference. 
In  the  spring  of  1888  he  was  called 
to  preside  over  the  Trenton  branch  in 
the  Cache  Stake  of  Zion,  which  po- 
sition he  held  until  1892.  In  1892  he 
was  set  apart  as  a  president  of  Sev- 
enty by  Christian  D.  Fjeldsted,  which 
position  he  held  until  May  19,  1901, 
when  he  was  ordained  a  High  Priest 
by  Samuel  Roskelly.  In  1894-1896 
he  filled  a  second  mission  to  Swe- 
den, on  which  he  presided  over  the 
Sk&ne  conference.  For  several  years 
Bro.  Ravsten  has  been  a  resident  of 
the  town  of  Clarkston,  Cache  county, 
where  all  his  children  reside.  His 
marriage  with  Betty  Johnson  was 
blessed  with  five  children,  namely, 
John,  Ellen,  Bernice,  Frank  and  An- 
na Sophia,  all  born  in  Logan.  The 
two  girls  died  in  infancy,  but  the  boyr 
all  grew  to  manhood. 

READ,  Charles,  an  Elder  who  died 
in  the  missionary  field,  was  born 
Aug.  13,  1891,  in  Hooper,  Weber 
county,  Utah,  the  son  of  Thomas  R. 
Read  and  Martha  E.  Hardy.  He  was 
baptized  when  eight  years  old  by  Ole 
Olsen,  and  while  residing  with  his 
parents  at  Hooper,  Weber  county, 
Utah,  he  was  called  on  a  mission  to 
the  Central  States,  being  set  apart 
for  the  same  May  2,  1911.  On  his 
arrival  at  the  mission  headquarters 
May  6,  1911,  he  was  assigned  to  the 
Oklahoma  conference.  Like  so  many 
others  whom  the  Lord  has  called  into 
His  service.  Elder  Read  was  a  dia- 
mond in  the  rough,  yet  capable  of  re- 
sponding  to   the   polishing   touch    of 


BIOGRAPHICAL   ENCYCLOPEDIA. 


701 


the  Lord's  providence.  He  entered 
upon  his  work  with  a  vim  and  deter- 
mination to  succeed,  and  it  is  be- 
lieved he  would  have  made  a  record 
in  the  field  creditable  to  himself,  his 
friends,  and  the  Central  States  Mis- 
sion, had  his  life  been  spared.  In  the 
latter  part  of  July,  1911,  Elder  Read 
became  ill,  and  as  his  condition  grew 
worse,  medical  advise  was  obtained, 
and  a  diagnosis  of  typhoid  fever  was 
given,  whereupon  he  was  brought  by 
one  of  his  companions,  Elder  Wm.  J. 
Bond,  to  Kansas  City,  Mo.,  and  placed 
In  a  hospital.  There  every  possible 
attention  was  given  him,  but  he  rap- 
idly grew  worse  until  shortly  after 
midnight,  Aug.  3,  1911,  when  his 
spirit  left  the  body.  The  mortal  re- 
mains of  Elder  Read  were  fittingly 
prepared  and  in  care  of  Elder  Rich- 
ard F.  Shumway,  who  served  as  El- 
der Read's  conference  president,  were 
sent  to  Hooper,  Utah,  for  burial. 

RICHARDS,  Alma  Pascal,  an  El- 
der who  died  in  the  missionary  field, 
was  born  March  7,  1858,  in  River- 
dale,  Weber  county,  Utah,  the  son  of 
John  Richards  and  Martha  Pascal. 
He  was  baptized  by  Elder  George 
Criddle  in  the  spring  of  18  69,  later 
ordained  to  the  Priesthood  and  set 
apart  for  a  mission  to  the  Southern 
States  by  Elder  Seymour  B.  Young, 
Oct.  10,  1887.  After  arriving  in  the 
mission  field  the  following  month,  he 
was  assigned  to  labor  in  the  Missis- 
sippi conference,  to  travel  in  Jasper 
county,  Mississippi,  and  S  u  m  p  t  e  r 
county,  Alabama,  which  belonged  to 
the  Mississippi  conference.  He  and 
his  traveling  companions  labored  as- 
siduously in  this  field  with  varying 
success,  during  the  winter  of  188  7 
and  1888,  making  a  few  converts  and 
many  friends,  with  the  usual  number 
of  enemies  who  spring  up  around  an 
Elder's  pathway.  Elder  Richards  was 
possessed  of  a  social  disposition  and 
readily  made  many  friends  wherever 
he  went;  confiding,  frank  and  gen- 
tle, he  won  the  hearts  of  all  he  came 


in  contact  with,  and  was  especially 
a  favorite  among  the  saints,  who 
placed  the  utmost  confidence  in  him 
and  relied  implicitly  on  every  state- 
ment he  made.  In  June  of  1888  his 
traveling  companion,  Elder  Harmon, 
was  released  to  return  home,  which 
left  Elder  Richards  alone,  but  with 
the  prospect  in  the  near  future  of  a 
companion  to  take  Elder  Harmon's 
place.  Owing  to  the  demand  for  El- 
ders it  was  found  impossible  to  sup- 
ply the  vacancy  at  once  and  Elder 
Richards  was  counseled  by  Presiaent 
Wm.  Spry  to  continue  his  labors  and 
report  through  the  president  of  the 
conference  to  the  office  at  Chatta- 
nooga regularly.  In  the  latter  part 
of  June  he  left  Sumpter  county,  Ala- 
bama, to  visit  the  saints  in  Mississip- 
pi, with  the  promise  to  return  and 
take  dinner  at  Brother  Odums  on  the 
5th  of  August,  the  anniversary  of  the 
latter's  birthday.  Visiting  the  sainis 
in  Mississippi  occupied  his  time  dur- 
ing July.  All  the  saints  that  he  came 
in  contact  with  testified  to  his  joyous 
and  jubilant  feelings.  His  letters  lo 
his  wife  and  parents  were  full  of  en- 
couragement and  good  advise,  and 
bore  evidence  of  the  spirit  that  actu- 
ated him  in  his  labors.  On  the  night 
of  July  31st  he  stayed  at  Sister  Tuck- 
er's in  Jasper  county,  Mis^.,  going 
from  there  to  Brother  Kemp's,  a  dis- 
tance of  seventeen  miles,  in  the  di- 
rection of  Meridan,  Miss.,  en  route  to 
Brother  Odums,  to  make  the  prom- 
ised visit.  Leaving  Brother  Kemp's 
on  the  morning  of  August  1st  in  fine 
spirits,  he  followed  the  main  traveled 
road  toward  Enterprise  on  the  line  of 
the  New  Orleans  &  Northeastern 
Railway,  stopping  at  a  colored  man's 
house  to  get  a  drink,  and  wash  his 
face  and  hands,  doubtless  to  alleviate 
the  fatigue  caused  by  the  extreme 
heat  then  prevalent.  As  was  his  cus- 
tom, he  frankly  stated  who  he  was, 
where  he  was  from  and  his  destina- 
tion. Thence  he  evidently  made  his 
way  to  the  town  of  Enterprise,  and 
was  seen  standing  on  t}^-R  ?!atfoi-m  of 


702 


LATTER-DAY   SAINT 


the  depot.    Next  he  was  seen  stepping 
into  the  door  of  the  Ragsdale  Hotel 
at  Meridian,  on  the  morning  of  Aug. 
2,    1888,   between   daylight   and   sun- 
rise, and  handed  a  package  contain- 
ing his  Bible,  hymn  book,  two  photo- 
graphs,  and   a   clean   shirt,   to   A.   D. 
Blank,   the   colored   porter,   with  the 
request  to  retain  them  for  a  couple 
of  weeks,  and  he  would  call  for  them. 
Here  all  trace  of  Elder  Richards  dis- 
appeared.    President  Wm.   Spry   and 
the    Elders    in    the    Southern    States 
Mission  immediately  instituted  a  dili- 
gent search  for  the  missing  man  and 
finally  learned  that  a  man  had  been 
killed    a   few    miles   up   the   railroad 
track  from  Meridian  during  the  past 
summer.     Following    this    clue    they 
called   on   Squire   J.   W.   Deerman   of 
Toomsuba,  from  whom  they  learned 
that  such  an  accident  had  really  tak- 
en place  and  that  Mr.  Deerman  had 
served  as  coroner  at  the  inquest.    He 
readily  recognized  the  photograpu  oi 
Brother  Richards  as  the  man  killed, 
as  also  did  five  of  the  jurymen  who 
had  served  at  the  inquest.    They  had 
all  seen  the  mangled  remains  of  the 
dead  man  and  pointed  out  where  he 
was   buried.     The   brethren   now   se- 
cured  a   casket,    which   was   shipped 
from  Meridian  to  Toomsuba  station, 
twelve  miles  distant.    The  grave  was 
opened    and    the   box   containing    me 
body  brought  to  the  surface;   the  lid 
was  removed  and  the  body  identified, 
and  though  in  an  advanced  stage  of 
decomposition  it  was  transferred  to 
the   casket,   which   was   then   herme- 
tically sealed.   The  supposition  is  that 
Brother   Richards   was   murdered   by 
brutal  hands  for  the  sake  of  plunder 
Aug.  2,  1888,  and  that  his  body  was 
intentionally   placed   on   the   railway 
tracks   to   cover   up   the   deed.      The 
place  where  he  is  supposed  to  have 
lost  his  life  is  an  isolated  section  of 
the  country,  eight  miles  east  of  Meri- 
dian, and  four  miles  west  of  Tooms- 
uba   in    Lauderdale    county,    Missis- 
sippi.       Elder  Richards  was  a  good 
and  exemplary  young  man. 


RICHARDS,   John   A.,   one   of  the 

Elders  of  the  Church  who  died  in  the 
missionary   field,   was   born   in   Eng- 
land  in   1892.     He  emigrated   to  the 
Rocky    Mountains    during    the    early 
years  of  Utah's  settlement  and  at  the 
general    conference    of    the    Church 
held   in  April,   1855,   he  was   called, 
with    four    other    Elders,    to    labor 
among  the  natives  inhabiting  the  Ind- 
ian Territory.    On  the   way  to  their 
destination  they  were  joined  by  four 
Elders  from   St.   Louis,   Mo.,   and   all 
arrived  in  the  territory  in  the  fall  of 
the  same  year.    The  mission  opened 
up  encouragingly  and  in  a  short  time 
a   branch   of  the-  Church  was  organ- 
ized on  Grand  River,  in  the  Cherokee 
Nation.    Elder  Richard's  wife  having 
died  in  Utah,  he  married  a  Cherokee 
lady  named  Manhui,  thus  becoming  a 
citizen  of  the  nation.    The  lady  being 
a  widow  and  owning  a  large  planta- 
tion and  about  sixteen  slaves,  conve- 
nient   and    permanent    headquarters 
were  established  for  the  Elders.    Just 
prior  to  the  assassination  of  Parley 
P.  Pratt  in  1857,  near  the  boundary 
line  between  Arkansas  and  the  Cher- 
okee Nation,   Elder  Richards  was  in 
his  company.    When   they  parted. 
Apostle  Pratt  started  on  his  way  to 
the  States,  to  the  place  where  he  was 
murdered,   while  Elder  Richards  re- 
turned to  his   home.     He  was  conse- 
quently fully  acquainted  with  all  the 
details  of  Apostle  Pratt's  death.     In 
the  spring  of  1853  all  the  Elders  la- 
boring  in    the    Indian    Territory    re- 
turned to  their  homes,  excepting  John 
A.    Richards   and   one   or   two   other 
Elders   who   died   later  in   the   field. 
When  the  War  of  the  Rebellion  broke 
out,  the  Indian  Territory  shared  its 
horrors  and  the  branch  of  the  Church 
was  broken  up  and  the  members  scat- 
tered.     When   peace    was    again    re- 
stored   between    the   North    and    the 
South,  and  the  Indians  had  returned 
to    their    country,    Elder    Richards 
turned  his  attention  to  the  cultivation 
of  a  farm,  and  when  Elders  Matthew 
W.   Dalton  and  John  Hubbard  were 


BIOGRAPHICAL   ENCYCLOPEDIA. 


703 


sent  to  the  Indian  Territory  to  labor 
as  missionaries  in  1877,  they  found 
Bro.  Richards  a  regular  Cherokee  in 
his  customs  and  ways.  He  was  re- 
baptized,  but  after  a  short  mission  by 
these  Utah  Elders,  they  returned, 
leaving  him  alone  in  the  field.  His 
Cherokee  wife  (a  high  class  woman 
who  was  very  kind  to  the  Elders) 
died,  and  he  afterwards  married  a 
Choctaw  woman,  and  Brother  Rich- 
ards thus  became  a  member  of  the 
Choctaw  Nation.  This  wife  also  died, 
after  which  he  returned  to  the  Cher- 
okees  with  his  only  son  by  the  Cher- 
okee woman,  for  whom  he  provided 


RICHARDS,  Levi  Willard,  a  Patri- 
arch in  the  Church  and  a  resident  of 
the  20th  Ward  (Ensign  Stake),  Salt 
Lake  City,  Utah,  was  born  June  12, 
1845,  at  Nauvoo,  Hancock  county, 
Illinois,  the  only  child  of  his  par- 
ents. Dr.  Levi  Richards  and  Sarah 
Griffith.  His  parents  were  both  ad- 
vanced towards  middle  age  when  they 
were  married.  They  were  possessed 
of  great  faith,  as  will  be  seen  from 
the  following  excerpt  from  the  pen  of 
Bro.  Levi  W.  Richards,  the  subject 
of  this  sketch.  He  says:  "In  the 
year  1848  my  father  and  mother  were 
called  to  go  on  a  mission  to  England. 


a  liberal  education,   both  in  English    They  were  then  living  at  Winter  Quar- 


ters   with    the    saints.      I    was    quite 
young    (about  three  years   old)    and 


and  Cherokee,  with  a  view  to  making 
him  an  efficient  Latter-day  Saint  mis- 
sionary;    but    the    young    man    took 
sick  and  died  just  before  the  advent 
of  President  Andrew  Kimball  in  the 
mission  in  1887.  Elders  Andrew  Kim- 
ball and  James  G.  West  re-baptlzea 
Brother  Richards  and   ordained   him 
a   Seventy.      After  this   he   did   some 
missionary  work  with  Elder  Kimball, 
but  was  occupied  mostly  on  his  farm. 
The  Elders   often   endeavored   to   in- 
duce him  to  return  to  Utah  to  spend 
his  remaining  days  with  his  daughter, 
who  resided  in  Cache  county,  but  for 
some  time  he  would  not  entertain  the 
idea.  He  was  then  advancing  in  years, 
being    upwards    of    sixty    years    old. 
During  the  summer  of  1889  he  min- 
gled   with    the    Indians    in    all    their 
feasts,  festivities  and  political  labors, 
by  which  he  probably  exerted  and  ex- 
posed himself  too  much.  In  the  spring 
of   1889   he  also  met  with  a  serious 
accident.  His  wagon  overturned  while    promise  them  that  I  would  live,  but  if 
crossing  a  stream,  inflicting  upon  him    they  let  me  come  on  to  the  Valley, 
such  injuries  that  he  never  fully  re-    I    should    live    and    make    a    strong, 
covered.    He  died  Sept.  21,  1889,  and     healthy  boy.     Through  their  faith  in 
was   buried   the    following   day   near    the  Prophet  of  the  Lord  they  decided 
his   ranch   on   the  Verdiges   river   m    to  make  the  sacrifice  and  send  me  to 
Western    Cherokee    Nation.      Among    the  Valley  in  the  care  of  Aunt  Rhoda, 
all  his  acquaintances,   whites   ana    my    father's    oldest    sister,    and    my 
Indians,    Bro.    Richards  was   held   in    Uncle    Willard    Richards.       My    first 
the  highest   esteem,   and   the   Elders    faint  recollections  are  of  this  journey 
who  had  shared  his  hospitality  will    across  the  wild  plains  to  the  Rocky 
never  forget  him.  Mountains:     On  the  way  I  broke  my 


an  only  child.  President  Young  said  if 
they  took  me  with  them,  he  could  not 


■04 


LATTER-DAY   SAINT 


arm,  but  that  was  not  impressed  on 
my  memory  so  deeply  as  my  trying  to 
read  a  child's  book  my  parents  had 
given  me.  We  camped  on  the  corner 
of  Main  and  First  South  streets.  I 
recollect  some  of  the  incidents  of  the 
first  year  passed  in  a  wagon-box  tak- 
en off  the  running-gears  and  placed 
on  stationary  supports.  I  attended  a 
small  private  school  taught  by  Sister 
Sarah  Phelps,  on  the  west  side  of 
what  is  now  known  as  West  Temple, 
between  South  Temple  and  First 
South  streets.  I  also  attended  other 
schools  in  the  Fourteenth  Ward,  in 
which  we  lived.  I  left  school  before 
I  completed  my  eighth  year  and  did 
not  go  again  until  I  attended  the 
University  of  Deseret,  after  my  re- 
turn from  England.  Our  home  from 
the  time  we  entered  the  Valley  was 
located  on  the  southeast  corner  of  the 
block  immediately  south  of  the  Tem- 
ple block.  I  was  so  young  when  1 
parted  from  my  parents  that  any  dis- 
tinct recollection  fast  faded  from  my 
mind,  but  their  memory  was  kept 
green  by  my  dear  Aunt  Rhoda  who 
often  spoke  to  me  of  them,  and  also 
by  little  letters,  picture-books  and 
other  presents  which  they  sent  me 
whenever  they  had  opportunities  by 
returning  missionaries  or  by  the  oc- 
casional mail  of  those  days."  The 
mission  of  Dr.  Richards  and  wife  to 
England  lasted  five  years  and  Levi 
was  eight  years  old  when  he  was 
again  united  with  his  parents.  After 
that  he  picked  and  peddled  straw- 
berries and  other  fruits  which  his 
father  cultivated,  herded  cows  and, 
when  scarcity  of  food  came,  dug 
segoes  on  the  hills,  etc.  His  book 
learning  was  carried  on  in  spare  mo- 
ments at  home,  both  his  parents  be- 
ing students  and  scholars.  He  was 
at  an  early  age  a  member  of  a  boys' 
military  organization,  a  sort  of  youths' 
militia,  drilled  in  regular  fashion,  in 
preparation  for  whatever  emergency 
might  arise.  While  the  early  mis- 
understandings between  the  United 
States  government  and  the  pioneers 


of  Deseret  took  a  military  form  he 
was  active  in  the  defense  of  his  peo- 
ple, having  on  one  occasion  stood 
guard  all  night  before  the  Eagle 
Gate,  then  one  of  the  entrances  to 
the  President's  headquarters,  while 
attack  was  momentarily  expected. 
While  in  his  teens  he  received  ap- 
pointment from  the  Territory  of  Utah 
to  the  West  Point  Military  Academy, 
but  because  of  reluctance  on  the  part 
of  his  parents  to  consent  to  another 
long  separation  from  him,  he  de- 
clined the  assignment.  Ordained  an 
Elder  at  the  age  of  eighteen,  he  was, 
three  years  later,  called  to  labor  In 
the  mission  field  in  England,  over 
which  mission  his  cousin,  Apostle 
Franklin  D.  Richards,  was  then  pre- 
siding. His  journey  thither,  occupy- 
ing three  months,  was  fraught  with 
many  of  the  dangers  and  hardships 
common  to  those  times.  Levi  was 
first  appointed  to  Sheffield.  He  had 
labored  as  a  missionary  but  a  few 
weeks  when  a  malignant  attack  of 
small-pox  nearly  cost  him  his  life. 
Through  the  mercies  of  the  Lord,  and 
the  loving  care  of  Sister  Mary  Col- 
bert, with  her  son  John  and  other 
faithful  friends,  he  was  given  back 
health  and  strength  for  the  comple- 
tion of  his  mission,  which  lasted 
about  three  years.  He  presided  for  a 
time  over  the  Monmouthshire  con- 
ference In  the  neighborhood  of  his 
mother's  birthplace,  where  he  ac- 
quired a  deep-rooted  Interest  for  the 
Welsh  people.  Elder  Caleb  Parry, 
writing  to  President  Horace  S.  Eld- 
redge  of  the  missionary  labors  of  El- 
der Richards,  said:  "I  am  here  in 
Monmouthshire  alone,  Bro.  Levi  W. 
Richards,  as  you  are  aware,  having 
left  me.  I  feel  rather  lonesome  now 
that  he  Is  gone,  as  he  is  a  young  man 
I  greatly  esteem  and  who  is  greatly 
beloved  by  all  the  saints  in  this  con- 
ference without  one  exception  that  I 
know  of.  I  know  myself  that  he  has 
lived  a  life  of  purity  that  is  seldom 
equalled.  He  leaves  this  country  with 
the   blessings   of  all   the  saints   that 


BIOGRAPHICAL  ENCYCLOPEDIA. 


705 


are  acquainted  with  him."  Released 
in  the  autumn  of  1870,  Levi  returned 
to  Utah.  The  Union  Pacific  Railroad 
having  reached  Ogden  the  year  before 
greatly  simplified  and  facilitated  the 
home  journey.  Shortly  after  his  re- 
turn home  he  entered  the  University 
of  Deseret  and  was  soon  recognized 
as  one  of  the  best  and  most  earnest 
students  of  that  always  leading  and 
progressive  institution,  which  is  now 
so  widely  and  favorably  known  as 
the  University  of  Utah.  In  1873 
(June  16th)  Levi  Willard  Richards 
married  Louisa  Lula  Greene,  a  daugh- 
ter of  Patriarch  Evan  M.  Greene  and 
Susan  Kent.  The  young  woman  was 
then  editor  of  the  "Woman's  Ex- 
ponent." Seven  children  were  born 
of  this  union,  three  daughters  and 
four  sons.  Their  names  follow  in  or- 
der of  birth:  Mary,  Mabel,  Lee,  Wil- 
lard, Evan,  Heber  and  Sarah,  the 
mother's  maiden  name  being  attached 
to  that  of  each  of  the  children.  The 
daughters  all  died  in  early  child- 
hood. The  four  boys  are  all  living, 
all  married  and  raising  families  of 
their  own.  About  the  time  of  Levi's 
marriage  his  parents  moved  from  the 
Fourteenth  to  the  Twentieth  Ward, 
and  two  years  later  the  son  with  his 
wife  and  baby  girl  followed,  becom- 
ing identified  at  once  with  the  people 
and  interests  of  the  Twentieth  Ward, 
Salt  Lake  City,  where  they  continued 
to  reside  during  the  remainder  of  his 
mortal  life.  On  the  16th  of  June, 
1884,  eleven  years  to  the  day  from 
the  time  of  his  first  marriage,  Levi 
W.  Richards  married  as  a  plural  wife 
Persis  Louisa  Young,  daughter  of 
Bishop  Franklin  W.  Young  and  Nancy 
Leonora  Greene,  a  niece  on  the  moth- 
er's side  of  his  first  wife.  Persis  be- 
came the  mother  of  one  child  only,  a 
son  named  Franklin  Young,  who  died 
in  infancy.  Among  the  Church  activ- 
ities, to  which  the  time,  talents  and 
life  of  Levi  W.  Richards  were  freely 
given  with  unswerving  devotion,  may 
be  counted  the  Deseret  Sunday  School 
Union  Board,   of  which  he  held  the 


secretaryship  for  many  years  and  was 
a  faithful  member  from  the  time  of 
its  organization  until  his  death.  He 
was  clerk  of  the  Fourteenth  Ward 
for  a  short  time  and  of  the  Twen- 
tieth Ward  for  more  than  thirty  years, 
president  of  the  Elders  quorum  in 
the  Twentieth  Ward  for  a  long  period 
of  time,  counselor  to  the  president  of 
the  High  Priests  quorum  in  the  En- 
sign Stake  of  Zion  from  the  time  of 
the  organization  of  that  Stake,  in 
1904,  until  a  few  months  before  his 
death,  w^hen  he  was  ordained  a  Patri- 
arch. As  a  worker  in  the  Endowment 
House  and  afterwards  in  the  Salt 
Lake  Temple  he  gave  faithful  and 
efficient  service  for  more  than  twen- 
ty-five years  and  until  disabled  by 
the  sickness  which  terminated  in  his 
death.  In  all  his  walks  in  life,  in  the 
privacy  of  his  own  home,  as  well  as 
before  the  public,  Levi  W.  Richards 
was  always  justly  upheld  as  a  model 
of  the  charity,  patience,  benevolence 
and  brotherly  kindness  and  love  which 
should  characterize  a  1 1  Latter-day 
Saints.  During  his  final  illness,  which 
covered  a  period  of  two  years,  his  un- 
complaining gentleness  through  all 
his  sufferings,  which  were  great,  and 
the  sincere  loving  appreciation  he 
manifested  for  all  that  was  done  to 
relieve  or  benefit  him,  endeared  him 
more  and  more  each  day  to  those  who 
had  the  privilege  of  being  near  him 
and  administer  to  his  needs.  When 
satisfied  himself  that  he  would  not 
be  restored  again  to  health  and 
strength  in  mortal  life,  he  talked 
calmly  and  resignedly  of  the  change 
so  near  approaching  him  and  ex- 
pressed gratitude  that  he  had  been 
allowed  to  remain  here  until  the 
springtime  had  come  instead  of  hav- 
ing been  called  home  while  the  snow 
and  cold  wintry  season  made  the 
world  less  beautiful.  To  his  wives  he 
said  one  day,  "I  will  make  you  a  bet- 
ter home  'over  there'  than  I  have 
provided  for  you  here."  Then  with 
the  caution  which  was  natural  to  him 
he  quickly  added,  "That  is,  if  I  shall 


Vol.  Ill,  No.  45. 


May   22,   1920 


706 


LATTER-DAY   SAINT 


be  permitted  to  do  so."  To  these  re- 
marks his  trusting  companions  un- 
hesitatingly and  with  the  utmost  as- 
surance eagerly  replied,  "You  will 
be!  Such  a  life  as  you  have  lived 
here  cannot  fail  to  secure  unlimited 
privileges  and  powers  in  the  life  to 
comel"  Bro.  Richards  was  no  enthus- 
iast. When  some  one  spoke  cheer- 
fully to  him  of  the  "good  time  and 
place"  he  had  certainly  earned  and 
was  soon  to  enter,  he  replied  bright- 
ly, "We  shall  all  know  what  awaits 
us  when  we  get  there — I  think  not 
before."  As  his  sons  were  assisting 
him  to  turn  and  change  his  position 
in  bed,  but  a  few  hours  previous  to 
his  departure,  he  "got  off"  a  clever 
pun,  comparing  his  condition  to  some- 
thing else  in  a  humorous  way,  and 
when  the  absurdity  of  his  witticism 
brought  smiles  to  the  faces  of  his 
attendants  he  laughed  lightly  himself 
and  concluded  by  settling  down  with 
a  contented,  "O  well!"  The  day  he 
died  was  a  pleasant,  sunny  one,  as 
he  had  hoped  it  would  be,  and  his 
going  was  as  peaceful  as  the  falling 
to  sleep  on  its  mother's  breast  of  a 
happy  babe.  This  change  for  him 
from  mortal  life  to  immortality  oc- 
curred at  sundown  March  30,  1914, 
at  his  home  in  Salt  Lake  City.  (L.  L. 
G.  R.) 

ROBISON,  Cliarles  Edward,  an  Ji:i- 
der  who  died  in  the  missionary  field, 
was  born  Dec.  2,  1845,  in  Nauvoo, 
Hancock  county,  111.,  the  son  of  Lewis 
Robison  and  Clarissa  M.  Durette.  In 
the  spring  of  1883  he  was  called  on 
a  mission  to  the  Southern  States  and 
left  Salt  Lake  City  for  his  field  of  la- 
bor April  10,  1883,  having  been  set 
apart  the  day  before  by  Apostle  Lor- 
enzo Snow.  He  labored  diligently  and 
faithfully  until  September,  1893, 
when  he  was  taken  ill  with  an  attack 
of  chills  and  fever,  combined  with 
yellow  jaundice.  He  gradually  grew 
worse  until  the  2  6th  of  the  month, 
when  he  passed  away  near  Whitaker, 
York  county.  South  Carolina.    He  was 


a  High  Priest  (Bishop  of  Montpelier, 
Bear  Lake  county,  Idaho),  and  at  the 
time  of  his  death  was  president  of  the 
South  Carolina  conference. 

ROGERS,  Henry  Parkinson,  an  El- 
der who  died  while  filling  a  foreign 
mission,  was  born  Jan.  19,  1900,  at 
Preston,  Oneida  county,  Idaho,  the 
son  of  Henry  T.  Rogers  and  Esther 
Parkinson.  He  resided  with  his  par- 
ents in  Logan,  Cache  county,  Utah, 
when  he  was  called  on  a  mission  to 
New  Zealand.  He  left  for  his  mission 
Feb.  20,  1918,  and  while  faithfully 
performing  his  labors  as  a  mission- 
ary, he  died  of  influenza-pneumonia 
Nov.  17,  1918. -Owing  to  the  restric- 
tions of  the  shipping  board,  the  body 
could  not  be  sent  home,  the  Elder  dy- 
ing with  a  contagious  disease.  Bro. 
Rogers  was  the  first  Elder  of  the 
Church  who  died  with  influenza  out- 
side of  the  United  States.  Through 
the  energetic  efforts  of  Pres.  James 
N.  Lambert,  the  government  officials 
of  New  Zealand  permitted  the  body 
to  be  exhumed;  it  was  carefully 
packed  in  a  strong  lead-lined  box  and 
shipped  home  on  the  steamship  "Ni- 
agara," in  care  of  returning  Elders, 
in  April,  1920.  Interment  took  place 
in  Logan  April  25,   1920. 

RUCKERT,    Cliristopher    Leonard, 

an  Elder  who  died  in  the  missionary 
field,  was  born  March  4,  1870,  near 
Burgbernheim,  Uffenheim,  Bavaria, 
Germany,  the  son  of  Johann  A.  Ruck- 
ert  and  Margaretta  B.  Hoofer,  tie 
was  baptized  April  11,  1892,  by  Geo. 
Schick,  and  was  afterwards  ordained 
an  Elder.  After  emigrating  to  Utah, 
he  became  a  resident  of  the  Thir- 
teenth Ward,  Salt  Lake  City,  where 
he  still  resided  in  1903,  when  he  was 
called  on  a  mission  to  the  Northern 
States.  He  was  set  apart  for  his  mis- 
sion Feb.  20,  1903,  and  soon  after- 
wards took  his  departure  for  the 
East.  After  he  had  labored  about 
eighteen  months  in  the  missionary 
field  he  was  advised  to  have  his  fam- 


BIOGRAPHICAL  ENCYCLOPEDIA. 


707 


ily  join  him  and  go  into  business.  He 
did  so  upon  borro,\ved  capital,  and 
through  his  diligence  and  hard  work 
he  became  one  of  the  financial  pillars 
in  the  Northern  States  Mission,  ror 
while  carrying  on  a  successful  busi- 
ness in  Milwaukee,  he  also  continued 
in  the  missionary  work,  and  many  of 
the  members  of  the  Church  who  were 
faithful  and  true  at  the  time  of  Elder 
Ruckert's  demise  appreciated  the 
fact  that  he  had  brought  the  light  of 
the  gospel  to  them.  In  the  summer 
of  1-914,  while  still  faithfully  dis- 
charging his  many  duties.  Brother 
Ruckert  was  stricken  with  sickness 
and  taken  to  a  hospital  in  Milwaukee, 
where  he  died  July  9,  1914.  Three 
weeks  prior  to  his  death  he  was  op- 
erated on  for  appendicitis  and  at  rirst 
began  an  encouraging  convalescence, 
but  later  tumors  set  in  and  these 
brought  on  his  death.  His  remains 
were  shipped  to  Salt  Lake  City  im- 
mediately after  his  demise.  Brother 
Ruckert  had  made  Milwaukee  his 
home  for  ten  years. 

SAMUELSEN,  Frederik  Ferdinand, 

a  prominent  and  active  Elder  in  the 
Scandinavian  Mission,  was  born  April 
12,  1865,  in  Copenhagen,  Denmark, 
the  son  of  Lars  Samuelsen  and  Julia 
Florentine  Ronne.  He  received  a  good 
common  school  education  in  his  na- 
tive city,  and  in  1890  (Aug.  8th)  he 
married  Marie  Mariane  Florentine 
Jensen,  who  was  born  May  24,  1865, 
in  Roskilde,  Denmark.  She  subse- 
quently bore  her  husband  five  chil- 
dren, namely,  Julia,  Ella,  Wilford, 
Kaj,  and  Ove  Emil.  Becoming  con- 
verts to  "Mormonism,"  he  and  his 
wife  were  baptized  Dec.  21,  1892, 
having  previously  changed  his  place 
of  residence  from  Copenhagen  to  Aar- 
hus  in  1889.  Prior  to  his  marriage 
he  served  an  apprenticeship  as  lock- 
smith and  machinist  and  followed 
that  occupation  as  long  as  he  re- 
mained in  his  native  land.  He  passed 
his  examination  as  a  mechanic  with 
the  greatest  honor,  receiving  a  silver 


medal  for  efficiency  and  later  a  sti- 
pendium  to  visit  the  different  coun- 
tries in  Europe  as  a  mechanic  on  the 
public  expense.  In  1900  Bro.  Sam- 
uelsen was  chosen  as  a  member  of  the 
city  council  in  Aarhus  (the  second 
city  in  point  of  population  in  Den- 
mark), which  positior  he  held  con- 
tinuously for  seventeen  and  a  half 
years.  In  1906  he  was  elected  a  mem- 
ber of  the  Danish  Rigsdag  and  was 
elected  repeatedly  after  that  with 
ever   increasing   majorities,    notwith- 


standing strong  opposition  on  the 
part  of  the  Lutheran  clergy,  who  in- 
sisted that  it  was  a  disgrace  to  tne 
country  that  a  "Mormon"  should  oc- 
cupy a  seat  in  the  Danish  Rigsdag, 
a  position  which  was  not  held  by  any 
"Mormon"  in  any  other  country  out- 
side of  the  United  States.  Brother 
Samuelsen  occupied  his  position  in 
the  Rigsdag  until  1918.  During  the 
many  years  that  he  served  in  the 
Rigsdag  he  took  advantage  of  every 
opportunity  which  presented  itself  to 
testify  to  the  truth  of  "Mormonism" 
in  the  higher  circles  of  Denmark. 
When  a  new  law  was  being  enacted 
in  1908,  regulating  the  rules  for  con- 
ducting funerals,  he  succeeded  in  ob- 
taining permission  for  "Mormon" 
Elders  to  conduct  funerals  for  their 


708 


LATTER-DAY   SAINT 


own  people  and  occupy  the  chapels 
used  for  that  purpose,  the  same  as 
the  Lutheran  clergy.  When  an  at- 
tempt was  made  in  1912  to  forbid 
"Mormon"  Elders  carrying  on  propa- 
ganda in  Scandinavia,  Elder  Samuel- 
sen  took  a  bold  stand  in  the  Danish 
Rigsdag,  protesting  such  a  move,  and 
declared  that  during  the  twenty  years 
he  had  been  a  member  of  the  "Mor- 
mon" Church  he  had  associated  with 
hundreds  of  "Mormon"  missionaries, 
all  of  whom  he  knew  possessed  the 
best  and  noblest  character,  being  uni- 
versally known  for  their  honesty  and 
intelligence.  The  Church  minister 
(Kirkeminister)  gave  a  favorable  de- 
cision, but  felt  humiliated  to  think 
that  not  one  of  the  seven  Lutheran 
priests  who  served  in  the  Danish  Rigs- 
dag had  opened  his  mouth  in  opposi- 
tion to  Samuelsen  when  he  called  the 
"Mormon"  Elders  good  and  honor- 
able men.  In  1913  Elder  Samuelsen 
again  had  occasion  to  defend  the 
"Mormon"  missionaries  when  they 
were  falsely  accused  of  aiding  the  so- 
called  "white  slavery."  He  called 
boldly  for  even  a  single  proof  in  con- 
nection with  the  accusations,  but  none 
such  was  forthcoming.  It  ended  with 
a  declaration  from  the  king's  cabinet 
that  the  accusation  against  the  "Mor- 
mons" was  entirely  unfounded.  When 
in  1914  a  certain  high  official  (Her- 
redsfoged)  in  Jutland  forbid  two 
"Mormon"  missionaries  to  hold  one 
of  their  usual  religious  services.  El- 
der Samuelsen  referred  the  case  to  the 
minister  of  justice,  which  led  to  that 
official  receiving  a  severe  reprimand 
for  having  interfered  with  religious 
liberty.  During  the  time  of  the  World 
War  Brother  Samuelsen  found  it  nec- 
essary on  many  occasions  to  use  his 
influence  with  the  king's  cabinet  in 
obtaining  permission  for  Norwegian 
and  Swedish  missionaries  belonging 
to  the  "Mormon"  Church  to  visit  their 
relatives  in  Denmark.  When  the  El- 
ders from  Utah  were  called  home,  ow- 
ing to  war  conditions,  Brother  Sam- 
uelsen was  called  as  a  local  Elder  to 


preside  over  the  Aarhus  conference, 
which  position  he  held  for  about  eight 
months,  during  which  time  he  visited 
the  different  branches  in  the  confer- 
ence repeatedly.  He  held  this  posi- 
tion until  he  emigrated  in  May,  1919. 
Prior  to  this.  Elder  Samuelsen  (who 
had  been  ordained  an  Elder  in  1893 
by  Martin  Nielsen)  had  occupied 
many  responsible  positions  in  the 
Church;  thus  he  presided  over  the 
Y.  M.  M.  I.  A.  of  the  Aarhus  branch 
twelve  years,  and  labored  as  a  dis- 
trict teacher  about  twenty-six  years. 
He  also  took  an  active  part  in  preach- 
ing the  gospel  in  the  public  meetings 
and  assisted  in  holding  many  meet- 
ings in  country  villages,  advocating 
the  principles  of  "Mormonism,"  be- 
sides circulating  Church  literature. 
During  the  many  years  he  was  a 
member  of  the  Church  he  was  known 
for  his  benevolence  and  liberality. 
Thousands  of  Elders  from  Utah  and 
others  have  partaken  of  the  hospi- 
tality of  the  Samuelsen  home  in  Aar- 
hus. After  his  arrival  in  Utah,  Bro. 
Samuelsen  located  with  his  family  in 
Salt  Lake  City,  where  he  still  resides. 
He  was  ordained  a  High  Priest  April 
11,  1920,  by  Bishop  James  D.  Cum- 
mings  of  the  Wilford  Ward. 

SAVAGE,  Charles  Roscoe,  a  promi- 
nent Elder  in  the  Church  and  the 
father  of  Old  Folks'  Excursions,  was 
born  in  Southampton,  England,  Aug. 
16,  1832,  the  son  of  John  and  Ann 
Savage.  The  circumstances  surround- 
ing him  in  his  earliest  childhood  were 
scenes  of  want  and  poverty.  His 
father  was  a  gardner  and  occupied 
much  of  his  time  in  trying  to  produce 
a  blue  dahlia,  for  which  a  great  re- 
ward had  been  offered.  He  was  a 
man  of  an  easy  temperament  and  un- 
successful in  financial  affairs.  In 
consequence  of  this  the  education  ol 
his  children  was  sadly  neglected,  and 
not  even  their  natural  wants  were  al- 
ways satisfied.  Bro.  Savage  had  no 
recollection  of  ever  learning  to  reaa 
or  write  as  a  child,  but  what  oppor- 


BIOGRAPHICAL   ENCYCLOPEDIA. 


709 


tunities  he  had  later  he  turned  to 
good  advantage.  In  his  boyhood  days 
he  had  indeed  a  hard  and  difficult 
road  to  travel.  As  soon  as  his  physi- 
cal strength  allowed  it,  he  com- 
menced to  work  at  most  anything  he 
could  find  to  do  in  such  an  over-pop- 
ulated country  as  England.  He  found 
the  world  cold  and  heartless  and  could 
not  remember  any  patrons  and  friends 
who  ever  interested  themselves  in  his 
welfare.  Whatever  he  enjoyed  in  his 
boyhood  days  he  earned  by  his  own 
hard  labor.  By  this  he  was  able  to 
sustain  himself  and  after  awhile  also 
to  assist  in  procuring  a  livelihood  for 
his  younger  brothers  and  sisters.  His 
early    experience,    hard    as    it    was. 


taught  him  an  important  lesson, 
namely,  always  to  depend  upon  him- 
self and  never  to  expect  success 
through  kind  services  or  interest  of 
others.  Amidst  all  his  hardships  he 
was  constantly  buoyed  up  by  some 
sort  of  inspirational  and  hopeful  feel- 
ing which  seemed  to  point  forward  to 
a  better  future.  He  found,  however, 
in  early  life  that  mere  labor  of  the 
muscles  could  not  procure  a  decent 
living,  but  that  it  needed  the  conjoint 
action  of  the  head  and  brain.  When 
about  fifteen  years  of  age,   he   first 


heard  the  voice  of  a  "Mormon"  Elder 
(Thomas  B.  H.  Stenhouse),  whose 
teachings  and  instructions  made  a 
deep  and  lasting  impression  upon  his 
mind.  The  doctrines  he  taught  seemed 
to  be  the  very  things  his  nature  need- 
ed. He  had  previously  visited  several 
of  the  sects  of  the  day,  but  they  all 
seemed  deficient  in  their  elements  to 
fit  his  spiritual  wants.  The  accept- 
ance of  the  "new  hope"  and  the  faith 
of  the  Latter-day  Saints  changed  his 
entire  being  and  feelings.  Life  now 
seemed  to  have  something  in  it  to 
live  for,  and  through  his  new  ac- 
quaintances he  soon  got  employment 
in  the  stationary  store  of  Elder  Wm. 
Eddington  in  Portsmouth.  He  was 
baptized  May  21,  1848,  by  John  Lewis. 
Afterwards  he  was  ordained  to  the 
ministry  and  in  the  fall  of  1852  sent 
on  a  mission  to  Switzerland,  where 
he  stayed  until  the  summer  of  1855. 
In  that  country  he  did  a  vast  amount 
of  traveling  on  foot  and  acquired  a 
good  knowledge  of  the  French  lan- 
guage, as  well  as  a  smattering  of 
German.  He  was  also  imprisoneu  lu 
the  city  of  Zurich  for  three  days,  in 
company  with  Elder  Wm.  Budge. 
After  his  return  to  England  in  1855, 
he  traveled  as  a  missionary  in  the 
Derbyshire  conference,  in  company 
with  Elder  Israel  Evans.  On  the  11th 
of  December,  1855,  he  was  appointed 
interpreter  for  a  company  of  Italian 
and  Swiss  saints  and  crossed  the  At- 
lantic in  the  ship  "John  J.  Boyd," 
which  sailed  from  Liverpool,  Eng- 
land, Dec.  12,  1856,  and  arrived  in 
New  York  Feb.  15,  1857.  A  number 
of  passengers  died  during  the  voyage. 
After  his  arrival  in  New  York  Elder 
Savage  was  appointed  to  assist  in  the 
transfer  of  other  emigrant  companies 
at  Castle  Gardens.  He  worked  at 
Samuel  Booth's  printing  office  in  New 
York  for  nearly  two  years.  In  that 
city  he  married  Annie  Adkins  (daugh- 
ter of  Robert  Adkins  of  London  and 
Annie  Fenn  of  Leighton,  Bedfordshire, 
England),  who  was  born  Feb.  6,  1836, 
in    Leighton    Buzzard,    Bedfordshire, 


710 


LATTER-DAY   SAINT 


England.   Bro.  Savage  passed  through 
the  incidents  of  the  panic  of  1857  and 
took  charge  of  the  New  York  branch 
choir  during  the  lively  times  in  New 
York    when    the   saints    rented    large 
halls  and  had  crowded  meetings.    It 
was  during  his  residence  in  New  York 
that  he  concluded  to  adopt  photogra- 
phy as  a  vocation,  having  got  some 
incentive  by  watching  the  efforts  of 
Thos.    B.    H.   Stenhouse,   who   had   a 
camera    and    took    some    views    and 
who,  it  is  said,  brought  from  England 
the  first  stereoscope  camera  ever  seen 
in  America.     Elder   Savage   was   sent 
on  special  business  to  Florence,  Neb., 
in  1859,  by  George  Q.  Cannon,  upon 
which  occasion  he  left  his  wife  and 
child  in  New  York.  In  Florence,  Neb., 
he  made  his  first  start  in  the  photo- 
graph   business,    having    for   a    back- 
ground an  old  grey  blanket,  and  for 
a  dark  room,  a  tea  chest.    In  1859  he 
managed  to  get  a  wagon  and  a  yoke 
of  cattle  and,  through  a  combination 
of  successful  moves,   was  enabled  to 
leave   Council   Bluffs   in   June,    1860, 
and    crossed    the    plains    in    Captain 
Brown's  company,  and  arrived  in  Salt 
Lake  City  Aug.  27,  1860.    Soon  after 
his   arrival   he   joined   Marsena   Can- 
non and  opened   a  photograph  busi- 
ness in  the  upper  part  of  a  house  lo- 
cated  on   Main    Street,    in    Salt    Lake 
City,  ne.xt  to  the  old  Salt  Lake  House 
He  was  always  foremost  in  the  intro- 
duction of  every  new  device  pertain- 
ing to  photography.    In  the  interest 
of  his  business,  which  grew  rapidly, 
he  traveled  extensively  over  the  whole 
Rocky   Mountain   country,   making 
views  of  nearly  every  object  of  inter- 
est for  all  the  railroads  in  the  West, 
being  in  many  localities  the  pioneer 
in   that   line   of   work.     He   won   the 
first  prizes  on  his  exhibits  in  photog- 
raphy at  the  World's  Expositions  in 
Chicago,    St.    Louis,    San    Francisco, 
Portland   and  other  places.    In   1866 
he  visited  the  States,   going  by  way 
of  California  and  returning  in  Capt. 
Thos.    E.    Ricks'    company.     In    early 
Utah  days  Bro.  Savage  distinguished 


himself  as  a  military  man  and  served 
for  a  number  of  years  as  lieutenant 
and  afterwards  as  captain  in  a  com- 
pany of  the  first  battalion,  third  regi- 
ment of  infantry  of  the  Nauvoo  Le- 
gion.   In  1870    (Nov.  21st),  together 
with    seven    others,    he   was   arrested 
and  imprisoned  at  Camp  Douglas  for 
having  turned  out  to  a  harmless  mus- 
ter of  the  Nauvoo  Legion  in  violation 
of  Governor  Schaffer's  proclamation 
forbidding  the  assembling  of  troops 
in  Utah.    He  and  his  fellow-prisoners 
were  released  on  bail  two  days  later 
and    subsequently    discharged.     This 
affair    is    known    in    history    as    the 
Wooden  Gun  Rebellion.    In  1870  Bro. 
Savage  accompanied  President  Brig- 
ham  Young  and  others  on  an  explor- 
ing expedition  through  the  upper  Rio 
Virgin  country,  including  what  is  now 
known   as  Little  Zion   Canyon.     At  a 
meeting   held   at   President   Brigham 
Young's  office  in  Salt  Lake  City  May 
9,  1873,  Bro.  Savage  was  ordained  a 
High  Priest  and  set  apart  to  act  as  a 
member  of  the  High  Council  of  the 
Salt    Lake    Stake;    he    occupied    thai 
position    until   the   summer   of    1874. 
In    1875,    together    with    Elder    Geo. 
Goddard    and    others,    he    originated 
the  idea  of  treating  the  Old  Folks  to 
a  summer  excursion,  an  undertaking 
which    has    been    repeated    annually 
ever  since  and  has  become  more  pop- 
ular and  successful  every  year.     For 
many    years    he    labored   as   a    home 
missionary    in    the    Salt    Lake    Stake 
and  also  delivered  a  number  of  inter- 
esting lectures  on  Utah  and  its  scenic 
beauties,  illustrated  by  many  photo- 
graphic views,  and  contributed  a  num- 
ber of  valuable  letters  to  the  "Des- 
eret   News"   upon   the   same   subject 
He  also  contributed  many  articles  on 
various  subjects   to   the   local  maga- 
zines.   In  1861  he  became  a  member 
of  the  Tabernacle  choir  and  contin- 
ued   his    labors   in   that   organization 
with    great    fidelity    until    his    death. 
In  1883  (  June  21st)   by  a  disastrous 
fire,    which    destroyed    his    place    of 
business  on  East  Temple  Street,  Salt 


BIOGRAPHICAL   ENCYCLOPEDIA. 


711 


Lake  City,  he  lost  nearly  his  entire 
stock  of  negatives,  which  portrayed 
the  growth  of  Salt  Lake  City  and 
other  places — a  loss  that  never  can 
be  replaced.  Elder  Savage  was  a  thor- 
oughly practical  man,  who  always  be- 
lieved in  doing,  rather  than  profess- 
ing, being  convinced  that  the  faithful 
observance  of  this  principle  would 
correct  many  of  the  evils  now  exist- 
ing in  the  world.  He  was  a  true  friend 
to  the  aged,  the  widow  and  the  fath- 
erless, and  many  a  ton  of  coal  and 
load  of  wood  was  delivered  at  the 
homes  of  such,  of  which  no  one  ever 
kne-w  except  the  giver  and  the  receiv- 
er. In  1893  (Nov.  30th)  his  first  wife 
died.  She  had  borne  him  eleven  chil- 
dren, namely,  Charles  Stenhouse,  born 
July  16,  1857  (died  Aug.  23,  1857); 
Roscoe  Eddington,  born  June  19, 
1858;  Ralph  Graham,  born  April  13, 
1860;  Annie  Amelia,  born  March  21, 
1862;  George  Lewis,  born  Jan.  27, 
1865;  Fannie  Maude,  born  July  25, 
1867;  Enos  Hoge,  born  Oct.  25,  1869 
(died  April  13,  1870);  Luacine  An- 
netta,  born  July  12,  1871;  Ida  May, 
born  Jan.  5,  1874  (died  Nov.  4, 
1918);  Lennie  Louise,  born  Nov.  14, 
1875,  and  Ray  Thomas,  born  Nov. 
27,  1878.  In  1876  (Oct.  12th)  ne 
married  Mary  Emma  Fowler  (daugh- 
ter of  Henry  C.  Fowler  and  Martha 
Holland),  who  was  born  Dec.  26, 
1852,  in  Sheffield,  Yorkshire,  Eng- 
land, and  died  July  21,  1881.  Sne 
had  no  children.  In  1878  (Oct.  19th) 
Bro.  Savage  married  Ellen  Fenn 
(daughter  of  Joseph  Fenn  and  Jane 
Andrews),  who  was  born  in  Leighton 
Buzzard,  Bedfordshire,  England,  Nov. 
14,  1843;  she  bore  her  husband  two 
children,  namely,  Arley  F.,  born  Sept. 
1,  1879,  and  Emma  Jane,  born  Aug. 
26,  1882.  In  1895  he  married  Annie 
Smith  Clowes,  a  widow  (daughter  of 
George  Smith  and  Sarah  Harris),  who 
was  born  Oct.  2  8,  1847.  She  had  no 
children  by  Bro.  Savage.  Elder  Sav- 
age died  Feb.  3,  1909,  at  his  home  in 
Salt  Lake  City,  leaving  a  family  oi 
sons  and  daughters  worthy  to  carry 


on  his  name  among  the  saints,  whom 
their  father  loved  and  by  whom  he 
was  sincerely  beloved.  His  wife,  An- 
nie S.  Clowes  Savage,  died  April  14, 
1920,  in  Idaho,  and  was  buried  in 
Salt  Lake  City. 

SECRIST,  Jacob  F.,  an  Elder  of 
the  Church  who  died  while  returning 
from  a  foreign  mission,  was  born 
Sept.  19,  1818,  in  Franklin  county, 
Pa.,  the  son  of  Solomon  and  Mary  Se- 
crist.  He  became  a  convert  to  "Mor- 
monism"  and  was  baptized  in  t"he 
spring  of  1848.  Soon  afterwards  he 
migrated  to  the  Rocky  Mountains  and 
resided  in  Salt  Lake  Valley  in  1852, 
when  he  was  called  on  a  mission  to 
Europe.  He  crossed  the  plains  in 
company  with  a  number  of  other  El- 
ders going  to  different  parts  of  the 
world  as  missionaries,  and  labored 
faithfully  in  the  German  Mission  un- 
til 1855,  when  he  was  honorably  re- 
leased to  return  home.  He  crossed 
the  Atlantic  in  the  ship  "Isaac  Jeans," 
sailing  from  Liverpool,  England,  Feb. 
3rd,  in  company  with  George  C.  Riser 
and  a  small  company  of  saints  (six- 
teen souls).  They  landed  in  Phila- 
delphia March  5,  1855,  and  reached 
the  frontiers  in  safety.  When  the 
companies  were  organized  for  travel- 
ing across  the  plains,  Elder  Secrist 
was  chosen  as  captain  of  the  second 
company  of  the  year's  emigration,  and 
was  proceeding  westward  with  his 
company  when  he  was  stricken  with 
cholera,  of  which  he  died  July  2, 
1855,  on  the  Little  Blue  River,  near 
Fort  Kearney  (now  in  Nebraska).  His 
body  was  placed  in  a  tin  coffin  and 
buried  on  the  Little  Blue. 

SEELEY,  Joseph  FrankUn,  an  El- 
der who  died  in  the  missionary  field, 
was  born  Sept.  6,  1894,  at  Mt.  Pleas- 
ant, Sanpete  county,  Utah,  the  son  of 
Joseph  Seeley  and  Adella  Olsen.  His 
father  was  an  active  Church  worker 
and  was  for  some  time  a  counselor  in 
the  Mt.  Pleasant  North  Ward  Bishop- 
ric.   The  boyhood  days  of  Elder  Jo- 


•12 


LATTER-DAY   SAINT 


seph  F.  Seeley  were  spent  in  his  home 
town,  where  he  attended  school,  ad- 
vancing to  the  third  year  in  the  High 
School.  As  a  youth  he  took  an  active 
part  in  the  different  organizations  of 
the  Church,  acting  as  president  of  a 
Deacons  quorum  and  held  other  offi- 
ces, in  all  of  which  he  was  faithful 
in  the  performance  of  his  duties.  In 
1915  he  was  called  on  a  mission  to 
the  Central  States;  he  reported  at 
mission  headquarters  June  21,  1915, 
and  was  assigned  to  the  Missouri  con- 
ference, where  he  labored  with  much 
success  for  two  years  and  nine 
months.  He  had  just  been  honorably 
released  and  was  on  the  eve  of  re- 
turning home  when,  in  the  afternoon 
of  March  26,  1917,  he  took  part  in 
a  game  of  baseball  with  his  fellow 
missionaries.  Returning  to  the  mis- 
sion office  in  the  evening,  he  went 
upstairs  to  take  a  bath;  one  of  the 
Elders,  noticing  the  young  man's  con- 
tinued absence,  made  inquiries  con- 
cerning him,  when  he  was  found  dead 
in  the  bathroom.  His  remains  were 
shipped,  in  charge  of  returning  El- 
ders, to  his  home  in  Mt.  Pleasant, 
where  impressive  funeral  services 
were  held  in  the  Mt.  Pleasant  North 
Ward  April  4,  1917.  Elder  Seeley 
made  a  splendid  record  as  a  mission- 
ary; he  took  great  pleasure  in  min- 
gling with  the  people  among  whom 
he  labored  and  made  many  friends. 
Possessing  a  spirit  of  cheerfulness 
and  goodwill,  he  was  always  a  wel- 
come visitor  wherever  he  went.  His 
kind  and  brotherly  spirit  endeared 
him  to  the  saints  in  the  different 
branches  of  the  conference  in  which 
he  labored. 

SESSIONS,    Fabyan    Carter,    jiin., 

an  Elder  who  died  in  the  missionary 
field,  was  born  Jan.  22,  1889,  in  South 
Bountiful,  Davis  county,  Utah,  the 
son  of  Fabyan  Carter  Sessions  and 
Elizabeth  Moss.  He  was  baptized 
June  6,  1897,  by  Thomas  Fisher. 
While  residing  at  Bountiful  (First 
Ward),  he  was  called  on  a  mission  to 


the  Northwestern  States.  After  being 
set  apart  for  this  mission,  he  left 
home  Nov.  16,  1909;  he  was  appoint- 
ed to  labor  in  Montana,  where  he  act- 
ed for  six  months  as  conference  pres- 
ident. In  August,  1911,  he  was  trans- 
ferred to  Oregon,  and  while  laboring 
in  that  State  he  was  suddenly  strick- 
en with  illness,  and  his  death  came  as 
a  great  shock  to  all  the  Elders  and 
saints,  as  there  had  been  no  intima- 
tion of  his  sickness  until  about  two 
days  before  his  demise,  which  oc- 
curred at  Cottage  Grove,  Oregon, 
Nov.  14,  1911.  He  died  from  an  ab- 
cess  on  the  brain.  His  remains  were 
sent  to  his  home  in  Utah  for  inter- 
ment. Elder  Sessions  was  beloved  by 
all  who  knew  him.  He  possessed  a 
genial  and  unselfish  personality  anu 
as  a  missionary  he  was  a  ceaseless 
and  ardent  worker  and  was  ever  on 
hand  to  respond  to  any  call  made 
upon  him  by  his  superiors  in  the 
Priesthood.  His  death  cast  a  gloom 
over  the  entire  mission. 

SIMS,  George,  one  of  the  Latter- 
day  Saint  Elders  who  died  in  the  mis- 
sionary field,  was  born  in  London, 
England,  March  4,  1822,  the  son  of 
Alexander  William  Sims  and  Esther 
Jeffs.  Becoming  a  convert  to  the  gos- 
pel, he  was  baptized  Sept.  3,  1848,  by 
Wm.  Booth  and,  with  his  wife,  Caro- 
line Hilleker  Sims,  and  their  three 
children  emigrated  to  Utah  in  1853. 
After  his  arrival  in  Salt  Lake  City, 
Bro.  Sims  entered  the  office  of  Pres- 
ident Brigham  Young  as  a  copying 
clerk,  being  an  excellent  penman,  his 
specimens  of  plain  and  fancy  writing 
and  engrossing  receiving  honorable 
mention  and  prizes  at  the  Utah  ter- 
ritorial fairs  on  several  occasions.  He 
was  ordained  a  Seventy  in  1853  by 
Joseph  Young  and  became  a  member 
of  the  sixth  quorum  of  Seventy.  In 
Salt  Lake  City  he  marriea  Isabella 
McMurrin,  daughter  of  Joseph  Mc- 
Murrin  and  Margaret  Irvine.  His 
first  wife  died  in  1858,  leaving  four 
children,    namely,    Emma,    Julia, 


BIOGRAPHICAL   ENCYCLOPEDIA. 


713 


George  H.  and  Alexander.  Bro.  Sims 
left  on  a  mission  to  England  in  1862, 
being  set  apart  April  8,  1862,  under 
the  hands  of  Apostle  Erastus  Snow. 
He  crossed  the  Atlantic  in  the  ship 
"Francis  A.  Palmer"  and  arrived  in 
Liverpool  Sept.  9th  of  the  same  year. 
After  laboring  diligently  and  faithful- 
ly as  a  missionary,  he  was  honorably 
released  April  29,  1865.  Returning 
to  America,  he  crossed  the  ocean  and 
was  on  his  way  to  Utah,  when  he  was 


accidentally  drowned  in  the  Platte 
river  Oct.  23,  1865.  After  the  death 
of  Bro.  Sims'  first  wife,  Mrs.  Emma 
Colebrook,  a  close  friend  of  the  de- 
ceased lady,  took  charge  of  Sister 
Sims'  two  little  girls,  Emma  and 
Julia,  whom  she  raised  to  woman- 
hood, being  as  devoted  a  mother  to 
her  adopted  daughters  as  to  her  own 
child,  Nellie.  Bro.  Sims'  second  wife, 
Isabella,  bore  him  two  children, 
namely,  Esther  and  Joseph.  Elder 
Sims  was  a  good  man  without  guile, 
and  strictly  honest  in  his  dealings 
and  intercourse  with  everybody. 

SIRRINE,  Mephibosheth,  a  faithful 
Elder  in  the  Church,  who  died  in  the 
missionary  field,  was  born  Oct.  27, 
1811,  in  Phillipstown,  New  York.  He 
was   among   the   early   converts   to 


"Mormonism,"  and  after  his  baptism 
he  was  ordained  to  the  Priesthood 
and  became  an  efficient  and  diligent 
missionary,  performing  a  number  of 
missions  for  the  Church.  As  early  as 
August,  1838,  he  raised  up  a  branch 
of  the  Church  in  Lenawee  county, 
Michigan,  in  which  State  he  subse- 
quently had  great  success  as  a  mis- 
sionary. Thus  we  find  him  presiaing 
over  a  number  of  conference  meet- 
ings. In  February,  1841,  he  presided 
over  a  conference  held  in  Browns- 
ville. In  184  3  he  was  still  in  Michi- 
gan, and  presided  over  a  confer- 
ence meeting  held  in  Briton,  Michi- 
gan, where  nine  branches  of  the 
Church  were  represented.  In  1844  he 
continued  his  labors  in  Michigan,  at- 
tended a  conference  in  Brownsville 
in  January  and  another  in  Southfield 
in  August,  1844.  At  the  latter  con- 
ference fourteen  branches  of  the 
Church  were  represented.  He  appears 
to  have  returned  to  Nauvoo  shortly 
after  that,  but  was  called  on  another 
mission  to  the  Eastern  States,  togeth- 
er with  many  others,  and  in  January, 
1845,  we  find  him  presiding  over  a 
conference  held  at  Hartford,  Conn. 
At  a  council  held  at  Nauvoo  Oct.  11, 

1845,  he  was  appointed  captain  of  the 
2  4th  company  of  hundreds,  the 
Church  leaders  looking  forward  to 
the  migration  of  the  saints  to  the 
West.     He  was  in  Nauvoo  in  April, 

1846,  to  attend  a  conference,  and  was 
thence  called  on  a  mission  to  Great 
Britain.  While  in  England  he  con- 
tracted a  violent  cold,  from  which  he 
never  fully  recovered.  He  returned 
to  America  in  the  fall  of  1847  and 
became  president  pro  tem.  of  the 
branches  in  the  Eastern  States,  suc- 
ceeding Wm.  I.  Appleby,  who  went 
West  to  join  the  camps  of  the  saints 
on  the  frontier.  During  the  winter  of 
1847-1848  Brother  Sirrine  traveled 
extensively  as  a  missionary  in  the 
Eastern  States.  In  the  spring  of  1848 
he  started  for  the  West  and  while 
traveling  on  the  steamboat  "Niagara" 
he  died  with  consumption  April  29, 


714 


LATTER-DAY    SAINT 


1848,  at  the  mouth  of  the  Ohio  river. 
His  remains  were  brought  to  Winter 
Quarters  for  interment.  Under  date 
of  May  21,  1848,  the  following  is 
recorded  in  the  Historian's  Office 
journal  kept  at  Winter  Quarters: 
"The  remains  of  Mephibosheth  Sir- 
rine  were  taken  up  to  the  burying 
ground  on  the  hill.  In  the  procession 
following  the  remains  were  Sister 
Sirrine  and  children.  President  Brig- 
ham  Young  and  lady,  Ezra  T.  Benson, 
Erastus  Snow  and  lady,  Phinehas 
Richards,  Franklin  D.  Richards  and 
others.  While  the  grave  was  being 
dug,  Ezra  T.  Benson  delivered  a  short 
but  appropriate  address,  Erastus  Snow 
prayed,  after  which  the  remains  were 
interred  and  the  people  left  the 
ground  a  little  before  noon." 

SJODAILL,  Janne  Mattson,  editor 
and  author,  was  born  Nov.  29,  1853, 
in  Karlshamn,  Blekinge  Ian,  Sweden, 
the   son   of   Johan   Mattson   and    Pe- 


tronella  Suneson  Mattson.  After  iirst 
receiving  a  good  common  school  edu- 
cation he  entered  the  Bethel  Semi- 
nary in  Stockholm  in  18  70  and  in 
1875  the  Regent's  Park  College  in 
London,  England.  He  associated  him- 
self with  the  Baptists  early  in  life  and 
acted  for  several  years  as  general  sec- 


retary of  the  Norwegian  Baptist 
Union,  with  headquarters  at  Trond- 
hjem,  Norway.  In  18  86  he  emigrated 
to  Utah,  where  he  became  a  convert 
to  "Mormonism"  and  was  baptized  in 
Manti  by  Hans  Westenskov  Oct.  7, 
1886.  Soon  after  his  baptism  he  was 
ordained  to  the  office  of  a  Teacher 
and  subsequently  to  that  of  an  Elder, 
and  in  1886-1887  he  translated  the 
Doctrine  and  Covenants  into  the 
Swedish  language.  He  was  ordained 
a  Seventy  Nov.  15,  1888,  by  Moses 
Thatcher,  being  called  on  a  mission 
to  Palestine  and  Switzerland.  While 
on  this  mission  he  compiled  the  music 
of  the  German  Latter-day  Saint  hymn 
book.  After  his  return  he  was  ap- 
pointed to  preside  over  the  Scandi- 
navian meetings  in  Salt  Lake  City, 
which  position  he  held  for  a  number 
of  years.  In  1897  he  was  chosen  by 
the  Church  authorities  to  present  on 
behalf  of  the  Scandinavians  in  Utah 
a  copy  of  the  Book  of  Mormon  to 
King  Oscar  II  at  His  Majesty's  25- 
year  jubilee.  He  went  to  Sweden 
for  the  purpose  and  was  granted  an 
audience  at  the  palace  Sept.  22,  1897. 
In  1890  he  became  connected  with 
the  "The  Deseret  News,"  the  official 
church  organ,  which  position  he  held 
until  1914.  In  1'908  (July  27th)  he 
was  ordained  a  High  Priest  by  Pres. 
Wm.  McLachlan  and  set  apart  as  an 
alternate  member  of  the  High  Coun- 
cil of  the  Pioneer  Stake;  he  acted  in 
that  position  about  three  years  or  un- 
til he  moved  to  the  Ensign  Stake.  In 
1906,  when  Elder  Charles  W.  Pen- 
rose went  to  Liverpool  to  preside 
over  the  European  Mission,  Elder  Sjo- 
dahl  was  appointed  editor-in-chief  of 
the  "Deseret  News"  and  held  that  po- 
sition until  1914,  when  he  was  called 
to  go  on  a  mission  to  Great  Britain. 
He  arrived  in  Liverpool  Sept.  22, 
1914,  and  was  appointed  assistant 
editor  of  the  "Millennial  Star."  He 
discharged  the  duties  of  that  office 
until  May  10,  1919,  when  he  returned 
home,  having  been  honorably  re- 
leased.    During   this   period,    Europe 


BIOGRAPHICAL   ENCYCLOPEDIA. 


715 


was  convulsed  with  the  most  terrible 
war  on  record.  The  missionaries  from 
Zion  were  called  home,  except  a  few 
who  could  make  it  convenient  to  re- 
main; the  branches  of  the  Church 
were  deprived  of  their  male  members, 
who  were  needed  for  military  service, 
and  the  work  was  handicapped  by  the 
spirit  of  militarism  that  domineered 
the  world.  In  order  to  keep  the  "Mil- 
lennial Star"  going,  it  became  neces- 
sary for  Elder  Sjodahl  to  do  a  great 
deal  of  type-setting,  in  addition  to 
his  editorial  work,  and  he  cheerfully 
met  every  emergency.  In  addition  to 
his  work  on  the  "Millennial  Star"  and 
his  frequent  visits  to  the  various  con- 
ferences in  the  British  Mission,  he 
compiled,  under  the  direction  of  El- 
der Hyrum  M.  Smith,  the  president  of 
the  Mission,  a  Commentary  on  the 
Doctrine  and  Covenants,  and,  in  ac- 
cordance with  instructions  from  the 
late  President  Joseph  F.  Smith,  su- 
perintended the  printing  of  it  at  the 
Liverpool  office.  The  work  has  re- 
ceived very  favorable  comment  by  the 
Church  authorities  who  have  exam- 
ined it.  President  Charles  W.  Pen- 
rose, in  an  article  in  the  "Deseret 
News,"  characterizes  it  as  evincing 
"patient  and  scholarly  research  and 
remarkable  diligence"  and  showing 
"long  and  persistent  literary  labor 
and  great  ability."  Elder  Sjodahl  re- 
gards this  work  as  his  chief  effort  of 
a  mission  extending  over  almost  five 
years.  On  his  arrival  home  he  was 
called,  by  President  Heber  J.  Grant, 
to  assist  Elder  Edward  H.  Anderson 
in  his  work  on  the  "Improvement 
Era." 

S>UTH,  Alvin  Nathaniel,  an  Elder 
who  died  in  the  missionary  field,  was 
born  Oct.  29,  1896,  at  Colonia  Pa- 
checo.  Chihuahua,  Mexico,  the  son  of 
Jesse  N.  Smith  jun.  and  Nancy  A. 
Freeman.  He  was  baptized  Oct.  29, 
1903,  by  his  father,  and  was  after- 
wards ordained  an  Elder.  After  the 
expulsion  of  the  saints  from  Mexico, 
he    became    a    resident    of    El    Paso, 


Texas,  where  he  resided  in  1918, 
when  he  was  called  on  a  mission  to 
the  Eastern  States.  He  was  set  apari 
for  his  mission  Jan.  8,  1918,  and  ar- 
rived in  the  mission  field  Jan.  18, 
1918.  While  laboring  in  the  East 
Pennsylvania  conference,  he  was 
stricken  with  a  severe  attack  of  pneu- 
monia, which  resulted  in  his  death 
Dec.  25,  191S,  at  Scranton,  Pa.  Elder 
Smith  was  valiant  in  the  cause  of 
truth,  and  his  humility  and  sincerity 
impressed  many  people.  Love  for  oth- 
ers was  one  of  the  outstanding  fea- 
tures of  his  noble  character.  He  was 
one  of  the  hardest  workers  in  the 
Eastern  States  Mission  and  whatever 
task  was  requested  at  his  hands  he 
performed  with  a  zeal  and  energy 
that  distinguished  him  among  his  as- 
sociates. His  kind  and  loving  dispo- 
sition won  for  him  many  friends. 
He  died  an  unmarried  man,  the  son 
of  a  widow. 

SMITH,  Herald  Eugene,  an  Elder 
who  died  in  a  foreign  mission,  was 
born  March  7,  1893,  at  Provo,  Utah 
county,  Utah,  the  son  of  Joseph  Smith 
and  Esther  Gee.  He  was  baptized  in 
June,  1902,  and  later  ordained  an  El- 
der. He  resided  in  the  Sixth  Ward, 
Provo,  Utah  county,  Utah,  when  he 
was  called  on  a  mission  to  Hawaii. 
After  being  set  apart  for  his  mission 
Feb.  18.  1914,  he  started  for  his  field 
of  Ir.bor,  and  was  meeting  with  suc- 
cess on  the  islands  when  he  was 
stricken  with  sickness  and  died  in  a 
sanitarium  at  Honolulu  Sept.  11, 
1916. 

SMITH,  Warren  Barnes,  Bishop  and 
Patriarch  and  a  resident  of  American 
Fork,  Utah  county,  Utah,  was  born 
Dec.  20,  1844,  in  Nauvoo,  HancocK 
county.  111.,  the  son  of  Warren  Smith 
and  Amanda  Barnes.  He  migrated  to 
Utah  in  1850  and  was  baptized  in 
Salt  Lake  City  by  James  McKnight 
in  1852.  After  first  being  ordained 
to  several  offices  in  the  lesser  Priest- 
hood,  he   was  ordained   an   Elder  in 


716 


LATTER-DAY   SAINT 


February,  1866,  and  later  ordained  a 
Seventy  by  Samuel  Mulliner.  He  filled 
a  mission  to  Great  Britain  in   1877- 

1879  and  another  mission  to  the 
Southern    States    in    1887-1889.      In 

1880  he  was  set  apart  (together  with 
Karl  G.  Maeser  and  Isaiah  Coombs) 
to  preside  over  all  the  Seventies  in 
Utah  county,  and  also  served  as  a 
member  of  the  American  Fork  city 
council.  In  1887  he  was  ordained  a 
High  Priest  by  Abraham  O.  Smoot 
and  set  apart  as  first  counselor  to 
Bishop  William  M.  Bromley  of  Amer- 
ican Fork.  He  was  leader  of  the 
American  Fork  choir  for  thirty  years 
(1871-1901)  and  also  acted  as  a  High 
Councilor  in  the  Alpine  Stake.  Bishop 
Smith's  principal  occupations  in  life 
have  been  those  of  farming  and  mer- 
chandising. From  1873  to  1886  he 
acted  as  superintendent  of  the  Amer- 
ican Fork  Co-operative  Mercantile  In- 
stitution. When  American  Fork  was 
divided  into  four  Wards  in  1901,  he 
was  ordained  a  Bishop  by  Apostle 
George  Teasdale  and  set  apart  to 
preside  over  the  American  Fork 
Fourth  Ward.  This  position  he  held 
for  fourteen  years,  until  Oct.  2  4, 
1915,  when  he  was  ordained  a  Pa- 
triarch by  Apostle  Francis  M.  Lyman. 
In  1865  (Oct.  11th)  Brother  Smith 
married  Elizabeth  Mercer,  which 
union  was  blessed  with  ten  children 
(three  boys  and  seven  girls).  In  1874 
he  married  Mary  E.  Tyrrell,  who  bore 
him  six  children  (two  boys  and  four 
girls).  In  1884  (Oct.  15th)  he  mar- 
ried Harriet  A.  Harrington,  who  bore 
him  eight  children  (three  boys  and 
five  girls),  and  in  1907  (May  29th) 
he  married  Margaret  Emma  Cramp- 
ton  Rushton,  a  widow  with  six  chil- 
dren. In  1890  he  was  arrested  on  a 
charge  of  unlawful  cohabitation  and 
after  being  convicted  he  served  six 
months  in  the  Utah  penitentiary  for 
living  with  more  than  one  wife.  In 
violation  of  the  Tucker-Edmund's 
law;  later  he  was  granted  amnesty 
by  the  president  of  the  United  States. 


SNOW,  LeRoi  Clarence,  a  member 
of  the  general  board  of  Y.  M.  M.  I.  A., 
was  born  Aug.  26,  1876,  in  Brigham 
City,  Box  Elder  county,  Utah,  the  son 
of  President  Lorenzo  Snow  and  Min- 
nie Jensen.  He  was  baptized  when 
eight  years  of  age  by  his  father  and 
was  ordained  successively  to  the  dif- 
ferent offices  in  the  holy  Priesthood, 
now  being  a  High  Priest.  He  received 
his  education  in  the  Brigham  City 
public  schools,  the  Box  Elder  Stake 
Academy,  the  L.  D.  S.  College,  the 
Church  University,  the  University  of 
Utah  and  the  Salt  Lake  Business  Col- 
lege. When  only  ten  years  old  he  ac- 
companied his  father  on  a  missionary 
trip  through  Sanpete  county.    He  took 


up  shorthand  and  typewriting  when 
twelve  years  of  age  and  held  the  posi- 
tion of  public  stenographer  and  type- 
writer with  Judge  Coombs  in  Brig- 
ham City.  While  thus  engaged  he 
copied  Orson  W.  Whitney's  "l^ater 
Leaves  in  the  Life  of  Lorenzo  Snow," 
and  Andrew  Kimball's  "Mission  in 
the  Indian  Territory."  Before  he  was 
fifteen  years  of  age  he  became  Church 
shorthand  reporter  In  the  Box  Elder 
Stake  Tabernacle.  With  his  parents 
he  moved  to  Salt  Lake  City  in  18^3, 
when  his  father  was  appointed  presl- 


BIOGRAPHICAL  ENCYCLOPEDIA. 


71' 


dent  of  the  Temple.  He  also  acted  as 
reporter  In  the  Salt  Lake  Tabernacle, 
was  special  correspondent  to  the  "Des- 
eret  News"  and  reported  Dr.  James 
E.  Talmage's  lectures  delivered  in  the 
Assembly  Hall,  the  Articles  of  Faith, 
and  also  his  series  of  lectures  on  sci- 
ence and  philosophy.  From  1893  to 
18  9  6  Bro.  Snow  acted  as  librarian  in 
the  Salt  Lake  Temple.  Being  called 
on  a  mission  to  Germany,  he  left 
home  March  21,  1896,  crossed  the  At- 
lantic in  the  steamship  "Weasland," 
and  after  spending  six  months  travel- 
ing as  a  missionary  and  visitor  in  the 
United  States,  the  Isle  of  Man,  iung- 
land,  Ireland,  Scotland,  Wales,  Hol- 
land, Luxemburg  and  Switzerland,  he 
was  appointed  to  labor  In  Munich, 
as  presiding  Elder.  There  he  was  ar- 
rested, fined,  imprisoned  and  ban- 
ished for  life  from  the  kingdom  of 
Bavaria  because  of  his  missionary  ac- 
tivity. Later  he  presided  over  the 
Darmstadt  branch  and  still  later  over 
the  Dresden  conference.  He  received 
an  honorable  release  after  a  success- 
ful mission.  After  his  return  home 
in  February,  1899,  he  became  his 
father's  private  secretary  and  also 
chief  tithing  clerk  of  the  Church, 
acted  as  correspondent  to  the  "Des- 
eret  News"  on  a  trip  with  his  father 
and  others  to  St.  George  and  on  other 
presidential  tours,  and  was  chosen  as 
a  member  of  the  General  Board  of 
the  Y.  M.  M.  I.  A.  In  1900  (June 
29th)  he  married  Maud  Mary  Ford 
in  the  Salt  Lake  Temple.  One  child 
(Aileen)  blessed  this  marriage.  Bro. 
Snow  acted  as  instructor  in  French 
and  German  in  the  L.  D.  S.  Univer- 
sity, was  instructor  in  the  night 
school  of  the  L.  D.  S.  Business  Col- 
lege, served  as  bookkeeper  in  the 
Zion's  Savings  Bank,  etc.  He  entered 
the  automobile  business  in  1904  as 
president  and  manager  of  the  Utah 
Auto  Company,  in  which  he  was  en- 
gaged until  1907.  After  moving  to 
Snowflake,  Ariz.,  in  1908,  he  became 
interested  in  the  sheep  business,  and 
in  1909  he  labored  as  a  special  Y.  M. 


M.  I.  A.  missionary  in  Arizona  and 
Mexico.  In  November,  1909,  he  locat- 
ed in  Thatcher,  Ariz.  There  he  pro- 
moted the  Citizen's  Bank  of  Thatcher, 
which  opened  for  business  May  10, 
1910.  In  that  bank  he  was  cashier 
and  later  vice-president.  In  1912 
(May  10th)  he  married  Burma  Celia 
Thompson,  who  has  borne  her  hus- 
band three  children,  namely,  Clar- 
ence W.,  Margaret  and  Robert  T. 
Bro.  Snow  acted  for  some  time  as 
vice-president  of  the  Arizona  State 
Bankers'  association  and  as  fair  com- 
missioner from  Graham  county.  He 
became  associated  with  the  Arizona 
historian  in  the  fall  of  1917,  but 
moved  to  Salt  Lake  City  in  April, 
1919,  to  take  charge  of  a  department 
of  the-real  estate  business  carried  on 
by  the  Kimball  &  Richards  Company. 
Having  been  chosen  as  secretary  and 
assistant  to  the  Arizona  Historian,  he 
moved  to  Phoenix,  Arizona,  in  1919. 
Elder  Snow's  life  so  far  has  been 
largely  devoted  to  public  and  Church 
service,  often  at  the  expense  of  per- 
sonal interests.  He  has  always  had  a 
strong  testimony  of  the  truth  of  the 
gospel  and  ever  been  loyal  to  the 
leaders  of  the  Church. 

SORENSON,  Alden  Conrad,  an  El- 
der who  died  in  the  missionary  field, 
was  born  Oct.  24,  1897,  in  Salt  Lake 
City,  Utah,  the  son  of  Peter  Soren- 
son  and  Malinda  Jane  North.  He  was 
baptized  Nov.  3,  1905,  by  Christian 
Peterson  and  was  afterwards  ordained 
an  Elder.  He  resided  at  Silver,  Juab 
county,  Utah,  when  he  was  set  apart 
for  a  mission  to  the  Southern  States 
June  10,  1919.  He  was  laboring  as  a 
missionary  in  Florida  when  he  was 
accidentally  drowned  in  a  river  in 
Florida  July  4,  1919.  His  remains 
were  shipped  to  his  home  in  Salt 
Lake  City,  where  they  arrived  July 
10,  1919. 

SOREXSEN,  Hans  Christian,  fourth 
Bishop  of  the  Mount  Carmel  Ward 
(Kanab  Stake),  Kane  county,   Utah, 


718 


LATTER-DAY   SAINT 


was  born  Nov.  30,  1864,  at  Dostrup, 
Aalborg  amt,  Denmark,  the  son  of 
Mads  Sorensen  and  Kirsten  Larsen. 
His  parents  having  become  converts 
to  the  restored  gospel,  he  emigrated 
to  America  with  two  of  his  elder 
brothers  and  his  sister,  in  charge  of 
his  uncle,  Anders  C.  Sorensen.  They 
crossed  the  Atlantic  in  the  steamship 
"Wyoming"  and  arrived  in  Salt  Lake 
City  Sept.  29,  1873.  For  about  three 
months  Hans  made  his  home  with  his 
uncle  (Borregaard),  at  Fillmore,  Mil- 
lard county,  thence  went  to  live  with 
a  family  at  Holden,  where  he  attend- 
ed  school.     A  year   later    (1874)    his 


parents  emigrated  to  Utah  and  set- 
tled at  Mill  Creek.  His  father  was  so 
anxious  to  see  his  boy  that  he  walked 
to  Holden,  a  distance  of  about  125 
miles,  to  get  him;  the  return  journey 
was  made  by  team  in  company  with 
the  friends  in  whose  home  Hans  had 
been  staying.  While  living  in  Mill 
Creek,  Hans  was  baptized  May  2, 
1875.  In  1879  the  family  moved  to 
Orderville,  Kane  county,  where  they 
lived  in  the  United  Order.  Here  Hans 
was  ordained  a  Deacon.  His  mother 
was  an  ardent  Temple  worker  in  the 
St.  George  Temple,  and  in  order  that 
he  might  assist  her  in  this  work,  Bro. 


Hans  Sorensen,  by  permission  of  Pres. 
Wilford  Woodruff,   was   ordained   an 
Elder  when  only  fifteen  years  of  age, 
by  John  L.  Winder.    In  1887  he  was 
called   on   a   mission   to   Scandinavia 
and  on  his  arrival  in  Copenhagen  he 
was   appointed   to    labor   in   the   Aal- 
borg conference;    he  was  the  young- 
est Elder  in  said  conference.    Being 
honorably    released    after    two   years 
and    a   half   of   service,    he   returned 
home,  arriving  in  Orderville  Sept.  13, 
1889.   The  following  day  (Sept.  14th) 
he  was  ordained   a  High  Priest  and 
set  apart  as  an  alternate  member  of 
the  High  Council  of  the  Kanab  Stake. 
Returning  home  from  his  mission  he 
took   seven  young  emigrating   saints 
to  the  home  of  his  parents,  who  were 
always  trying  to  assist  in  the  emigra- 
tion of  their  friends  by  finding  homes 
for  their  boys  and  girls  in  Utah.    In 
1890     (March    18th)     Bro.    Sorensen 
married  Miranda  Esplin  (daughter  of 
Bishop    John    Esplin    and    Margaret 
Webster),    who   was   born   in    Mount 
Carmel  Jan.  25,  1872.  With  his  young 
wife  Bro.  Sorensen  settled  in  Mount 
Carmel,    where    he    acted    for    some 
years  as  superintendent  of  the  Ward 
Sunday  school.    In  1900   (Aug.  30th) 
he  was  ordained  a  Bishop  by  Francis 
M.   Lyman  and   set  apart  to  preside 
over  the  Mount  Carmel  Ward,  a  po- 
sition  which   he   still   holds.     Bishop 
Sorensen's    marriage    with    Miranda 
Esplin  has  been  blessed  with  ten  chil- 
dren,   namely,    Binnie    H.,    Kirsten, 
Evelene,  David,  Earl  J.,  Loyd,  Marie, 
Vilate,  Joseph  and  Doyle.   All  of  these 
children  are  living  except  Kirsten 
and   Joseph.      Bishop   Sorensen   is   a 
farmer  and  stock  raiser  by  avocation 
and  has  held  many  positions  of  trust 
and  responsibility  in  civil  affairs. 

SOUTHAVICK,  John  Allord,  an  El- 
der who  died  while  filling  a  foreign 
mission,  was  born  Feb.  20,  1883,  at 
Lehi,  Utah  county,  Utah,  the  son  of 
Edward  Southwick  and  Ann  Maria 
Taylor.  He  was  baptized  in  1892,  re- 
ceived  a   good   education  and   at  the 


BIOGRAPHICAL   ENCYCLOPEDIA. 


719 


time  he  was  called  on  his  mission  to 
New  Zealand  in  1904  he  was  a  stu- 
dent at  the  Brigham  Young  Univer- 
sity at  Provo  and  a  resident  of  the 
Springville  First  Ward  (Utah  county, 
Utah).  Being  set  apart  for  his  mis- 
sion Oct.  14,  1904,  he  left  for  New 
Zealand,  arriving  there  the  latter  part 
of  1904.  He  was  appointed  to  labor 
among  the  Maoris  on  the  North 
Island.  He  was  about  to  be  released 
to  return  home,  when  he  was  strick- 
en with  typhoid  fever,  which  termin- 
ated his  life  March  12,  190  8.  For 
some  time  he  had  been  president  of 
the  Thames  and  Tauranga  confer- 
ences and  had  been  in  the  field  near- 
ly three  and  a  half  years  and  had 
performed  an  excellent  work.  His 
body,  encased  in  a  solid  oak  casket 
with  lead  lining,  was  shipped  home 
in  charge  of  Elder  George  B.  Andrus. 

STANDING,    Joseph,    one    of    tne 

martyrs  of  the  Church,  was  born  Oct. 
5,  1854,  in  Salt  Lake  City,  Utah,  the 
son  of  James  and  Mary  Standing,  was 
baptized  in  September,  1862,  by  Ed- 
ward Snelgrove,  and  still  resided  with 
his  parents  Oct.  11,  1875,  when  he 
was  set  apart  by  Apostle  Joseph  F. 
Smith  for  a  mission  to  the  Southern 
States.  He  returned  Sept.  15,  1876, 
after  filling  an  honorable  mission.  In 
March,  1878,  he  was  again  set  apart 
for  a  mission  to  the  Southern  States 
and  after  arriving  in  the  missionary 
field  he  was  appointed  to  labor  in  the 
State  of  Georgia,  where  he  accom- 
plished a  good  work  in  Whitfield 
county,  particularly  in  the  neighbor- 
hood of  Varnells  Station,  where  he 
had  succeeded  in  raising  up  a  branch 
of  the  Church.  Early  in  the  year 
1879,  Elder  Rudger  Clawson  arrived 
in  the  mission  and  became  associated 
with  Brother  Standing,  who  was  then 
the  president  of  the  Georgia  confer- 
ence. In  Ju?y,  1879,  these  two  breth- 
ren were  laboring  in  Union  and  Fan- 
nin counties.  About  the  middle  of  the 
month  they  left  their  field  of  labor  to 


attend  a  conference  to  be  held  in 
Haywood  Valley,  Chattooga  county, 
Georgia.  On  the  way  they  called  at 
Varnells  Station  to  visit  the  Saints, 
arriving  there  on  the  night  of  Satur- 
day, July  Vd,  18  79.  A  short  time  be- 
fore their  departure  for  Haywood  Val- 
ley, Elder  Standing  had  the  follow- 
ing dream,  which  made  a  powerful 
impression  upon  his  mind  and  caused 
him  to  have  forebodings  of  approach- 
ing trouble:  "I  thought  I  went  to 
Varnells  Station,  when  suddenly 
clouds  of  intense  blackness  gathered 
overhead  and  all  around  me.  I  vis- 
ited a  family  who  were  connected 
with  the  Church.  The  moment  I  en- 
tered their  house  the  most  extreme 
consternation  seized  them,  and  they 
made  it  clear  beyond  any  possibility 
of  doubt  that  my  presence  was  ob- 
jectionable. They  appeared  to  be  in- 
fluenced by  a  sense  of  great  fearful- 
ness.  There  was  no  clearing  away  of 
the  clouds  nor  abatement  of  the  rest- 
lessness of  the  people,  when  I  sud- 
denly awoke,  without  my  being  shown 
the  end  of  the  trouble."  The  Elders 
had  called  at  the  home  of  the  family, 
seen  by  Bro.  Standing  in  his  dream, 
on  the  evening  of  their  arrival  at 
Varnells,  and  were  received  with 
great  coolness.  The  inmates  of  the 
home  appeared  to  be  in  a  state  of 
great  excitement  and  said  that  threats 
had  been  made  against  the  brethren 
and  the  feeling  toward  them  in  the 
neighborhood  was  very  bitter  and 
murderous.  They  declined  to  allow 
them  to  stop  over  night,  because  if 
anything  happened  they  would  have 
to  share  the  trouble.  This  reception 
chilled  the  feelings  of  the  Elders  and 
Brother  Clawson  said  to  himself: 
"This  is  the  fulfillment  of  Joseph's 
dream."  "What  shall  we  do?"  said 
the  missionaries.  "It  is  now  nine 
o'clock  and  getting  quite  dark.  Can 
you  tell  us  of  a  place  where  we  can 
find  shelter?"  The  answer  was  that  if 
they  went  to  Mr.  Henry  Holston's,  a 
mile  and  a  half  further  on,  he  would 


720 


LATTER-DAY   SAINT 


doubtless  entertain  them.  This  the 
brethren  decided  to  do  and  were  kind- 
ly received  by  Mr.  Holston,  who  was 
not  a  member  of  the  Church,  but 
friendly  to  the  Elders.  Here  they 
stayed  over  night  and  Sunday,  where 
the  day  was  quietly  spent  In  singing 
and  conversing  on  the  gospel.  After 
breakfast  Monday  morning,  July  21, 
1879,  they  walked  over  to  a  Mr.  Log- 
gins,  a  distance  of  about  one  mile, 
to  look  after  their  clothing.  While 
on  their  way  back,  as  they  were  walk- 
ing along  the  public  road,  near  the 
line  of  Catoosa  and  Whitfield  coun- 
ties, they  were  suddenly  surprised  by 
an  armed  mob  consisting  of  the  fol- 
lowing twelve  persons,  all  of  whom 
were  citizens  of  the  surrounding  ter- 
ritory: Jasper  N.  Nations,  Hugh  Blair, 
David  Nations,  Mac  McClure,  Andrew 
Bradley,  Joseph  Nations,  James  Fau- 
cett,  Benjamin  Clark,  David  Clark, 
Jefferson  Hunt,  William  Nations  and 
A.  L.  Smith.  With  many  threats  of 
violence,  these  armed  ruffians  com- 
pelled the  Elders  to  accompany  them 
through  the  woods  to  an  isolated 
place.  As  they  were  walking  along, 
one  of  the  mobbers,  Benjamin  Clark, 
a  Baptist  deacon,  struck  Elder  Claw- 
son  a  heavy  blow  with  a  club  from 
behind,  nearly  felling  him  to  the 
ground.  This  cowardly  act  he  at- 
tempted to  repeat  a  few  minutes  la- 
ter, but  was  prevented  by  another 
member  of  the  gang.  While  passing  a 
spring  of  water.  Elder  Standing  re- 
quested to  be  permitted  to  get  a 
drink,  which  was  granted  him.  He 
was  very  pale,  his  features  rigid  and 
overspread  with  an  expression  of 
deep  anxiety.  While  at  the  spring, 
James  Faucett  addressed  the  Elders 
as  follows:  "I  want  you  men  to  un- 
derstand that  I  am  the  captain  of 
this  party,  and  that  if  we  ever  find 
you  in  this  part  of  the  country,  we 
will  hang  you  by  the  neck  like  dogs." 
The  space  of  about  one  hour  was  con- 
sumed in  conversation  when  three  of 
the  mobbers,  who  had  left  the  party 
a  few  minutes   before,   rode   up   and 


one  of  them  exclaimed:  "Follow  us." 
Brother  Standing,  undoubtedly  ex- 
pecting that  to  follow  him  meant  cer- 
tain death,  made  some  resistance, 
when  a  man  who  was  near  him  point- 
ed his  pistol  at  him  and  fired.  Elder 
Standing  fell  mortally  wounded.  Sud- 
denly a  member  of  the  party,  point- 
ing to  Elder  Clawson,  said,  "Shoot 
that  man."  Every  gun  was  leveled  at 
him  and  he  calmly  folded  his  arms 
and  said  with  apparent  deliberation, 
"Shoot."  The  murderous  wretches 
paused  a  moment,  when  the  man  who 
gave  the  first  order  suddenly  changed 
his  mind  and  shouted,  "Don't  shoot." 
Elder  Clawson  then  walked  over  to 
his  martyred  companion,  raised  his 
head  and  placed  his  hat  under  it  for 
a  pillow.  Turning  to  the  murderers 
he  said  indignantly,  "It  is  a  burning 
shame  to  shoot  a  man  down  in  this 
way  and  leave  him  to  die  in  the 
woods;  either  go  and  get  help,  or  let 
me  go."  The  mob  permitted  him  to 
go,  which  he  did  with  the  greatest 
speed.  After  his  departure  the  gang 
fired  a  number  of  shots  into  the  body 
of  Elder  Standing,  no  doubt  to  cover 
the  trails  of  the  actual  murder.  In 
the  preparation  of  the  body,  Elder 
Clawson  was  left  almost  entirely 
alone,  but  secured  a  casket  and  had 
the  body  encased,  after  which  it  was 
taken  to  Dalton,  Georgia,  by  wagon 
and  thence  to  Salt  Lake  City,  accom- 
panied by  Elder  Clawson.  The  news 
of  the  tragedy  had  created  a  deep 
sensation  in  the  community  of  the 
Latter-day  Saints.  In  Ogden  a  brass 
band,  an  organized  body  of  members 
of  the  Young  Men's  Improvement  As- 
sociation, and  a  multitude  of  other 
people  awaited  the  arrival  of  the  re- 
mains in  that  town.  The  obsequies 
were  conducted  in  the  Tabernacle  at 
Salt  Lake  City  on  Sunday,  Aug.  3, 
1879,  in  the  presence  of  about  10,000 
persons.  The  speakers  on  that  occa- 
sion were  Presidents  John  Taylor  and 
George  Q.  Cannon.  The  body  was  in- 
terred in  the  Salt  Lake  City  cemetery, 
where    a    handsome    monument    of 


BIOGRAPHICAL  ENCYCLOPEDIA. 


721 


Italian  marble,  with  data  pertaining 
to  the  tragedy  inscribed  upon  it,  was 
erected.  At  the  time  his  life  was 
taken,  Brother  Standing  had  already 
served  sixteen  months  of  a  second 
mission  to  the  Southern  States,  auu 
had  been  for  some  time  in  daily  ex- 
pectation of  being  notified  of  an  hon- 
orable release  to  return  home.  He 
had  been  indulging  in  gleeful  antici- 
pations of  meeting  soon  with  valued 
friends  and  loved  ones,  but  these 
were  cruelly  cut  short  of  realization 
by  the  bullet  of  the  cowardly  assas- 
sin. Bro.  Standing  was  of  a  mild  and 
gentle  though  firm  disposition,  one 
who  would  suffer  wrong  rather  than 
do  wrong,  and  it  was  because  of  his 
kind  and  wise  manner  of  conducting 
himself  that  Pres.  John  Morgan  left 
the  hostile  district  of  Georgia  under 
his  watchful  care. 

STANGER,  George  C,  an  ElBer 
who  died  in  the  missionary  field,  was 
born  March  28,  1880,  at  Slaterville, 
Weber  county,  Utah,  the  son  of  Geo. 
W.  Stanger  and  Sarah  Helen  Knight. 
He  was  baptized  March  28,  1888.  by 
John  A.  Allred,  and  was  subsequently 
ordained  an  Elder.  He  resided  in 
Neeleyville,  Idaho,  in  1903,  when  he 
was  called  on  a  mission  to  the  South- 
v/estern  States,  being  set  apart  Feb. 
10,  1903.  Arriving  in  that  mission 
Feb.  15,  1903,  he  was  appointed  to 
labor  in  Vernon  county,  Missouri;  af- 
terwards he  labored  in  Dade  county, 
in  the  same  State.  Early  in  April, 
1903,  he  was  taken  sick,  in  conse- 
quence of  which  he  went  to  the  mis- 
sion office  in  Kansas  City.  On  the 
26th  of  April,  1903,  he  was  taken  to 
the  St.  Joseph  hospital,  where  two 
Elders  sat  up  with  him  every  night. 
After  suffering  with  typhoid  fever 
ten  days,  pneumonia  set  in  and  later 
other  complications.  He  lay  uncon- 
scious for  nearly  four  weeks  and  fin- 
ally died  May  2  3,  1903.  His  body  was 
embalmed,  laid  in  a  beautiful  metai- 
lined  casket  and  shipped  to  his  home 
in   Idaho.     The   Catholic   sisters   and 


nurses  who  waited  on  him  at  the  hos- 
pital said  that  during  his  long  suf- 
fering and  unconsciousness  not  one 
impure  expression  passed  his  lips, 
something  that,  in  their  long  experi- 
ence, had  never  been  equalled.  Elder 
Stanger  was  a  zealous  worker  and 
was  beloved  by  all  who  became  ac- 
quainted with  him,  and  while  his  mis- 
sion was  a  short  one,  it  was  an  im- 
portant one,  for  he  was  the  means  of 
bringing  the  gospel  to  many  people 
who  otherwise  would  never  have 
heard  of  it. 

STEVENS,  George  W.,  an  Elder 
who  died  while  filling  a  foreign  mis- 
sion, was  born  Jan.  19,  1873,  at 
Ephraim,  Sanpete  county,  Utah,  the 
son  of  Joseph  Smith  Stevens  and  Abi- 
gail Marina  King.  He  was  baptized 
May  29,  1881,  by  Samuel  Allred, 
and  later  ordained  a  Seventy,  and  be- 
came a  member  of  the  91st  quorum 
of  Seventy.  He  moved  to  Perron, 
Emery  county,  Utah,  which  was  his 
home  in  December,  1905,  when  he 
was  called  to  fill  a  mission  in  New 
Zealand.  Being  set  apart  for  that  mis- 
sion Dec.  8,  1905,  he  arrived  In  Auck- 
land Jan.  4,  1906,  where  he  received 
an  appointment  to  labor  in  the  Otago 
conference,  in  which  place  he  worked 
very  energetically  for  the  spread  of 
truth,  never  being  ashamed  of  the 
name  he  bore.  He  was  a  most  faith- 
ful and  diligent  Elder  and  won  the 
respect  and  confidence  of  both  saints 
and  strangers,  but  he  took  sick  with 
brain  fever  (meningitis)  and  died  at 
the  hospital  at  Invercargill  July  2  6, 
1^0  6.  His  illness  was  of  but  short 
duration,  he  having  been  confined  at 
the  hospital  only  ten  days.  His  body 
was  embalmed  and  shipped  to  his 
home  (Ferron)  in  Utah,  accompanied 
by  Elder  Hiram  L.  Baker,  one  of  his 
missionary  companions  in  New  Zea- 
land. Bro.  Stevens  left  a  wife  and 
several  children. 

STEVENS,  Margery,  a  lady  mis- 
sionary  who   died   in   the   field,    was 


Vol.  III.  No.  46. 


May  29,  1920 


722 


LATTER-DAY   SAINT 


born  April  4,  1894,  at  Orderville, 
Kane  county,  Utah,  the  daughter  of 
C.  F.  Stevens  and  Olive  E.  D.  Stevens. 
She  resided  with  her  parents  in 
Enoch,  Iron  county,  Utah,  when  she 
was  called  on  a  mission  to  the  West- 
ern States  in  April,  1917.  After  la- 
boring in  the  Pueblo  conference 
(mostly  in  Pueblo,  Trinidad  and  Ala- 
mosa, Colorado),  she  was  transferred 
to  Denver  in  October,  1918.  There 
she  was  stricken  with  influenza  and 
died  at  the  Mercy  Hospital,  Denver, 
Nov.  5,  1918.  Her  fatal  sickness  came 
as  a  result  of  her  courageous  and  un- 
selfish effort  to  assist  others  who 
were  suffering  from  the  prevailing 
dread  scourge  before  she  left  Ala- 
mosa for  Denver.  Her  untimely  death 
was  caused  from  pneumonia,  follow- 
ing influenza,  after  but  one  week's 
illness.  The  body  was  shipped  home 
for  burial. 

STEVENS,  Ransom  M.,  an  Elder 
who  died  while  presiding  over  the 
Samoan  Mission,  was  born  May  1, 
1864,  in  Fairview,  Sanpete  county, 
Utah,  the  son  of  Ransom  A.  Stevens 
and  Tranquilla  Ann  Brady.  He  was 
baptized  by  Andrew  Rasmussen  July 
28,  1872,  and  being  set  apart  by 
Abraham  H.  Cannon  for  a  mission  to 
Samoa  March  25,  1892,  arrived  in 
his  field  of  labor  April  17th,  follow- 
ing. He  labored  diligently  in  his  call- 
ing, and  his  many  deeds  of  love  ana 
his  kindness  made  him  a  favorite 
among  his  associates  in  the  mission 
and  won  for  him  the  respect  of  those 
among  whom  he  labored.  After  gain- 
ing an  experience  among  the  natives, 
he  was  called  to  preside  over  the 
Samoan  Mission.  This  position  he 
filled  with  honor  and  wisdom  until 
his  death  at  Fagalii,  Upolu,  Samoa, 
April  28,  1894.  For  some  time  be- 
fore his  death  he  had  been  complain- 
ing of  not  feeling  well  and  was  con- 
fined to  his  bed  for  ten  days.  His 
wife,  Annie  T.,  was  with  him  at  the 
time  and  did  all  in  her  power  to  al- 
leviate his  sufferings.     The  remains 


of  Elder  Stevens  were  shipped  to  his 
home  in  Utah. 

STEWART,  Daniel  Jones,  an  Elder 
who  died  while  filling  a  mission,  was 
born  Feb.  25,  1871,  in  Beaver  county, 
Utah,  the  son  of  Urban  Van  Stewart 
and  Mary  Ann  Jones.  He  was  bap- 
tized when  about  eight  years  old  and 
subsequently  ordained  a  Seventy.  In 
1895  he  was  called  on  a  mission  to 
the  Southern  States  and  left  for  Chat- 
tanooga, Tennessee,  July  27th  of  that 
year.  He  took  hold  of  missionary  la- 
bors in  great  earnest  and  gave  prom- 
ise of  becoming  a  successful  Elder, 
but  he  was  stricken  with  typhoid  fe- 
ver, of  which  he  died  Nov.  1,  1895. 
His  body  was  shipped  to  his  home  in 
Adamsville,  Beaver  county,  Utah,  in 
charge  of  Elder  George  H.  Home. 

STEWART,  Neil  Murdocli,  Bishop 
of  Meadow  (Millard  Stake),  Millard 
county,    I'tah,    was    born    April    15, 


1855,  in  Peoria,  Illinois,  the  son  of 
William  Stewart  and  Elizabeth  Mur- 
dock.  As  an  infant  he  came  to  Utah 
with  his  father's  family  in  the  year 

1856,  crossing  the  plains  in  a  hand- 
cart company.  His  mother  died  in 
confinement  Nov.  23,  1856,  on  the 
Big  Sandy,   near  Green  river.    With 


BIOGRAPHICAL   ENCYCLOPEDIA. 


723 


his  father  and  older  brother  he  ar- 
rived in  Salt  Lake  City  in  December, 
1856.  Neil  was  baptized  by  his  fath- 
er about  1865,  and  had  but  very  slim 
opportunities  for  schooling.  From  his 
early  youth  he  took  interest  in  Church 
matters  and  acted  as  president  of  the 
Meadow  Y.  M.  M.  I.  A.  about  eight 
years.  He  was  ordained  a  Seventy 
Nov.  25,  1883,  by  Francis  M.  Lyman, 
and  became  a  member  of  the  42nd 
quorum  of  Seventy.  In  1887  (Aug. 
19th)  he  was  ordained  a  High  Prlesi 
by  Joseph  V.  Robison,  filled  a  mis- 
sion to  Great  Britain  in  1898-ldOO 
and  was  ordained  a  Bishop  Jan.  22, 
1901,  and  set  apart  to  preside  over 
the  Meadow  Ward,  which  position  he 
held  for  nine  years,  and  was  then 
honorably  released  on  account  of  fail- 
ing health.  Bishop  Stewart  has  also 
filled  a  number  of  secular  positions 
and  served  a  term  as  a  county  com- 
missioner. He  married  Hannah  Fish- 
er Nov.  24,  1880,  in  the  St.  George 
Temple,  and  has  been  engaged  in 
farming  his  whole  life. 

STOKER,  John,  Bishop  of  the  Lehi 
Fourth  Ward  (Alpine  Stake),  Utah 
county,  Utah,  was  born  Aug.  4,  185  6, 
in  Doncaster,  Yorkshire,  England, 
the  son  of  John  Stoker  and  Mary 
Marsh.  He  was  educated  in  his  fath- 
er's public  school  until  the  latter's 
death,  when  he  finished  his  educa- 
tion at  the  Jefferson  boarding  school 
at  Pontefract,  England.  He  served  an 
apprenticeship  to  the  mercantile  busi- 
ness and  engaged  successfully  in  the 
gents'  furnishing  business  in  his  na- 
tive town,  about  1882.  Becoming  a 
convert  to  "Mormonism,"  he  was  bap- 
tized May  11,  1892,  was  ordained  suc- 
cessively to  the  offices  of  Deacon, 
Priest  and  Elder  and  was  set  apart 
as  president  of  the  Doncaster  branch 
of  the  Sheffield  conference,  which  po- 
sition he  retained  until  he  and  his 
family  emigrated  to  Utah  in  August, 
1893;  they  made  their  home  in  Lehi. 
Here  he  became  a  member  of  the 
Ward  choir  and  also  acted  as  a  Sun- 


day school  teacher,  block  teacher  and 
secretary  of  the  Elders  quorum.  For 
several  years  he  held  the  position  of 
tithing  clerk  under  Bishop  Thomas  R. 
Cutler,  and  when  Lehi  was  divided 
into  four  Wards,  in  December.  1903, 
Bro.  Stoker  was  chosen  as  Bishop  of 
the  Lehi  Fourth  Ward,  which  posi- 
tion he  still  holds.  In  1909-1911  he 
acted  as  treasurer  for  Lehi  city,  but 
the  Bishop's  present  avocation  in  life 
is  farming.     In    188  2    (Aug.    7th)    he 


married  Clara  Swaby  (daughter  of 
George  Swaby  and  Elizabeth  Bean), 
who  was  born  May  12,  1857,  at  Birk- 
wood,  England)  and  who  bore  her 
husband  five  children,  namely,  John 
W.  (who  married  Ruby  Davis),  Har- 
ry Swaby  (who  married  Janet  Gil- 
christ), Dorothy  E.  (who  married 
Hanmer  J.  White),  Olive  Mary  (who 
married  Ebben  R.  Speer),  and  Clara 
L.,  who  is  still  living  at  home  with 
her  parents. 

STREET,  Edwin  W.,  an  Elder  who 
died  while  filling  a  foreign  mission, 
was  born  in  October,  1852,  in  Stock- 
well,  Sussex,  England,  the  son  of 
Thomas  G.  Street  and  Esther  Hug- 
gett,  and  was  baptized  in  18  70  by  El- 
der F.  Childs.  When  he  emigrated  to 
Utah,  he  settled  in  Springville,  Utah 


724 


LATTER-DAY   SAINT 


county,  and  became  a  member  of  the 
5th  quorum  of  Seventy.  On  the  4th 
day  of  June,  1877,  he  was  set  apart 
for  a  mission  to  Europe  by  Elder 
George  Reynolds,  and  arrived  in  Eng- 
land on  the  22nd  of  the  same  month. 
He  labored  in  the  London  conference 
until  his  death,  which  occurred  April 
12,  1878,  at  Beachwood,  Green  Heath, 
where  his  remains  were  interred. 

SUNDWALL,  Peter,  president  of 
the  Scandinavian  and  later  of  the 
Swedish  Mission,  was  born  June  11, 
1848,  at  Aspas,  Jemtland,  Sweden, 
the  son  of  Olof  and  Katrina  Nilson. 
As  a  convert  of  the  restored  gospel 
he  was  baptized  Feb.  27,  1866,  and 
was  soon  afterward  ordained  to  the 
Priesthood  and  appointed  to  labor  as 


a  local  missionary  in  Sundsvall,  and 
in  the  fall  of  1867  he  was  sent  to 
Gotland,  and  subsequently  he  again 
labored  in  Sundsvall,  and  in  Oster- 
sund,  Eskilstuna,  and  Stockholm.  He 
emigrated  to  Utah  in  1872  and  made 
his  home  in  Fairview,  Sanpete  coun- 
ty. In  1881-18  84  he  filled  a  mission 
to  Scandinavia,  laboring  in  the  mis- 
sion office  in  Copenhagen,  Denmark, 
as  an  assistant  to  the  president  of  the 
mission,  and,  again,  in  1894,  he  was 


called  on  another  mission  to  Scandi- 
navia, this  time  to  act  as  presi- 
dent of  the  mission,  which  he  did 
with  wisdom  and  success.  In  the 
spring  of  1908  he  was  called  on  his 
third  mission  to  Europe,  this  time  to 
preside  over  the  Swedish  Mission,  re- 
turning in  November,  1910.  At  home 
Bro.  Sundwall  has  filled  various  po- 
sitions of  trust  and  responsibility, 
serving  as  manager  of  the  Co-op 
Store  In  Fairview  for  several  years. 
In  1886  he  was  appointed  postmas- 
ter of  Fairview  and  served  in  that 
capacity  for  nearly  three  years,  m  a 
business  capacity  he  has  been  active- 
ly identified  with  nearly  every  busi- 
ness enterprise  of  importance  in  the 
community.  At  the  present  time  he 
is  serving  as  president  of  the  Fair- 
view  State  Bank,  with  which  institu- 
tion he  was  previously  connected  as 
cashier  from  the  time  of  its  organiza- 
tion in  1914.  At  home  he  has  always 
taken  an  active  part  in  any  calling 
that  has  been  assigned  to  him  in  a 
Church  capacity.  For  many  years  he 
was  president  of  the  26th  quorum  of 
Seventy.  In  1901  (Jan.  5th)  he  was 
ordained  a  High  Priest,  and  set  apart 
to  act  as  a  High  Councilor  in  the 
North  Sanpete  Stake  of  Zion.  In  1916 
he  was  released  from  this  position  and 
ordained  a  Patriarch,  under  the  hands 
of  Presiding  Patriarch  Hyrum  G. 
Smith.  In  1875  (Feb.  1st)  he  mar- 
ried Anna  K.  Johanson  (daughter  of 
Lars  Johanson),  who  was  born  in 
Grava,  Vermland,  Sweden,  March  17, 
1848.  This  marriage  has  been  blessed 
with  five  children,  namely,  Peter, 
Annie,  John,  Mary  I.,  Olof,  and  an 
adopted  son  (Carl). 

TAYLOR,  Edmund  Zebulon,  an  El- 
der who  died  in  the  missionary  field, 
was  born  March  14,  1859,  in  Slater- 
ville,  Weber  county,  Utah,  the  son  of 
Wm.  Warren  Taylor  ad  Julia  Aner 
Carbine.  Later  he  moved  with  his 
parents  to  New  Harmony,  Washing- 
ton county,  and  became  a  member  of 
the   9th  quorum  of  Seventy.     In  the 


BIOGRAPHICAL  ENCYCLOPEDIA. 


725 


fall  of  1882  he  married  a  daughter 
of  Bishop  Pleasant  G.  Taylor  of  Har- 
risville,  by  whom  he  had  three  chil- 
dren, two  boys  and  a  girl.  He  was  set 
apart  for  a  mission  to  the  Southern 
States  by  Apostle  John  Henry  Smith, 
Feb.  14,  1887,  and  was  president  of 
the  North  Carolina  conference  at  the 
time  of  his  death,  which  was  caused 
by  chills  and  fever,  Aug.  13,  1888. 
Elder  Taylor  bore  an  excellent  char- 
acter. He  was  a  reliable  and  moral 
young  man  and  made  a  good  mis- 
sionary. The  body  was  taken  to  Og- 
den,  Utah,  for  burial. 

TAYLOR,  George  B.,  an  Elder  who 
died  in  the  missionary  field,  was  born 
Sept.  19,  1885,  at  Manti,  Sanpete 
county,  Utah,  the  son  of  Joseph  J. 
Taylor  and  Malinda  D.  Barton.  While 
residing  at  Manti,  he  was  called  on 
a  mission  to  the  Western  States,  be- 
ing set  apart  for  the  same  Dec.  13, 
1911.  He  was  laboring  in  Pueblo. 
Colorado,  when  he  was  stricken  with 
typhoid  fever.  Being  sent  to  Denver, 
he  was  placed  in  a  hospital  for  treat- 
ment. Everything  possible  was  done 
for  him  and  hopes  of  his  recovery 
were  entertained  by  those  around 
him,  until  suddenly  and  unexpectedly 
the  end  came  on  the  morning  of  Nov. 
14,  1912,  when  he  passed  peacefully 
away.  During  the  illness  of  Elder 
Taylor  his  young  wife  was  near  him. 
for  as  soon  as  word  came  of  his  sick- 
ness, she  left  Manti  for  Denver,  ac- 
companied by  her  brother,  L.  R.  An- 
derson. She  remained  in  the  Colora- 
do capital  until  the  remains  of  her 
husband  were  brought  home.  The 
party  reached  Manti  Nov.  17,  1912, 
and  impressive  funeral  services  were 
held  Nov.  21,  1912,  in  the  Manti 
Tabernacle. 


TAYLOR,  Joseph  Harris,  an  Elder 
who  died  while  filling  a  foreign  mis- 
sion, was  born  Jan.  28,  1888,  in  Salt 
Lake  City,  Utah,  the  son  of  Thomas  Maud  Rogers  (daughter  of  Isaac  Rog- 
E.  Taylor  and  Emma  L.  Harris.  He  ers  and  Unice  L.  Stewart).  This  mar- 
was  baptized  when  eight  years  old  by     riage  has  been  blessed  with  ten  chil- 


Thomas  Maycock,  was  educated  in  the 
public  schools  and  later  attended  the 
L.  D.  S.  University  in  Salt  Lake  City. 
While  residing  in  the  Fourteenth 
Ward,  Salt  Lake  City,  he  was  called 
on  a  mission  to  Germany,  being  set 
apart  for  that  calling  Sept.  23,  1909. 
He  had  labored  in  that  missionary 
field  over  a  year,  when  he  was  stricK- 
en  with  sickness.  His  mother  and 
sister  Emma  were  in  New  York  to 
meet  his  brother,  Thomas  E.  jun., 
when  they  received  word  that  Joseph 
was  sick.  They  immediately  left  for 
Europe  and  were  with  him  until  the 
end.  He  died  with  rheumatism  of  the 
heart  Nov.  14,  1910,  at  Stuttgart, 
Wurttemberg,  Germany.  His  remains 
were  shipped  to  his  home  in  Utah,  ac- 
companied by  the  mother,  brother 
and  sister.  Impressive  funeral  serv- 
ices were  held  in  the  Fourteenth 
Ward  Assembly  Rooms,  Salt  Lake 
City,  Dec.   9,   1910. 

TAY^LOR,  Thomas  Nicholls,  presi- 
dent of  the  Utah  Stake  of  Zion.  (Con- 
tinuation from  Vol.  1:493.)  In  1889 
(Sept.  18th)   Brother  Taylor  married 


726 


LATTER-DAY   SAINT 


dren,  eight  of  whom  (five  boys  and 
three  girls)  are  still  living.  The  old- 
est son  has  spent  three  years  on  a 
mission  in  Germany,  the  second  son 
has  labored  two  years  as  a  missionary 
in  New  Zealand,  and  the  third  son 
has  filled  a  mission  to  the  Soutnern 
States.  While  acting  as  Bishop  of  the 
Provo  Third  Ward,  Bro.  Taylor  su- 
pervised the  erection  of  an  amuse- 
ment hall  in  that  Ward,  including  a 
dance  hall  and  a  gymnasium.  This 
building,  which  cost  |20,000,  is  prac- 
tically all  finished,  except  the  lower 
floor.  After  serving  successfully  and 
faithfully  as  a  Bishop  of  the  Provo 
Third  Ward,  Bro.  Taylor  was  chosen 
and  set  apart  as  president  of  the 
Utah  Stake  of  Zion,  Oct.  26,  1919, 
Apostle  Stephen  L.  Richards  officiat- 
ing. Bro.  Taylor's  commercial  activi- 
ties are  as  follows:  In  1885  he  en- 
tered into  a  partnership  with  Julius 
Jensen,  under  the  firm  name  of  Jen- 
sen &  Taylor,  and  started  the  first 
exclusive  jewelry  store  in  Provo. 
When  the  Taylor  Bros.  Company  was 
incorporated  in  1890,  Thomas  N.  was 
chosen  as  one  of  the  directors  and 
manager,  which  position  he  still 
holds.  In  1904  he  and  others  organ- 
ized the  Provo  Building  and  Loan  So- 
ciety, an  organization  which  has  at 
the  present  time  an  authorized  capi- 
tal of  $2,000,000  and  has  been  the 
means  of  making  it  possible  for  hun- 
dreds of  young  men  to  own  their  own 
homes.  The  society  is  not  organized 
for  selfish  motives,  as  no  officer  be- 
longing to  it  receives  remuneration 
for  his  services,  except  the  secretary. 
Bro.  Taylor  has  been  its  president 
and  trustee  since  its  organization.  In 
1907  Bro.  Taylor  and  others  organ- 
ized the  Farmers  and  Merchants 
Bank,  which  institution  has  an  au- 
thorized capital  of  $100,000,  and  is 
a  member  of  the  Federal  Reserve 
System.  Bro.  Taylor  has  been  its 
president  since  its  organization.  In 
1910  the  Jesse  Knight  interests 
bought  the  old  Provo  Woolen  Mills, 
and   at   Bro.    Knight's   request,    Bro. 


Taylor  became  a  director  of  that  in- 
stitution and  is  still  serving  in  that 
capacity.  When  the  Springville,  Ma- 
pleton  Sugar  Company  was  organized 
in  1917,  he  accepted  a  position  as  a 
director  in  that  company.  He  has 
been  a  director  of  the  Beneficial  Life 
Insurance  Company  since  its  organ- 
ization and  is  president  of  the  Mai- 
ben  Glass  and  Paint  Company.  At  the 
convention  held  in  Logan  June  22, 
1918,  the  Utah  Bankers'  Association 
honored  Bro.  Taylor  by  electing  him 
president  for  the  ensuing  year.  When 
the  Utah  State  Council  of  Defence 
was  organized  at  the  outbreak  of  the 
war,  Bro.  Taylor  was  appointed  a 
member  of  that  board  and  was  elect- 
ed vice-president  and  a  member  of 
the  executive  committee.  Recently  he 
was  appointed  a  member  of  the 
Mormon  Battalion  Monument  Com- 
mission, for  the  purpose  of  raising 
$100,000  towards  the  erection  of  a 
monument  in  honor  of  the  battalion. 
Bro.  Taylor  is  one  of  the  leading  busi- 
ness men  in  Utah  county,  being  asso- 
ciated with  nearly  every  enterprise 
which  represents  progress  and  ac- 
tivity. 

TE  AWi:  AWE,  Tamlhana,  a  Ma- 
ori Elder  who  died  in  the  missionary 
field,  was  born  about  1856  at  Oroua, 
Bridge  Manavatu,  New  Zealand,  the 
son  of  Wiremu  Kingi  Te  Awe  Awe 
and  Roka  Te  Kai  Ara.  He  was  bap- 
tized in  the  fall  of  1889,  by  Joseph 
David  Muir,  and  emigrated  in  July, 
1910,  to  Utah,  where  he  was  or- 
dained a  High  Priest.  He  resided  at 
Forest  Dale,  Salt  Lake  county,  Utah, 
when  he  was  called  on  a  mission  to 
his  native  country,  New  Zealand.  He 
was  set  apart  for  his  mission  Jan.  12, 
1916.  While  laboring  faithfully  as  a 
missionary  in  New  Zealand,  he  died 
Nov.  23,  1918,  at  Hawkes  Bay.  He 
was  a  prominent  chief  and  highly  re- 
spected among  the  Maoris. 

THEDDELL,  Emil  Conrad,  an  El- 
der who  died  while  filling  a  foreign 


BIOGRAPHICAL  ENCYCLOPEDIA. 


727 


mission,  was  born  Nov.  1,  1867,  at 
Lindesberg,  Orebro,  Sweden,  the  son 
of  Lars  Erik  Theddell  and  Anna 
Catherine  Pehrson.  He  was  baptized 
when  sixteen  years  old  by  Carl  A. 
Alhquist,  and  while  residing  in  the 
Ogden  Eighth  Ward  he  was  called  on 
a  mission  to  Sweden,  to  which  he  was 
set  apart  Aug.  23,  1910.  Arriving  in 
Stockholm,  Sweden,  Sept.  16,  1910, 
he  was  called  to  labor  in  the  Uppsala 
branch  of  the  Stockholm  conference. 
But  he  had  only  spent  about  two 
months  in  that  field  when  he  was 
stricken  with  sickness  and  was  taken 
to  a  hospital  in  Stockholm,  one  of  the 
best  in  Sweden.  He  rallied  and  left 
the  hospital  to  visit  relatives  in  the 
Sundsvall  conference,  hoping  to  ob- 
tain strength  with  which  to  make  the 
journey  home,  he  having  been  re- 
leased from  his  missionary  labors  on 
account  of  his  sickness.  He  grew 
worse  and  had  to  return  again  to  the 
hospital  in  Stockholm,  where  he  died 
July  18,  1911.  His  ailment  puzzled 
the  best  Swedish  physicians,  who, 
however,  finally  decided  that  he  died 
of  weakness  due  to  insufficient  blood 
to  maintain  life  in  the  body.  The  re- 
mains of  Elder  Theddell  were  sent 
home  in  charge  of  Elder  Joseph  A. 
Christopherson,  a  returning  Elder, 
and  interred  in  the  Ogden  City  ceme- 
tery, after  the  funeral  services  which 
were  held  in  Ogden,  Aug.  14,  1911. 
Brother  Theddell  left  a  young  wife, 
an  aged  mother  and  other  relatives  in 
Ogden,  besides  a  numerous  host  of 
sympathizing  saints,  friends  and  fel- 
low-laborers in  Sweden. 

TINGEY,  Wesley  Earl,  the  first 
Bishop  of  the  Centerville  First  Ward 
(South  Davis  Stake),  Davis  county, 
Utah,  was  born  Nov.  2  3,  1882,  in 
Centerville,  the  son  of  Thomas  Tin- 
gey  and  Alzina  Call.  He  was  bap- 
tized Aug.  30,  1891,  by  Brigham  H. 
Roberts,  received  a  good  district 
school  education  and  was  ordained 
successively  to  the  offices  of  Deacon, 
Priest  and   Elder.      In   18  9  6   he   was 


chosen  as  a  counselor  in  the  presi- 
dency of  the  4th  quorum  of  Elders 
in  the  Davis  Stake.  In  1911-1914  he 
filled  a  mission  to  Australia,  his  par- 
ticular field  of  labor  being  South 
Australia,  with  headquarters  at  Ade- 
laide. Part  of  the  time  he  acted  as 
president  of  the  South  Australia  con- 
ference. While  on  this  mission,  he 
spent  one  month  doing  missionary 
work,  together  with  Elder  Alfred 
Brooks,  on  the  Kangaroo  Island  (an 
island  ninety  miles  long),  lying  south 
of  Australia.  They  were  the  first  Lat- 
ter-day Saint  Elders  to  proclaim  the 


truths  of  the  restored  gospel  to  the 
inhabitants  of  that  island;  during 
their  sojourn  there  they  called  on 
nearly  every  family  on  the  island. 
After  his  return  home,  Bro.  Tingey 
was  chosen  as  president  of  an  Elders 
quorum  and  as  assistant  superinten- 
dent, and  later  superintendent  of  the 
Centerville  Sunday  School.  In  1917 
(Dec.  30th)  he  was  ordained  a  High 
Priest  and  Bishop  by  Anthony 
W.  Ivins  and  set  apart  to  preside  over 
the  Centerville  First  Ward,  the  town 
of  Centerville  on  that  occasion  being 
divided  into  two  Wards.  Bishop  Tin- 
gey married  May  Ann  Croft  Feb.  22, 
18  9  6,  which  union  was  blessed  with 
two  children  (Virginia  May  and  Wil- 
liam   Wesley).      Sister    Tingey    died 


728 


LATTER-DAY   SAINT 


Nov.  19,  1909,  and  Bro.  Tingey  mar- 
ried Ivy  Gladys  Parsons  Aug.  19, 
1914;  she  has  borne  him  three  chil- 
dren (Beth,  Wesley  Parsons  and 
Ralph  J.).  The  Bishop  is  a  farmer  by 
avocation  and  is  possessed  of  much 
energy  and  push,  which  naturally 
makes  him  a  leading  and  influential 
man  in  the  community. 

TOMLINSON,  Judson  Bliss,  an  El- 
der in  the  Church  who  died  while  fill- 
ing a  foreign  mission,  was  born  June 
26,  1878,  in  Quincy,  Adams  county, 
Illinois,  the  son  of  James  Berry  Tom- 
linson  and  Mary  C.  Rood.  He  was 
baptized  Jan.  21,  1891,  by  John  E. 
Moulton  and  subsequently  ordained 
an  Elder.  He  was  a  resident  of  the 
Thirteenth  Ward,  Salt  Lake  City, 
Utah,  June  6,  1900,  when  he  was  or- 
dained a  Seventy  by  Seymour  B 
Young  and  set  apart  for  a  mission  to 
Samoa.  Arriving  in  his  field  of  labor, 
he  commenced  missionary  labor  in 
earnest,  but  he  took  sick  and  died 
with  brights  disease  at  Fagalii,  the 
headquarters  of  the  Samoan  Mission, 
on  Sunday,  May  18,  1902.  Brother 
Tomlinson  was  an  efficient  and  faith- 
ful missionary. 

TRIPP,  John  Leroy,  an  Elder  who 
died  while  filling  a  foreign  mission, 
was  born  Jan.  24,  1888,  in  South  Cot- 
tonwood (now  Murray),  Salt  Lake 
county,  Utah,  the  son  of  John  A.  Tripp 
and  Emmeline  Shoell.  He  was  bap- 
tized in  1897  by  James  Proctor  and 
later  ordained  to  the  Priesthood. 
While  residing  with  his  parents  in 
Murray  he  was  called  on  a  mission 
to  the  Netherlands,  being  set  apart 
for  that  mission  Jan.  30,  1908  (six 
days  after  his  twentieth  birthday), 
and  left  soon  afterwards  for  his  field 
of  labor.  On  his  arrival  in  Holland, 
he  was  appointed  to  labor  in  Belgium 
and  was  faithfully  performing  his 
duties  as  a  minister  of  the  gospel, 
when  he  was  stricken  with  sickness 
(appendicitis)  and  died  April  14, 
1908,  at  Charleroi,  Belgium.    His  re- 


mains were  shipped  to  the  home  of 
his  parents  in  Murray,  Salt  Lake 
county,  Utah,  where  most  impressive 
funeral  services  were  held  May  11, 
1908.  Brother  Tripp  was  an  exam- 
plary  young  man  and  seemed  to  have 
a  bright  future  before  him  when  he 
was  stricken  down  in  his  early  youth. 

TURPIN,  Jesse,  an  Elder  who  died 
while  returning  from  a  foreign  mis- 
sion, was  born  June  22,  1816,  In 
Stewart  county,  Tennessee,  the  son 
of    James    Turpin    and    Nancy    Ann 


Taltum.  Becoming  a  convert  to 
"Mormonism,"  he  was  baptized  not 
very  long  after  the  organization  of 
the  Church;  subsequently  he  was  or- 
dained to  the  Priesthood  and  filled  a 
mission  to  the  Eastern  States  In 
1840.  He  was  with  the  saints  during 
their  troubles  in  Nauvoo,  111.,  and 
came  west  during  the  exodus  of  1846. 
After  spending  some  time  on  tne 
frontiers,  he  migrated  to  the  Valley, 
crossing  the  plains  in  President  Brig- 
ham  Young's  company,  which  arrived 
in  Salt  Lake  City  Sept.  20,  1848.  He 
located  in  Salt  Lake  City,  following 
the  business  of  a  saddle  and  harness- 
maker.  In  the  meantime  he  was  or- 
dained a  Seventy  and  in  18  52  he  was 
called  on  a  mission  to  the  West  Ind- 


BIOGRAPHICAL   ENCYCLOPEDIA. 


729 


ies,  together  with  Alfred  Lambson 
and  others.  He  crossed  the  plains  in 
company  with  many  other  mission- 
aries and  labored  in  the  West  Indies 
until  1854,  when  he  was  released  to 
return  home  Having  arrived  on  the 
frontiers,  and  while  making  prepara- 
tions to  cross  the  plains,  he  took  sick 
with  cholera,  which  broke  out  in  the 
company,  and  died  near  Fort  Leaven- 
worth, Kansas,  June  22,  1854.  Many 
other  saints  also  died  and  their  re- 
mains were  buried  in  a  private  ceme- 
tery, which  is  still  preserved  (sur- 
rounded by  an  iron  fence)  and  fre- 
quently visited  by  missionaries  and 
others.  In  1846  (April  16th),  Pro. 
Turpin  married  Jane  Smith  at  Nau- 
voo,  111.  She  was  the  daughter  of 
Daniel  Smith  and  Sarah  Wooding  and 
was  born  Aug.  15,  1827.  The  chil- 
dren by  this  marriage  were  Jesse  R. 
(now  a  resident  of  Granger,  Salt 
Lake  county,  Utah),  Sarah  Jane  (now 
the  wife  of  George  Budd  of  Salt  Lake 
City),  and  Nancy  Ann  (now  the  wife 
of  Daniel  H.  Higley  of  Brigham  City, 
Utah).  Elder  Turpin  died  as  a  faith- 
ful Latter-day  Saint,  and  had  spent 
much  of  his  time  after  he  joined  the 
Church  in  the  missionary  field. 

TUTTLE,  Luther  Terry,  a  member 
of  the  Mormon  Battalion  and  for 
many  years  one  of  the  leading  citi- 
zens of  Manti,  Sanpete  county,  Utah, 
was  born  Nov.  19,  1825,  in  New  York 
City,  the  son  of  Terry  Tuttle.  a  ship- 
builder in  good  financial  circum- 
stances, who  died  when  Luther  was 
an  infant  of  fourteen  months.  His 
mother,  Ellen  Tuttle,  reared  him  well 
and  superintended  his  limited  educa- 
tion. Up  to  the  age  of  thirteen  his 
boyhood  was  passed  in  his  native  city, 
but  in  the  fall  of  183  8  he  left  with 
his  mother  for  Missouri,  where  they 
experienced  the  vicissitudes  caused 
by  the  persecution  of  the  Latter-day 
Saints  by  the  Missourians.  About  that 
time  Luther  went  to  live  with  his  un- 
cle, a  hotel-keeper  in  St.  Louis.  The 
Tuttle  family,  consisting  of  a  mother. 


three  sons  and  a  daughter,  were  also 
in  Illinois,  where  Luther,  the  young- 
est in  the  family,  engaged  in  farming. 
Being  with  his  people  at  their  exodus 
from  Illinois  in  1846,  he  enlisted  in 
the  famous  Mormon  Battalion,  being 
then  in  his  twenty-first  year.  Three 
days  before  his  enlistment,  or  on  July 
13,  1846,  he  married  Abigail  Haws  at 
Council  Bluffs,  Iowa.  He  served 
eighteen  months  in  the  Battalion  and 
held  the  rank  of  orderly  sergeant. 
After  receiving  his  discharge  in  Cali- 
fornia, he  returned  to  Council  Bluffs, 
Iowa,  where  he  engaged  in  mercan- 
tile business  and  other  pursuits.  He 
was  in  the  fur  trade  as  agent  for 
Peter  A.  Sarpy  of  the  American  Fur 


Company.  Next  he  engaged  in  the 
lumber  business  at  Macedonia,  twen- 
ty-five miles  east  of  Council  Bluffs, 
where  he  built  a  saw  mill,  and  after- 
wards a  flouring  mill.  He  continued 
in  the  milling  business  at  Macedonia 
until  he  emigrated  to  Utah  in  1863. 
With  his  family  and  teams  he  left 
Iowa,  without  any  company,  June  10, 
1863,  but  fell  in  with  some  travelers 
along  the  road,  namely,  Thos.  Clark, 
Robert  Caldwell  and  others  (later 
residents  of  Provo,  Utah),  whose 
teams  were  loaded  with  stoves  and 
other   goods   for   the   home   markets 


730 


LATTER-DA  i"   SAINT 


Bro.  Tuttle  and  his  family  arrived  in 
Salt  Lake  City  Aug.  25,  1863.  They 
settled  at  Manti,  where  Bro.  Tuttle 
resided  until  his  death.  Elder  Tuttle 
was  for  many  years  one  of  the  lead- 
ing business  men  of  Manti,  being  a 
successful  banker  and  merchant,  and 
participated  as  a  leader  in  nearly 
every  business  enterprise  of  impor- 
tance in  Sanpete  county.  He  took  an 
active  part  in  the  Indain  wars  caused 
by  Black  Hawk  and  his  band,  and 
held  a  colonel's  commission  under 
Gen.  Warren  S.  Snow.  He  was  more 
or  less  connected  with  all  social  and 
political  movements  in  that  part  of 
the  country  ever  since  his  arrival  in 
Utah,  acted  as  mayor  of  Manti  for 
two  terms  and  represented  his  county 
in  the  Utah  legislature  four  terms, 
three  in  the  Council  and  one  in  the 
House.  Ecclesiastically  he  acted  for 
years  as  a  member  of  the  High  Coun- 
cil of  Sanpete  Stake.  Elder  Tuttle 
was  twice  married.  His  first  wife  had 
no  children.  His  second  wife  was 
Lola  Ann  Haws,  his  first  wife's  sister, 
whom  he  married  Jan.  22,  1850.  His 
children  were  twelve  in  number, 
namely,  Louise,  Luther,  Charlotte, 
Albert,  Terry,  Frank  J.,  John  Henry, 
Louis  E.,  Lola  Ann,  Lilie  Belle, 
Ethela  C,  and  Alpheus  H.  Bro.  Tut- 
tle died  Dec.  23,  1917,  at  his  home 
In  Manti,  Utah,  ninety-two  years  old. 

VETTERLI,  John,  Bishop  of  Emi- 
gration Ward  (Liberty  Stake),  Salt 
Lake  City,  Utah,  was  born  May  6, 
1865,  at  Schaffhausen,  Switzerland, 
the  son  of  John  Vetterli  and  Ursula 
Spengler.  He  was  baptized  May  8, 
1884,  by  Carl  Schmid,  emigrated  to 
America  in  1884,  crossing  the  At- 
lantic in  the  steamship  "Arizona," 
located  in  Logan  and  afterwards  in 
Smithfield,  Cache  county,  Utah,  and 
then  moved  to  Tooele,  where  he  re- 
sided three  years  and  attended  school, 
after  which  he  moved  to  Salt  Lake 
City.  He  married  Annie  Naeff  Dec. 
3,  1890,  and  filled  a  mission  to  Ger- 
many and  Switzerland  in  1892-1894. 


He  first  labored  eight  months  in 
Wurttemberg  and  Bavaria,  and  was 
then  appointed  to  labor  in  the  prov- 
inces of  Brandenburg  and  Silesia, 
Prussia,  succeeding  the  late  David  H. 
Cannon,  who  had  died  in  the  field. 
While  laboring  in  the  city  of  Sorau 
he  was  cited  to  appear  in  the  court 
several  times  for  preaching  the  gos- 
pel and  finally  banished  from  the 
kingdom  of  Prussia.  At  home  Bro. 
Vetterli  has  labored  as  a  Ward  Sun- 
day school  superintendent,  president 


of  the  Ward  Y.  M.  M.  I.  A.,  president 
of  the  10th  quorum  and  afterwards 
of  the  138th  quorum  of  Seventy. 
When  the  Liberty  Stake  was  organ- 
ized in  1904,  he  was  ordained  a  High 
Priest  by  Angus  M.  Cannon  and  set 
apart  as  a  High  Councilor  in  that 
Stake,  which  position  he  held  until 
190  9.  He  was  ordained  a  Bishop 
June  13,  1909,  by  Hyrum  M.  Smith 
and  set  apart  to  preside  over  the  Emi- 
gration Ward,  which  had  just  been 
organized.  Having  served  his  appren- 
ticeship as  a  machinist  in  Switzer- 
land, he  followed  that  occupation  in 
his  native  land,  and  after  his  arrival 
in  America  he  worked  in  the  Union 
Pacific  Railroad  mechanical  depart- 
ment and  in  the  Silver  Brothers  Iron 
Works  for  nearly  fifteen  years.     He 


BIOGRAPHICAL   ENCYCLOPEDIA. 


731 


then  took  up  the  life  insurance  busi- 
ness and  acted  as  an  agent  for  the 
Metropolitan  Life  Insurance  Company 
one  year  and  as  local  assistant  super- 
intendent seven  years.  In  1918  he 
entered  the  real  estate  and  fire  insur- 
ance business  with  offices  in  the  Ness 
building.  The  names  of  Bishop  Vet- 
terli's  children  are  as  follows:  Oscar 
John,  Annie  Mary,  Lydia  Margaret, 
Ruth  Mabel,  Francis  Leroy,  Ralph 
Herbert,  Reed  Ernest,  and  Dora  Lu- 
cille. 

VALENTINE,  Hyrum  Washington, 

president  of  the  Swiss  and  German 
Mission  (1912-1916),  and  now  Bish- 
op of  the  Brigham  City  Third  Ward 
(Box  Elder  Stake)  Box  Elder  county, 
Utah,    was    born    March    4,    1873,    in 


Brigham  City,  Utah,  the  son  of  Val- 
entin Valentinsen  and  Hannah  Ben- 
sen.  He  was  baptized  May  2  2,  1881, 
by  Christian  J.  Nielsen  and  became 
an  active  member  of  the  Church  in 
his  early  youth.  After  receiving  a 
common  school  education,  he  gradu- 
ated from  the  Box  Elder  High  School 
in  its  first  graduating  class  and  after- 
wards studied  in  the  Agricultural 
College  at  Logan,  Utah.  Having  pre- 
viously been  ordained  a  Deacon,  he 
was    ordained    an    Elder    by    Charles 


Kelly  in  February,  1900,  and  took  a 
missionary  course  in  the  Brigham 
Young  College  at  Logan  the  same 
year.  In  October,  1900,  he  was  called 
on  a  mission  to  Europe,  being  or- 
dained a  Seventy  and  set  apart  for 
his  mission  by  Abraham  O.  Woodruff 
Oct.  9,  1900.  Being  assigned  to  la- 
bor in  the  German  Mission,  he  spent 
the  first  few  months  in  Erfurt,  later 
in  Leipzig,  and  still  later  in  Meissen. 
After  that  he  presided  over  the  Dres- 
den conference  and  returned  home  in 
July,  1903.  Soon  after  his  return,  he 
was  chosen  superintendent  of  the 
Brigham  City  Second  Ward  Sunday 
School.  For  three  successive  seasons 
he  taught  school  with  phenomenal 
success  at  North  Elwood,  Box  Elder 
county.     Brother   Valentine   has   also 


Rose  Ellen  B.  Valentine. 

been  busy  in  other  matters  pertain- 
ing to  the  upbuilding  of  the  commun- 
ity in  which  he  has  lived.  In  1905 
(Aug.  17th)  he  married  Rose  Ellen 
By  water  (daughter  of  James  By  water 
and  Hannah  Jensen ) ,  who  was  born 
Sept.  17,  1875,  in  Brigham  City.  For 
several  years  Bro.  Valentine  acted  as 
chairman  of  the  Board  of  Horticul- 
ture in  Box  Elder  county;  he  was  also 
the  moving  spirit  in  the  organization 


•32 


LATTER-DAY   SAINT 


of  the  Valentine  Fruit  Company  and 
was  its  continuous  manager  until 
1911,  when  he  was  called  on  his  sec- 
ond mission  to  Europe.  In  January, 
1909,  he  was  elected  clerk  of  the 
Board  of  Education,  and  four  months 
later  he  became  superintendent  of 
Box  Elder  county  schools,  having  the 
distinction  of  being  chosen  the  first 
superintendent  of  said  schools  after 
the  county  consolidation  of  schools 
Into  a  district  of  the  first  class.  In 
1906  he  was  made  a  member  of  the 
Box  Elder  Stake  Sunday  School  Board 
and  some  time  later  chosen  as  first 
assistant  to  Justin  D.  Call,  Stake  su- 
perintendent of  Sunday  schools,  in 
1911-1917  he  filled  his  second  mis- 
sion to  Europe,  this  time  presiding 
over  the  Swiss  and  German  Mission. 
In  that  position  he  succeeded  Thomas 
E.  McKay  in  February,  1912,  and 
presided  until  December,  1916,  when 
he  turned  the  presidency  of  the  mis- 
sion over  to  Angus  J.  Cannon,  un 
this  mission  Brother  Valentine  was 
accompanied  by  his  wife  (Rose  Ellen 
By  water  Valentine),  who  was  set 
apart  as  president  of  the  Relief  So- 
cieties of  the  Mission  by  Prea.  Rudger 
Clawson,  March  8,  1913.  On  this 
mission  Brother  Valentine  traveled 
64,039  miles,  held  963  meetings  and 
preached  805  times.  Soon  after  his 
return  home  he  was  called  to  act  as 
Bishop  of  the  Brigham  City  Third 
Ward,  being  ordained  and  set  apart 
to  that  position  June  3,  1917,  by 
Apostle  David  O.  McKay.  He  haa 
previously  been  ordained  a  High 
Priest  by  Niels  Madsen.  Bishop  Val- 
entine is  noted  for  his  devotion  to  his 
Church  duties,  his  business  ability 
and  his  special  gifts  as  a  leader 
among  men. 

WALKER,  Thaddeus,  an  Elder  who 
died  in  the  missionary  field,  was  born 
Jan.  9,  1889,  at  Rockland,  Oneida 
county,  Idaho,  the  son  of  Wiliam  I. 
Walker  and  Phoebe  Ann  Wright.  He 
was  baptized  May  29,  1897,  by  Isaac 
Thorne,  and  moved  with  his  parents 


to  Inkom,  near  Pocatello,  Bannock 
county,  Idaho,  in  1904,  where  he  re- 
sided in  1908,  when  he  was  called  on 
a  mission  to  the  Southern  States,  be- 
ing ordained  a  Seventy  and  set  apart 
for  his  mission  April  28,  1908.  On  his 
arrival  in  the  mission  he  was  appoint- 
ed to  labor  in  the  Florida  conference, 
where  he  remained  about  twenty-three 
months.  He  was  an  earnest,  diligent 
and  successful  missionary  and  won 
the  confidence  and  good  will  of  both 
saints  and  strangers.  Because  of  his 
integrity  and  the  wisdom  he  pos- 
sessed, which  seemed  be  yon  a  nis 
years,  he  was  assigned  to  fill  respon- 
sible positions  in  the  conference,  such 
as  opening  up  new  fields  of  labor, 
where  the  qualities  of  prudence,  faith- 
fulness and  courage  were  required  in 
large  measure.  He  enjoyed  the  con- 
fidence of  his  co-laborers  to  the  full- 
est extent.  After  being  transferred  to 
the  Atlanta  conference,  Ga.,  he  was 
stricken  with  typhoid  fever,  though 
the  immediate  cause  of  his  death  was 
hemorrage  of  the  bowels.  When  the 
attending  physician  announced  that 
he  was  suffering  with  typhoid  fever, 
he  was  taken  to  the  hospital  at  At- 
lanta, but  there  he  gradually  grew 
worse  until  Friday,  April  15,  1910, 
when  he  died.  His  remains  were 
shipped  to  his  home  in  Idaho  in  care 
of  Elder  Lionel  L.  Myers,  arriving 
there  April  20,  1910.  Elder  Walker 
was  only  twenty-one  years  old  when 
he  died  and  had  been  in  the  mission 
about  two  years.  He  left  both  his 
parents  and  a  number  of  brothers  and 
sisters,  but  was  himself  unmarried. 

WARD,  WilUam  Ivan,  an  Elder 
who  died  while  filling  a  foreign  mis- 
sion, was  born  July  22,  1894,  at  North 
Ogden,  Weber  county,  Utah,  the  son 
of  William  Ward  and  Celestia  Bailey. 
He  was  baptized  Aug.  3,  1902,  by 
Thomas  F.  Brown  and  afterwards  or- 
dained an  Elder.  He  resided  with  his 
parents  at  North  Ogden  when  he  was 
set  apart  for  a  mission  to  Australia, 
Jan.  29,  1914.    While  performing  his 


BIOGRAPHICAL  ENCYCLOPEDIA. 


733 


labors  at  Brisbane,  Queensland,  Aus- 
tralia, he  was  stricken  with  typhoid 
fever  and  died  Dec.  10,  1915.  His  re- 
mains were  shipped  to  his  home  in 
Ogden,  where  they  arrived  Jan.  19, 
1916. 

WARREN,  Louis  Albert,  an  Elder 
who  died  in  the  missionary  field,  was 
born  Dec.  16,  1866,  in  Spanish  Fork, 
Utah  county,  Utah,  the  son  of  Wil- 
liam James  Warren  and  Sarah  Jane 
Simmons.  He  was  baptized  by  Allen 
Adamson  Oct.  4,  1875,  and  later  or- 
dained to  the  Priesthood.  Elder  War- 
ren was  set  apart  for  a  mission  to  the 
Southern  States  by  Apostle  Frances 
M.  Lyman  June  15,  1898,  and  arrived 
in  his  field  a  few  days  later.  He  la- 
bored with  zeal  until  February,  1899, 
when  he  was  taken  sick  with  a  cold, 
which  finally  turned  to  pneumonia. 
At  the  time  he  was  laboring  in  Rich- 
land parish,  Louisiana,  with  Elder 
Orson  C.  Raymond.  While  in  this 
condition,  he,  with  Elder  Raymond, 
started  to  attend  a  conference  to  be 
held  Feb.  14,  1899,  at  Victoria,  Lou- 
isiana, where  they  were  to  be  met  by 
President  Ben  E.  Rich.  The  weather 
was  exceptionally  cold  and  in  this 
delicate  condition  Elder  Warren  was 
greatly  weakened.  The  Elders  arrived 
at  a  Mr.  Fredericks  in  due  time  c.nd 
were  kindly  received.  When  the  time 
came  for  them  to  continue  their  jour- 
ney, Elder  Warren  felt  so  poorly  that 
he  decided  not  to  go,  but  would  re- 
main where  he  was  until  he  was  bet- 
ter. Elder  Raymond  reported  his  con- 
dition at  conference,  but  not  feeling 
easy,  he  suggested  that  Elder  War- 
ren be  transferred  to  the  office  at 
Chattanooga.  Three  days  later  El- 
der V/arren  wrote  to  Elder  Cornwall, 
president  of  the  Alabama  conference, 
stating  that  he  was  worse  and  that 
the  doctor  said  he  had  contracted  a 
bad  case  of  pneumonia.  He  was  care- 
fully moved  to  a  hotel  in  Coushatta, 
where  he  could  receive  better  care. 
Here  every  attention  was  given  him, 
but  he  gradually  grew  worse  and  died 


Feb.  19,  18  99.  The  body  was  given 
prompt  attention  and  under  the  care 
of  Elder  Cornwall  was  taken  to  his 
home  in  Price,  Carbon  county,  Utah. 
Elder  Warren  left  a  loving  wife  and 
one  child,  besides  a  fond  mother  and 
brother  to  mourn  his  departure.  He 
had  never  complained,  but  stuck  man- 
fully to  his  duties  until  the  fatal  dis- 
ease prostrated  him  and  carried  him 
off. 

WTELKER,  Hugh  Melvin,  an  Elder 
in  the  Church  who  died  while  filling 
a  foreign  mission,  was  born  Feb.  5, 
1885,  in  Bloomington,  Bear  Lake 
county,  Idaho,  the  son  of  James  A. 
Welker  and  Inger  M.  Madson.  He  was 
baptized  when  eight  years  old  and 
later  ordained  to  the  different  grades 
of  the  Priesthood.  As  a  resident  of 
Bennington,  Bear  Lake  county,  Ida- 
ho, he  was  called  on  a  mission  to  the 
Netherlands  in  1905,  having  previous- 
ly being  ordained  a  Seventy.  He  was 
set   apart   for   his   mission   April   18, 

1905,  and  when  he  arrived  in  Rotter- 
dam, Holland,  May  7,  1905,  he  was 
appointed  to  labor  in  the  Groningen 
conference.  Taking  hold  of  mission- 
ary labor  with  zeal,  he  soon  became 
an  efficient  messenger  of  the  gospel 
of  peace  and  gained  the  love  and 
esteem  of  both  saints  and  strangers. 
After  a  short  spell  of  sickness  (small- 
pox)  he  died  at  Groningen  April  29, 

1906,  and  was  buried  May  1,  1906. 

WHIPPLE,  Robert  John,  Bishop  of 
the  Lehi  First  Ward  (Alpine  Stake), 
Utah  county,  Utah,  was  born  Nov.  13, 
18  69,  in  Salt  Lake  City,  Utah,  the  son 
of  Nelson  Wheeler  Whipple  and  Su- 
san Ann  Gay.  He  is  a  descendant  of 
old  New  England  stock.  His  father, 
who  was  born  July  11,  1818,  in  San- 
ford,  Broom  county,  New  York,  be- 
longed to  the  same  family  as  William 
Whipple,  one  of  the  signers  of  the 
Declaration  of  Independence.  He 
came  to  Utah  in  1851.  Until  he  was 
sixteen  years  of  age,  Robert  John  at- 
tended school  in  the  Nineteenth  Ward, 


734 


LATTER-DAY   SAINT 


Salt  Lake  City,  during  the  winter, 
and  in  the  summer  worked  with  his 
father  in  Big  Cottonwood  canyon, 
running  a  saw  mill.     His  father  died 


July  5,  1887.  after  which,  for  a  num- 
ber of  years,  Robert  John  worked  at 
the  carpenter's  trade  and  contracting. 
In  1892  he  went  to  Lehi  to  work  on 
the  construction  of  the  sugar  factory, 
and  in  1896  (June  24th)  he  married 
Susie  Winn,  the  daughter  of  William 
Henry  WMnn  and  Martha  Evans.  This 
marriage  has  been  blessed  with  six 
children,  namely,  Ora,  Winnie,  Leath. 
Essie  June.  Hyron  John,  Mildred  and 
Miriam,  the  latter  two  being  twins. 
When  still  a  young  man  Robert  John 
worked  as  a  Ward  teacher  and  he 
acted  as  assistant  to  Bishop  Thos.  R. 
Cutler  in  the  Priests  quorum  from 
1898  to  1903.  He  also  acted  as  an 
assistant  in  the  Ward  Sunday  school, 
as  second  counselor  in  the  presidency 
and  afterwards  as  president  of  the 
Ward  Y.  M.  M.  1.  A.,  etc.  In  1903, 
when  the  Lehi  Ward  was  divided,  he 
was  ordained  a  High  Priest  by  John 
Henry  Smith  and  set  apart  as  first 
counselor  to  Bishop  Andrew  Fjeld  of 
the  Lehi  First  Ward,  which  position 
he  held  until  May  24,  1914.  After 
that  he  moved  to  American  Fork  and 
was  set  apart  as  an  alternate  High 
Counselor   in   the   Alpine   Stake   Oct. 


25,  1914.  In  December,  1915.  he 
moved  back  to  Lehi  and  bought  the 
lumber  yard  of  the  Racker  Mercan- 
tile Company.  In  1917  (July  1st)  he 
was  set  apart  as  first  counselor  to 
Bishop  Samuel  I.  Goodwin  of  the  Lehi 
Second  Ward,  which  position  he  held 
until  the  Lehi  First  and  Second  Wards 
were  divided,  when  he  was  chosen  to 
act  as  Bishop  of  the  Lehi  First  W^ard. 
He  was  ordained  a  Bishop  by  Rudger 
Clawson  March  7,  1920,  and  still 
holds  that  position.  In  1910-1911 
Bro.  Whipple  served  as  a  member  of 
the  Lehi  city  council.  He  is  one  of 
the  progressive  citizens  of  the  town, 
deeply  interested  in  the  growth  and 
development  of  the  community. 

WIDTSOE,  Anna  Karine  Gaarden, 

a  faithful  member  of  the  Church  and 
a  woman  of  literary  ability,  was  born 
June  14,  1849,  at  Titran,  on  the 
island  of  Frojen,  Trondhjem  amt, 
Norway,  the  daughter  of  Peder  O. 
Gaarden  and  Beret  Martha  J.  Haavig 
Her  father  was  the  chief  royal  pilot 


of  that  part  of  Norway.  Her  mother 
was  the  daughter  of  a  wealthy  real 
estate  owner.  Anna  received  a  liberal 
education  and  was  known  in  her  cir- 
cle of  acquaintances  as  an  elocution- 


BIOGRAPHICAL   ENCYCLOPEDIA. 


'35 


ist.  In  1870  (Dec.  2dth)  she  married 
John  A.  Widtsoe,  a  prominent  edu- 
cator, by  whom  she  had  two  sons, 
namely,  John  A.  and  Osborne  J.  P. 
She  was  left  a  widow  Feb.  14,  1878. 
After  the  death  of  her  husband,  she 
was  engaged  as  a  teacher  in  the 
Namsos  Industrial  School.  While  thus 
employed  she  was  converted  to  "Mor- 
monism"  and  was  baptized  April  1, 
1881,  by  Elder  Anthon  L.  Skanchy. 
She  at  once  became  a  diligent  worker 
in  the  Church  and  acted  as  counselor 
and  secretary  in  the  Relief  Society  of 
the  Trondhjem  branch,  Norway.  She 
emigrated  to  Utah  in  1883,  together 
with  her  two  sons,  and  settled  in  Lo- 
gan, Cache  county,  where  she  became 
a  teacher  of  domestic  arts  and  acted 
as  a  teacher  and  afterwards  as  a 
counselor  in  the  Logan  First  Ward 
Relief  Society.  She  put  forth  every 
effort  to  give  her  sons  a  thorough 
education,  often  denying  herself  al- 
most the  necessaries  of  life  in  order 
to  accomplish  her  object.  After  mov- 
ing to  Salt  Lake  City  she  labored  as  a 
teacher  in  the  Relief  Society  of  the 
Thirteenth  Ward.  She  also  took  an 
active  part  in  the  interest  of  womens 
franchise  and  was  prominent  among 
her  Scandinavian  sisters.  She  was  for 
many  years  an  active  member  and 
for  one  year  the  president  of  the  Utah 
Women's  Press  Club.  Being  possessed 
of  considerable  literary  ability  she 
wrote  quite  extensively  in  poetry  and 
prose;  some  of  her  work  was  pub- 
lished, but  much  of  it  was  left  in 
manuscript  form.  From  1902  to  1907 
she  served  as  a  missionary  for  her 
Church,  together  with  her  sister  Pe- 
troline  J.  P.  Gaarden,  laboring  chief- 
ly in  Norway.  She  died  at  her  home 
in  Salt  Lake  City  July  11,  1919,  as  a 
faithful  member  of  the  Church  and 
highly  respected  by  all  who  knew  her. 

WIDTSOE,  John  A.,  president  of 
the  University  of  Utah.  (Continued 
from  Vol.  1:768.)  Professor  Widtsoe 
acted  as  director  of  the  Utah  Experi- 
ment Station  from  1900  to  1905.  di- 


rector of  the  Department  of  Agricul- 
ture in  the  Brigham  Young  Univer- 
sity at  Provo  from  1905  to  1907, 
president  of  the  Utah  Agricultural 
College  from  1907  to  1916,  and  pres- 
ident of  the  University  of  Utah  since 
1916.  He  organized  and  conducted 
the  first  farmers'  institutes  in  the 
State  of  Utah,  served  as  president  of 
the  International  Dry  Farming  Con- 
gress at  a  session  held  at  Lethbridge, 
Canada,  and  was  chosen  as  an  officer 
at  various  times  of  the  Irrigation 
Congress.  He  is  now  the  senior  mem- 
ber of  the  State  Board  of  Education, 
is   a   member    (and   was   for   several 


years  president)  of  the  State  Board 
of  Horticulture,  was  a  member  of  the 
Utah  State  Conservation  Commission 
from  the  time  of  its  organization,  act- 
ed as  chairman  and  member  of  the 
Utah  Committee  to  Commemorate  Ir- 
rigation. During  the  World  War  he 
was  a  member  of  the  Utah  State 
Council  of  Defense,  chairman  of  the 
Food  Production  Committee  of  Salt 
Lake  City  and  of  the  Irrigation  Com- 
mittee of  the  Food  Administration. 
Dr.  Widtsoe  has  contributed  much  to 
literature;  thus  he  is  the  author  of 
"Principles  of  Irrigation  Practice," 
"Concordance"  to  the  Doctrine  and 
Covenants   (published  in  1906),  "Jo- 


736 


LATTER-DAY   SAINT 


seph  Smith  as  a  Scientist"  (published 
in  1908),  "Dry  Farming"  (published 
in  1911),  and  "Rational  Theology' 
(published  in  1915).  He  has  written 
several  manuels  and  popular  articles 
on  gospel  subjects,  besides  numerous 
technical  and  popular  articles  on  sci- 
entific subjects,  upwards  of  forty  bul- 
letins on  irrigation,  dry  farming, 
soils,  etc.  In  a  Church  capacity  Dr. 
Widtsoe  has  acted  as  secretary  of  a 
Priests  quorum,  counselor  in  the 
presidency  of  an  Elders  quorum, 
Stake  secretary  of  Elders,  member  of 
a  Stake  Sunday  school  board,  presi- 
dent of  local  Y.  M.  M.  I.  A.,  teacher, 
officer  and  superintendent  of  Ward 
Sunday  schools  and  teacher  and  pres- 
ident of  a  Seventies  quorum.  For 
many  years  he  has  acted  as  a  member 
of  the  General  Board  of  Y.  M.  M.  I.  A. 
Dr.  Widtsoe  ranks  as  one  of  Utah's 
foremost  educators,  and  is  one  of  the 
best  Informed  Elders  in  the  Churcn 
on  doctrine  and  Church  organization. 
Elder  Widtsoe  married  Leah  Eudora 
Dunford  (daughter  of  Alma  Dunford 
and  Susa  Young),  who  was  born  Feb. 

24,  1874,  in  Salt  Lake  City,  Utah,  and 
is  a  grand-daughter  of  President 
Brigham  Young.  Seven  children  have 
been-born  to  them,  namely,  Anna  G., 
John  Andreas,  Karl  Marcel,  Mark 
Adriel,  Helen,  Mary  and  Leah  Eudora. 
Of  these  Anna  G.,  Karl  Marcel  and 
Leah  Eudora  only  survive. 

WILLIAMS,  Griffith  E.,  an  Elder 
who  died  while  filling  a  foreign  mis- 
sion, was  born  Jan.  21,  1871,  at 
Greenville,  Beaver  county,  Utah,  the 
son  of  David  E.  Williams  and  Mar- 
garet Reese.    He  was  baptized  March 

25,  1880,  by  Wm.  Edwards  and  was 
an  active  Church  worker  from  his 
early  youth,  being  ordained  to  several 
offices  in  the  Priesthood.  He  resided 
at  Thomas,  near  Blackfoot,  Bingham 
county,  Idaho,  when  he  was  called  on 
a  mission  to  Great  Britain  in  1909, 
being  set  apart  May  13,  1909.  After 
his  arrival  in  Liverpool  June  1,  1909, 
he  was  assigned  to  labor  in  the  Leeds 


conference,  where  his  younger  broth- 
er, Franklin  D.  Williams,  was  labor- 
ing as  a  missionary.  They  both  went 
to  South  Wales  to  visit  relatives  and 
friends  Sept.  10th.  There  they  re- 
ceived a  hearty  welcome  and  made 
e.xcellent  impressions.  Brother  Grif- 
fith E.  Williams  was  stricken  with 
severe  internal  pains  on  the  evening 
of  Sept.  22nd,  and  his  friends  sent  for 
a  doctor,  who  prescribed  for  him,  but 
without  relief,  and  the  symptoms  be- 
ing very  alarming,  he  was  taken  to 
the  hospital  at  Tredegar,  where  an 
operation  was  performed,  which 
showed  that  he  was  suffering  from 
appendicitis  and  peritonitis.  The  ap- 
pendix had  superated  and  burst. 
Every  possible  attention  was  paid  to 
him,  but  he  succumbed  to  the  disease 
and  died  Sept.  25,  1909.  The  body 
was  shipped  on  the  steamship  "Me- 
gantic,"  in  charge  of  his  brother, 
Franklin  D.  Williams,  who  was  hon- 
orably released  from  his  missionary 
labors  for  the  purpose.  Bro.  Williams 
1  ft  a  wife  and  one  child.  Elder  Wil- 
liams was  a  High  Priest  at  the  time 
of  his  demise. 

WILSON,  Guy  Carlton,  president 
of  the  Latter-day  Saints  University 
and  one  of  the  foremost  educators  of 
Utah,  was  born  April  10,  1864,  in 
Fairview,  Sanpete  county,  Utah,  the 
son  of  Lycurgus  Wilson  and  Lois 
Ann  Stevens.  The  parents  came  to 
Utah  in  1851,  crossing  the  plains  with 
mule  team,  and  the  father  figured 
prominently  in  the  industrial  circles 
as  a  cooper  and  carpenter.  He  after- 
wards went  to  Old  Mexico  on  a  colon- 
izing expedition  and  died  at  Colonia 
Juarez  in  1911,  having  for  two  years 
survived  his  wife,  who  died  in  1909. 
They  had  a  family  of  eight  children. 
Guy  C.  Wilson,  raised  as  a  Latter-day 
Saint,  was  baptized  when  about  eight 
years  old  and  ordained  successively 
to  the  offices  of  Teacher,  Priest  and 
Seventy.  To  the  latter  office  he  was 
ordained  in  1882  by  Seymour  B. 
Young.    In  1886-1888  he  filled  a  mis- 


BIOGRAPHICAL   ENCYCLOPEDIA. 


737 


sion  to  the  Southern  States,  laboring 
in  West  Virginia  and  Kentucky,  and 
presiding  over  the  West  Virginia  con- 
ference one  year.  About  1890  he  was 
ordained  a  High  Priest  by  Canute  Pe- 
terson and  set  apart  as  second  coun- 
selor to  Bishop  James  C.  Peterson  of 
Fairview.  Prior  to  this  he  had  acted 
as  Ward  president  of  Y.  M.  M.  I.  A. 
and  as  secretary  of  the  2  6th  quorum 
of  Seventy.  He  attended  the  elemen- 
tary schools  of  Fairview  and  Pleasant 
Grove  and  the  Brigham  Young  Uni- 
versity at  Provo,  from  which  he  was 


graduated  in  1900,  and  afterwards 
attended  the  University  of  Utah.  After 
doing  post  graduate  work  in  the  Chi- 
cago University  in  190  2,  he  went  to 
the  Columbia  University  of  New  York 
for  post  graduate  work  in  1912  and 
1913.  Taking  up  the  profession  or 
teaching,  he  was  thus  connected  with 
the  schools  at  Fairview  for  ten  years 
and  subsequently  became  a  teacner 
in  the  Brigham  Young  University  at 
Provo.  In  18  97  he  was  made  princi- 
pal of  the  Juarez  Stake  Academy  ana 
superintendent  of  the  Church  schools 
in  Mexico,  serving  thus  from  1897  to 
1912.  In  the  meantime  he  promotea 
his  own  education  through  attend- 
ance at  summer  school  and  assem- 
blies  throughout   the    United    States. 


In  1912  he  left  Mexico,  at  the  time 
of  the  exodus,  to  become  a  student  of 
the  Columbia  University  Teachers 
College,  and  upon  his  return  to  Utah 
he  taught  in  the  first  theological  sem- 
inary of  the  Church  of  Jesus  Christ 
of  Latter-day  Saints,  in  connection 
with  the  Granite  High  School.  In 
1915  he  was  appointed  president  of 
the  Latter-day  Saints  University  in 
Salt  Lake  City.  Under  his  direction 
that  school  has  made  steady  and  sub- 
stantial progress  and  now  ranks 
high  among  the  educational  institu- 
tions of  the  West.  Also  in  secular 
matters  Elder  Wilson  has  held  a 
number  of  important  offices.  He  has 
served  on  the  general  board  of  Re- 
ligion Classes  and  as  a  member  of  the 
Board  of  Examiners  of  the  Church 
schools.  He  is  a  member  of  the  Na- 
tional Religious  Education  Associa- 
tion, a  member  of  the  National  Edu- 
cation Association  and  a  member  of 
the  association  of  the  secondary 
school  principals.  In  1885  (Sept. 
25th)  Bro.  Wilson  married  Elizabeth 
Hartsburg,  who  was  born  Oct.  8, 
IS 64,  in  Stockholm,  Sweden.  Later 
he  married  Malissa  Stevens  (daugh- 
ter of  David  H.  Stevens  and  Agnes 
Johnson),  who  was  born  Sept.  2, 
1883,  in  Fruitland,  New  Mexico.  She 
became  the  mother  of  six  children, 
namely,  Elizabeth,  Guy  C,  Steven, 
Owen  M.,  Mabel  and  Woodrow.  Bro. 
Wilson  also  married  Anna  Ivins 
(daughter  of  Anthony  W.  Ivins  and 
Elizabeth  Snow),  who  was  born  Oct. 
20,  1882,  in  St.  George,  Utah.  This 
marriage  has  been  blessed  with  seven 
children,  namely,  Anna,  Marguerite, 
Florence,  Rachel  and  Rebecca 
(twins),  Antonette  and  Ruth. 

WOIXX)TT,  Robert  W,  a  mission- 
ary who  died  while  on  a  foreign  mis- 
sion, was  born  in  Green  county,  N.  Y., 
Aug.  16,  1829,  the  son  of  Aaron  and 
Anna  Wolcott.  He  became  a  Meth- 
odist minister  while  yet  very  young, 
but  passing  through  Utah,  on  his  way 
to  California,  in   1852,   he  embraced 


Vol.  III.  No.  47. 


June  5,  1920 


738 


LATTER-DAY   SAINT 


the  gospel  as  revealed  through  the 
Prophet  Joseph  Smith.  Soon  after  his 
baptism  he  married  a  "Mormon"  girl, 
but  his  wife  died  afterwards,  and  la- 
ter he  married  a  second  time.  Being 
called  on  a  mission  to  England,  he 
left  Salt  Lake  City  May  1,  1854,  and 
arrived  in  Liverpool  July  16th.  He 
labored  for  a  time  in  the  Cambridge- 
shire conference;  afterwards  he  pre- 
sided over  the  Bedfordshire  confer- 
ence, and  on  Feb.  1,  1856,  he  suc- 
ceeded Elder  Dana  in  the  pastoral 
charge  of  the  Bedfordshire,  Cam- 
bridgeshire and  Norwich  conferences. 
While  laboring  in  this  capacity  he 
was  taken  sick  with  the  small-pox 
and  died  Feb.  27,  1856.  Bro.  Wolcott 
was  a  zealous  missionary  and  faithful 
saint. 

WOOD,  Georfie  William,  a  mission- 
ary Elder  who  died  in  the  field,  was 
born  Feb.  2  3,  1885,  in  Cedar  City, 
Iron  county,  Utah,  the  son  of  Samuel 
Wood  and  Josephine  C.  Chatterly.  He 
was  baptized  Feb.  24,  1893,  by  James 
B.  Decker,  and  while  residing  at 
Bluff,  San  Juan  county,  Utah,  he  was 
called  on  a  mission  to  the  Central 
States,  being  set  apart  for  the  same 
April  30,  1907.  He  had  labored  only 
a  short  time  in  the  North  Texas  con- 
ference when  he  took  sick  with  the 
typhoid  fever  and  after  eight  weeks 
of  illness  he  died  at  Harrold,  Wilbar- 
ger county,  Texas,  July  21,  1907.  His 
remains  were  shipped  home  in  care  of 
Elder  August  L.  Nelson,  as  far  as 
Thompsons  Springs,  Utah,  where  they 
were  met  by  a  brother  of  the  de- 
ceased and  taken  overland  to  Bluff, 
arriving  there  July  26,  1907.  During 
the  short  time  Elder  Wood  labored 
as  a  missionary,  he  had  shown  him- 
self as  an  earnest,  faithful  worker. 
He  was  quiet  and  unassuming,  but  al- 
ways willing  to  do  his  part  in  the 
mission  work.  He  died  an  unmarried 
man,  but  was  survived  by  a  father, 
mother,  three  brothers  and  four  sis- 
ters. 


WOOD,  Martin,  one  of  the  Latter- 
day  Saint  Elders  who  died  while  fill- 
ing   a    mission,    was    born    Feb.    24, 
1818,  in  Northfield,  Portage  county, 
Ohio,    the   son    of   Henry   Wood    and 
Esther  Cranmer.   Becoming  a  convert 
to  "Mormonism,"  he  was  baptized  by 
King  Follett  in  November,  1838.    Af- 
ter  that  he   was   with   the   saints   in 
their  persecutions  and  came  to  Utah 
at  an  early  day.    He  located  in  Wells- 
ville.    Cache    county,    Utah,    and    be- 
came a  member  of  the  17th  quorum 
of  Seventy.     In   18  63    he   was   called 
on  a  mission  to  England;  he  was  set 
apart  for  that  mission  April  26,  1863, 
and    arrived    in    Liverpool    July    2d, 
1863,  after  crossing  the  Atlantic  In 
the  steamship  "City  of  Washington." 
After  his  arrival  in  England,  he  was 
appointed  to  labor  in  the  Newcastle- 
on-Tyne  district,  under  the  direction 
of  Moses  F.   Farnsworth,   and   spent 
most  of  his  time  as  a  missionary  in 
the  Sunderland,  Shields  and  Seaham 
branches.    Because  of  failing  health 
he  was  honorably  released  to  return 
home  in  the  fall  of  1863.     He  sailed 
from    Liverpool    Oct.    14,    1863,    for 
New  York,   crossing   the   Atlantic   in 
the    steamship    "Etna,"    and    stayed 
with  friends  in  Ohio  until  the  emigra- 
tion  started   west  in   1864,   when  he 
joined  Wm.  B.  Preston's  train,  which 
left  W  y  o  m  i  n  g,  Nebraska,   for  the 
mountains   Sept.    15,    1864.      On   the 
journey  across  the  plains  Bro.  Wood 
died    on   the   Weber   river,    Utah,    in 
October,    1864.     He   left   a   wife   and 
three   children    (one   son    and    two 
daughters). 

WOODMANSEE,  Charles  Raymond, 

an  Elder  who  died  while  filling  a  for- 
eign mission,  was  born  Oct.  21,  1891, 
in  Ogden,  Weber  county,  Utah,  the 
son  of  Charles  Henry  Woodmansee 
and  Vilate  Pincock.  He  was  baptized 
Jan.  8,  1900,  by  Jesse  M.  Baker,  and 
his  early  life  was  spent  in  Rexburg, 
where  he  studied  at  the  Ricks  Acad- 
emy. Later  he  attended  the  Weber 
Academy  in  Ogden.    Being  called  and 


BIOGRAPHICAL   ENCYCLOPEDIA. 


739 


set  apart  for  a  mission  to  Switzerland 
and  Germany  Jan.  17,  1911,  he  took 
his  departure  from  home  Jan.  14, 
1911,  and  on  his  arrival  in  Switzer- 
land he  was  appointed  to  labor  in  the 
Swiss  part  of  the  mission.  About  four 
months  after  commencing  successful 
missionary  labor,  the  illness  which 
ended  his  earthly  career  attacked 
him.  During  his  sickness  he  was  at- 
tended by  two  German  specialists  and 
two  Rush  medical  students.  All  were 
baffled  by  the  peculiarity  of  the  case. 
He  died  at  the  hospital  in  Luzerne, 
Switzerland,  May  24,  1911.  A  post 
mortem  examination  proved  tuber- 
culosis of  the  brain  to  be  the  cause 
of  his  death — the  result  of  a  fall 
sustained  two  years  previously  while 
working  on  his  father's  farm.  His 
body  was  shipped  to  his  home  in 
Rexburg,  where  impressive  funeral 
services  were  held  June  14,  1911.  His 
fellow-missionaries  all  spoke  well  of 
Elder  Wodmansee,  whose  zeal  and 
integrity  as  a  missionary  was  com- 
mendable. He  was  of  a  kind  dispo- 
sition and  beloved  by  his  associates. 

WOOLLEY,  Hugh  Roberts,  an  El- 
der who  died  while  filling  a  foreign 
mission,  was  born  Oct.  7,  1890.  at 
Centerville,  Davis  county,  Utah,  the 
son  of  Lorin  Calvin  Woolley  and  Sa- 
rah Ann  Roberts.  He  was  baptized 
by  his  father  Oct.  7,  1898,  was  partly 
educated  at  Centerville  and  in  the 
L.  D.  S.  University  in  Salt  Lake  City, 
and  later  graduated  from  the  Bounti- 
ful High  School  in  Bountiful,  Utah. 
He  took  an  active  part  in  Church 
matters  from  his  early  youth,  and 
was  ordained  successively  to  the  or- 
fices  of  Deacon,  Teacher,  Priest,  and 
Elder.  When  quite  young  he  went  to 
Nevada  as  an  employee  of  a  rail- 
road company  to  build  bridges  and 
do  other  work.  Later  he  located  tem- 
porarily in  San  Francisco,  where  he 
labored  faithfully  in  the  branch  of 
the  Church,  assisting  the  Elders  from 
Zion  in  the  Sunday  school  and  Y.  M. 
M.  I.  A.    While  in  the  employ  of  the 


Eastman  Kodak  Company,  he  trav- 
eled extensively  on  the  Pacific  Coast. 
After  his  return  home  he  was  called 
on  a  mission  to  the  Netherlands,  be- 
ing set  apart  for  that  mission  Oct. 
13,  1911.  After  his  arrival  in  Eu- 
rope, he  labored  at  different  places 
in  Holland,  and  later  was  sent  to 
Antwerp,  Belgium,  where  he  spent 
eight  months,  re-opening  a  field 
where  no  Elder  had  labored  with  suc- 
cess for  many  years.  He  seemed  to 
have  a  special  gift  for  learning  lan- 
guages, for  during  his  sojourn  in 
Holland  and  Belgium  he  acquired  a 
good    knowledge    of    the    German, 


French,  Dutch  and  Flemish  lan- 
guages, mastering  these  to  such  a 
degree  of  perfection  that  it  aston- 
ished all  his  associates.  He  had  just 
been  appointed  to  go  to  Amsterdam, 
Holland,  to  preside  over  the  confer- 
ence there  and  to  build  a  meeting 
house  for  the  saints,  when  he  was 
stricken  with  heart  trouble,  through 
having  caught  a  severe  cold.  He  died 
suddenly  at  Rotterdam,  Holland,  Feb. 
7,  1914.  His  body  was  embalmed 
and  shipped  to  his  home  in  Center- 
ville, Utah,  where  impressive  funeral 
services  were  held  March  4,  1914. 
Elder  Woolley  was  a  most  diligent 
Elder   and    by    his    good    nature    and 


740 


LATTER-DAY   SAINT 


courage  he  gained  the  hearts  of  all 
his  associates,  by  whom  he  was  re- 
garded as  a  most  conscientious  and 
able  Elder,  willing  to  undergo  any 
sacrifice  for  the  welfare  of  the 
Church.  He  died  an  unmarried  man, 
being  only  twenty-three  years  of  age 
when  he  passed  away. 

WOTHERSPOON,  James,  president 
of  the  North  Weber  Stake  of  Zion 
and  a  resident  of  Ogden,  Weber  coun- 
ty, Utah,  was  born  June  14,  1856,  in 
Millarston,  Paisley,  Scotland,  the  son 
of  John  M.  Wotherspoon  and  Agnes 
Walker.  His  parents  being  converts 
to  "Mormonism"  (his  father  being 
baptized  in  1846  ) ,  James  was  baptized 
when  about  eighteen  years  old  in 
Paisley    and    emigrated    to    America 


In  1893  (Dec.  17th)  he  was  ordained 
a  High  Priest  by  Lewis  W.  Shurtliff 
and  set  apart  as  first  counselor  to 
Bishop  Barnard  White  of  the  Ogden 
Third  Ward,  which  position  he  held 
until  1901,  when  he  was  ordained  a 
Bishop  by  John  Henry  Smith  and  set 
apart  to  preside  over  said  Ward,  suc- 
ceeding Bishop  White.  He  held  that 
position  until  Aug.  2,  1908,  when  We- 
ber county  was  divided  into  three 
Stakes  and  he  was  called  to  act  as 
president  of  North  Weber  Stake,  which 
includes  all  the  Bishops  Wards  in 
Weber  county  north  of  Twenty-fourm 
Street  and  west  of  Washington  Ave- 
nue and  extending  to  the  Box  Elder 
line  on  the  north  and  the  Great  Salt 
Lake  on  the  west.  The  Stake  also 
includes    all    the    settlements    of    the 


with  his  parents  in  1874,  locating  in 
Ogden.  His  father  died  a  few  months 
after  the  arrival  of  the  family  in 
Utah,  which  left  James  to  provide  for 
his  mother  and  three  younger  mem- 
bers of  the  family,  until  his  elder 
brother  and  sister  arrived  from  Scot- 
land a  year  later  (1875).  James 
Wotherspoon  was  a  diligent  worker 
in  the  Church  from  the  beginning  and 
held  many  positions  in  the  Priest- 
hood, to  which  he  was  ordained  early. 


Nora    Karr    Wotherspoon. 

saints  in  Nevada,  east  of  the  Hum- 
boldt range  of  mountains,  including 
Metropolis,  McGill,  Preston  and  Lund, 
with  a  branch  at  Ely.  President 
Wotherspoon  made  his  initial  step  in 
the  business  world  by  securing  em- 
ployment in  a  grocery  store  in  Scot- 
land when  eleven  years  old,  and 
through  the  intervening  period  he 
has  been  associated  with  merchandis- 
ing    and     manufacturing     interests. 


BIOGRAPHICAL   ENCYCLOPEDIA. 


741 


After  locating  in  Ogden  he  served  as 
a  clerk  in  a  store  for  five  years,  and 
then  (having  carefully  saved  his 
earnings  until  his  industry  and  econ- 
omy had  brought  him  sufficient  capi- 
tal to  embark  in  business  on  his  own 
account)  he  established  a  general 
merchandise  store  in  Ogden  in  Sep- 
tember, 1879,  in  connection  with  A. 
G.  Fell,  under  the  firm  style  of  James 
Wotherspoon  and  Company.  This  un- 
dertaking proved  a  financial  success 
and  he  continued  active  therein  until 
called  on  a  mission  to  Scotland  in 
1889,  where  he  labored  for  two  years. 
On  his  return  to  Ogden  from  that 
mission  he  again  engaged  in  mercan- 
tile business  and  in  1896  became 
identified  with  John  Scowcroft  and 
Sons  Company,  with  which  he  acted 
as  salesman,  buyer,  etc.,  until  1908, 
when  he  became  interested  in  the 
Shupe  Williams  Candy  Company,  of 
which  he  became  a  director,  secretary 
and  sales  manager.  In  this  capacity 
he  visited  nearly  all  places  of  impor- 
tance from  the  Missouri  river  to  the 
Mexican  line.  Aside  from  all  this  he 
has  made  for  himself  a  prominent 
place  in  business  circles  and  has  al- 
ways taken  an  active  interest  in  the 
building  up  of  Utah's  manufacturies 
He  has  been  honored  with  the  presi- 
dency and  the  directorship  of  many 
of  the  leading  industries  in  Ogden. 
His  entire  life  has  been  actuated  by  a 
benevolent  and  helpful  spirit,  and  he 
has  given  support  to  every  project 
and  measure  which  he  deemed  of 
worth,  in  promoting  the  material, 
intellectual  and  social  welfare  of  the 
community  at  large.  In  1883  (Oct. 
26th)  President  Wotherspoon  mar- 
ried Nora  Farr,  daughter  of  Hon. 
Lorin  Farr  and  Nikoline  Eriksen), 
who  was  born  April  2,  1865,  in  Og- 
den, Utah.  This  marriage  has  been 
blessed  with  seven  children,  namely, 
Clyde,  Birdie,  Ruby  Viola,  James 
Bryan  (who  is  now  laboring  as  a 
missionary  in  the  Southern  States), 
Glenna,  Helen  Shirley  and  Victor 
Hugo. 


WRIGHT,  Ernest  James,  an  Elder 
who  died  while  filling  a  foreign  mis- 
sion, was  born  Dec.  13,  1887,  at 
Neeley,  Oneida  county,  Idaho,  the  son 
of  Edward  Hunter  Wright  and  Eliza 

5.  Christensen.   He  was  baptized  Aug. 

6,  18  9  6,  by  Joseph  Johnson,  and  while 
residing  in  Ogden  Third  Ward,  We- 
ber county,  Utah,  in  1910,  he  was 
called  to  labor  in  the  Swiss  and  Ger- 
man Mission  and  was  set  apart  Nov. 
1,  1'910.  He  arrived  in  said  mission 
Nov.  26,  1910,  and  while  faithfully 
engaged  in  his  missionary  labors  in 
Baden,  Germany,  he  was  stricken 
with  appendicitis  and  submitted  to 
an  operation,  which  seemed  to  have 
been  successful,  but  complications  set 
in  afterwards  and  he  died  suddenly 
on  Monday,  Aug.  21,  1911,  in  the 
hospital  in  Carlsruhe,  Baden,  Ger- 
many. His  demise  came  as  a  great 
surprise  to  his  fellow-laborers,  who 
had  not  considered  his  case  so  very 
serious.  Brother  Wright  was  a  dili- 
gent worker  in  the  Lord's  vineyard, 
had  made  great  progress  in  the  lan- 
guage and  was  doing  good  missionary 
work  when  his  career  so  suddenly  and 
so  unexpectedly  was  cut  short.  Quiet 
and  unassuming  in  demeanor,  foster- 
ing an  unspotted  character,  regular 
in  his  habits  and  strict  in  his  appli- 
cation to  duty,  he  won  the  love  and 
respect  of  all  who  were  associated 
with  him.  He  was  of  a  cheerful  dis- 
position and  his  droll  humor,  always 
ready,  made  him  a  most  congenial 
companion.  His  remains  were  shipped 
to  his  home  in  Ogden,  where  impres- 
sive services  were  held  Sept.  11, 1911, 
in  the  Third  Ward  chapel. 

YOUNG,  Brigham  Willard,  one  of 

the  Elders  of  the  Church  who  died 
while  filling  a  foreign  mission,  was 
born  Feb.  7,  1860,  in  Salt  Lake  City, 
Utah,  the  son  of  Lorenzo  D  Young 
and  Hannah  Ida  Hewitt.  He  was  bap- 
tized in  his  early  youth  by  Elder 
George  Openshaw,  was  ordained  to 
the  Priesthood  and  finally  became  a 


742 


LATTER-DAY   SAINT 


member  of  the  22nd  quorum  of  Sev- 
enty.   His  early  life  was  spent  in  the 
city  of  his  birth.    On  Aug.  20,  1886. 
he   was   set   apart   for   a   mission   to 
New  Zealand,   and   after  arriving  in 
his  field  of  labor,  he  became  a  dili- 
gent advocate  for  the  cause  of  truth 
until  July  8.  1887,  when  he  was  tak- 
en sick  with  lung  fever.    During  the 
following  eleven  days  he  continued  to 
grow  worse  and  he  finally  died  at  a 
Maori  village  in  Te   Mahia,  Nuhaka 
district,  July  19,  1887.    He  was  ten- 
derly nursed  by  the  Maori  saints.    His 
lungs  were  weak  before  he  left  home 
to  fill  his  mission,   but  no  one   sus- 
pected that  his  case  was  a  serious  one. 
The    remains    of   Elder    Young    were 
brought  to  Utah  for  interment.   Elder 
Young  was  known  as  a  straight-for- 
ward,   true    and    affectionate    young 
man,  and  was  much  esteemed  by  both 
Maoris   and    Europeans,    whose   ac- 
quaintance  he   formed    while   on   his 
mission.  He  had  commenced  to  preach 
in   the  language   of  the  natives   and 
was  making  good  progress  in  his  mis- 
sionary   labors    when    he    was    taken 
sick.    He  often  spoke  of  his  parents 
and  kindred  during  his  sickness  and 
expressed    a    desire    that    his    father 
should  be  informed  that  he  died  firm 
in  the  faith,  as  he  had  lived,  that  he 
had  kept  himself  pure  and  his  cove- 
nants inviolate. 

YOUXG,  Feramorz  Little,  an  El- 
der who  died  at  sea  while  returning 
from  a  foreign  mission,  was  born 
Sept.  16,  1858,  the  son  of  President 
Brigham  Young  and  Lucy  Decker.  He 
was  baptized  by  Elder  Karl  G.  Maeser 
Sept.  11,  1866.  His  childhood  was 
passed  at  home,  attending  school,  at 
first  at  his  father's  private  school 
house  and  afterwards  at  the  Deseret 
University,  where  he  prepared  him- 
self for  the  appointment  to  the  United 
States  Naval  Academy  at  Annapolis, 
Maryland,  which  he  received  from 
Delegate  George  Q.  Cannon.  He  en- 
tered the  academy  in  Septemoer, 
1874,  and  continued  there,  pursuing 


his  studies  very  successfully  for  two 
years,    when   he   resigned.      He   then 
entered    the    Raensslaer    Polytechnic 
Institution    at    Troy,    New    York,    in 
January,  1877.    Passing  a  successful 
examination,  and  taking  up  his  stud- 
ies with  the  class  in  the  third  year  of 
the  college  course,  he  graduated  with 
honor   in   June,    1879.      He    was   set 
apart    for    a    mission    to    Mexico    by 
Apostle   Wilford    Woodruff   Nov.    13, 
1880,  and  accompanied  Elder  Moses 
Thatcher    to    that    country,    arriving 
in     the     Mexican     capital     December 
5th,   following.     He   entered   at   once 
upon   the   duties   of   his   calling   and 
made  rapid  progress  in  the  acquire- 
ment  of   the   Spanish   language.     On 
the  6th  day  of  April,  1881,  he  accom- 
panied Elders  Moses  Thatcher,  James 
Z.  Stewart  and  several  native  breth- 
ren in  their  ascent  of  the  volcanic  Mt. 
Popocatepetl,    where   conference   was 
held  and  the  General  Authorities  of 
the  Church  and  those  of  the  Mexican 
Mission  were  unanimously  sustained 
by   all   present,   and   the   republic   of 
Mexico  dedicated  to  the  work  of  the 
God    of   Israel.     On    the   morning    of 
September  6th  he  was  taken  sick  and 
purged  severely.  This  continued  more 
or  less  for  two  days  and  was  followed 
by  slight  fever  in  the  early  evenings. 
In  company  with  Elder  Thatcher  ne 
left  Mexico  City  for  home  Sept.   15, 
1881,  and  on  the  morning  of  the  17th 
went  on  board  the  steamer  "Knicker- 
bocker" in  the  harbor  of  Vera  Cruz, 
which   sailed    in   the   evening   of   the 
18th.     Elder   Young   gradually    grew 
worse,   though   all  that  was  possible 
Was  done  for  him,  and  he  died  in  the 
night  of  Sept.   27,   1881,   in  latitude 
24  degrees  21  minutes  N.  and  longi- 
tude 80  degrees  52  minutes  W.,  about 
one  hundred  and  ten  miles  from  Ha- 
vana.   The  body   was  buried   at  sea. 
Bro.  Young  was  a  most  exemplary  and 
lovable   young  man,   intelligent,   tal- 
ented  and   refined.     He   was   a  most 
intimate  boyhood  companion  of  Pres- 
ident Heber  J.  Grant  and  a  good  and 
exemplary  young  man. 


BIOGRAPHICAL   ENCYCLOPEDIA. 


743 


YOUXG,  Harriet  Page  Wheeler,  one 

of  the  three  original  pioneer  women 
of  Utah,  was  born  Sept.  7,  18  03,  in 
Hillsborough,  Hillsborough  county, 
New  Hampshire,  the  oldest  child  of 
Oliver  Wheeler  and  Annie  Ashby. 
Harriet's  ancestors  were  from  Wales, 
having  emigrated  to  America  five  gen- 
erations before  she  was  born.  When 
about  two  years  old,  she  removed 
from  her  birthplace  with  her  parents 
to  Salem,  Mass.,  the  birthplace  of  her 
mother.  She  attended  school  until 
she  was  ten  years  of  age,  when  she 
entered  one  of  the  Salem  factories, 
where  she  became  an  expert  spinner 
of  flax  and  wool,  and  equally  efficient 
as  a  weaver,  milliner  and  cook.  Whe.n 
seventeen  years  of  age,  she  moved  to 
New  York  State  to  teach  school  near 
the  little  town  of  Phelps,  Ontario 
county,  and  about  four  miles  from 
the  hill  Cumorah.  She  formed  the  ac- 
quaintance of  Isaac  Decker,  to  whom 
she  was  married  in  1821.  She  bore  her 
husband  six  children,  namely,  Lucy 
(afterwards  a  wife  of  Prest.  Brigham 
Young),  Charles,  Harriet,  Caroline, 
Fanny  and  Isaac  Perry.  The  Decker 
family  removed  to  Freedom,  Cattar- 
augus county.  New  York,  and  after- 
wards to  New  Portage,  Portage  coun- 
ty, Ohio,  where  they  became  converts 
to  "Mormonism"  and  subsequently  re- 
moved to  Franklin,  a  few  miles  from 
Kirtland.  Isaac  Decker  was  a  pros- 
perous farmer  and  gathered  consider- 
able means  around  him,  but  when  the 
call  was  made,  he  freely  placed  every- 
thing upon  the  altar  to  relieve  ihe 
financial  distress  of  the  Church.  In 
the  fall  of  18  37  the  family  went  to 
Kirtland,  penniless,  and  at  the  time 
the  saints  were  leaving  that  town 
under  the  stress  of  dire  persecution, 
Lorenzo  D.  Young  gave  Isaac  Decker 
a  team  and  otherwise  assisted  him  on 
his  journey  to  Missouri,  whither  the 
Decker's  went  in  1837.  In  Missouri 
the  family  was  exposed  to  the  bitter 
storm  of  persecution  which  descended 
upon  the  saints  there.  Under  the  ex- 
terminating order  of  Gov.  Boggs  they 
fled    to   Quincy,    Illinois,    and    subse- 


quently resided  at  Winchester,  where 
Harriet's  son  Isaac  Perry  was  born. 
In  1841  the  family  removed  to  Nauvoo, 
where  the  husband  and  wife  separated 
and  Harriet  became  the  wife  of  Lo- 
renzo Dow  Young,  March  9,  1843. 
Bro.  Young  had  been  a  true  friend  to 
the  Decker  family  in  Ohio  and  Mis- 
souri. After  sharing  in  the  expulsion 
from  Nauvoo  and  the  subsequent  life 
in  the  wilderness  (spending  the  win- 
ter of  1846-1847  at  Winter  Quarters), 
Sister  Harriet  was  permitted  to  re- 
main with  her  husband,  when  he  was 
chosen  as  one  of  the  original  pioneers 
in  the  spring  of  18  47,  because  she 
was  in  delicate  health  and  her  hus- 
band was  afraid  she  would  die  if  he 
left  her  in  the  Missouri  bottoms.  No 
mistake  was  made  in  this  decision,  as 
Sister  Harriet  became  a  veritable 
nurse  to  the  sick  all  along  the  weary 
journey  and  did  a  thousand  deeds 
which  only  a  noble  hearted  energetic 
woman  can  think  of.  When  she  ar- 
rived in  the  Valley  July  24,  1847,  she 
had  an  awful  heartache  at  the  thought 
of  passing  the  remainder  of  her  days 
in  such  a  desolate  and  barren  place, 
but  her  heart  was  brave  and  strong 
and  she  flung  despair  to  the  winds. 
In  184'd  she  returned  to  the  Missouri 
river  with  her  husband  who  had  gone 
to  assist  his  brother  Joseph  to  the 
Valley.  On  her  return  in  1850  she 
nearly  lost  her  life  while  driving 
through  a  river,  but  here  cool  pres- 
ence of  mind  saved  her.  On  one  oc- 
casion, while  living  where  the  "Bee- 
hive House"  now  stands,  she  was 
saved  from  an  Indian  by  her  hus- 
band's faithful  dog.  When  the  animal 
was  finally  induced  to  release  the 
"redskin,"  Mrs.  Young  dressed  his 
wound  and  sent  him  on  his  way  a 
wiser  and,  it  is  to  be  hoped,  a  better 
Indian.  Courage,  energy  and  magni- 
nimity  were  signal  qualities  with  Sis- 
ter Harriet,  and  when  at  last  on  Sept. 
22,  1871,  in  Salt  Lake  City,  she  passed 
to  her  rich  reward  (69  years  old),  all 
the  people  of  the  Valley  mourned  her 
inestimable  loss.  She  was  truly  a 
mother  in  Israel. 


744 


LATTER-DAY   SAINT 


BALLARD,  Melvin  Joseph,  the  jun- 
ior member  of  the  Council  of  Twelve 
Apostles,  was  born  Feb.  9,  1873,  at 
Logan,  Cache  county,  Utah,  the  son 
of  Bishop  Henry  Ballard  and  Mar- 
garet McNeil.  His  parents,  who  emi- 
grated to  Utah  in  1852,  were  num- 
bered among  the  old  sturdy  pioneers, 
who  endured  the  hardships  incident 
to  travel  over  the  plains  with  ox 
teams  and  who  assisted  in  the  estab- 
lishment of  the  great  Western  em- 
pire, making  the  "desert  blossom  as 
the  rose"  and  laying  upon  the  rocks 
a  foundation  that  will  weather  every 
storm  during  the  ages  to  come.  They 
were    exceptionally    unassuming    and 


succeeded  in  living  the  divine  law  as 
nearly  perfect  as  seems  possible  to 
mortals.  A  few  years  prior  to  the 
birth  of  Melvin,  much  sickness  and 
numerous  deaths  visited  the  home  of 
the  Ballards  until  it  appeared  at  times 
as  if  they  were  forsaken,  yet  never  a 
word  of  complaint  fell  from  their  lips, 
nor  did  they  ever  deny  the  power  of 
God,  who,  in  the  midst  of  all  these 
trials  and  sorrows,  had  comforted 
them  with  a  testimony  that  God  lives 
and  overrules  to  bring  about  the  per- 
fection of  his  obedient  children.  Upon 
one  of  these  sad  occasions,  when  the 


clouds  of  darkness  hovered  long  about 
them,  the  mother,  with  a  "broken 
heart  and  a  contrite  spirit,"  bowed 
in  solemn  supplication  before  her 
Father,  and  received  the  assuring  com- 
fort that  she  should  be  given  a  son 
who  would  be  numbered  as  one  of 
the  Apostles  of  the  Lamb,  and  to  her 
last  day  she  maintained  that  this 
would  come  to  pass  just  as  it  had 
been  revealed  to  her.  This  knowledge 
was  one  of  the  many  blessings  which 
sustained  and  cheered  her  long  years 
of  toil  and  sacrifice.  The  boyhood 
days  of  Melvin  were  spent  upon  his 
father's  farm,  and  in  attending  school 
as  time  and  means  permitted.  He 
was  a  devoted  worker  and  possessea 
a  studious  mind,  aiming  to  qualify 
himself  for  what  he  felt  to  be  his 
life's  mission,  the  salvation  of  his 
fellow-men.  He  succeeded  well  in 
acquiring  a  common  school  education 
in  the  midst  of  difficulties.  The  di- 
vine art,  music,  made  up  a  large  part 
of  his  nature,  the  development  of 
which  has  brought  joy  mingled  with 
tears  to  thousands  of  souls,  and  no 
one  In  his  home  county  is  more  grate- 
fully and  lovingly  remembered  in  this 
respect  than  is  he.  Few  funerals  were 
held  where  the  sadness  of  the  occa- 
sion was  not  made  brighter  by  the 
sympathetic  strains  of  melody  as  they 
pierced  into  the  very  hearts  of  those 
who  needed  comfort.  Melvin  was  bap- 
tized and  confirmed  on  his  eighth 
birthday  by  his  father.  In  1884  he 
was  ordained  a  Deacon.  In  this  capac- 
ity, as  a  boy,  he  first  learned  obedi- 
ence in  the  operations  of  the  Priest- 
hood. He  was  prompt  in  attending 
his  quorum  meetings,  in  caring  for 
the  Ward  meeting  house,  keeping  it 
clean,  making  fires,  and  in  doing 
whatever  was  essential  for  the  com- 
fort of  those  who  attended  Ward 
gatherings.  In  those  days  it  was 
customary  for  the  Deacons  quorums 
throughout  the  Church  to  chop  wood 
for  the  widows  and  poor  among  the 
people,  and  in  this  work  young  Mel- 
vin took  great  delight.        Especially 


BIOGRAPHICAL  ENCYCLOPEDIA. 


745 


was  it  his  custom  to  spend  a  part  of 
each  Christmas  day,  with  a  sleigh  as 
a  vehicle,  in  distributing  gifts  which 
had  been  given  through  his  father, 
the  Bishop,  for  the  blessings  and  com- 
fort of  the  widows  and  orphans  and 
those  In  need.  As  a  Priest,  to  which 
office  he  was  ordained,  Dec.  27,  1891, 
by  his  father,  he  manifested  the  same 
zeal  and  love  for  God's  work  that  he 
had  done  while  acting  as  a  Deacon. 
In  this  calling  he  traveled  as  a  teacher 
among  the  Ward  members  and  re- 
ceived his  first  experience  as  a  preach- 
er of  the  gospel.  His  love  for  this 
constantly  increased,  and  he  endeared 
himself  in  the  hearts  of  the  people 
until  they  looked  upon  him  as  indeed 
a  bearer  of  glad  tidings.  Elder  Bal- 
lard entered  the  Brigham  Young  Col- 
lege and  graduated  with  the  class  of 
18  94  in  the  business  course,  follow- 
ing which  he  became  a  member  of  the 
faculty  and  taught  music.  The  Higher 
Priesthood  was  conferred  upon  him 
Feb.  5,  1895,  at  which  time  he  was 
ordained  an  Elder,  and  succeeded  in 
magnifying  his  holy  calling  to  the 
entire  satisfaction  of  those  who  pre- 
sided over  him.  At  about  this  time 
he  became  acquainted  with  Miss  Mar- 
tha A.  Jones  and  they  were  married 
in  the  Logan  Temple  June  17,  1896. 
On  the  sixth  of  July,  1896,  Elder  Bal- 
lard was  ordained  a  Seventy  by  Apos- 
tle John  Henry  Smith  and  on  the  fol- 
lowing day  he  was  set  apart  as  a  mis- 
sionary to  labor  with  Elders  Brigham 
H.  Roberts  and  George  D.  Pyper  to 
hold  meetings  in  the  larger  cities  of 
the  United  States.  This  special  mis- 
sion was  continued  for  several  months, 
and  upon  the  return  of  Elder  Rob- 
erts and  Pyper  to  Utah,  Elder  Ballard 
was  assigned  to  the  Northern  States 
Mission,  where  he  labored  with  his 
usual  energy.  He  was  appointed  presi- 
dent of  the  Southern  Illinois  Confer- 
ence, in  which  capacity  he  served 
until  honorably  released  to  return 
home  in  December,  1898.  In  1899, 
he  assisted  in  organizing  the  Logan 
Knitting  Factory,  one  of  the  leading 


factories  of  the  State.  He  also  assist- 
ed in  organizing  the  Logan  Commer- 
cial Club  which  was  later  united  with 
the  Booster's  Club  under  the  name 
of  Commercial-Boosters  Club.  He 
served  two  terms  as  president  and 
director  of  that  organization,  which 
now  has  a  membership  of  about  five 
hundred  of  Cache  county's  prominent 
business  men.  During  the  same  year 
he  was  set  apart  as  one  of  the  presi- 
dents of  the  40th  quorum  of  Seventy, 
which  position  he  filled  with  signal 
honor.  In  January,  1899,  he  held  a 
week's  discussion  with  one  of  the 
ministers  of  the  Reorganized  Church 
upon  the  question  of  succession,  and 
succeeded  in  establishing  in  the  hearts 
of  the  hearers  the  fact  that  the  au- 
thority of  the  Priesthood  is  with  the 
Church  of  Jesus  Christ  of  Latter-day 
Saints.  Brother  Ballard  was  ordained 
a  High  Priest,  April  23,  1900,  by 
Apostle  Francis  M.  Lyman,  and  by 
him  set  apart  as  a  counselor  to  the 
Bishop  of  the  Logan  Second  ward, 
where  he  labored  untiringly  until 
190  6,  when  he  was  called  as  an  alter- 
nate High  Councilor  in  the  Cache 
Stake  of  Zion,  in  which  position  he 
was  afforded  an  opportunity  of  en- 
larging upon  his  usefulness  because 
of  a  larger  field  in  which  to  labor. 
At  this  time  he  had  become  a  recog- 
nized speaker  of  exceptional  ability, 
and  his  services  were  sought  after  by 
Bishops  and  presidents  of  auxiliary 
associations  in  his  own  and  adjoining 
Stakes  of  Zion.  During  the  winter  of 
1902-1903  he  was  called  upon  a  short 
mission  to  Boise,  Idaho,  and  assisted 
President  Joseph  W.  McMurrin  in  or- 
ganizing the  scattered  saints  into  a 
branch,  which  they  successfully  ac- 
complished to  the  joy  and  comfort  of 
many  who  had  been  long  deprived  of 
the  blessings  of  an  organization.  Many 
public  meetings  were  held  which  re- 
sulted in  bringing  several  into  the 
fold  of  the  Redeemer.  This  small  be- 
ginning later  resulted  in  the  organ- 
ization of  the  Boise  Stake  of  Zion. 
Notwithstanding  his  strenuous  religi- 


746 


LATTER-DAY   SAINT 


ous  and  business  activities,  he  found 
time  to  serve  in  a  civil  way  as  a  city 
councilman,  and  as  a  member  of  the 
civic  organizations  of  the  city  and 
county.  For  three  years  he  served 
upon  the  Stake  Board  of  Young  Men's 
Mutual  Improvement  Association  and 
Religion  Classes;  acted  for  many  years 
as  chorister  of  the  Logan  Second 
Ward,  and  was  chairman  of  the  Cache 
Stake  Tabernacle  choir  for  seventeen 
years,  and  assisted  in  installing  a 
$15,000  pipe  organ.  While  engaged 
primarily  in  Stake  work  he  always 
found  time  to  assist  in  a  Ward  capac- 
ity, for  he  was  a  devoted  teacher  in 
the  Sunday  school  and  president  of 
the  Y.  M.  M.  I.  A.  for  several  years. 
Being  called  to  preside  over  the 
Northwestern  States  Mission  he  was 
set  apart  for  this  very  responsible 
position  April  6,  1909.  During  his 
ten  years  of  presidency,  he  presided 
over  hundreds  of  young  men  and  wo- 
men missionaries,  all  of  whom  loved 
him  with  exceptional  devotion.  Thou- 
sands of  saints  also  regard  him  as  a 
man  of  God,  devoted  to  the  uplift  of 
humanity.  His  friends  are  legion  in 
the  Northwest  and  are  numbered 
among  the  leading  busines  and  pro- 
fessional men.  Many  chapels  were 
built  under  his  direction,  and  the  spir- 
itual and  financial  condition  of  the 
saints  improved.  Elder  Ballard  was 
ordained  an  Apostle,  Jan.  7,  1919,  by 
President  Heber  J.  Grant  to  fill  a 
vacancy  caused  by  the  reorganization 
of  the  First  Presidency.  The  appoint- 
ment of  Elder  Ballard  as  a  member 
of  the  Council  of  Twelve,  in  harmony 
with  the  revelation  to  his  mother  be- 
fore his  birth,  is  further  evidence  of 
the  beautiful  harmony  that  comes 
through  the  operations  of  the  Spirit 
of  God  through  his  humble  and  de- 
voted children.  His  appointment 
gave  universal  satisfaction,  and  he 
entered  upon  his  new  duties  with  the 
love  and  affection  of  the  saints  every- 
where. Brother  and  Sister  Ballard 
are  the  parents  of  eight  children, 
seven  of  whom  are  living,  four  boys 


and  three  girls.    Since  1919  they  have 
made  their  home  in  Salt  Lake  City. 

BURTON,  Robert  T.,  first  coun- 
selor to  Presiding  Bishop  Wm.  B. 
Preston  (continued  from  Vol.  1:238), 
died  Nov.  11,  1907,  in  Salt  Lake  City, 
Utah,  leaving  an  honorable  name  and 
a  large  family. 

FJELDSTED,  Christian  Daniel,  one 

of  the  First  Seven  Presidents  of  Sev- 
enties. (Continued  from  Vol.  1:203.) 
President  Fjeldsted  labored  dilligent- 
ly  in  the  interest  of  the  Scandinavian 
saints  and  made  several  trips  to  Eur- 
ope in  the  interest  of  the  Scandi- 
navian Mission.  He  assisted  the  late 
President  Anthon  L.  Skanchy  in  se- 
lecting a  site  for  the  building  of  a 
new  meeting  house  in  Copenhagen, 
Denmark,  and  was  present  when  that 
edifice  was  dedicated  July  4,  1902. 
He  was  also  present  when  a  new  mis- 
sion house  was  dedicated  in  Chrisii- 
ania,  Norway,  July  24,  1903,  and  was 
in  Stockholm,  Sweden,  Oct.  23,  1904, 
when  a  mission  house  recently  pur- 
chased by  the  Church  and  partly  re- 
constructed in  that  city  was  dedicat- 
ed. After  that  Bro.  Fjeldsted  was 
placed  in  charge  of  the  Scandinavian 
Mission,  succeeding  Anthon  L.  Skan- 
chy in  that  position  Dec.  6,  1904.  He 
presided  until  July,  1905,  when  he 
was  succeeded  by  Jens  M.  Christen- 
sen,  and  returned  to  Utah.  Soon  after 
his  return  home.  Brother  Fjeldsted's 
health  began  to  fail,  and  he  died  in 
Salt  Lake  City  Dec.  23,  1905,  after 
an  operation.  At  the  time  of  his  de- 
mise he  was  one  of  the  veteran  mem- 
bers of  the  Church,  having  been  con- 
verted to  the  restored  gospel  soon 
after  the  arrival  of  the  first  Latter- 
day  Saint  Elders  in  Scandinavia. 

GRANT,  Heber  Jeddy,  the  seventh 
President  of  the  Church  of  Jesus 
Christ  of  Latter-day  Saints.  (Contin- 
ued from  Vol.  1:147.)  Throughout 
the  thirty-seven  years  of  his  service 
as  one  of  the  Council  of  the  Twelve 


BIOGRAPHICAL  ENCYCLOPEDIA. 


747 


Apostles,  Elder  Heber  J.  Grant  was 
persistent  and  untiring  in  the  duties 
of  his  special  ministry,  as  his  recora 
of  travel  and  visitations  among  both 
Stakes  and  missions  demonstrates. 
Pursuant  to  action  by  the  First  Pres- 
idency and  the  Twelve  on  Feb.  14, 
1901,  immediate  steps  were  taken  to 
open  a  mission  in  Japan,  and  Elder 
Grant  was  chosen  for  the  work — -a 
work  specifically  belonging  to  the 
Apostleship.  As  president  of  the  then 
prospective  but  now  actual  and  pros- 
perous Japan  Mission  he  left  home 
July  24,  1901,  accompanied  by  three 
other  Elders,  bound  for  the  new  field. 
Notwithstanding  the  difficulties  and 


obstacles  incident  to  such  an  under- 
taking as  that  of  introducing  the  mes- 
sage of  the  restored  Church  of  Jesus 
Christ  to  a  non-Christian  nation. 
President  Grant  was  instrumental  in 
opening  the  door  for  the  preaching  of 
the  gospel  in  the  Orient.  He  returned 
to  Utah  in  September,  1903,  leaving 
the  mission  in  good  condition,  as  was 
apparent  at  that  time  and  as  subse- 
quent growth  and  development  con- 
firm. On  Jan.  1,  1904,  he  succeeded 
the  late  Elder  Francis  M.  Lyman  as 
the  head  of  the  European  Mission, 
and  so  remained  until  Dec.   5,   1906, 


when  he  relinquished  the  office  to  El- 
der Charles  W.  Penrose  of  the  Coun- 
cil of  the  Twelve,  and  soon  thereafter 
returned  home.     A  feature  of  Presi- 
dent   Grant's    administration    in    the 
European   Mission   was   his   personal 
and  close  supervision  of  the  several 
conferences  and  branches,  in  both  the 
British  Isles  and  the  continental  coun- 
tries.    His  long  experience  in  direct- 
ing the  labors  of  others,  in  business 
and   Church  activities,  aided  him  in 
keeping  missionaries  and  local  work- 
ers at  their  best,  and  his  example  of 
untiring  effort  was  a  means  of  devel- 
oping efficiency  and   earnest  service 
in    both    officers    and    members.      A 
great  sorrow  befell  him  on  May  2  5, 
1908,  when  his  beloved  wife,  Emily 
Wells   Grant,   who   had   accompanied 
him    to    Europe,    died    in    Salt    Lake 
City.     Following  the  death  of  Presi- 
dent Francis  M.  Lyman,  Elder  Grant, 
as  the  senior  member  of  the  Council 
of  the  Twelve,  became  the  president 
of  that  body  on  Nov.   23,   1916.      In 
January,    1918,   he   was  made   chair- 
man of  the  State  committee  in  charge 
of  the  Liberty  Loan   campaign;    and 
in  this,  as  in  other  executive  activities 
incident  to  the  World  War,  he  exer- 
cised to  the  full  his  usual  vigor  and 
aggressiveness,  and  did  much  to  se- 
cure  for   Utah  its   deserved   recogni- 
tion for  loyalty  and  patriotism,  as  ex- 
hibited   by    the    works    that    count. 
Throughout  the  long  years  of  stress 
and   struggle   for   prohibition   of   the 
liquor  traffic.  President  Grant  was  a 
leading  and  inspiring  figure.     He  was 
an  ardent  and  efficient  worker  for  the 
success   of   the    18th   Amendment   to 
the  national  Constitution,  and  enjoys 
the  well-earned  satisfaction  of  having 
seen  both  state  and  nation-wide  pro- 
hibition realized.     On  Nov.  23,  1918, 
four  days  after  the  death   of  Presi- 
dent Joseph  F.  Smith,  Heber  J.  Grant 
became   President   of  the   Church   of 
Jesus  Christ  of  Latter-day  Saints,  by 
action  of  the  Council  of  the  Apostles. 
By  his  choice  and   nomination,  sup- 
ported   by    unanimous    vote    of    the 


748 


LATTER-DAY   SAINT 


Council,  Anthon  H.  Lund  and  Charles 
W.  Penrose  were  made  counselors  in 
the  First  Presidency,  each  succeeding 
himself  in  the  position  held  under  the 
former  administration.  Owing  to  the 
prevalence  of  influenza  and  the  con- 
sequent ban  on  large  assemblies,  the 
General  Conference  of  the  Church, 
which  in  usual  order  would  have  been 
held  in  April,  1919,  was  deferred  un- 
til June  1st  following,  and  on  that  day 
the  First  Presidency,  constituted  as 
above  specified,  was  sustained  by  vote 
of  the  Church  in  conference  assem- 
bled. Among  President  Grant's  nat- 
ural qualifications  for  leadership  are 
genius  as  an  organizer  and  marked 
capability  as  a  director  of  men.  In 
the  early  months  of  his  administra- 
tion he  placed  competent  presiding  of- 
ficers at  the  heads  of  several  auxili- 
ary associations,  and  created  a  Church 
Commission  on  Education,  thus  less- 
ening the  arduous  duties  of  the  First 
Presidency  by  placing  responsibility 
for  detailed  operation  upon  others. 
Now,  in  the  very  prime  of  his  life  as 
gaged  by  physical,  mental  and  spir- 
itual vigor,  he  travels  much  among 
the  Stakes  and  missions;  and  no 
branch  or  Ward  is  insignificant  in 
his  estimation.  Indeed  he  manifests 
genuine  delight  in  the  opportunity  of 
visiting  any  small  or  outlying  unit  of 
the  Church,  which,  perhaps,  had  gone 
long  without  the  personal  ministra- 
tion of  one  of  the  General  Authori- 
ties. On  Nov.  13,  1919,  President 
Grant,  accompanied  by  a  small  party 
of  other  Church  officials,  left  home 
for  the  Hawaiian  Islands,  where,  on 
the  27th  day  of  that  month,  he  offi- 
ciated in  dedicating  the  newly  erect- 
ed Temple  at  Laie,  and  thus  Inaug- 
urated on  the  Isles  of  the  Pacific  the 
administration  of  sacred  ordinances 
for  the  salvation  of  the  dead.  The 
return  journey  of  the  little  company 
was  completed  Dec.  17,  1919.  In  the 
"Juvenile  Instructor"  of  January, 
1919,  appears  a  symposium  of  trib- 
utes to  the  character  and  qualifica- 
tions of  President  Grant,  written  by 


prominent  officers  in  the  Church,  who 
from  their  long  and  close  association 
with  him  were  able  to  speak  with  as- 
surance; and  the  "Improvement  Era" 
of  the  same  date  contains  a  valuable 
contribution  on  the  'Reorganization 
of  the  First  Presidency."  President 
Grant's  gentleness  of  disposition,  com- 
bined with  unshakable  firmness  for 
the  right;  his  sympathy,  as  shown  by 
works,  for  those  afflicted  or  in  dis- 
tress, together  with  his  readiness  for 
self-sacrifice  whatever  the  personal 
deprivation;  his  unquestionable  pa- 
triotism for  his  country  and  loyal  sup- 
port of  its  government;  his  devotion 
to  the  gospel  of  Jesus  Christ,  and  to 
the  Church  which  Is  the  earthly  em- 
bodiment thereof;  the  equable  union 
of  mercy  and  justice  in  his  nature; 
his  material  support  and  encouraging 
patronage  of  authors,  artists,  poets, 
musicians,  and  others  of  genius,  whose 
splendid  endowments  without  such 
aid  would  possibly  languish  and  die 
— these  and  many  other  attributes  of 
true  greatness  are  attested  in  pub- 
lished encomiums  by  men  who  knew 
him  best.  No  one,  believer  or  skep- 
tic, who  has  heard  President  Grant 
voice  his  personal  testimony  of  the 
divinity  .of  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ  as 
the  foreordained  Redeemer  and  Sav- 
ior of  the  race,  and  of  the  actuality 
of  divine  appointment  and  guidance 
in  the  life  work  of  Joseph  Smith  as 
verily  a  Prophet  of  the  Living  God, 
can  ever  expel  from  his  mind  the  ef- 
fect of  that  soulful  avowal.  The  as- 
surance of  reality  in  the  restoration 
of  the  gospel  in  this  dispensation,  as 
was  of  old  predicted,  is  Ingrained  in 
the  heart,  mind  and  soul  of  Heber  J. 
Grant.  Fearlessly  he  proclaims  that 
solemn  truth  to  the  world.  He  is  veri- 
ly a  living  witness  for  God. 

HART,  Charles  Henry,  one  of  the 

First  Seven  Presidents  of  Seventies, 
was  born  July  5,  1S66,  In  Blooming- 
ton,  Bear  Lake  county,  Idaho,  the  son 
of  James  H.  Hart  and  Sablna  Scheib. 
He  is  the  oldest  son  of  his  mother's 


BIOGRAPHICAL   ENCYCLOPEDIA. 


74  d 


nine  children,  six  of  whom  are  still 
(1920)  living.  His  father  served  with 
President  John  Taylor  in  opening  up 
the  French  Mission,  assisted  in  Church 
immigration  and  newspaper  work  in 
St.  Louis,  Mo.,  in  the  early  fifties, 
was  for  several  years  Church  immi- 
gration agent  in  New  York  City,  and 
was  first  counselor  to  President  Wm. 
Budge,  of  the  Bear  Lake  Stake,  for 
many  years.  The  mother  of  Charles 
H.  was  born  and  educated  in  London 
and  came  to  Utah  with  her  parents  In 


1852.  She  died  March  1,  rdl9,  at  the 
age  of  80  years.  The  subject  of  this 
sketch  moved  with  his  father's  fam- 
ily to  Provo,  Utah,  when  a  boy,  and 
was  there  baptized  by  his  father.  Af- 
ter a  few  years'  residence  in  Provo 
and  Salt  Lake  City,  the  family  moved 
back  to  Bear  Lake  valley.  There  he 
engaged  in  the  various  duties  inci- 
dent to  the  conditions  growing  out  of 
the  settlement  of  a  new  country,  be- 
ing employed  in  farming,  in  canyon 
work,  in  freighting  during  the  sum- 
mer season,  and  in  attending  the  dis- 
trict school  during  the  winter  months. 
At  the  age  of  fourteen  he  entered  a 
printing  office  and  remained  there  for 
over  two  years,  learning  such  branch- 
es of  the  printer's  art  as  are  common 


to  a  country  newspaper  office.  After 
attending  high  school,  he  became  a 
student  in  the  Normal  department  of 
the  University  of  Utah,  from  which 
he  was  graduated  with  the  class  of 
1887  with  valedictorian  honors.  He 
then  entered  the  University  of  Michi- 
gan, in  which  he  pursued  his  law 
course,  winning  his  LL.  B.  degree  in 
1889.  Following  graduation  he  re- 
turned to  the  west  and  entered  upon 
the  practice  of  law  at  Paris,  Idaho, 
where  he  remained  for  a  year.  He 
then  removed  to  Logan,  Utah,  where 
he  continued  in  the  practice  of  his 
profession,  and  his  marked  ability 
and  devotion  to  the  interests  of  his 
clients  won  him  quick  recognition  in 
a  large  practice.  He  was  elected  to 
the  office  of  county  attorney  and  lat- 
er was  chosen  a  member  of  the  last 
Territorial  council.  He  was  then 
elected  a  member  of  the  constitu- 
tional convention  which  framed  the 
organic  law  of  Utah,  and  he  took  part 
in  preparing  the  State  constitution, 
his  knowledge  of  law  being  of  im- 
mense benefit  in  this  direction.  Af- 
terward he  was  elected  judge  of  the 
First  Judicial  District  of  the  State 
and  served  upon  the  bench  for  nine 
years,  his  record  as  judge  being  in 
harmony  with  his  record  as  a  citizen 
and  a  lawyer,  characteristic  by  marked 
devotion  to  duty  and  by  a  masterful 
grasp  of  every  problem  presented  for 
solution.  While  officiating  upon  the 
district  bench  he  was  called  upon  to 
serve  as  a  member  of  the  Supreme 
Court  of  the  State  many  times.  Later 
he  formed  a  partnership  with  Hon. 
Frank  K.  Nebeker,  under  the  firm 
name  of  Hart  &  Nebeker,  at  Logan, 
Utah,  and  was  there  successfully  en- 
gaged in  practice  until  called  upon 
to  fill  a  mission.  Brother  Hart  was 
ordained  a  Deacon  in  early  life,  and 
later  an  Elder.  He  was  ordained  a 
Seventy  by  John  Henry  Smith,  Aug. 
10,  1890.  When  the  Mutual  Improve- 
ment Associations  were  organized,  he 
became  associated  therewith,  and  took 
an  active  part  therein  for  many  years. 


750 


LATTER-DAY   SAINT 


serving  as  secretary  of  the  local  or- 
ganization where  he  lived  and  also  as 
a  counselor  to  the  Stake  superinten- 
dent of  the  Bear  Lake  Stake,  at  a  time 
when  the  associations  of  that  Stake 
numbered    fifty-seven.      In    1898    he 
was  set  apart  as  a  president  of  the 
sixty-fourth  quorum  of  Seventy,  and 
was    acting    in    that    capacity    when 
called  to   be  a  member  of  the  First 
Council  of  Seventies  of  the  Church, 
held  in  April,  1906.     Elder  Hart  has 
been    interested    in    Sunday    School 
work    from    his    boyhood,    teaching 
classes   in   various   departments,    but 
particularly    in    the    theological    de- 
partment,  and   was   also   superinten- 
dent and  teacher  of  the  parents'  class 
of    the    Logan    Fifth    Ward    Sunday 
School  at  the  time  he  was  called  to 
his  present  position  among  the  Sev- 
enties.    He  succeeded  to  fill  the  va- 
cancy caused  by  the  death  of  the  late 
Christian   D.   Fjeldsted,   and   was   set 
apart  by  President  Joseph  F.  Smith, 
April    9,    1906.      Since    then    he    has 
been    a    most    earnest    and    effective 
worker  in  advancing  the  interests  of 
the  Church.     He  is  a  member  of  the 
General  Sunday  School  Board,  which 
has  charge  of  a  Sunday  School  mem- 
bership  of   one   hundred   and    ninety 
thousand,   and   he  is  also  a  member 
of  the  General  Board  of  the  Young 
Men's  Mutual  Improvement  Associa- 
tion,    an     organization      comprising 
about   fifty  thousand   members.      He 
was  appointed  by  Governor  Bamber- 
ger as  a  member  of  the  Mormon  Bat- 
talion    Monument     Commission,     in 
which  office  he  serves  without  com- 
pensation.    In  October,  1889,  Broth- 
er Hart  married  Adelia  Greenhalgh, 
daughter  of  Peter  and  Sarah  Green- 
halgh, early  English  converts  to  the 
Church,  who  settled  at  Willow  Creek 
(now    Willard),    Box    Elder    county, 
Utah,  and  later  in  Bear  Lake  county, 
Idaho,  at  the  time  of  the  early  settle- 
ment of  those  places.     Mrs.  Hart  bore 
her    husband    ten    children,    namely, 
Lucile   (now  Mrs.  W.  D.  Pack  and  a 
violinist  of  marked  proficiency),  Le- 


ona  (now  Mrs.  Willard  Ashton  and 
an  accomplished  pianist),  Genevieve 
(now  Mrs.  Raymond  Wilcox  and  a 
high  school  teacher  of  public  ex- 
pression), Charles  J.  (who  filled  a 
mission  to  the  Northwestern  States 
and  afterwards  served  in  the  U.  S. 
army),  Harold  H.  (now  filling  a  mis- 
sion in  the  Northeastern  States),  Paul 
Eugene,  Dean  Eldon,  Melvin  G.,  Ray- 
mond G.  and  Phyllis.  The  mother 
died  in  Salt  Lake  City  in  March, 
1913,  and  in  June,  1915,  President 
Hart  married  LaLene  Hendricks  of 
Logan,  Utah,  a  daughter  of  B.  A.  and 
Mary  Hendricks  of  Lewiston,  Utah. 

IVINS,  Anthony  Woodward,  a  mem- 
ber of  the  Council  of  Twelve  Apostles, 
was  born  Sept.  16,  1852,  at  Toms 
River,  Ocean  county.  New  Jersey,  me 
son  of  Israel  Ivins  and  Anna  Lowrie 


Ivlns.  He  came  to  Utah  with  his 
parents  in  1853  and  to  southern  Utah 
in  18  61.  He  was  baptized  in  Novem- 
ber, 1860,  by  Joseph  Pollard;  or- 
dained a  Deacon,  and  subsequently  a 
Teacher,  serving  faithfully  in  both 
these  offices  until  he  was  13  years 
of  age,  when  he  was  ordained  an  Eld- 
er. Later  he  was  ordained  a  Seven- 
ty by  Joseph  Young  and  acted  as  a 
counselor    in    the    first    Mutual    Im- 


BIOGRAPHICAL   ENCYCLOPEDIA. 


751 


provement  Association  in  St.  George; 
he  was  chosen  as  president  of  the  St. 
George  Fourth  Ward,  Y.  M.  M.  I.  A., 
in  1879.  Later,  when  the  associa- 
tions of  the  four  St.  George  Wards 
were  consolidated  into  one,  Bro.  Ivins 
was  chosen  as  president  of  the  amal- 
gamated association.  Later  he  acted 
as  Stake  president  of  Y.  M.  M.  I.  A. 
In  1875-1876  he  filled  a  mission  to 
Arizona,  New  Mexico  and  Mexico,  in 
company  with  Daniel  W.  Jones,  Hela- 
man  Pratt,  Jas.  Z.  Stewart,  Robert 
H.  Smith,  Ammon  M.  Tenney  and 
Wiley  C.  Jones.  The  expedition  was 
sent  out  by  President  Brigham  Young 
and  was  under  the  direction  of  Daniel 
W.  Jones.  It  went  instructed  to  ex- 
plore and  report  on  the  country  for 
colonization  purposes,  visit  the  vari- 
ous Indian  tribes,  establish  friendly 
relations  between  the  Indians  and 
whites,  and  preach  the  gospel  to  the 
people.  The  party  visited  the  Na- 
vajos,  Hopis  (Moquis),  Apaches,  Pi- 
mas,  Maricopas  and  Papagos.  It  pen- 
etrated Mexico  to  the  city  of  Chihua- 
hua, went  west  into  the  Sierra  Ma- 
dre  country,  and  explored  the  Casas 
Grandes  district,  where  the  "Mor- 
mon" colonies  of  Mexico  later  were 
established.  Two  thousand  five  hun- 
dred copies  of  extracts  from  the  Book 
of  Mormon  were  distributed  on  the 
trip.  In  1878  Bro.  Ivins  filled  a  mis- 
sion to  the  Navajo  and  Pueblo  Indians 
of  Arizona  and  New  Mexico,  Erastus 
B.  Snow  being  his  companion.  In  1881 
he  was  chosen  a  member  of  the  High 
Council  of  the  St.  George  Stake,  at 
which  time  he  was  ordained  a  High 
Priest  by  John  D.  T.  McAllister.  In 
1882,  at  the  April  conference,  he  was 
called  to  the  City  of  Mexico  to  do 
missionary  work  among  the  Mexican 
people.  He  returned  home  in  April, 
1884,  having  presided  for  one  year 
over  the  Mexican  Mission.  In  1888 
he  was  chosen  to  act  as  first  coun- 
selor to  Daniel  D.  McArthur,  in  the 
presidency  of  the  St.  George  Stake, 
in  which  capacity  he  continued  to  act 
until  he  was  called  by  President  Wil- 


ford  Woodruff  in  18  95  to  go  to  Mexi- 
co and  take  charge  of  the  interests  of 
the  Church  in  that  country.  He  moved 
his  family  to  Mexico  in  1896,  having 
gone  there  himself  the  previous  year, 
and  he  was  appointed  president  of 
the  Juarez  Stake  of  Zion,  at  the  time 
the  Stake  was  organized  by  Apostle 
Francis  M.  Lyman,  in  December, 
1895.  While  presiding  in  Mexico  he 
also  acted  as  vice  president  and  gen- 
eral manager  of  the  Mexican  Coloni- 
zation and  Agricultural  Company,  un- 
der which  the  "Mormon"  colonies  in 
Mexico  were  established,  and  was 
president  of  the  Dublan  Mercantile 
Company,  the  largest  mercantile 
house  in  that  part  of  Mexico.  He 
was  chosen  and  sustained  as  a  mem- 
ber of  the  Council  of  Twelve  Apostles 
at  the  general  conference  held  in  Oc- 
tober, 1907,  and  was  ordained  an 
Apostle,  Oct.  6,  1907,  by  President 
Joseph  F.  Smith.  The  first  civil  ser- 
vice performed  by  Bro.  Ivins  was  that 
of  special  policeman  in  St.  George 
precinct.  He  saw  service  in  the  In- 
dian wars  which  prevailed  in  south- 
ern Utah,  was  constable  of  the  St. 
George  precinct,  city  attorney  and 
mayor,  deputy  sheriff  of  Washington 
county,  prosecuting  attorney,  and  for 
six  years,  assessor  and  collector  of 
the  county.  He  also  served  as  a  rep- 
resentative to  the  Territorial  Legis- 
lature in  1894,  and  as  a  member  of 
the  constitutional  convention  in  1895. 
Elder  Ivins  secured  the  first  govern- 
ment appropriation  for  the  Shebit 
Indians  and  moved  them  from  the 
Shebit  Mountains  (where  they  had 
become  a  menace  to  the  white  set- 
tlers) and  purchased,  and  established 
them  on  their  present  reservation  on 
the  Santa  Clara  River.  He  was  the 
first  government  agent  to  these  In- 
dians, in  which  capacity  he  served  for 
two  years;  he  resigned  this  position 
in  order  to  accept  the  nomination  to 
the  legislature.  Before  going  to  Mexico 
Bro.  Ivins  engaged  successfully  in 
farming  and  stock  business,  both  pri- 
vately and  as  manager  of  the  Mojave 


752 


LATTER-DAY   SAINT 


Land  &  Cattle  Company,  and  the  Kal- 
bab  Cattle  Company,  both  of  which 
were  Incorporated  companies  and 
owned  the  largest  herds  and  ranches 
in  what  is  now  known  as  the  Arizona 
Strip,  which  lies  north  of  the  Grand 
Canyon  of  the  Colorado  and  south  of 
the  Utah  line.  Since  returning  from 
Mexico,  Elder  Ivins  has  been  occupied 
with  Church  duties  and  been  identi- 
fied with  various  colonization  and  ir- 
rigation schemes  and  other  enterprises 
of  a  secular  nature.  Among  these 
may  be  mentioned  that  he  took  a 
leading  part  in  the  Enterprise  Res- 
ervoir and  Canal  Company,  which 
company  has  built  a  splendid  reser- 
voir at  the  head  of  Shoal  Creek,  in 
Washington  county,  Utah.  Elder  Ivins 
is  now  general  superintendent  of  the 
Y.  M.  M.  I.  A.  for  the  whole  Church, 
is  president  of  the  Board  of  Trustees 
of  the  Utah  Agricultural  College,  vice 
president  of  Zion's  Saving  Bank  & 
Trust  Company,  and  director  in  the 
Deseret  Savings  Bank  and  Utah  State 
National  Bank.  In  1878  Elder  Ivins 
married  Elizabeth  A.  Snow  (daughter 
of  Erastus  Snow  and  Elizabeth  Ash- 
by),  who  was  born  March  24,  1854, 
in  Salt  Lake  City.  She  has  borne  her 
husband  nine  children,  of  whom  eight 
are  still  living.  Following  are  the 
names  of  Bro.  Ivins'  children:  An- 
thony W.,  Antolne  R.,  Anna  L.,  Flor- 
ence, Leah,  Heber  Grant,  Stanley  S., 
Augusta  and  Fulvia.  Since  the  return 
from  Mexico  in  18  98  the  family  have 
resided  in  Salt  Lake  City.  Elder  Ivins 
is  known  throughout  the  Church  as 
an  interesting  and  logical  speaker,  a 
successful  business  man  and  a  wise 
counselor.  Since  his  early  youth  he 
has  been  before  the  public  in  many 
different  capacities,  both  of  an  eccle- 
siastical and  secular  nature.  He  is  a 
thorough  scholar  and  a  fluent  speak- 
er of  the  Spanish  language  and  a 
staunch  friend  of  the  Mexican  saints. 
(See  also  Vol.  1,  p.  311.) 

JENSON,  Andrew,  assistant  Church 
Historian.     (Continued  from  Vol.   1: 


261.)  In  1901  Elder  Jenson  published 
Volume  I  of  the  L.  D.  S.  Biographical 
Encyclopedia,  the  first  book  of  its 
kind  ever  published  in  the  Church. 
He  also  assisted  President  Anthon  H. 
Lund  in  revising  the  Danish  transla- 
tion of  the  Book  of  Mormon  and  the 
Pearl  of  Great  Price,  and  in  1902  he 
was  sent  on  a  special  mission  to  Scan- 
dinavia to  supervise  the  printing  of 
the  revised  edition  of  the  Book  of 
Mormon  in  the  Danish  language.  Dur- 
ing this  time  he  attended  the  dedica- 
tion of  a  new  meeting  house  in  Co- 


penhagen, Denmark,  July  4,  1902. 
After  his  return  to  Utah  in  1903  he 
traveled  extensively  in  many  Stakes 
of  Zion  in  the  interest  of  Church  his- 
tory. In  February,  1904,  he  was 
summoned  to  Washington,  D.  C,  as 
a  witness  in  the  Smoot  case  before 
the  Senate  Committee  on  Privileges 
and  Elections  and  had  occasion  to 
explain  in  somewhat  detail  the  or- 
ganizations of  the  Church.  Later  the 
same  year  (190  4)  he  was  called  on 
another  special  mission  to  Scandi,- 
navia,  this  time  to  supervise  the 
printing  of  a  new  edition  of  the  His- 
tory of  Joseph  Smith  in  the  Danish 
language.  He  attended  the  dedica- 
tion of  a  mission  house  in  Stockholm, 
Sweden,  Oct.  23,  1904.  and  returned 


BIOGRAPHICAL   ENCYCLOPEDIA. 


753 


home  in  1905.  The  following  four 
years  he  spent  traveling  in  the  Stakes 
of  Zion,  gathering  historical  data.  In 
1909  he  was  called  to  preside  over 
the  Scandinavian  Mission  and  left 
home  to  fill  that  mission  in  January, 
1909.  During  his  sojourn  in  Scan- 
dinavia this  time  he  traveled  exten- 
sively in  Denmark,  Sweden  and  Nor- 
way and  delivered  illustrated  lectures 
on  "Mormonism"  in  many  of  the 
principal  cities  of  Denmark  and  Nor- 
way; he  also  visited  in  Germany. 
Holland,  Belgium,  France  and  Great 
Britain  with  members  of  his  family. 
While  presiding  in  Denmark  and  Nor- 
way he  published  large  editions  of 
the  Book  of  Mormon  and  the  Pearl 
of  Great  Price  in  Danish  and  re- 
turned home  by  way  of  Russia,  Si- 
beria, Japan  and  Hawaii,  thus  cir- 
cumnavigating the  globe  a  second 
time.  Since  his  return  home  from 
that  mission  in  July,  1912,  he  has 
been  busily  engaged  at  the  Histo- 
rian's office,  dictating  to  stenogra- 
phers and  putting  into  readable  shape 
the  vast  manuscript  material  which 
he  has  gathered  in  many  lands  and 
climes  during  the  past  thirty  years. 
In  1913  he  published  a  second  vol- 
ume of  the  L.  D.  S.  Biographical  En- 
cyclopedia and  the  third  or  conclud- 
ing volume  of  that  work  of  reference 
is  now  in  the  hands  of  the  printer. 
Up  to  the  present  time  Elder  Andrew 
Jenson  has  traveled  about  300,000 
miles  in  the  interest  of  Church  his- 
tory. 

LUND,  Anthon  Henrik,  first  coun- 
selor to  President  Heber  J.  Grant. 
(Continuation  from  Vol.  1:161.)  For 
an  extended  account  of  the  truly  re- 
markable career  of  President  Anthon 
H.  Lund  the  reader  is  referred  to  the 
sketch  published  in  Volume  I  of  this 
work,  which  gives  the  biography  in 
outline  to  the  year  1900,  when  he 
was  appointed  superintendent  of  the 
Church  Religion  Classes  and  Church 
Historian.     In  1901,  Elder  Lund  was 


called  to  the  office  of  second  coun- 
selor in  the  First  Presidency,  and,  at 
the  departure  of  President  John  R. 
Winder  from  this  sphere  of  action,  he 
was  appointed  first  counselor,  a  posi- 
tion he  now  (June,  1920)  holds.  For 
almost  twenty  years,  then,  he  has 
been  connected  with  the  First  Presi- 
dency of  the  Church.  It  is  needless 
to  say  that  he  has  discharged  every 
duty  devolving  upon  him  in  this  call- 
ing, as  in  every  other  that  has  come 


to  him,  with  great  ability  and  never 
wavering  fidelity.  Part  of  the  time, 
particularly  during  the  last  illness  of 
our  beloved  President  Joseph  F. 
Smith,  the  burden  of  the  office  was 
carried  entirely  by  the  two  counsel- 
ors. In  1911,  President  Lund  was 
made  acting  president  of  the  Salt 
Lake  Temple,  and  in  1918,  at  the 
death  of  President  Joseph  F.  Smith, 
he  became  president  of  that  sacred 
building,  and  also  president  of  the 
Council  of  the  Twelve  Apostles.  Pres- 
ident Lund  has  traveled  extensively. 
In  1909  he  and  his  wife  and  daughter 
visited  Denmark,  Norway,  Sweden, 
Germany,  Holland,  Belgium,  France 
and  England,  and  in  1919  he  accom- 
panied President  Heber  J.  Grant,  El- 
der Rudger  Clawson,  Bishop  Charles 


Vol.  Ill,  No.  48. 


June   12,   1920 


754 


LATTER-DAY   SAINT 


W.  Nibley,  Elder  Stephen  L.  Richards 
and  Elder  Arthur  Winter  to  the  Ha- 
waiian Islands,  where  the  Temple  at 
Laie  was  dedicated  Nov.  2  7,  1919. 
President  Lund,  in  addition  to  his  ec- 
clesiastical offices,  holds  several  po- 
sitions of  industrial  and  commercial 
importance,  and  in  every  place  his 
sound,  well  matured  judgment,  his 
integrity,  and  his  faithful  adherence 
to  the  principles  of  the  gospel  of 
Jesus  Christ  are  felt  as  a  powerful 
influence  which  is  highly  esteemed 
and  valued  by  his  associates.  (J.  M. 
Sjodahl.) 

LUND,  August  William,  Assistant 
Church  Historian,  was  born  Aug.  10, 
1886,  at  Ephraim,  Sanpete  county, 
Utah,  the  son  of  Anthon  H.  Lund  and 
Sarah  Ann  Peterson.  He  was  bap- 
tized   Sept.     25,     1894,    by    John    L. 


Bench,  moved  with  his  parents  to 
Salt  Lake  City  in  1898  and  graduated 
from  the  public  schools,  after  which 
he  became  a  student  of  the  L.  D.  S. 
University  and  the  University  of  Utah, 
graduating  from  both  of  these  insti- 
tutions. He  was  ordained  to  the 
Aaronic  priesthood  when  quite  young 
and  presided  over  a  Deacons'  quorum 
and  later  acted  as  first  counselor  in 
the  presidency  of  a  Teachers'  quorum 


in  the  Seventeenth  Ward,  Salt  Lake 
City,  and  also  as  librarian  of  the  Sev- 
enteenth Ward   Sunday   School.      He 
was  ordained  an  Elder  Sept.  13,  1906, 
by   his   father,   and   in    1^06-1908   he 
filled  a  mission  to  Great  Britain,  la- 
boring as  a  missionary  in   the  New- 
castle conference,  part  of  the  time  as 
clerk   of   said   conference.      In    1909- 
1910  he  acted  as  second  counselor  in 
the  presidency  of  the  Y.  M.  M.  I.  A. 
of  the  Eighteenth  Ward,  and  in  1911- 
1912    as    first    assistant    superinten- 
dent of  the  Eighteenth  Ward  Sunday 
School.     From  January,  1911,  to  Feb- 
ruary, 1912,  he  acted  as  president  of 
the  first  quorum  of  Elders  in  the  En- 
sign  Stake,   and   from    1912   to    1914 
he   was   first  counselor  in  the  presi- 
dency of  the  Sugar  House  Y.   M.  M. 
I.  A.     In  fact,  from  the  time  he  was 
13  years  of  age,  Bro.  Lund  has  been 
an  active  worker  in  the  Church.     In 
1908    (September   17th),   he  married 
Josephine   Brown    (daughter  of  Geo. 
H.    Brown   and    Harriet   Bates),    who 
was  born  Oct.   3.   1886,  in  Salt  Lake 
City.    This  marriage  has  been  blessed 
with  three  children,  namely,  Kenneth, 
Gwendolyn    and    Ruth.       Bro.    Lund 
commenced    work   at   the    Historian's 
office  Sept.  21,  1908,  and  at  the  gen- 
eral conference  of  the  Church  held  in 
April,  1911,  he  was  sustained  as  one 
of    the    assistant    Church    historians. 
He  was  ordained  a   Seventy  Feb.   3, 
1913,  by  Patriarch  James  McGhie  and 
became  a  member  of  the  140th  quo- 
rum   of    Seventy.      When    the    Sugar 
House  Ward  of  the  Granite  Stake  was 
divided,   in    1914,   he   was   chosen   as 
second  counselor  to  Bishop  Wm.  L. 
Hansen  and  ordained  a  High  Priest 
and    set    apart    to    that    position    by 
Francis  M.  Lyman,  Feb.  24,  1914.    At 
a    Stake    conference    held    Aug.    2  6, 
1917,   he   was   chosen   and   sustained 
as  a  High  Councilor  in  the   Granite 
Stake,  which  position  he  still  holds. 
Elder  Lund's  special  position  in  the 
Historian's  office  is  that  of  librarian, 
having  charge  of  the  magnificent  ref- 
erence library  and  valuable  collection 


BIOGRAPHICAL   ENCYCLOPEDIA. 


755 


of  Church  manuscripts.  His  genial 
manner  and  large  amount  of  infor- 
mation render  him  very  efficient  in 
the  entertainment  of  the  many  visi- 
tors, both  members  of  the  Church  and 
tourists,  who  visit  the  Historian's  of- 
fice daily. 

LiYMAN,  Francis  3Iarion,  President 
of  the   Council   of   Twelve   Apostles. 
(Continued    from    Vol.    1:13  6.)       In 
1901  Apostle  Francis  M.  Lyman  was 
called  by  the  First  Presidency  to  pre- 
side over  the  European  Mission.   Dur- 
ing  his   presidency    he    introduced    a 
number  of  reforms  in  the  missionary 
labors  in  Great  Britain,  as  well  as  on 
the    continent    of    Europe.       In    the 
spring   of   190  2    he   visited    Palestine 
and  offered   up   a   solemn  prayer  on 
the  Mount   of  Olives.      On   the  same 
trip  he  also  visited  Italy,  Egypt,  Asia 
Minor,    Turkey   in   Europe,    etc.      On 
July  4,  1902,  he  dedicated  a  mission 
house  in  Copenhagen,  Denmark.      A 
year  later   (July  24,  1903),  he  dedi- 
cated a  new  mission  house  in  Chris- 
tiania,    Norway.     In    August    follow- 
ing  he   visited    Finland    and    Russia. 
At    the    general    conference     of     the 
Church,    held    in    Salt   Lake    City   in 
October,  1903,  he  succeeded  the  late 
Brigham  Young,  jun.,  as  president  of 
the  quorum  of  the  Twelve  Apostles. 
In  the  beginning  of  1904  he  returned 
to  America,   being   succeeded   in   the 
presidency  of  the  European  Mission 
by  Heber  J.   Grant.      Soon  after   his 
return   home,    he    was    summoned    to 
Washington,    D.    C,   as   a   witness   in 
the    Smoot    investigation    before    the 
Senate  Committee  on  Privileges  and 
Elections,  where  he  was  subjected  to 
severe  cross-questioning.     In  1905  he 
accompanied     President     Joseph     F. 
Smith    and   company   to   the    Eastern 
States  and  took  part  in  the  dedicatory 
services  of  the  Joseph  Smith  Memo- 
rial  Monument  Dec.    23,    1905.      The 
following  years  President  Lyman  was 
busily  engaged  in  visiting  the  differ- 
ent   Stakes    of   Zion,    organizing   and 
reorganizing  new  Stakes  and  Wards, 


dedicating  meeting  houses,  etc.   Pres- 
ident Lyman  died  at  his  residence  in 
Salt  Lake  City,  Nov.  18,  1916.     "The 
Deseret  Evening  News"  of  that  day, 
commenting    on    his    demise,     says: 
"Lamenting    the    sudden    death    ana 
mourning  at  the  bier  of  one  whom  he 
had   sent  away  in  peace,   an  ancient 
king    exclaimed    unto    those    round 
about  him,  'Know  ye  not  that  there  is 
a  prince  and  a  great  man  fallen  this 
day  in  Israel?'  With  similar  emotions 
and  in  similar  terms  may  the  word 
go   forth   to   latter-day  Israel   in   an- 
nouncing    the     death     of     President 
Francis  Marion  Lyman.    Truly  he  was 
a  mighty  man  and  a  chieftain  among 
the  host.     To  tens  of  thousands  who 
had  not  even  heard  that  he  was  ill, 
the  news  this  morning  of  his  demise 
will  come  as  a  terrible  and  benumb- 
ing shock.     So  quickly  has  the  'grim 
reaper'    done   his   work,    that   within 
the  space  of  three  days  the  splendid 
physique  was  changed  from  vigorous 
pulsing  health  into  cold  and  lifeless 
clay.     A  great  community  is  plunged 
in     grief    and     a     hushed     solemnity 
broods  over  all,  disturbed  only  by  the 
sobs  and  sorrow  of  the  multitude  who 
feel    themselves    bereaved.      Francis 
Marion  Lyman  was  of  heroic  size  in 
every  sense.     His  rugged  massiveness 
of  build   was   fit   embodiment  of   his 
granite-like  firmness  and  strength  of 
character,  and  his   bigness  of  heart. 
Yet  he  had   the   gentleness,   the   hu- 
mility and  the  sympathy  of  a  child. 
A  man  of  dynamic  energy  and  inces- 
sant industry,  he  was  never  too  busy 
to  stop  and  throw  his  arm  around  a 
young  man,  espe'^ially  a  son  of  one 
with  whom  he  had  had  previous  ac- 
quaintance, asking  kindly  concerning 
his  welfare  and  giving  a  word  of  ad- 
vice.     Himself  a  strict  disciplinarian 
as  to  his  own  habits,   he  was  chari- 
table to  the  weaknesses  of  others;  if 
he  seemed  stern,  it  was  only  because 
he  was  grieved  by  any  form  of  back- 
sliding,   and    because    he    could    not 
look  upon  evil  with  patience  or  tol- 
eration;  at  any  rate,  he  required  no 


756 


LATTER-DAY   SAINT 


code  of  conduct  from  others  that  he 
was  unwilling  to  observe  himself.  He 
was  a  true  exemplar,  unyielding  in 
his  convictions,  void  of  hypocrisy  or 
guile,  the  soul  of  loyalty  and  honor, 
and  open  and  candid  as  the  day. 
These  qualities  made  him  the  trusted 
and  beloved  leader  that  he  was — a 
thoughtful  father  among  the  people, 
a  wise  counselor,  a  generous  and  sin- 
cere friend.  *  *  *  President  Ly- 
man's belief  and  testimony  was — and 
it  is  shared  by  hundreds  of  thousands 
in  these  Rocky  Mountain  valleys  who 
knew  and  loved  him — that  in  passing 
death's  portal  he  would  merely  go 
from  one  stage  of  experience — from 
one  room,  as  it  were,  in  the  illimit- 
able mansion  of  eternity — to  another. 
That  which  we,  who  are  left  behind, 
mourn  as  death,  is  by  those  who  on 
the  other  side  await  the  released 
spirit,  hailed  in  a  sense  as  birth. 
Where  we  may  weep,  they  will  re- 
joice— our  seeming  loss  is  their  gain. 
Into  a  goodly  company  President  Ly- 
man has  accordingly  entered — loved 
ones  and  friends  who  will  welcome 
him  as  joyously  as  loved  ones  and 
friends  here  part  from  him  with  tears 
But  he  has  left  the  precious  legacy  of 
an  honored  name,  a  well-spent  life, 
and  an  undying  example  of  righteous- 
ness. The  simplest  phrase  is  his  best 
epitaph — he  was  'God's  noblest  work, 
an  honest  man'." 

LYAL\N,  Richard  Roswell,  a  mem- 
ber of  the  Council  of  Twelve  Apostles, 
was  born  Nov.  23,  1870,  at  Fillmore. 
Millard  county,  Utah,  the  son  of 
Francis  M.  Lyman  and  Clara  Caroline 
Callister.  His  father  was  president 
of  the  Council  of  the  Twelve  for  thir- 
teen years  and  a  member  of  that 
Council  thirty-six  years.  Amasa  M. 
Lyman,  the  grandfather  of  Richard 
R.  Lyman,  was  a  member  of  the 
Council  of  the  Twelve  for  twenty- 
eight  years.  On  his  mother's  side, 
Richard  R.  Lyman  belongs  to  the  fifth 
generation  of  members  of  the  Church 
His   great   grandfather,    John    Smith, 


the  Prophet's  uncle,  was  one  of  the 
presiding  Patriarchs  of  the  Church. 
The  mother  of  this  Patriarch  also  be- 
longed to  the  Church.  Richard  R. 
Lyman's  grandmother,  on  his  moth- 
er's side,  was  Caroline  Smith  Callis- 
ter, the  only  sister  of  the  late  George 
A.  Smith,  who  was  a  counselor  to 
President  Brigham  Young.  Of  Rich- 
ard R.  Lyman  it  is  said  that  during 
his    childhood    he    never   smiled    and 


that  while  as  a  little  fellow  he  would 
jump  with  delight,  he  was  a  strapping 
boy  before  he  was  induced  to  laugh. 
In  April.  1878.  at  the  age  of  seven 
years,  he  moved  with  his  father's 
family  to  Tooele.  Tooele  county.  Utah, 
where  his  father  had  been  called  to 
preside  over  the  Tooele  Stake  of  Zion. 
In  a  school  house  at  Fillmore,  with 
his  face  turned  toward  the  south. 
Richard  R.  began  to  study  geography. 
During  his  twenty-five  or  thirty  years' 
experience  as  a  teacher,  and  in  his  as- 
sociation with  school  teachers,  he  en- 
deavored to  impress  the  importance 
of  having  students  who  are  beginning 
the  study  of  geography  and  the  use 
of  maps  do  so  facing  the  north. 
When  he  went  to  the  school  taught 
by  William  Foster,  in  the  little  adobe 
school  house  in  Tooele,  slabs  with  the 


BIOGRAPHICAL   ENCYCLOPEDIA. 


757 


round  side  up  were  used  for  the  reci- 
tation benches;  and  when  home-made 
wooden  benches  with  backs  were 
brought  into  the  school  room  for  reci- 
tation benches,  the  school  children 
looked  upon  them  as  a  great  luxury. 
Richard  R.  Lyman  was  baptized  July 
29,  1879,  and  soon  afterwards  or- 
dained a  Deacon.  For  many  years 
after  that,  he  did  duty  as  a  Deacon  in 
the  Tooele  Ward.  At  the  age  of  eight 
(in  the  summer  of  1879),  Richard  R. 
was  placed  in  charge  of  his  father's 
fine  driving  team  and  Concord  buggy. 
While  he  was  not  big  enough  to  hitch 
the  team  to  the  buggy,  the  team  be- 
ing unusually  full  of  life,  he  took 
pride,  under  his  father's  direction  and 
encouragement,  in  keeping  the  horses, 
harness,  buggy  and  barn  in  clean  and 
first  class  condition.  In  1881-1882 
he  drove  team  for  both  his  father  and 
President  Heber  J.  Grant,  who  had 
succeeded  his  father  as  president  of 
the  Tooele  Stake.  It  always  afforded 
the  boy  great  joy  to  meet  President 
Grant  at  the  Tooele  station  or  at  Lake 
Point  with  his  fine  team,  and  he  will 
never  forget  with  what  relish  he 
ate  candy  and  raisins  with  President 
Grant,  as  they  rode  together  from 
the  station  or  went  about  Tooele  coun- 
ty on  Stake  business.  While  Presi- 
dent Grant  was  in  Salt  Lake  City  at- 
tending to  his  personal  business  Rich- 
ard R.  Lyman,  then  about  eleven 
years  old,  used  to  stay  at  the  home 
of  Pres.  Grant's  wife,  Lucy  String- 
ham  Grant,  to  render  what  protection 
he  could  to  her  and  her  two  baby 
daughters,  Rachel  and  Lucy.  The 
family  prayers  of  that  good  woman 
as  she  knelt  with  her  two  little  girls 
and  the  boy  (Richard  R.  Lyman) 
made  a  wonderful  impression  upon 
the  boy's  mind.  With  a  mother  so 
saint-like  and  prayerful  he  says  it  is 
no  surprise  that  the  two  little  girls 
have  developed  into  such  model  moth- 
ers and  influential  leaders  among  the 
young  women  of  the  Church.  In  the 
fall  of  1882,  at  the  age  of  twelve, 
Richard  R.  was  sent  to  Provo  to  at- 


tend school  in  the  Brigham  Young 
Academy.  He  was  a  student  in  that 
institution  when  the  fire  occurred 
which  made  it  necessary  to  move  the 
educational  institution  into  another 
part  of  the  city.  Richard  R.  spent 
two  summers  working  at  the  "Mill" 
located  near  E  T  City,  on  the  shore  of 
Great  Salt  Lake.  Here  he  milked 
many  cows,  assisted  in  hauling  logs 
for  lumber,  out  of  the  mountains,  etc. 
Here  also  he  learned  to  swim  and 
ride  horses,  when  they  were  swim- 
ming. While  thus  riding  and  herd- 
ing in  Tooele  county  Richard  R.  near- 
ly always  carried  with  him  the  New 
Testament,  which  was  given  to  him 
by  his  mother,  with  instructions  to 
read  it  frequently.  In  accordance  with 
this  instruction  he  read  and  re-read 
the  life  and  works  of  the  Great  Mas- 
ter. The  policy  of  President  Francis 
M.  Lyman  was  to  put  his  boys  to  work 
while  they  were  young,  being  much 
more  anxious  about  the  kind  of  train- 
ing the  boys  received  than  the  amount 
of  money  they  were  paid.  For  two 
years  Richard  R.  worked  at  the  ranch 
of  Hyrum  E.  Booth,  near  Grantsville, 
and  he  regards  the  training  given  him 
and  hard  work  he  was  required  to  do 
by  Hyrum  E.  Booth  and  his  industri- 
ous wife  and  family  as  one  of  the 
most  valuable  trainings  that  came  in- 
to his  life.  An  expert  gardener  from 
England  pruned  the  trees,  planted 
and  cared  for  the  garden  and  did  the 
irrigating  on  the  two  homes  belong- 
ing to  Francis  M.  Lyman  in  Tooele. 
When  this  work  was  turned  over  lat- 
er to  Richard  R.  as  a  boy,  he  followed 
the  example  set  for  him  by  the  Eng- 
lish gardener.  The  weeds  were  hoed 
with  regularity,  and  the  gravel  walks 
about  the  home  were  carefully  raked 
and  crowned.  He  also  cared  for  the 
trees,  the  vines,  the  flowers,  the  chick- 
ens and  the  cows.  Following  the  ex- 
ample and  teachings  of  his  father, 
Richard  R.,  during  most  of  his  boy- 
hood, kept  a  daily  journal,  and  per- 
haps the  most  striking  feature  con- 
tained in  this  record  is  the  regularity 


758 


LATTEH-DAY   SAINT 


with  which  the  boy  attended  Priest- 
hood meetings,  Y.  M.  M.  I.  A.  meet- 
ings, Sunday  schools  and  other  meet- 
ings. In  August,  1888,  with  his  sister 
Mary,  he  went  to  the  Brigham  Young 
Academy  at  Provo  to  study.  At  that 
time  this  educational  institution  was 
under  the  able  leadership  of  Karl  G. 
Maeser.  Richard  R.  was  ordainea  a 
Teacher  by  Bishop  Thos.  Atkin  jun. 
Sept.  16,  1888.  While  attending  school 
in  Provo,  Richard  R.  began  a  courtship 
with  Miss  Amy  Brown,  which  covered 
continuously  a  period  of  eight  years. 
To  this  girl,  whom  he  married  Sept. 
9,  185  6  (President  Joseph  F.  Smith 
performing  the  ceremony),  Richard 
R.  always  regards  himself  as  greatly 
indebted  for  whatever  degree  of  suc- 
cess has  come  to  him  in  the  business 
world,  in  the  educational  field  or  in 
Church  work.  After  a  summer  of  hard 
work  at  Grantsville,  Richard  R.  and 
his  sister  Mary  were  sent  by  their 
father  to  the  Brigham  Young  College 
at  Logan,  which  institution  then  was 
under  the  direction  of  Dr.  Joseph 
M.  Tanner.  During  this  school  year 
(1889-1890),  Richard  R.  began  his 
labors  as  an  assistant  teacher  in  the 
college.  While  in  Logan  he  took  out 
special  certificates  in  plane  and  solid 
geometry,  algebra  and  physiology. 
The  following  year,  in  Provo.  his 
studies  covered  trigonometry,  analy- 
tic geometry,  theory  of  teaching, 
psychology,  logic,  surveying,  physics 
and  rhetoric.  During  the  summer  of 
1890,  Richard  R.  was  employed  as  a 
bookkeeper  in  the  combined  jewelry 
and  furniture  store  of  T.  B.  Cardon  & 
Co.  at  Logan,  and  during  the  summer 
of  1891  he  was  bookkeeper  for  the 
Utah  Manufacturing  &  Building  Co. 
at  Mill  Creek,  near  Salt  Lake  City. 
Thus  far  during  his  school  life  Rich- 
ard R.  had  been  required  to  furnish 
his  own  clothing,  his  own  books  and 
his  own  spending  money,  while  his 
father  had  paid  his  tuition  and  board. 
When  Richard  R.  now  asked  his  fath- 
er for  an  opportunity  to  go  East  to 
college,  the  father  offered  to  lend  him 


the  necessary  means  for  a  period  of 
four  years,  an  offer  which  the  son 
promptly  accepted.  Repaying  this 
money  and  the  interest  on  it  at  the 
rate  of  10  per  cent,  required  a  period 
of  seven  years,  the  principal  amount- 
ing to  nearly  $2500.  Richard  R.  was 
ordained  an  Elder,  Aug.  29,  1891,  by 
Joseph  F.  Smith  and  after  receiving 
his  endowments  in  the  Logan  Temple 
he  went  East  to  study.  The  policy  of 
Pres.  Francis  M.  Lyman  had  been  to 
keep  his  sons  either  at  work  or  in 
school  practically  every  day.  On  his 
way  East,  Richard  R.  spent  ten  days 
with  his  mother  at  Manassa,  Colo- 
rado, she  and  her  family  being  at  that 
time  on  the  'underground."  The  ten 
days  spent  in  Manassa  are  remem- 
bered vividly  by  Richard  R.  because 
they  were  the  last  ten  days  he  spent 
with  his  mother.  He  separated  from 
the  family  Sept.  19,  1891,  and  his 
mother  died  Sept.  21,  1892.  He  re- 
members with  great  gratitude  how  his 
dear  mother  prepared  underclothing, 
socks  and  other  necessities  to  serve 
him  during  his  four  years  of  college 
life.  While  he  attended  the  Univer- 
sity at  Ann  Arbor,  primarily  for  the 
purpose  of  studying  mathematics  with 
the  thought  of  teaching  in  the  Brig- 
ham Young  University  at  Provo,  and 
while  he  registered  in  the  department 
of  civil  engineering,  he  devoted  a 
great  deal  of  time  to  the  study  of  lit- 
erature, history  and  public  speaking. 
During  his  sophomore  year  he  was 
elected  president  of  his  class  and  was 
elected  to  the  same  position  a  second 
time  during  his  senior  year.  Richard 
R.  spent  all  his  vacations  in  hard 
work;  one  was  devoted  to  the  study 
of  chemistry  at  the  University  at 
Michigan,  while  two  were  devoted  to 
traveling  through  the  State  selling 
school  supplies  for  a  business  firm  at 
Chicago,  and  one  was  spent  as  assist- 
ant mine  and  railroad  surveyor  in  the 
Tintic  mining  district,  Utah.  The 
school  year  1895-1896  was  spent  in 
the  Brigham  Young  University  as 
principal  of  the  High  School  and  head 


BIOGRAPHICAL   ENCYCLOPEDIA. 


759 


of  the  department  of  mathematics 
and  physics.  Beginning  in  the  fall  or 
1896  and  continuing  until  the  spring 
of  1918,  Richard  R.  Lyman,  in  the 
University  of  Utah,  passed  through 
all  the  grades  of  instructor,  assistant 
professor,  associate  professor  and  full 
professor  in  charge  of  the  department 
of  civil  engineering.  He  held  a  full 
professorship  and  was  head  of  the  de- 
partment for  eighteen  years  and  he 
still  holds  a  professorship  in  the  de- 
partment of  civil  engineering.  With 
his  family  Professor  Lyman  spent  the 
summer  of  1902  doing  advanced  work 
in  the  University  of  Chicago;  thence 
he  went  to  Cornell  University  where 
he  was  given  a  residence  credit  of 
three  years.  While  there,  with  the 
class  of  1903,  he  was  graduated  with 
the  degree  of  M.  C.  E.  (Master  of  Civil 
Engineering).  In  the  spring  of  1904 
he  was  elected  by  the  faculty  of  Cor- 
nell University  to  membership  in  the 
society  of  The  Sigma  Xi,  a  scientific 
organization  into  which  only  those 
who  have  achieved  faiarked  success 
and  have  unusual  ability  in  the  line 
of  scientific  investigation  and  research 
are  supposed  to  be  received.  With  the 
class  of  1905  he  was  graduated  with 
the  degree  of  Ph.  D.  (Doctor  of  Phi- 
losophy). In  one  year  he  was  awarded 
the  only  scholarship  offered  by  the 
college  of  civil  engineering  and  dur- 
ing another  the  only  fellowship  of- 
fered by  that  same  department.  Rich- 
ard R.  Lyman  began  writing  for  pub- 
lication while  he  was  a  student  at  the 
University  of  Michigan.  He  wrote  a 
series  of  articles  on  "The  University 
of  Michigan,  Ann  Arbor,"  for  the 
"Juvenile  Instructor,"  beginning  in 
May,  1894.  In  addition  to  writing  a 
good  many  articles  of  a  non-technical 
character,  he  has  written  scientific 
articles  for  the  "Engineering  Rec- 
ord," the  "Engineering  News,"  and 
for  the  "Transactions  of  the  American 
Society  of  Civil  Engineers."  For  the 
University  of  Utah  Experiment  Sta- 
tion, he  has  prepared  one  bulletin  en- 
titled   "The   Construction   and    Main- 


tenance of  Earth  Roads,"  and  anoth- 
er on  "The  Measurement  of  Flowing 
Streams."  For  his  article  entitled 
"Measurement  of  the  Flow  of  Streams 
by  Approved  Forms  of  Weirs  with 
New  Formulas  and  Diagrams,"  which 
was  published  in  Vol.  LXXVII,  page 
1189  (1914)  of  the  "Transactions  of 
the  American  Society  of  Civil  Engi- 
neers," he  was  awarded  the  "J.  James 
R.  Croe's  gold  medal,"  for  the  year 
1915.  Tnis  prize  is  awarded  only  for  a 
paper  which  is  "judged  worthy  of  the 
award  of  this  prize  for  its  merit  as  a 
contribution  to  engineering  science." 
From  1909  to  1918  he  served  as  vice- 
chairman  of  the  Utah  State  Road 
Commission.  During  this  nine  years 
of  service  the  work  of  the  State  Road 
Commission,  from  a  beginning  with 
little  funds,  so  advanced  that  at  the 
expiration  of  this  time  the  State 
Road  Commission  was  expending  in 
the  neighborhood  of  three-fourths  or 
a  million  dollars  annually.  The  Utah 
State  Road  Commission  was  created 
in  1909  and  Richard  R.  Lyman  was 
one  of  its  original  members  and  its 
first  vice-chairman,  which  position  he 
held  during  the  whole  nine  years.  He 
has  served  as  city  engineer  of  Provo, 
was  transitman  on  a  railroad  sur- 
vey from  Springville  through  Hobble 
Creek  Canyon  toward  the  Uintah  res- 
ervation for  Jesse  Knight  in  1898, 
and  designed  and  superintended  the 
construction  of  waterwork  systems 
in  nearly  all  the  towns  and  smaller 
cities  of  Utah  and  many  in  Idaho  and 
Wyoming.  For  years  he  conducted  an 
office  as  a  civil  and  consulting  engi- 
neer. At  various  times  he  has  served 
as  chief  engineer  and  consulting  en- 
gineer for  the  following  companies: 
Melville  Irrigation  Company,  Delta, 
Utah;  Deseret  Irrigation  Company, 
Oasis,  Utah;  Oasis  Land  &  Irrigation 
Company,  with  headquarters  in  Salt 
Lake  City,  Utah;  Delta  Land  &  Water 
Company  of  Salt  Lake  City,  Utah; 
Utah  County  Light  &  Power  Com- 
pany, American  Fork,  Utah,  and  Utah 
Copper   Company   of  Salt   Lake   City. 


760 


LATTER-DAY   SAINT 


He  was  one  of  the  original  directors 
of  the  Intermountain  Life  Insurance 
Company  and  is  at  present  serving  as 
vice-president  of  this  company.  He  is 
also  president  of  the  Giant  Racer 
Company,  vice-president  of  the  En- 
sign Amusement  Company,  director 
of  the  Pleasant  Green  Water  Com- 
pany, president  of  the  Lyman-Callis- 
ter  Company,  and  director  of  Heber 
J.  Grant  &  Co.  Bro.  Lyman  had  ex- 
perience in  the  Brigham  Young  Uni- 
versity as  a  Priest,  administering  the 
Sacrament  and  doing  other  similar 
service.  From  the  fall  of  1895  to  the 
summer  of  1896  he  acted  as  a  coun- 
selor to  Bryant  S.  Hinckley,  superin- 
tendent of  the  Mutual  Improvement 
Associations  of  the  Utah  Stake,  when 
the  Utah  Stake  embraced  all  of  Utah 
county.  In  1897  (Sept.  12th),  he  was 
ordained  a  High  Priest  by  President 
Angus  M.  Cannon  and  set  apart  as 
superintendent  of  the  Y.  M.  M.  I.  A. 
of  Salt  Lake  Stake,  which  Stake  then 
included  the  whole  of  Salt  Lake  coun- 
ty. He  continued  to  serve  in  this  ca- 
pacity until  the  spring  of  1902,  when 
he,  with  his  family,  went  to  the  Uni- 
versity of  Chicago,  and  later  to  Cor- 
nell University.  For  several  years  Bro. 
Lyman  acted  as  supervisor  of  the  par- 
ents' classes  of  the  Ensign  Stake.  He 
was  ordained  an  Apostle  and  set  apart 
as  a  member  of  the  Council  of  Twelve 
Apostles  by  President  Joseph  F.  Smith 
April  7,  1918,  in  the  Salt  Lake  Tem- 
ple, assisted  by  Presidents  Anthon  H. 
Lund  and  Charles  W.  Penrose  and  the 
members  of  the  Council  of  the 
Twelve.  Richard  R.  Lyman  and  his 
wife.  Amy  B.  Lyman,  have  had  two 
children,  namely,  Wendell  Brown  Ly- 
man, born  Dec.  18,  1897,  in  Salt  Lake 
City,  and  Margaret  Lyman,  born  Sept. 
15,  1903,  at  Ithaca,  New  York.  Amy 
B.  Lyman  is  the  general  secretary  of 
the  Relief  Society  of  the  Church. 
Wendell  B.  Lyman  was  ordained  an 
Elder  by  his  father  June  11,  1920, 
and  started  on  a  mission  to  the  North- 
western States  June  18,  1920. 


McKAY,  David  Oman,  a  member  of 
the  Council  of  Twelve  Apostles,  was 
born  Sept.  8,  1873,  in  Huntsville,  We- 
ber county,  Utah,  the  son  of  Bishop 
David  McKay,  of  Huntsville,  and  Jen- 
nette  Evans.  His  father  was  born  in 
Caithness,  Scotland,  but,  when  still  a 
small  boy,  emigrated  with  his  parents 
to  Utah,  where  he  arrived  in  the  year 
1859.  He  was  Bishop  of  Huntsville 
for  twenty  years,  and  after  his  re- 
moval to  Ogden  was  ordained  a  Patri- 
arch and  chosen  as  a  member  of  the 
High  Council  of  the  Weber  Stake.   He 


also  served  in  the  last  Utah  territorial 
legislature  and  afterwards  was  elect- 
ed State  senator  three  times.  Jen- 
nette  Evans,  mother  of  David  O.,  was 
born  in  South  Wales,  Aug.  28,  1850. 
In  the  fall  of  1859,  she  arrived  with 
her  parents  in  Ogden,  Utah,  and  re- 
sided there  until  her  marriage,  in 
1867,  when  she  accompanied  her  hus- 
band to  Huntsville  and  made  her  home 
there  until  one  year  before  her  death, 
which  occurred  Jan.  6,  1905.  She  was 
connected  with  the  Relief  Society  and 
Y.  L.  M.  I.  A.  of  the  Huntsville  Ward 
from  the  time  of  their  organization, 
b\it  during  her  entire  life  her  home 
and  family  received  such  attention, 
consideration  and  gentle  care  that  can 
be  bestowed  only  by  an  ideal  wife  and 


BIOGRAPHICAL   ENCYCLOPEDIA. 


761 


mother.  Thus  David  O.  McKay,  in  his 
childhood  and  youth,  was  highly  fa- 
vored in  having  the  guidance  of  excep- 
tionally discreet  and  loving  parents — 
faithful,  consistent  Latter-day  Saints. 
In  their  home  the  Priesthood  of  God 
was  always  respected.  It  was  a  home 
where  the  performance  of  every  relig- 
ious duty  was  a  part  of  life,  where  re- 
spect and  honor  for  parents  and  for 
each  other  was  impressed  daily  by 
words  and  acts  and  in  which  the  most 
sacred  obligation  was  the  daily  devo- 
tion to  God.  With  such  home  influence 
it  is  not  surprising  that  the  young  boy 
David  was  early  impressed  with  the 
efficacy  of  prayer  and  that  as  a  youth, 
when  the  religious  part  of  his  nature 
began  to  assert  itself,  he  sought  gui- 
dance in  secret  prayer.  When  riding 
in  the  hills  he  would  sometimes  dis- 
mount, and,  kneeling  by  a  service- 
berry  bush  with  only  his  horse  for 
company,  would  plead  with  the  Lord 
to  give  him  a  testimony  of  His  truth. 
Sometimes  it  would  be  by  the  creek  in 
his  father's  meadow,  and  sometimes 
in  the  timber  when  out  in  the  hills. 
Thus  the  influence  of  his  early  teach- 
ing, the  influence  of  his  home,  guided 
his  thoughts  and  actions  until  the 
critical  period  of  youth  was  passed. 
He  was  baptized  September  8,  1881, 
by  Peter  C.  Geertsen,  of  Huntsville, 
and  soon  afterwards  he  was  ordained 
to  the  Lesser  Priesthood.  From  his 
early  childhood  he  was  an  enthusias- 
tic member  of  the  Sunday  school  and 
Primary  Association.  Later  he  became 
secretary  of  the  Huntsville  Sunday 
school  and  Young  Men's  Mutual  Im- 
provement Association.  His  God-fear- 
ing parents  watched  the  development 
of  their  eldest  son  with  that  anxiety 
and  pride  which  are  felt  only  by  those 
who  truly  love,  and  many  a  time  a 
kind  word  and  loving  arm  kept  the 
lad  from  swerving  from  that  straight 
path  which  they  knew  would  lead  to 
respected  manhood.  David  O.  received 
his  early  education  in  the  Huntsville 
common  schools,  and  when  twenty 
years  old  he  became  principal  of  the 


Huntsville  school.  He  went  from  this 
position  to  the  University  of  Utah, 
where  he  graduated  as  president  of 
his  class  in  1897.  While  he  was  en- 
thusiastically planning  to  enter  the 
teaching  profession  to  repay  in  a  meas- 
ure what  his  parents  had  sacrificed  to 
keep  him  at  school,  a  call  came  for 
him  to  go  to  Europe  as  a  missionary. 
Having  previously  been  ordained  an 
Elder,  he  was  now  ordained  a  Sev- 
enty, August  1,  1897,  by  Seymour  B. 
Young,  and  set  apart  for  a  mission  to 
Great  Britain.  On  his  arrival  in  Liver- 
pooj  he  was  appointed  to  labor  in 
Scotland,  where  he  performed  most 
excellent  missionary  labors.  Having 
taken  advantage  of  every  opportunity 
offered  by  the  Church  and  the  educa- 
tional institutions  of  his  State,  it  is 
a  natural  consequence  that  compan- 
ions, saints,  friends  and  enemies  alike 
should  be  deeply  impressed  by  the 
teaching  of  this  earnest  and  enthu- 
siastic young  missionary.  As  a  result 
of  his  two  years'  work,  several  fam- 
ilies were  brought  to  a  knowledge  of 
the  truth,  and  prejudice  against  the 
work  of  the  Lord  was  allayed  in  the 
minds  of  many  people  who  were  will- 
ing to  listen  to  his  testimony.  From 
March,  1898,  until  August,  1899,  he 
presided  over  the  Scottish  conference 
and  returned  home  Sept.  10,  1899, 
being  specially  released  to  become  an 
instructor  in  the  Weber  Stake  Acad- 
emy. One  week  after  his  return  from 
Europe  he  entered  said  Academy  and 
three  years  later  became  the  principal 
of  that  institution,  which  position  he 
held  until  1908.  His  influence  upon 
the  Academy  was  indeed  remarkable. 
During  his  administration  a  spirit  of 
love  and  unity  permeated  the  life  of 
the  entire  school.  His  ambitions  and 
ideals  soon  became  the  goal  for  which 
teachers  and  students  were  willing  to 
make  great  sacrifices,  and  the  daily 
association  with  hii©  counted  for  gen- 
uine mental  and  spiritual  develop- 
ment. His  spirit  was  felt  especially 
by  the  careless  and  wayward  students. 
A  pleasant  look,  a  word  of  encourage- 


762 


LATTER-DAY   SAINT 


ment,  a  hand  on  the  shoulder,  a  heart- 
to-heart  talk,  a  confession,   followed 
by  continued  interest  and  assistance, 
resulted  almost  invariably  in  a  con- 
version; and  scores  of  boys  and  girls 
now  grown  to  manhood  and  woman- 
hood give  him  credit  for  leading  them 
to  higher  and  more  useful  lives  by  his 
noble    example    and    teachings.       As 
president  of  the  Board  of  Education 
of    the    Weber    Normal    College,    to 
which  office  he  was  chosen  in  1908, 
he  has  still  been  able  to  give  much 
encouragement  and  inspiration;    and 
all  connected  with  the  institution  hope 
that  his  many  other  duties  will  not 
compel  the  withdrawal  of  his  assist- 
ance from  the  school  that  is  so  great- 
ly indebted  to  him  for  its  growth  and 
development.     For   six   years    (1899- 
1906),  Bro.  McKay  labored  as  second 
assistant  superintendent  of  the  Sun- 
day Schools  of  the  Weber  Stake,  and 
in  connection  with  Supt.  Thomas  B. 
Evans  and  Charles  J.  Ross  he  worked 
energetically  and  unceasingly  for  the 
advancement  of  the  youth.    Possibly 
no  other  schools  of  the  Church  made 
greater  strides  toward  perfection  than 
did    those    of    Weber    Stake    at    that 
time.    Bro.  McKay  won  the  love  and 
respect  of  all  connected  with  the  Sab- 
bath Schools,  all  his  work  being  char- 
acterized by  that  energy  and  unself- 
ishness which  cannot  but  win  the  con- 
fidence of  associates,  and  the  bless- 
ings of  the  Lord,  and  as  a  mark  of 
appreciation,    a    party    was    tendered 
him  in  Ogden  May  16,  1906,  by  the 
entire  body  of  officers  in  this  organ- 
ization,   who   presented    him    with    a 
handsome    watch    fob    set    with    dia- 
monds, and  a  worthy  tribute  in  a  tes- 
timonial beautifully  engrossed.     The 
recent  testimonial  of  the  Weber  Stake 
Sunday  Schools  in  the  Ogden  Taber- 
nacle, December,  1919,  and  the  pres- 
entation of  a  handsome   gold   watch 
and   chain,    was   but   another   of   the 
many  expressions  of  appreciation  that 
came  from  the  members  of  the  great 
Sunday  School  Union.     In  the  begin- 
ning of  his  labors  in  the  Stake  super- 


intendency  preparation  meetings  for 
teachers  were  established,  individual 
and  co-operative  outlines  of  the  les- 
son   were    prepared,    through    which 
each  Sunday  School  lesson  became  a 
unit.     Subsequently  "aim,"  "illustra- 
tion" and  "application"  became  house- 
hold terms.     So  firmly  did  he  believe, 
and  so  enthusiastically  did  he  explain 
this  new  class  work  system  that  even 
brothers   and    sisters    who    had    been 
teaching    in    the    good    old    way    for 
many   years,    became   converted    and 
through  most  strenuous  efforts  were 
soon  among  the  strongest  supporters 
of  the   new   method.      In   1901    (Jan. 
2nd)  Bro.  McKay  married  Emma  Ray 
Riggs  of  Salt  Lake  City,  the  daughter 
of  O.   H.   Riggs  and   Emma  Robbins. 
She  was  born  June  23,  1877,  in  Salt 
Lake  City,  where  she  was  reared  and 
educated,   graduating   from   the   Uni- 
versity of  Utah  with  the  degree  of  A. 
B.  in   1898.    This  marriage  has  been 
blessed  with  six  children,  namely,  Da- 
vid Lawrence,  Llewelyn  Riggs,  Louise 
Jeanette,    Royle    Riggs,    Emma    Ray 
and  Edward  Riggs.   Sister  McKay  has 
been   an  ideal   wife  and  mother  and 
an  inspiration  in  all  the  work  of  her 
husband.    In  the  rearing  of  his  chil- 
dren we  again  see  in  David  O.  McKay 
the  remarkable  teacher,  for  although 
his  Church  work  has  required  much 
of  his  time,  every  possible  moment  he 
has  been  permitted  to  spend  at  home 
has  been  given  to  his  boys  and  girls 
and  as  a  result  of  this  association  and 
training,   supplemented   by   the   guid- 
ing hand  of  a  wise  and  loving  moth- 
er, these  young  people  are  marching 
toward  the  goal  of  splendid  manhood 
and  beautiful  womanhood.  The  ideals 
he  has  held  up  to  teachers  in  the  Sun- 
day  School,   Religion   Class,   Primary 
and  Priesthood  quorums  he  has  prac- 
ticed in  his  home.  At  the  general  con- 
ference of  the  Church  held  in  April, 
1906,  three  vacancies  were  filled  in 
the  Council  of  the  Twelve  Apostles, 
caused  by  the  death  of  Elder  Marrl- 
ner  W.  Merrill  and  the  resignation  of 
John  W.  Taylor  and  Matthias  F.  Cow- 


BIOGRAPHICAL   ENCYCLOPEDIA. 


763 


ley.  These  vacancies  were  filled  by 
the  appointment  of  Elders  George 
Franklin  Richards,  Orson  F.  Whitney 
and  David  O.  McKay,  who  were  unan- 
imously sustained  by  the  conference 
April  8,  1906.  Bro.  McKay  was  or- 
dained an  Apostle  by  President  Jo- 
seph F.  Smith  April  9.,  1906.  In  1906 
(Oct.  6th),  he  was  sustained  as  sec- 
ond assistant  general  Sunday  school 
superintendent,  and  as  first  assistant 
general  Sunday  school  superintendent 
April  4,  1909.  In  reporting  the  reor- 
ganization of  the  general  superinten- 
dency,  many  splendid  things  were 
said  of  what  Bro.  McKay  had  accom- 
plished in  the  Sunday  school  work. 
Among  them  the  following  was  re- 
corded in  an  editorial  in  the  "Juvenile 
Instructor":  "Apostle  David  O.  Mc- 
Kay is  well  known  to  the  Church  at 
large.  His  phenominally  successful 
labors  in  the  superintendency  of  the 
Weber  Stake  Sunday  schools  were 
watched  with  interest  before  he  be- 
came one  of  the  Lord's  special  wit- 
nesses. His  great  influence  for  bet- 
ter Sunday  schools  since  he  became 
second  assistant  general  superinten- 
dent of  the  Deseret  Sunday  School 
Union  Board,  has  been  felt  not  only 
on  that  board,  but  also  throughout 
the  Stakes  of  Zion.  We  are  glad  to 
welcome  him  as  our  first  assistant 
general  superintendent."  In  Febru- 
ary, 1918,  Apostle  McKay  received 
from  the  press,  "Ancient  Apostles,"  a 
book  written  by  him  for  the  Deseret 
Sunday  School  Union.  In  this  book 
the  Ancient  Apostles  are  made  real 
living  men  with  characteristics,  such 
as  men  possess  today — men  about 
whom  young  people  love  to  read  and 
from  whom  the  highest  ideals  may  be 
formed.  In  1918  (Nov.  27th),  Elder 
McKay  was  appointed  general  super- 
intendent of  the  Church  Sunday 
schools  by  the  First  Presidency  and 
Council  of  the  Twelve.  He  selected  as 
his  assistants  Elder  Stephen  L.  Rich- 
ards and  Elder  George  D.  Pyper.  The 
confidence  and  love  that  each  of  these 
three  men  has  for  the  other  is  appre- 


ciated by  all  who  know  them.  At  a 
meeting  of  the  General  Board  held 
Jan.  7,  1919,  which  was  attended  also 
by  the  First  Presidency,  the  names 
of  the  new  general  superintendency 
were  presented  by  President  Heber  J. 
Grant  and  unanimously  sustained  by 
the  board.  Elder  Edward  P.  Kimball, 
writing  of  the  reorganization,  says: 
"Elder  David  O.  McKay  is  signally 
honored  by  this  call  to  preside  over 
the  Sunday  schools  of  the  Church  in 
all  the  world.  He  is  the  first  general 
superintendent  who  has  not  been  in 
the  First  Presidency  of  the  Church 
while  acting  in  this  capacity.  His  ap- 
pointment comes  as  a  merited  recog- 
nition of  the  faithfulness  and  zeal 
which  he  has  displayed  during  his 
long  association  with  the  Sunday 
schools;  and  that  confidence  in  his 
training  for  the  great  responsibility 
of  his  new  calling  and  in  his  capa- 
bilities in  the  fidelity  to  the  great 
Sunday  school  cause,  exhibited  by  his 
brethren  in  placing  him  at  the  head 
of  this  wonderful  work  w^ill  find  an 
echo  in  the  heart  of  every  Sunday 
school  worker  throughout  the  Church. 
His  name  is  synonymous  with  the 
Sunday  school  movement,  and  those 
who  are  most  intimately  acquainted 
with  him  know  best  how  close  to  his 
heart  are  the  youth  of  Zion,  and  how 
devoutly  and  indefatigably  he  has  ap- 
plied himself  for  their  improvement 
and  salvation.  Bro.  McKay  has  giv- 
en his  strength  to  the  work  ever  since 
he  was  first  appointed  a  member  of 
the  Sunday  school  board  in  1906.  His 
mind  is  constantly  busy  with  new 
problems  and  plans  for  the  growth  of 
the  work.  While  he  looks  to  and  into 
the  future,  he  is  no  idle  dreamer;  he 
has  a  wonderful  capacity  for  making 
men  see  his  vision  and  then  of  solving 
the  details  of  his  plan  which  will  make 
this  vision  a  living  reality.  His  sure 
and  unfailing  testimony  of  the  gospel 
of  Jesus  Christ  is  exemplified  in  his 
every  thought,  word  and  deed  for  the 
young  people  of  the  Church.  His  kind- 
ly, gentlemanly  bearing  toward  every- 


764 


LATTER-DAY   SAINT 


one  whom  he  meets  is  proverbial;  his 
testimony  is  inspiring,  and  his  exam- 
ple compels  admiration."  When  the 
Church  School  Superintendency  was 
reorganized  in  the  spring  of  1919, 
Bro.  McKay  was  appointed  commis- 
sioner of  Church  school  education, 
with  Stephen  L.  Richards  as  first  and 
Richard  R.  Lyman  as  second  assistant 
commissioner,  and  Adam  S.  Bennlon, 
superintendent.  He  is  at  present  head 
of  the  outline  work  in  the  general 
committee  on  courses  of  study  for 
the  Priesthood,  and  chairman  of  the 
Church  Correlation  Committee.  Even 
with  all  the  calls  that  have  been  made 
upon  his  time  in  an  educational  way 
and  by  the  Church,  Bro.  McKay  has 
accomplished  much  real  social  service 
work  that  has  resulted  in  improved 
conditions  in  his  home  city,  county  and 
State.  He  was  for  several  years  presi- 
dent of  the  Ogden  Betterment  League, 
an  organization  formed  to  improve 
civic  conditions  and  especially  to  es- 
tablish higher  standards  of  morality 
for  young  people.  In  all  the  cam- 
paigns against  liquor  and  vice  he  has 
been  most  energetic.  He  has  been 
since  1915  also  an  active  member  ot 
the  Red  Cross  Executive  Board  of  We- 
ber county.  Since  his  ordination  to  the 
high  and  holy  calling  of  an  Apostle, 
Elder  McKay  has  labored  most  zeal- 
ously and  successfully  in  the  inter- 
ests of  the  Church.  He  has  traveled 
very  extensively  in  the  different 
Stakes  of  Zion,  attending  quarterly 
conferences,  organizing  and  re-organ- 
Izing  Stakes  and  Wards  and  paying 
particular  attention  also  to  Church 
schools  and  to  the  work  done  by  the 
auxiliary  organizations  of  the  Church. 
Elder  McKay  is  a  popular  speaker, 
his  earnestness  always  making  a  fa- 
vorable impression  upon  his  hearers, 
and  being  a  man  of  education  he 
wields  a  great  influence  among  the 
professors  and  teachers  of  Church 
schools,  where  his  counsels  and  ad- 
vise have  done  much  to  improve  the 
educational  conditions  of  the  Church. 


MERRILL,  Marriner  Wood,  a  mem- 
ber of  the  Council  of  the  Twelve 
Apostles.  (Continued  from  Vol.  I: 
156.)  Apostle  Merrill  continued  his 
labors  in  the  Logan  Temple  and  trav- 
eling in  the  different  Stakes  of  Zion 
until  Feb.  6,  1906,  when  he  died 
peaceably  at  his  home  in  Logan,  Cache 
county,  Utah.  The  'Deseret  Evening 
News"  commented  editorially  upon 
his  demise  as  follows:  "The  announce- 
ment of  the  death  of  Marriner  W. 
Merrill,  president  of  the  Logan  Tem- 
ple and  one  of  the  Twelve  Apostles  of 
the  Church  of  Jesus  Christ  of  Latter- 
day  Saints,  will  not  occasion  as  much 
surprise  as  regret.  Brother  Merrill 
has  been  a  sufferer  from  ill  health 
for  a  long  time.  If  he  had  not  been 
blessed  with  a  strong  constitution, 
he  would  doubtless  have  succumbed 
much  sooner.  But  through  his  faith 
and  that  of  his  family  and  numerous 
friends,  his  life  has  been  prolonged. 
Elder  Merrill  has  been  a  prominent 
character,  particularly  in  the  north- 
ern part  of  this  State,  for  many  years. 
He  was  a  Cache  Valley  pioneer.  Of  a 
practical  turn  of  mind  and  a  vigorous 
worker  with  the  gift  of  a  leader 
among  men,  he  was  a  striking  figure 
in  movements  for  the  development  of 
that  region,  and  in  things  spiritual 
as  well  as  temporal,  exhibited  quali- 
ties that  gained  for  him  the  respect 
and  regard  of  the  people  with  whom 
he  associated.  As  Bishop  of  Rich- 
mond, as  president  of  the  Cache  Stake 
before  it  was  divided,  as  one  of  the 
Twelve  Apostles  and  as  president  of 
the  Logan  Temple,  he  exhibited  those 
qualities  that  fitted  him  for  the  posi- 
tion he  was  called  to  fill,  and  he  will 
be  remembered  as  one  of  the  stal- 
warts of  Israel,  always  true  and  stead- 
fast and  reliable,  and  one  who  could 
be  looked  up  to  and  trusted  by  the 
Latter-day  Saints." 

MILLER,  Orrin  P.,  first  counselor 
in  the  presiding  bishopric  of  the 
Church.  (Continued  from  Vol.  1:307.) 
In  October,  1901,  Orrin  P.  Miller  was 


BIOGRAPHICAL   ENCYCLOPEDIA. 


765 


chosen  as  second  counselor  to  Presid- 
ing Bishop  Wm.  B.  Preston,  to  fill  the 
vacancy  caused  by  the  promotion  of 
Elder  John  R.  Winder.  He  took  hold 
of  his  new  office  with  great  zeal,  hav- 
ing exhibited  marked  ability  as  a 
president  of  the  Jordan  Stake  and  in 
handling  stock  and  other  property  be- 
longing to  the  Church.  He  continued 
as  second  counselor  to  Bishop  Preston 
until  Dec.  11,  1907,  when  he  was 
chosen  as  first  counselor  to  Bishop 
Charles  W.  Nibley.  This  position  he 
held  until  July  7,  I'iJlS,  when  he  died 
in  Salt  Lake  City.  The  following  was 
published  editorially  in  the  "Deseret 
Evening  News"  of  July  8,  1918:  "The 
State  loses  a  choice  citizen,  the  Church 
an  efficient  leader  and  servant,  and 
the  people  a  tried  and  sturdy  friend 
by  the  death  of  Bishop  Orrin  P.  Mil- 
ler. *  *  *  He  was  of  the  best  type 
of  the  native  Utahn,  unassuming  but 
dependable,  quiet  but  firm,  patient 
but  steadfast,  an  observer  and  a  lis- 
tener rather  than  a  performer  or  a 
talker,  but  wise  in  council,  conserva- 
tive in  outlook  and  of  excellent  sagac- 
ity as  a  man  of  affairs.  Moreover,  he 
was  a  man  of  the  people,  always  ap- 
proachable; and  in  his  high  ecclesias- 
tical position  as  counselor  in  the  Pre- 
siding Bishopric,  he  demonstrated  a 
fine  conception  of  that  beautiful  part 
of  the  Bishop's  calling  which  consists 
in  being  'good  to  the  poor' — than 
which,  we  venture  to  think,  there  is 
no  better  proof  of  the  true  Christian, 
be  he  leader  or  layman.  While  Bishop 
Miller's  virtues  were  mostly  such  as 
would  be  called  homely,  they  never- 
theless sustained  successfully  many 
acid  public  tests;  and  with  his  growth 
in  years  and  prominence,  so  also  grew 
he  in  men's  confidence  and  esteem. 
Correct  habits  of  his  life  and  the 
lightly-borne  physical  burdens  of  ma- 
tured middle  age  seemed  to  give  war- 
rant that  many  years  of  usefulness 
were  still  before  him — but  this  was 
not  to  be.  To  say  that  no  one  will  be 
found  precisely  to  fill  his  place  is  an 
obvious  truism  that  can  be  remarked 


of  any  useful  man  who  dies  in  the 
harness.  And  yet  human  experience 
is  that,  much  as  such  men  may  be 
needed,  other  men  come  forward  to 
fill  the  gaps  and  the  world  wags  on 
as  before.  No  doubt  it  will  always  be 
so;  and  yet,  in  an  exceptionally  literal 
and  sincere  sense  it  can  be  said  of 
Orrin  P.  Miller  that  he  will  be  long 
and  deeply  mourned  and  by  many 
thousands  *  *  *  the  more  fondly 
remembered  because  so  sorely 
missed." 

MUSSER,  Amos  Milton,  assistant 
Church  historian.  ( Continued  from 
Vol.  1:381.)  Elder  Musser,  who  had 
been  in  the  Church  employ  as  a  clerk 
at  the  Historian's  Office  for  many 
years,  was  sustained  as  an  assistant 
Church  historian  at  the  April  confer- 
ence held  in  Salt  Lake  City  April  4, 
1902,  and  held  that  position  until 
Sept.  24,  1909,  when  he  died  in  Salt 
Lake  City,  79  years  old.  The  follow- 
ing was  published  in  the  "Deseret 
Evening  News"  at  the  time  of  his  de- 
mise: "Amos  Milton  Musser  *  *  *  was 
one  of  the  well-known  citizens  of  this 
city  and  a  faithful  and  prominent 
worker  in  the  Church.  He  is  missed 
in  the  Historian's  Office,  in  the  Ward 
and  the  Stake  in  which  he  resided,  as 
well  as  in  the  family  circle  and  among 
his  numerous  friends  and  acquaint- 
ances. Elder  Musser  was  one  of  the 
defenders  of  Nauvoo  during  his  early 
youth.  With  others,  his  mother,  with 
her  children,  was  driven  into  Iowa  by 
the  mob.  In  1851  he  started  for  Utah 
and  at  Kanesville  he  became  a  mem- 
ber of  the  Church,  of  which  he  has 
been  a  faithful  and  active  member 
ever  since.  Shortly  after  his  arrival 
in  Utah  he  was  called  to  go  on  a  mis- 
sion to  Hindostan,  and  he  accepted 
this  call  and  arrived  in  Calcutta  in 
1856.  He  was  absent  on  this  mission 
for  five  years  and  reached  home  in 
the  fall  of  1857,  having  circumscribed 
the  earth  in  his  travels.  Elder  Mus- 
ser never  tired  of  speaking  of  his  ex- 
periences during  this  mission,  and  the 


766 


LATTER-DAY   SAINT 


wonderful  manner  in  which  the  Lord 
opened  the  way  for  him,  traveling,  as 
he  did,  literally  without  money.  He 
used  to  say  that  at  no  time  did  he 
have  to  beg  for  food,  clothing  or 
transportation.  He  opened  his  heart 
in  prayer  to  his  Father  in  heaven, 
and  the  way  was  always  prepared  for 
him.  At  home  he  filled  many  impor- 
tant positions.  From  1858  to  1876 
he  was  traveling  Bishop.  He  was  one 
of  the  ten  incorporators  of  the  Des- 
eret  Telegraph  Company.  In  18  73  he 
was  appointed  assistant  trustee-in- 
trust for  the  Church.  He  filled  a  mis- 
sion to  the  Eastern  States,  and  pub- 
lished several  pamphlets  which  had  a 
wide  circulation.  Elder  Musser  had 
a  long  and  useful  life." 

NIBLEY,  Charles  Wilson,  presid- 
ing Bishop  of  the  Church,  was  born 
Feb.  5,  1849,  at  Hunterfield,  a  small 
coal  mining  town,  eight  miles  south 
of   Edinburgh,    Scotland,    and    is    the 


fourth  child  and  the  second  son  of 
James  Nibley  and  Jean  Wilson.  The 
father,  who  was  a  coal  miner,  had 
difficulty  in  providing  for  his  family, 
but  was  ably  assisted  by  his  wife,  a 
most  energetic,  frugal  and  thrifty 
woman,  who  never  seemed  to  tire  of 


working  and  planning  to  better  the 
conditions  of  herself  and  her  family. 
She  possessed,  too,  a  deeply  religious 
nature,  and  when,  in  the  year  1844, 
she  listened  to  the  teachings  of  Henry 
McEwan,  an  Elder  of  the  Church  of 
Jesus  Christ  of  Latter-day  Saints, who 
spoke  on  the  village  green  of  Hunter- 
field,  she  felt  a  satisfaction  in  listen- 
ing to  his  teachings  that  she  had 
never  before  experienced.  Both  James 
and  Jean  Nibley,  within  a  week,  were 
baptized  into  the  Church,  and  from 
that  time  forward  they  lived  in  the 
hope  that  they  might  join  the  main 
body  of  the  Saints  in  America.  Pov- 
erty prevented  them  from  carrying 
out  this  wish,  until  they  could  save  a 
sufficient  sum  to  enable  them  to  un- 
dertake the  journey.  A  branch  of  the 
Church  was  organized  at  Hunterfield 
and  James  Nibley  acted  as  president 
of  the  branch  until  he  emigrated  to 
America.  The  Nibleys  finally  left 
Scotland  in  1855,  crossing  the  Atlan- 
tic in  the  steerage  of  a  sailing  vessel 
and  taking  up  their  abode  in  Rhode 
Island,  for  their  money  was  not  suf- 
ficient to  carry  them  further.  For 
five  years  they  resided  in  that  State, 
working  in  the  woolen  mills  until 
they  could  resume  their  journey  to 
Utah.  In  the  spring  of  1860  they 
started  again  on  their  westward  jour- 
ney and  reached  Florence,  Nebraska, 
which  was  the  outfitting  point  for 
Church  immigration.  Joining  a  com- 
pany led  by  James  D.  Ross  as  captain, 
they  reached  Great  Salt  Lake  Valley 
Sept.  3,  1860,  and  soon  afterwards  es- 
tablished a  home  at  Wellsville,  Cache 
county,  the  first  winter  living  in  a 
dugout.  Charles  W.  Nibley  was  at 
that  time  a  lad  of  eleven  years.  He 
soon  afterwards  began  providing  for 
his  own  support,  first  by  gleaning 
wheat  with  his  mother  in  the  harvest 
field,  then  by  herding  sheep,  and  from 
his  initial  step  in  the  business  world 
he  utilized  every  available  opportun- 
ity for  advancement.  Later  he  secured 
a  clerkship  in  the  village  store  and 
also  made  good  use  of  his  limited  op- 


BIOGRAPHICAL  ENCYCLOPEDIA. 


767 


portunities  for  the  acquirement  of 
whatever  was  possible  in  the  way  of 
education,  with  the  most  meager  facil- 
ities for  any  kind  of  study.  Yet,  not- 
withstanding the  lack  of  early  educa- 
tional advantages,  he  is  today  a  won- 
derfully well  informed  man,  for  by 
reading  and  study  he  has  continually 
increased  his  knowledge.  The  Nib- 
leys  were  among  the  first  settlers  of 
Cache  Valley.  Charles  W.  remained 
in  Wellsville  until  1865,  when  he 
changed  his  residence  to  Brigham 
City.  Box  Elder  county.  After  locat- 
ing in  Brigham  City  he  clerked  for 
Moiris  Rosenbaum,  one  of  the  Jewish 
merchants  of  Utah,  who  was  a  mem- 
ber of  the  Church.  In  the  fall  of  18  69 
Brother  Charles  W.  Nibley,  who  had 
been  ordained  to  the  Priesthood  years 
before,  was  called  on  a  short  mission 
to  the  United  States,  together  with 
many  others.  He  returned  the  follow- 
ing spring  and  soon  afterwards  went 
to  work  for  the  Central  Pacific  as 
station  agent;  afterwards  he  was  an 
employee  of  the  Utah  Northern  Rail- 
road, being  with  that  railroad  when  it 
first  commenced  its  career  in  1872. 
For  five  years  he  was  general  freight 
and  ticket  agent  for  the  Utah  North- 
ern Railroad  Company,  during  which 
time  he  made  several  trips  east  and 
west  in  the  interest  of  the  road.  While 
in  this  service,  in  1877,  he  was  called 
on  a  mission  to  England,  and  labored 
under  the  presidency  of  Joseph  F. 
Smith.  He  worked  in  the  Liverpool 
office  and  had  charge  of  the  emigra- 
tion and  general  business  of  the  mis- 
sion. When  Joseph  F.  Smith  left  Eng- 
land, after  the  death  of  President 
Brigham  Young,  later  in  1877,  the  af- 
fairs of  the  British  Mission  were  left 
in  charge  of  Elders  Charles  W.  Nibley 
and  Henry  W.  Naisbitt  until  Elder 
William  Budge  went  to  preside  over 
that  mission  in  1878.  Brother  Nibley 
returned  to  Utah  in  May,  1879,  hav- 
ing charge  of  a  company  of  emigrat- 
ing saints.  His  home  was  now  in 
Logan,  Cache  county,  where  he  was 
chosen  as  manager  and  secretary  of 


the  United  Order  Manufacturing  and 
Building  Company  and  was  also  elect- 
ed assessor  and  collector  for  Cache 
county.  Not  only  was  Elder  Nibley 
prominent  in  a  business  and  social 
way  in  Cache  county,  but  he  took  an 
active  part  in  ecclesiastical  affairs. 
For  many  years  he  acted  as  superin- 
tendent of  Sunday  schools  in  Cache 
Stake  and  his  labors  in  other  direc- 
tions were  marked  by  signal  success. 
In  the  meantime  his  business  adven- 
ture drew  his  attention  to  the  north- 
west, and  it  was  not  long  before  he 
was  recognized  as  a  factor  in  the 
building  up  of  eastern  Oregon  and 
western  Idaho.  In  1889  Elder  Nib- 
ley, together  with  other  prominent 
business  men  of  Utah,  organized  the 
Oregon  Lumber  Company  of  Baker 
City.  He  acted  as  secretary  of  this 
company  for  many  years.  In  1890  he 
became  one  of  the  organizers  of  the 
Sumpter  Valley  Railroad  Company, 
and  for  a  number  of  years  he  occupied 
a  position  of  leadership  in  business 
circles  in  eastern  Oregon.  The  posi- 
tion of  vice  president  of  the  Sumpter 
Valley  Railroad  Company  was  also 
held  by  Elder  Nibley,  and  afterwards 
he  became  president  of  the  Payette 
Valley  Railroad.  He  was  one  of  the 
founders  and  chief  officials  of  the  La 
Grande  Sugar  Company,  afterwards 
merged  into  the  Amalgamated  Sugar 
Company,  and  took  an  active  part  in 
the  colonization  of  Grande  Ronde  Val- 
ley, Oregon,  and  Payette  Valley.  Ida- 
ho. The  lumber  business  in  which  he 
was  interested  was  not  confined  to 
Oregon,  but  extended  into  California. 
Wherever  he  was  known  he  was 
looked  upon  as  an  up-to-date,  progres- 
sive and  aggressive  man  of  affairs. 
Ecclesiastically  Elder  Nibley  was  ac- 
tive in  Oregon  as  elsewhere.  When  the 
saints  residing  in  eastern  Oregon  and 
western  Idaho  were  organized  into  the 
Union  Stake  of  Zion,  June  9,  1901, 
Charles  W.  Nibley  was  chosen  as  first 
counselor  to  Franklin  S.  Bramwell, 
the  president  of  the  Stake.  In  1906 
Elder  Nibley  and  part  of  his  family  ac- 


768 


LATTER-DAY   SAINT 


companied  President  Joseph  F.  Smith 
on  a  visit  to  Europe.  In  1907  he  was 
chosen  as  Presiding  Bishop  of  the 
Church,  being  ordained  and  set  apart 
to  that  office  Dec.  11,  1907,  with  Or- 
rin  P.  Miller  as  first  and  David  A. 
Smith  as  second  counselors.  The  long 
experience  which  Elder  Nibley  had 
had  in  financial  affairs  up  to  that 
time  qualified  him  specially  for  that 
important  position,  in  which  it  became 
his  duty  to  handle  the  revenues  of  the 
Church.  Under  his  administration  the 
tithing  system  of  the  Church  was 
changed  and  everything  placed  on  a 
cash  basis.  The  tithing  office  scrip, 
which  had  been  used  for  so  many 
years,  became  a  thing  of  the  past,  and 
reforms  in  handling  the  tithes  of  the 
people,  both  at  headquarters  and  in 
the  many  settlements  of  the  Saints 
where  the  members  paid  their  tithes 
and  offerings,  were  materially  im- 
proved. Early  in  190  9  Bishop  Xibley 
and  a  part  of  his  family  accompanied 
President  Joseph  F.  Smith  and  others 
on  a  visit  to  the  Hawaiian  Islands. 
The  next  year  (1910)  Bishop  Xibley 
accompanied  President  Smith  on  an- 
other trip  to  Europe,  during  which 
they  visited  a  number  of  the  confer- 
ences of  the  Holland  Mission,  the 
Scandinavian  Mission,  the  Swiss  and 
German  Mission  and  the  British  Mis- 
sion. In  the  summer  of  1913,  Bishop 
Xibley  accompanied  President  Joseph 
F.  Smith  and  others  to  Canada,  on 
which  visit  a  site  for  a  Temple 
was  dedicated  at  Cardston.  July  27, 
1913.  Later  in  the  year  he  accom- 
panied the  President  to  Chicago,  where 
mission  homes  and  chapels,  recently 
purchased  and  erected  by  the  Church, 
were  dedicated.  In  Xovember  of  the 
same  year  President  Smith,  Bishop 
Xibley  and  others  visited  Arizona.  In 
August,  1914,  Bishop  Xibley  accom- 
panied President  Joseph  F.  Smith  on 
a  visit  to  Canada.  In  the  latter  part 
of  the  same  year  he  accompanied 
President  Smith  on  an  extended  tour 
of  the  Southern  States  and  California, 
on  which  trip  the  party  traveled  about 


6,000  miles.  In  1915  Bishop  Nibley 
accompanied  President  Smith  and 
others  on  another  visit  to  the  Ha- 
waiian Islands,  arriving  in  Honolulu 
May  21,  1915.  On  this  visit,  on  the 
first  day  of  June,  1915,  President  Jo- 
seph F.  Smith  selected  the  Temple  site 
on  which  a  Temple  now  stands  at 
Laie,  on  the  island  of  Oahu.  Apostle 
Reed  Smoot  and  Bishop  Nibley  were 
present  with  President  Smith  when  he 
dedicated  that  Temple  site.  On  their 
return  journey  the  party  visited  Port- 
land, Ore.,  where  a  Latter-day  Saints 
chapel  was  dedicated  June  13,  1915. 
Early  in  1916  Bishop  Xibley  accom- 
panied President  Smith  and  others  on 
another  visit  to  Hawaii,  the  object  of 
the  visit  this  time  being  to  give  in- 
structions in  regard  to  the  building  of 
the  Temple  which  was  in  course  of 
construction  there.  The  party  re- 
turned to  Salt  Lake  City  March  16, 
1916.  In  July,  1916,  Bishop  Nibley 
was  chosen  as  a  director  of  the  West- 
ern Pacific  Railroad.  Subsequently  he 
accompanied  Prest.  Joseph  F.  Smith 
on  several  trips  to  the  Pacific  Coast. 
During  the  great  World  War  he  was 
very  active,  assisting  with  Church  and 
private  means  and  his  personal  in- 
influence  the  different  movements  in- 
augurated to  assist  the  allies.  He  was 
State  chairman  of  the  Red  Cross  or- 
ganization and  holds  that  position  at 
the  present  time.  Inthe  spring  of  1917 
Bishop  Xibley  accompanied  President 
Smith  and  others  on  still  another  visit 
to  Hawaii.  The  party  left  on  this  trip 
April  30th,  and  Bro.  Xibley  returned 
May  24,  1917.  On  a  trip  to  California, 
in  company  with  President  Smith,  in 
December.  1917,  Bishop  Xibley  visit- 
ed some  of  the  military  camps,  where 
Utah  boys  were  training,  giving  words 
of  encouragement  to  those  who  were 
in  the  service  of  their  country.  At  a 
meeting  held  May  20,  1918,  Bishop 
Xibley,  in  behalf  of  the  Church,  stated 
that  205,000  bushels  of  wheat  stored 
since  187  6  (a  movement  started  by 
President  Brigham  Young)  would  be 
sent  to  the  United  States  government 


BIOGRAPHICAL   ENCYCLOPEDIA. 


769 


to  assist  in  the  wheat  shortage,  the 
same  to  be  sent  to  the  assistance  of 
the  allies.  Bishop  Nibley  was  ap- 
pointed a  member  of  the  War  Indus- 
tries Board  July  26,  1918.  In  the  latter 
part  of  1919  he  accompanied  Presi- 
dent Heber  J.  Grant  and  others  to  the 
Hawaiian  Islands,  on  which  occasion 
the  Temple  erected  at  Laie,  on  the 
island  of  Oahu,  was  dedicated.  Early 
in  1920  Bishop  Nibley  accompanied 
President  Grant  and  company  to  Ari- 
zona, on  which  occasion  the  site  for  a 
Temple  at  Mesa,  Maricopa  county,  was 
discussed.  Bishop  Nibley's  commer- 
cial enterprises  have  placed  him  in  a 
conspicuous  position  as  one  of  the 
prominent  representatives  of  the  lum- 
ber and  sugar  trade  of  the  West.  He 
is  a  man  of  marked  enterprise  who 
from  the  beginning  of  his  career  has 
realized  that  success  depends  upon  the 
individual,  that  when  one  avenue  of 
opportunity  seems  closed  he  can  carve 
out  other  paths  to  reach  the  desired 
goal.  The  proud  American  title  of  "a 
self-made  man"  has  rightfully  been 
won  by  him.  Starting  out  in  the  bus- 
iness world  in  a  most  humble  capacity, 
he  is  now  a  dominent  figure  in  com- 
mercial and  business  circles;  nor  has 
he  ever  allowed  the  attainment  of 
wealth  to  monopolize  his  time  and 
energy,  as  he  has  always  rendered  a 
due  measure  of  service  to  the  Church 
and  to  the  community  in  the  work  of 
general  improvement  and  advance- 
ment. Bishop  Nibley  also  figures  as 
one  of  the  popular  and  forceful  speak- 
ers of  the  Church,  his  sermons  always 
being  pregnant  with  practical  and 
wholesome  advice.  Bishop  Nibley  has 
a  large  family — nine  sons  and  eight 
daughters  and  thirty-four  grand- 
children. 

PENROSE,  Charles  William,  sec- 
ond counselor  in  the  First  Presidency 
of  the  Church.  (Continuation  from 
Vol.  1,  page  256.)  Elder  Penrose 
labored  efficiently  as  an  assistant 
Church  Historian  until  July,  1904.  At 
a  meeting  of  the  First  Presidency  and 


the  Apostles  held  in  Salt  Lake  City 
July  7,  1904,  he  was  chosen  an  Apos- 
tle to  fill  the  vacancy  in  the  quorum 
of  the  Twelve  caused  by  the  death  of 
Abraham  O.  Woodruff,  and  was  or- 
dained one  of  the  Twelve  Apostles  by 
President  Joseph  F.  Smith.  His  long 
experience  as  a  preacher  of  the  gospel 
qualified  him  especially  for  this  high 
and  holy  calling,  and  he  at  once  be- 
came a  tower  of  strength  in  the  midst 
of  his  brethren.  In  December,  1904, 
he  was  summoned  to  Washington,  D. 
C,  and  appeared  as  a  witness  in  the 
Smoot  case,  to  testify  before  the  Sen- 
ate Committee  on  Privileges  and  Elec- 
tions. In  December  1905,  he  accom- 
panied President  Joseph  F.  Smith  and 
other  Church  leaders  to  Vermont, 
where  he,  on  Dec.  23,  1905,  attended 
and  was  one  of  the  speakers  at  the 
dedication  of  the  monument  erected 
at  Sharon,  in  honor  of  the  Prophet 
Joseph  Smith.  He  continued  as  editor 
of  the  "Deseret  News"  until  January, 
1907.  In  1906  he  was  called  to  suc- 
ceed Heber  J.  Grant  as  president  of 
the  European  Mission.  In  that  posi- 
tion his  many  talents  as  a  preacher  of 
the  gospel  and  as  a  writer  for  the 
"Millennial  Star"  his  influence  was 
felt  not  only  throughout  the  British 
Isles,  but  all  over  the  continent  of 
Europe,  where  there  were  branches 
of  the  Church,  as  he  traveled  quite 
extensively  on  continental  Europe  as 
well  as  in  Great  Britain.  On  one  of 
his  visits  to  Denmark  he  dedicated  a 
chapel  and  conference  house  (erect- 
ed at  Aalborg),  July  7,  1907.  On 
Sunday,  July  26,  1908,  he  dedicated 
Deseret,  the  new  Latter-day  Saint 
missionary  home  in  London,  England, 
and  on  Saturday,  March  27,  1909,  he 
dedicated  a  new  L.  D.  S.  chapel  re- 
cently erected  in  Oldham,  Lancashire, 
England.  Both  of  these  were  ac- 
quired by  the  Church  under  his  direc- 
tion. In  July,  190  9,  in  company  with 
President  Anthon  H.  Lund  and  others, 
he  visited  Scandinavia,  and  together 
with  his  wife,  Roumania,  sailed  up 
the  Norwegian  coast  beyond  the  Arc- 


Vol.  III.  No.  49. 


.Tune  19,  1920 


770 


LATTER-DAY   SAINT 


tic  Circle.  He  there  witnessed  the 
midnight  sun,  and  held  and  preached 
at  an  interesting  meeting  in  Vardo, 
near  the  northern  point  of  Norway. 
He  was  the  first  Apostle  of  the  Church 
who  ever  visited  any  point  of  the 
world  north  of  the  Arctic  Circle.  Af- 
terwards Pres.  Penrose  visited  and 
held  meetings  in  Germany,  Switzer- 
land, Holland,  and  other  continental 
countries.  In  the  summer  of  1910  he 
returned  home,  being  succeeded  in 
the  presidency  of  the  European  Mis- 
sion by  Rudger  Clawson,  June  11, 
1910.  From  December  1,  1906,  when 
President  Penrose  took  charge,  to  the 
date  of  his  valedictory,  June  9,  1910, 


the  official  report  gave  the  following 
statistics:  "There  have  been  dis- 
tributed 18,056,257  tracts,  523,216 
books,  and  3,641  persons  have  been 
added  to  the  Church  by  baptism,  in 
the  British  Mission  alone,  while  in 
the  other  parts  of  the  European  Mis- 
sion there  have  been  at  least  7,400,000 
tracts  distributed,  626,500  books  dis- 
tributed, and  over  4,800  baptisms, 
making  in  the  aggregate  about  25,- 
000,000  tracts  and  1,149,700  books 
distributed,  and  over  8,500  persons 
baptized.  Thousands  of  investigators 
who  have  not  yet  obeyed  the  gospel 
have  become  believers  in  its  princi- 


ples, and  many  of  them  will  also 
doubtless  break  the  bonds  of  tradition 
and  social  environments,  and  cast  in 
their  lot  with  the  people  of  God."  He 
sailed   from   Liverpool   late  June   11, 

1910,  and  arrived  in  Salt  Lake  City 
early  June  21,  a  remarkable  trip  of 
9%  days,  the  shortest  on  record  at 
that  time.  At  the  meeting  of  the  First 
Presidency  and  Apostles,  held  Dec.  7, 

1911,  Pres.  Penrose  was  chosen  as 
second  counselor  to  Pres.  Joseph  F. 
Smith,  filling  the  vacancy  caused  by 
the  death  of  John  Henry  Smith.  Bro. 
Penrose  held  this  position  until  the 
death  of  Pres.  Smith  in  November, 
1918,  since  which  he  has  acted  as  sec- 
ond counselor  to  Pres.  Heber  J.  Grant. 
In  the  latter  part  of  1914  Elder  Pen- 
rose accompanied  Pres.  Joseph  F. 
Smith  on  a  missionary  tour  through 
the  Southern  States,  on  which  he 
preached  in  some  of  the  leading  cities 
and  towns  in  Alabama,  Georgia,  Flor- 
ida and  Louisiana  and  also  in  Cali- 
fornia. Pres.  Penrose  is  one  of  the 
ablest  and  best  informed  men  among 
all  the  leaders  of  the  Church.  As  an 
expounder  of  the  principles  of  the 
gospel  he  has,  perhaps,  no  equal,  and 
as  a  writer  his  "Rays  of  Living  Light" 
and  other  productions  from  his  pen 
have  had  a  wider  circulation  and  been 
translated  in  more  foreign  languages 
than  any  other  literary  production 
originated  in  the  Church.  Notwith- 
standing his  advanced  years,  Pres. 
Penrose  is  remarkably  well  preserved 
physically,  and  his  mental  powers 
seem  to  be  as  brilliant  and  active  at 
over  88  years  of  age  as  in  the  days  of 
his  youth.  His  beautiful  and  inspir- 
ing poetical  productions  are  known 
throughout  Israel,  and  his  hymns  are 
sung  in  all  the  congregations  of  the 
saints,  not  only  in  the  Anglo-Saxon 
world,  but  as  translations  in  many 
other  countries.  Bro.  Penrose  has, 
perhaps,  spent  more  years  in  the  min- 
istry as  a  missionary  and  as  a  presid- 
ing officer,  both  at  home  and  abroad, 
than  any  other  man  in  the  Church, 
since  the  very  beginning  of  its  exist- 


BIOGRAPHICAL   ENCYCLOPEDIA. 


771 


ence.  His  style  of  preaching  and  the 
plain  comprehensive  language  used  is 
always  calculated  to  make  a  lasting 
impression  upon  all  who  come  with- 
in the  radiance  of  his  voice.  True  and 
faithful  in  all  the  many  callings  to 
which  he  has  been  called  and  the 
many  positions  he  has  filled,  he  is 
verily  one  of  the  pillars  of  the  Church, 
whose  faithfulness  and  incessant  ac- 
tivity could  well  be  emulated  by  any 
and  all  who  desire  to  serve  the  Lord 
and  keep  His  commandments. 

PRESTON,  William  B.,  presiding 
Bishop  of  the  Church.  (Continued 
from  Vol.  1,  page  232.)  Bishop  Pres- 
ton resigned  his  position  as  presiding 
Bishop  of  the  Church,  owing  to  ill 
health,  and  was  succeeded  in  that  of- 
fice by  Charles  W.  Nibley,  Dec.  11, 
1907.  He  died  at  his  home  in  Salt 
Lake  City  Aug.  2,  1908.  The  follow- 
ing was  published  in  the  "Deseret 
Evening  News"  at  the  time  of  his  de- 
mise: "Bishop  William  B.  Preston, 
now  called  to  another  sphere  of  ac- 
tion, was  one  of  the  noble  band  of 
men  who  were  selected  by  Providence 
to  lay  the  foundations  and  begin  the 
superstructure  of  this  great  and  glor- 
ious State  [Utah].  He  is  one  of  a 
band  of  God-fearing  devoted  pioneers, 
whom  generations  after  generations, 
to  the  end  of  time,  will  call  blessed. 
He  accomplished  a  great  work  and 
has  gone  to  receive  his  reward.  Bish- 
op Preston  was  a  man  possessed  of 
unusual  gifts  and  talents.  Wherever 
duty  called  him,  he  naturally  became 
a  leader.  As  an  empire-builder,  a 
law-maker,  a  missionary,  and  ecclesi- 
astical or  municipal  official,  at  home 
or  abroad,  he  distinguished  himself 
by  wise  counsel  and  solid,  enduring 
work.  And,  above  all,  he  was  faithful 
to  the  cause  of  God,  and  as  loyal  to 
his  brethren  as  to  his  country.  No 
matter  what  were  the  circumstances 
in  which  he  was  placed,  his  faith  was 
firm,  and  his  love  for  the  brethren 
(that  divine  quality  without  which 
all    others    are    as    naught)     burned 


steadily,  without  flickering.     He  was 
faithful  to  the  end." 

REYNOLDS,  George,  one  of  the 

seven  presidents  of  Seventy.  (Contin- 
ued from  Vol.  1,  page  206.)  Elder 
Reynolds  continued  his  activities  in 
the  Church  until  1907,  when  he  had 
a  breakdown,  due  to  over  work,  from 
which  he  never  fully  recovered,  and 
after  long  suffering  passed  peacefully 
to  rest,  Aug.  9,  1909,  surrounded  by 
his  family,  at  his  residence,  at  the 
corner  of  Wall  and  .\pricot  streets, 
on  Capitol  Hill,  Salt  Lake  City. 
Through  his  extensive  literary  work 
and  through  his  long  association,  a 
third  of  a  century  or  more,  w-ith  the 
Sunday  school  work  and  other  prom- 
inent Church  activities,  Bro.  Reynolds 
was  as  widely  known  as  any  man  in 
Utah  and  wherever  known,  was  uni- 
versally esteemed  for  his  honor,  in- 
tegrity and  kindness  of  heart.  He 
was  a  gifted  writer.  Besides  writing 
a  number  of  smaller  works,  he  was 
the  author  of  the  "Story  of  the  Book 
of  Mormon,"  "The  Dictionary  of  the 
Book  of  Mormon"  and  "The  Concord- 
ance of  the  Book  of  Mormon."  He 
was  secretary  to  the  First  Presidency 
of  the  Church  during  a  part  of  the 
administration  of  President  Brigham 
Young  and  filled  the  same  position 
for  all  the  First  Presidencies  up  to 
the  time  of  his  demise,  being  con- 
stantly in  the  employ  of  the  Church. 
For  many  years  he  was  superinten- 
dent of  the  Twentieth  Ward  Sunday 
School,  and  at  the  time  of  his  death 
was  the  oldest  member  of  the  Deseret 
Sunday  School  Union  Board,  being 
one  of  its  officers  since  its  inception. 
For  many  years  he  was  a  member  of 
the  general  superintendency  and  its 
treasurer.  He  was  also  deeply  in- 
terested in  the  affairs  of  the  State 
schools.  The  "Deseret  Evening  News" 
of  Aug.  10,  1909,  commenting  upon 
the  life  of  George  Reynolds,  says: 
"Few  men  in  the  Church  have  been 
more  incessantly  devoted  to  the  work 
of  the  last  dispensation  than  the  man 


772 


LATTER-DAY   SAINT 


who  has  just  gone  to  his  rest.  His 
connection  with  the  Church  dates 
from  his  early  boyhood  and  was  the 
result  of  his  individual  conviction  of 
the  divinity  of  the  message  as  he 
heard  it  declared  by  the  missionaries 
of  the  Church  of  Jesus  Christ  of  Lat- 
ter-day Saints.  Before  reaching  his 
teens,  he  was  preaching  the  gospel 
on  the  streets  of  London  and  ceased 
not  to  proclaim  the  glad  tidings  until 
the  final  summons  of  yesterday.  To 
him  the  gospel  was  meat  and  drink, 
breath  and  life.  .  .  .  Elder  George 
Reynolds  has  manifested  earnestness, 
sincerity,  devotion  and  power,  such 
as  come  only  through  divine  inspira- 
tion. As  a  patriarch  he  passes  with 
honor,  leaving  a  large  posterity  to 
emulate  his  noble  example." 

RICHARDS,    George    Franklin,    a 

member  of  the  Council  of  the  Twelve 
Apostles.  (Continued  from  Vol.  I,  page 
544).  By  invitation  from  President 
Joseph  F.  Smith,  Elder  Geo.  F.  Rich- 
ards,  with  wife  and  youngest  child. 


accompanied  the  President  and  his 
party  (about  thirty  people  all  told) 
on  their  pilgrimage  to  Sharon,  Ver- 
mont, the  birthplace  of  Joseph  Smith, 
the  Prophet,  and  was  present  on  the 
100th   anniversary   of   the   Prophet's 


birth  (Dec.  23,  1905),  when  the  beau- 
tiful granite  monument,  erected  to 
the  memory  and  honor  of  the  Prophet, 
was  unveiled  and  dedicated.  Return- 
ing from  this  memorable  trip  the 
party  visited  Boston,  Palmyra,  Man- 
chester, Cleveland,  Kirtland,  Chicago 
and  Omaha.  They  also  visited  sever- 
al points  of  historical  interest  to  the 
Latter-day  Saints,  such  as  the  home 
of  the  Prophet  Joseph's  parents  in 
Manchester,  the  Sacred  Grove,  the 
Hill  Cumorah,  the  Kirtland  Temple, 
etc.  The  party  left  Salt  Lake  City 
Dec.  18,  1905,  and  returned  Jan.  1, 
1906.  While  residing  in  Tooele,  Utah, 
Brother  Richards  engaged  with  his 
sons  in  the  implement  and  lumber 
business,  as  well  as  farming.  Being 
called  to  be  a  member  of  the  quorum 
of  the  Twelve  Apostles,  Brother  Rich- 
ards was  sustained  in  that  position  at 
the  general  conference  of  the  Church 
held  in  Salt  Lake  City,  April  8,  1906, 
and  the  next  day  (April  9th)  he  was 
ordained  an  Apostle  by  Pres.  Joseph 
F.  Smith,  to  fill  the  vacancy  in  the 
quorum  of  the  Twelve  occasioned  by 
the  death  of  Elder  Marriner  W.  Mer- 
rill. Soon  after  his  ordination  to  the 
apostleship,  Bro.  Richards  was  chosen 
as  a  member  of  the  General  Board  of 
the  Y.  M.  M.  I.  A.  and  a  member  of 
the  General  Board  of  the  Religion 
Classes.  For  several  yep^-s  he  also 
acted  as  an  advisory  member  of  the 
General  Board  of  Primary  Associa- 
tions. The  duties  of  his  calling  neces- 
sitated his  traveling  extensively  in 
the  Stakes  of  Zion,  from  Canada  on 
the  north  to  Old  Mexico  on  the  south, 
and  also  in  the  missionary  fields  in 
the  United  States.  Thus,  in  company 
with  Pres.  Joseph  E.  Robinson,  he 
attended  the  conferences  of  the  Cali- 
fornia Mission  in  the  fall  of  1906,  in 
the  spring  of  1907,  in  the  fall  of  1909 
and  in  the  spring  of  1915.  During  the 
latter  part  of  1906  and  the  fore  part 
of  1907  he  accompanied  Pres.  Nephi 
Pratt  through  the  Northwestern  States 
Mission,  attending  all  of  the  confer- 
ences, and  again  in  June,  1910,  he  at- 


BIOGRAPHICAL   ENCYCLOPEDIA. 


773 


tended  the  conferences  held  in  the 
States  of  Oregon  and  Washington.  In 
the  spring  of  1912,  in  company  with 
President  Samuel  O.  Bennion,  he  vis- 
ited all  the  conferences  of  the  Central 
States  Mission.  Having  received  a 
call  from  the  First  Presidency  to  pre- 
side over  the  European  Mission,  he 
was  blessed  and  set  apart  for  that 
position  Aug.  5,  1916,  by  President 
Joseph  F.  Smith,  and  the  following 
day,  accompanied  by  his  son  George, 
the  latter's  wife  and  two  smaller  chil- 
dren, he  left  home  for  England.  At 
that  time  England,  including  Canada, 
had  been  at  war  with  Germany  for 
two  years  and  sea  travel  was  conse- 
quently very  dangerous,  especially  for 
British  and  Canadian  steamships,  but 
the  Church,  being  under  contract  to 
patronize  the  Canadian  Steamship 
Company's  lines,  Bro.  Richards  and 
those  who  were  with  him,  sailed  from 
Montreal  for  Liverpool  on  the  C.  S. 
Co.'s  steamer  "Corsican,"  and  though 
the  ship  was  sought  after  by  the  Ger- 
man submarines,  no  harm  came  to  it 
on  the  voyage,  as  it  reached  Liverpool 
in  safety  Aug.  25,  1^16.  Upon  the 
departure  of  Pres.  Hyrum  M.  Smith 
for  his  home  in  Utah  Sept.  1,  1916, 
Bro.  Richards  succeeded  him  as  presi- 
dent of  the  European  Mission.  In 
February,  1919,  his  son  George  and 
family  returned  home.  In  March. 
1919,  President  Richards,  accompan- 
ied by  his  wife,  visited  the  Nether- 
lands, where  they  attended  meetings 
in  eight  of  the  principal  cities  of  that 
country.  A  persistent,  but  unsuccess- 
ful effort  was  made  to  obtain  permis- 
sion to  visit  Switzerland,  the  Swiss 
officials  refusing  to  permit  it.  In 
June,  1919,  Elder  Geo.  Albert  Smith, 
who  had  been  appointed  to  succeed 
Elder  Richards  as  president  of  the 
European  Mission,  arrived  in  Liver- 
pool with  his  family  and  took  charge 
of  the  mission  July  1st.  President 
Richards,  having  been  released  to  re- 
turn home,  left  Liverpool  a  few  days 
later,  crossed  the  Atlantic  in  the  ship 
"Melita"    and    arrived    in   Salt   Lake 


City  July  25,  1919,  having  been  ab- 
sent nearly  three  years. 

RICHARDS,  Stephen  L.,  a  member 
of  the  Council  of  Twelve  Apostles, 
was  born  June  18,  1879,  at  Mendon, 
Cache  county,  Utah,  the  son  of  Dr. 
Stephen  Longstroth  Richards  and  Em- 
ma Louisa  Stayner.  He  is  a  grand- 
son of  Willard  Richards,  who  was 
with  Joseph  the  Prophet  at  the  mar- 
tyrdom in  Carthage,  111.,  and  who  was 
one  of  the  early  pioneers  of  Utah.  His 
mother    was    a    daughter    of   Arthur 


Stayner,  a  man  of  business  affairs  In 
the  early  history  of  the  West,  and 
the  man  to  whom  the  establishment 
of  sugar  works  in  Utah  is  largely  in- 
debted. Elder  Richards  was  baptized 
when  about  fourteen  years  old  ana 
was  ordained  sucessively  to  the  sev- 
eral offices  in  the  Priesthood,  except 
that  of  a  Seventy.  From  his  youth 
he  has  taken  great  interest  in  Church 
activities.  The  scholastic  training 
of  Elder  Richards  is  characterized  by 
the  unusually  large  number  of  schools 
which  he  attended.  To  begin  with  he 
came  under  the  splendid  tutorship 
of  Camille  Cobb,  a  woman  of  rare 
culture.  After  that  he  attended  the 
Farmington  public  school,  the  Davis 
Stake  Academy,  Salt  Lake  county  and 


774 


LATTER-DAY   SAINT 


city  public  schools,  the  L.  D.  S.  UbI- 
versity,  the  Salt  Lake  High  School 
and  the  University  of  Utah,  while  his 
professional  training  was  obtained  in 
the  University  of  Michigan  and  in  the 
University  of  Chicago.  From  the  lat- 
ter institution  he  received  his  L.  L. 
B.  degree.  His  principal  training  and 
employment  has  been  in  the  law.  One 
year  at  the  law  school  of  the  Univer- 
sity at  Michigan  and  two  years  at  the 
law  school  at  the  University  of  Chi- 
cago gave  him  the  foundation  work 
for  the  success  he  subsequently  at- 
tained in  his  chosen  profession.  While 
at  the  University  of  Utah  he  was  one 
of  the  team  of  inter-collegiate  de- 
baters; he  was  the  first  Utah  student 
to  be  graduated  from  the  department 
of  law  at  the  University  of  Chicago 
and  was  one  of  the  first  class  ever 
graduated  in  law  from  that  institu- 
tion receiving  a  cum  laude  degree. 
In  numerous  branches  of  Church  work 
to  which  Elder  Richards  has  been 
called  from  boyhood  until  the  present 
time,  he  has  been  earnest  and  de- 
voted. His  first  official  position  in 
the  Sabbath  school  work  was  that  of 
secretary  of  the  Sugar  House  Ward 
Sunday  School;  later  he  became  a 
teacher  in  the  same  school.  He  taught 
also  in  the  schools  at  Pleasant  View 
and  Malad,  Idaho,  and  in  the  17th 
Ward  of  Salt  Lake  City.  In  the  Stake 
Sunday  school  work  he  became  as- 
sistant superintendent  of  the  Salt  Lake 
Stake  and  later  a  member  of  the 
Granite  Stake  Sunday  School  Board. 
While  a  resident  of  Murray,  Salt  Lake 
county,  he  was  a  member  of  a  build- 
ing committee  and  a  class  leader  in 
the  Y.  M.  M.  I.  A.  Following  the  death 
of  George  Reynolds  he  was  appointed 
second  assistant  general  superinten- 
dent of  the  Sunday  School  Union  April 
6,  1908,  having  previously  (since  Oct. 
1906)  been  a  member  of  the  board. 
He  was  also  chosen  as  a  member  of 
the  Priesthood  Study  Committee  and 
of  the  Board  of  Control  of  the  Deseret 
Gymnasium.  In  business  he  has  served 


as  officer  and  director  in  a  number 
of  corporations.  In  Tooele  he  en- 
gaged in  farming  and  in  Oneida  coun- 
ty, Idaho,  in  ranching.  For  some 
time  he  also  acted  as  principal  of  the 
Malad  City  public  schools  and  for 
many  years  was  a  successful  practis- 
ing attorney  in  Salt  Lake  City,  serv- 
ing also  as  a  member  of  the  law  facul- 
ty at  the  University  of  Utah.  Also 
Religion  class  work  has  claimed  a 
portion  of  his  time,  and  at  one  time 
he  served  as  superintendent  of  Re- 
ligion Classes  in  Malad  City,  Idaho. 
Whether  at  home  or  abroad  he  kept 
up  a  steady  and  consistent  interest  in 
Church  work.  At  Ann  Arbor,  Michi- 
gan, his  home  was  the  place  where 
religious  meetings  were  held  for  the 
students  and  members  of  the  Church. 
While  in  Chicago  he  did  Sunday  school 
and  other  Church  work  with  students. 
In  his  chosen  profession  of  the  law 
Elder  Richards  has  been  exception- 
ally successful.  The  law  firms  of 
which  he  has  been  a  member  have 
always  been  among  the  foremost  of 
the  younger  members  of  the  profes- 
sion. In  private  practice  his  work 
has  been  in  the  civil  as  distinguished 
from  the  criminal  law  procedure.  He 
is  one  of  the  safest  counselors  at  the 
Salt  Lake  bar  and  is  very  conscien- 
tious in  his  professional  work.  For 
two  terms  he  served  as  secretary  of 
the  Utah  State  Bar  Association.  Of 
late  years  much  of  his  time  has  been 
taken  in  directorship  work  as  he  has 
been  an  officer  and  director  of  some 
of  the  largest  and  more  important 
corporations  of  the  State.  Capacity, 
versatility  and  ease  in  performing 
work  are  among  his  characteristics. 
In  the  midst  of  his  ecclesiastical  and 
secular  activities,  Stephen  L.  Rich- 
ards was  chosen  as  a  member  of  the 
Council  of  Twelve  Apostles,  being 
nominated  by  President  Joseph  F. 
Smith  and  unanimously  sustained  by 
the  First  Presidency  and  Apostles  in 
one  of  their  general  meetings.  He 
was  ordained  an  Apostle  by  President 


BIOGRAPHICAL  ENCYCLOPEDIA. 


775 


Joseph  F.  Smith  on  Thursday,  Jan. 
18,  1917.  Since  his  calling  to  the 
Apostleship,  he  has  been  very  active 
in  Church  affairs,  visiting  the  differ- 
ent Stakes  of  Zion  and  attending  to 
ecclesiastical  duties  generally.  In  1900 
(Feb.  21st)  Elder  Richards  married 
Irene  Merrill  (daughter  of  Clarence 
Merrill  and  Bathsheba  Smith),  who 
was  born  June  4,  1874,  in  Fillmore, 
Utah.  This  marriage  has  been  blessed 
with  nine  children,  namely,  Lynn  Ste- 
phen, Irene  Louise,  Lois  Bathsheba, 
Alice  Lula,  Helen  Merle,  Georgia  Gill, 
Joseph  Albert,  Philip  Longstroth  and 
Richard  Merrill.  The  home  life  of 
Elder  Richards,  both  before  and  after 
marriage,  has  been  most  fortunate 
and  happy.  He  was  blessed  with  an 
ideal  mother  and  a  father  of  sterling 
worth  who  had  much  to  do  with  his 
careful  training  and  principles  of  in- 
tegrity, truthfulness,  honesty,  sincer- 
ity, kindness,  respect  for  parental  au- 
thority, devotion  to  home  and  the 
members  thereof,  and  loyalty  to  God 
and  His  work.  Elder  Richards  is  a 
man  of  pronounced  ability,  clear  judg- 
ment and  wide  experience,  his  train- 
ing, education  and  natural  endow- 
ments eminently  fit  him  for  the  high 
office  whereunto  he  has  been  called. 
He  possesses  a  pleasing  personality 
and  winning  ways,  has  a  strong,  abid- 
ing, unimpeachable  testimony  of  the 
divine  mission  of  Jesus  Christ,  and 
of  the  restoration  of  the  gospel  of  the 
Master  to  the  Prophet  Joseph  Smith. 
At  present  Elder  Richards  is  chair- 
man of  the  Board  of  Control  of  the 
Deseret  Gymnasium,  first  assistant 
superintendent  of  the  Latter-day  Saint 
Sunday  schools,  first  assistant  com- 
missioner of  the  Church  Schools,  a 
member  of  the  General  Church  Board 
of  Education,  a  member  of  the  Gen- 
eral Correlation  Committee  of  the 
Church,  and  chairman  of  the  Church 
Advisory  Committee.  In  secular  mat- 
ters and  business  Elder  Richards  fig- 
ures very  prominently,  being  an  offi- 
cer and  director  in  a  number  of  im- 
portant   business    corporations.       He 


also  serves  as  a  member  of,  the  State 
Board  of  Corrections. 

S>UTH,  David  Asael,  first  coun- 
selor in  the  presiding  bishopric  of  the 
Church,  was  born  May  24,  1879,  in 
Salt  Lake  City,  Utah,  the  son  of  Pres- 
ident Joseph  F.  Smith  and  Julina 
Lambson.  He  was  baptized  May  24, 
1887,  on  his  eighth  birthday,  and  as  a 
boy  and  youth  he  held  successively  the 
three  grades  of  the  lesser  Priesthood, 
Deacon,  Teacher  and  Priest.  In  the 
first  and  second  quorums  named  he 


acted  as  second  counselor  to  the  pres- 
ident. Later,  when  he  was  ordained 
an  Elder  he  was  chosen  as  second 
counselor  to  the  president  of  the  sixth 
quorum  of  Elders,  and  still  later  he 
acted  as  second  counselor  in  the  pres- 
idency of  the  Liberty  Stake  Y.  M.  M. 
I.  A.  While  residing  in  the  Salt  Lake 
Stake,  before  the  division  into  four 
Stakes,  in  1904,  Elder  Smith  was  a 
member  of  the  Stake  Sunday  School 
Board.  For  five  years  he  was  before 
the  public  in  an  official  capacity,  two 
years  as  chief  clerk  and  two  years  as 
chief  deputy  in  the  county  clerk's  of- 
fice in  Salt  Lake  City.  In  1900  (Jan- 
uary 24th)  David  A.  Smith  married 
Emily  Jenkins   (daughter  of  the  late 


776 


LATTER-DAY   SAINT 


Bishop  Thomas  Jenkins  and  Mahala 
Elmer),  who  was  born  Nov.  17,  1878. 
This  marriage  has  been  blessed  with 
nine  children,  namely,  David  Jenkins, 
Mahala,  Asael  Jenkins,  Alfred  Jen- 
kins, Edward  Jenkins,  Robert  Jen- 
kins, Elmer  Jenkins,  Hyrum  Jenkins, 
and  Louise.  When  Charles  W.  Nib- 
ley,  in  December,  1907,  was  chosen  as 
presiding  Bishop  of  the  Church,  David 
A.  Smith  was  chosen  as  his  second 
counselor,  being  ordained  under  the 
hands  of  the  First  Presidency,  Pres. 
Anthon  H.  Lund  being  mouth.  After 
the  death  of  Orrin  P.  Miller,  Brother 
Smith  was  set  apart  to  the  position  of 
first  counselor,  which  position  he  still 
holds.  For  a  number  of  years  he  had 
charge  of  the  L.  D.  S.  Hospital,  and 
is  now  supervising  trustee  and  vice 
president  of  the  board  of  trustees. 
He  is  associated  with  many  impor- 
tant business  enterprises  in  Salt  Lake 
City  and  elsewhere. 

SMITH,  George  Albert,  a  member 
of  the  Council  of  Twelve  Apostles, 
was  born  April  4,  1870,  in  Salt  Lake 


City,  Utah,  the  son  of  John  Henry 
Smith  and  Sarah  Farr.  He  received 
his  early  education  in  the  Salt  Lake 
City  public  schools,  and  later  entered 


the  Brigham  Young  Academy  at  Pro- 
ve, which  institution  of  learning  at 
that  time  was  presided  over  by  Dr. 
Karl  G.  Maeser.  When  his  father  left 
on  a  mission  to  Europe,  in  1883, 
"George  A.,"  as  he  was  often  called, 
returned  to  Salt  Lake  City  and  en- 
tered the  Z.  C.  M.  I.  clothing  factory. 
Subsequently  he  took  a  position  with 
the  Co-op.  Wagon  and  Machine  Co., 
and  later  took  a  course  at  the  State 
University.  Graduating  from  this  in- 
stitution, he  returned  to  the  Z.  C. 
M.  I.,  where  he  worked  until  June, 
1892,  when  he  was  called  on  a  mis- 
sion to  the  Southern  States.  After 
five  months  in  the  field,  he  was  trans- 
ferred to  the  office  at  Chattanooga, 
Tennessee,  where  he  became  secretary 
of  the  mission,  and  as  such  assumed 
the  charge  of  mission  affairs  during 
the  absence  of  J.  Golden  Kimball.  In 
that  capacity,  as  in  all  others,  he 
manifested  strict  devotion  to  duty  and 
was  an  earnest  worker  in  the  cause  of 
truth.  He  returned  home  in  July, 
1894.  Previous  to  his  departure  on 
that  mission  he  was  ordained  a  Sev- 
enty by  his  father,  John  Henry  Smith, 
and  was  subsequently  chosen  as  a 
president  of  the  3rd  quorum  of  Sev- 
enty. After  returning  from  his  mis- 
sion, he  took  his  old  position  at  the 
Z.  C.  M.  I.,  where  he  remained  until 
Feb.  10,  1898,  when  he  became  re- 
ceiver of  the  United  States  land  of- 
fice under  an  appointment  made  by 
Pres.  McKinley,  Jan.  31,  1898.  He 
was  reappointed  to  the  same  position 
by  Pres.  Theodore  Roosevelt,  March 
27,  1902,  which  position  he  still  held 
when  he  was  chosen  as  an  Apostle  in 
October,  1903.  At  that  time  he  held 
the  position  of  Stake  president  of  Y. 
M.  M.  I.  A.  in  the  Salt  Lake  Stake  of 
Zion.  In  the  17th  Ward,  Salt  Lake 
City,  where  he  was  raised,  he  was  a 
most  active  member  in  the  Sunday 
school,  first  laboring  as  a  teacher, 
then  as  a  secretary  and  later  as  a 
superintendent.  He  also  took  an 
active  part  in  the  Ward  Y.  M.  M.  I.  A. 
in   his   early   youth.      And   after   his 


BIOGRAPHICAL  ENCYCLOPEDIA. 


777 


calling  to  the  Apostleship  he  became 
a  most  active  member  of  his  quorum, 
visiting  the  different  Stakes  of  Zion, 
assisting  in  the  organization  of  new 
Stakes  and  Wards  and  attending  to 
Church  duties  generally.  Soon  his 
health  began  to  fail  and  it  became 
necessary  for  him  to  retire  for  a  cer- 
tain length  of  time  from  his  official 
duties  for  the  purpose  of  regaining 
strength.  Part  of  this  time  he  spent 
on  the  Pacific  coast.  In  1919  he  was 
called  on  a  mission  to  Europe  to  pre- 
side over  the  European  Mission,  suc- 
ceeding George  F.  Richards.  At  the 
time  of  his  departure  for  that  mis- 
sion, a  sketch  of  his  life  was  pub- 
lished in  the  "Improvement  Era"  of 
July,  1919,  from  which  we  cull  and 
copy  the  following:  "Some  years  ago 
Apostle  Smith's  health  gave  way,  but 
before  his  loss  of  health,  he  averaged 
thirty  thousand  miles  of  travel  year- 
ly, at  the  rate  of  one  and  one-half 
meetings  per  day.  He  visited  the 
saints  throughout  the  country,  mag- 
nified his  position  as  an  Apostle  of 
the  Lord,  and  gave  counsel  by  pre- 
cept and  example  to  all  with  whom  he 
came  in  contact.  He  was  elected  pres- 
ident of  the  Utah  society  of  'The 
Sons  of  the  American  Revolution'  for 
1918,  and  was  re-elected  in  1919;  was 
a  delegate  to  the  S.  A.  R.  Congress, 
at  New  York,  New  Jersey,  Rochester 
(New  York),  and  Detroit  (Michigan). 
He  has  visited  many  of  the  missions 
in  the  United  States;  and,  before  he 
became  a  member  of  the  Council  of 
Twelve,  some  of  the  missions  of  Eu- 
rope. George  Albert  Smith  has  been 
active  in  the  politics  of  Utah.  He  has 
a  remarkable  faculty  for  the  making 
of  friends,  his  enemies  even  respecting 
him.  He  has  been  an  active  Republi- 
can, but  has  never  said  mean  or  un- 
kind things  of  his  opponents.  This  is 
one  of  his  characteristics.  In  the 
preaching  of  the  gospel,  he  does  not 
tear  down  a  man's  house,  but  builds 
the  gospel  structure  over  him  with  an 
open  and  loving  invitation  to  inhabit 
it.     Bro.  Smith  was  elected  vice  presi- 


dent of  the  International  Irrigation 
Congress,  at  Calgary,  Canada,  in 
1913,  re-elected  vice  president  at  Sac- 
ramento, California,  in  1914,  and 
president  of  this  Congress,  at  El 
Paso,  Texas,  in  1915.  In  1917  he  was 
elected  president  of  the  International 
Dry-farm  Congress,  at  Peoria,  Illinois, 
and  elected  president  of  the  combined 
Irrigation  and  Farm  Congress,  now 
known  as  the  International  Farm  Con- 
gress, at  Kansas  City,  in  1918.  In 
these  positions  he  has  made  many 
friends.  He  has  been  personally  ac- 
quainted with  Presidents  McKinley, 
Roosevelt  and  Taft,  and  with  several 
members  of  the  cabinet,  governors, 
senators  and  representatives  through- 
out the  Union  and  Canada,  and  with 
many  business  men  of  prominence 
with  whom  he  has  associated  as  mem- 
ber and  officer  in  the  Irrigation  Con- 
gress and  in  the  International  Farm 
Congress.  George  Albert  Smith  is  a 
typical  Latter-day  Saint;  broad  mind- 
ed, pure  as  a  woman,  active  in  good 
work,  zealous  in  his  calling,  reliable, 
conscientious,  honest,  clean  in  lan- 
guage and  action,  faithful,  punctual, 
considerate  of  his  fellows,  high  or 
low,  having  confidence  in  God,  a  man 
who  puts  his  soul  into  his  work,  and 
who  is  as  nearly  completely  obedient 
to  the  laws  of  God  as  man  can  be 
upon  the  earth.  His  actions  in  youth 
never  caused  his  parents  one  moment 
of  anxiety,  and  he  has  kept  in  mind 
the  name  he  bears,  and  honored  it, 
believing  truthfully,  that  no  son  ever 
had  a  better  father  and  mother  than 
he.  He  is  a  great  admirer  of  punctu- 
ality, and  one  who  knows  him  may 
set  it  down  as  a  truth  that  if  he  is 
not  on  time  for  an  appointment  that 
he  will  not  be  there.  In  his  labors 
with  the  young  men  of  the  Church, 
he  made  a  speciality  of  impressing  the 
value  of  punctuality  upon  them.  Elder 
Smith  has  passed  through  many  won- 
derful experiences,  showing  the  care 
of  God  over  him,  and  has  had  at  least 
twenty-five  remarkably  narrow  es- 
capes from  death  which  would  make 


778 


LATTER-DAY   SAINT 


very  interesting  reading  in  themselves. 
The  Lord  has  preserved  him,  and  we 
are  certain  that  his  new  calling  to 
preside  over  the  European  Mission, 
will  give  him  great  opportunities  to 
accomplish  much  of  the  good  that  is 
in  his  heart.  His  experience  in  Church, 
State  and  national  affairs  wonderful- 
ly adapt  him  for  leadership  in  the 
European  Mission,  during  these  days 
of  political,  economic  and  religious 
life  and  reconstruction." 

SMITH,  Hyrum  Gibbs,  presiding 
Patriarch  of  the  Church,  was  born 
July  8,  1879,  in  South  Jordan,  Salt 
Lake  county,  Utah,  the  son  of  Hyrum 
Fisher  Smith  and  Annie  M.  Gibbs.  He 
was  blessed  and  named  by  his  grand- 
father, Patriarch  John  Smith,  Oct.  14, 
1879.      When    about   a    year   old    his 


parents  moved  to  Snake  river,  Idaho, 
to  seek  and  make  a  new  home.  Later 
they  located  at  Portage,  Box  Elder 
county,  Utah,  where  his  father  en- 
gaged in  farming  and  horse  raising. 
When  Hyrum  G.  was  seven  years  old 
the  family  moved  to  Hoytsville,  Sum- 
mit county,  where  he  spent  fifteen 
years  of  his  boyhood  days  upon  the 
farm  and  range,  herding,  fishing  and 
swimming  in  the  mountain  streams. 


hunting  and  riding  in  the  mountain 
ranges  and  assisting  his  father  in  his 
ranch  business.  He  graduated  from 
the  public  schools  in  1896  and  after 
being  baptized  in  August,  1891,  he 
attended  faithfully  to  his  duties  in 
the  lesser  Priesthood  and  the  auxil- 
iary organizations.  In  18  97  he  entered 
the  Brigham  Young  Academy  (now 
University)  at  Provo,  taking  a  three 
years'  normal  course.  After  that  he 
taught  in  the  public  schools  of  Wa- 
satch, Summit  and  Utah  counties,  fol- 
lowing this  profession  successfully 
for  seven  years.  During  this  time  he 
was  also  active  in  Church  work.  In 
1902  he  acted  in  the  superintendency 
of  the  Summit  Stake  Sunday  schools 
and  locally  was  diligent  in  Religion 
Class  work.  He  was  ordained  to  the 
office  of  an  Elder,  Seventy  and  High 
Priest  successively.  In  1904  (Aug. 
17th)  he  married  Martha  Gee  (daugh- 
ter of  George  W.  Gee  and  Sophina  A. 
Fuller),  who  was  born  at  Provo  April 
28,  1883.  This  marriage  has  been 
blessed  with  six  children,  namely, 
Cleone,  Eldred  Gee,  Helen,  Miriam, 
Barden  Gee  and  Hyrum  Gee.  In 
October,  1908,  Bro.  Smith  left  Utah 
for  Los  Angeles  to  pursue  a  course  in 
dentistry  in  the  University  of  South- 
ern California,  and  was  also  set  apart 
to  do  missionary  labor  as  time  and 
opportunity  would  permit.  He  acted 
as  superintendent  of  the  Los  Angeles 
branch  Sunday  school  two  years  and 
as  president  of  the  branch  Y.  M.  M. 
I.  A.  one  year.  In  September,  1911, 
he  was  appointed  to  preside  over  the 
Los  Angeles  branch  of  the  Church 
and  was  laboring  in  this  capacity 
when  he  called  to  be  Presiding  Patri- 
arch of  the  Church,  to  succeed  his 
grandfather,  the  late  Patriarch  John 
Smith.  He  was  graduated  from  the 
University  of  Southern  California  June 
15,  1'911,  with  high  honors  in  the 
college  of  dentistry,  receiving  a  gold 
medal,  offered  by  the  department  of 
operative  technique,  which  was  one 
of  four  medals  offered  by  the  school. 
After    graduating    he    practiced    his 


BIOGRAPHICAL   ENCYCLOPEDIA. 


779 


profession  with  success  until  May, 
1912,  when  he  was  chosen  as  Pre- 
siding Patriarch  of  the  Church.  He 
was  ordained  to  this  high  and  holy 
calling  May  9,  1912,  by  President 
Joseph  F.  Smith  in  the  Salt  Lake 
Temple.  Brother  Smith  is  a  man  of 
pleasing  address  and  pronounced  spir- 
ituality, whose  sympathies  go  out  for 
young  and  old  in  a  way  that  ensures 
him  the  sincere  love  and  respect  of 
the  people.  He  is  a  great-grandson 
of  the  martyred  Patriarch  Hyrum 
Smith  and  the  fourth  direct  descend- 
ent  of  the  first  Patriarch  of  the  Church 
(Joseph  Smith  senior). 

SMITH,  Hyrum  Mack,  a  member 
of  the  Council  of  Twelve  Apostles 
(continued  from  Vol.  I:   772).     As  a 


young  Apostle  it  fell  to  the  lot  of 
Bro.  Smith  to  travel  extensively  in 
the  Stakes  of  Zion,  assisting  the  older 
members  of  the  quorum  to  organize 
and  re-organize  Stakes  of  Zion,  dedi- 
cate meeting  houses,  attend  Mutual 
Improvement  conventions,  etc.,  and  he 
grew  rapidly  to  understand  the  many 
duties  pertaining  to  his  high  and  holy 
calling  in  the  Priesthood.  In  Febru- 
ary, 1904,  he  was  summoned  to  Wash- 


ington, D.  C,  together  with  other 
prominent  officers  of  the  Church,  to 
appear  as  a  witness  in  the  Smoot  in- 
vestigation case  before  the  Senate 
Committee  on  Privileges  and  Elec- 
tions. In  December,  1905,  he  accom- 
panied President  Joseph  F.  Smith  and 
his  party  to  Vermont  and  took  part 
in  the  dedicatory  services  held  Dec. 
23,  1905,  when  a  monument  was 
dedicated  in  honor  of  the  Prophet 
Joseph  Smith.  In  1913  he  was  called 
to  preside  over  the  European  Mission 
and  together  with  his  wife  and  four 
children  he  arrived  in  Liverpool,  Eng- 
land, Sept.  30,  1913.  When  the  great 
world  war  broke  out  he  was  in  Ger- 
many on  a  tour  of  the  missions  under 
his  direction,  and  he  experienced  con- 
siderable difficulty  in  obtaining  pas- 
sage back  to  England.  He  met  with 
signal  success  and  capability  every 
exigency  of  that  trying  period,  direct- 
ed the  movement  of  the  Elders  in 
every  mission  under  his  presidency, 
called  them  in  and  modified  their 
work  according  to  the  situation;  and 
the  work  of  the  Lord,  under  his  guid- 
ing hand,  went  on  with  as  little  in- 
terruption as  possible.  Bravely  he 
faced  the  ordeal  with  valor  and  with 
a  courage  unflinching.  He  instilled 
into  the  hearts  of  the  missionaries 
laboring  under  him,  from  presidents 
of  missions  to  the  humble  traveling 
Elder,  a  love  of  mankind  and  a  burn- 
ing eagerness  to  preach  the  gospel  to 
a  war-torn  world.  His  utterances 
from  the  pulpit  and  in  conversation 
were  keen  disquisitions  on  the  great 
war.  He  had  studied  the  causes  of 
the  war  and  was  fearless  in  his  de- 
nunciation of  unrighteousness  as  a 
contributing  factor;  but  he  was  kind 
and  forbearing  in  his  pity  for  man- 
kind for  the  plight  into  which  the 
world  had  been  plunged.  On  his  mis- 
sion as  president,  he  was  ably  assist- 
ed by  his  wife,  Ida  B.  Smith,  who 
worked  with  him  untiringly.  After 
filling  a  most  successful  mission,  Bro. 
Smith  and  family  returned  to  Amer- 
ica Sept.  15,  1916,  and  he  immediate- 


780 


LATTER-DAY   SAINT 


ly  resumed  his  former  labors  in  the 
Stakes  of  Zion  and  continued  thus 
until  he  was  stricken  with  his  last 
sickness  from  the  effects  of  which  he 
died  in  the  Latter-day  Saints  hospital. 
Salt  Lake  City,  Jan.  23,  1918.  His 
wife,  Ida  Bowman  Smith,  after  giving 
birth  to  a  son,  died  in  Salt  Lake  City 
Sept.  24,  1918.  The  following  was 
published  in  the  "Deseret  News"  at 
the  time  of  Apostle  Smith's  demise: 
"A  great  sorrow  comes  to  this  com- 
munity, the  Church  as  well  as  the 
State,  in  the  death  of  Hyrum  M. 
Smith,  eldest  son  of  President  Joseph 
F.  Smith,  and  himself  an  Apostle  in 
the  Church  of  Jesus  Christ  of  Latter- 
day  Saints.  He  was  known  and  be- 
loved throughout  the  length  and 
breadth  of  the  intermountain  country, 
every  part  of  which  he  has  traversed 
as  an  earnest,  vigorous,  sincere  and 
impressive  preacher  of  righteousness, 
the  uncompromising  opponent  of  evil, 
a  stalwart,  worthy  native  son  of  Utah, 
and  a  patriotic  citizen  through  and 
through.  Few  men  have  lived  a  purer 
life,  few  have  so  stoutly  resisted  from 
boyhood  up  the  blandishments  of  the 
world  that  tempt  from  the  path  of 
rectitude,  few  could  go  to  face  their 
account  with  so  little  to  regret  or 
wish  otherwise.  And  yet,  to  those 
who  knew  this  excellent  man,  it  would 
seem  that  few  could  be  so  ill-spared 
at  this  time,  because  there  are  so 
few  to  take  his  place.  His  loss  will 
be  most  keenly  felt,  and  he  will  be 
truly  mourned.  To  his  revered  father, 
than  whom  no  man  ever  loved  his 
children  more  devotedly,  this  deep 
bereavement  will  be  especially  severe. 
His  mother,  his  wife  and  children, 
his  brothers  and  sisters,  his  close  as- 
sociates and  his  host  of  acquaintances 
are  plunged  in  a  sorrow  the  measure 
of  which  will  correspond  to  the  de- 
gree of  their  intimacy  with  him.  The 
finite  mind  gropes  in  vain  for  a  rea- 
son why  one  so  good  and  useful,  so 
valiant  and  strong,  one  for  whom  life 
seemed  to  hold  so  much  in  store, 
should  thus  be  torn  away  in  the  very 


prime  and  vigor  of  manhood.  But 
though  this  mystery  we  may  not  ex- 
plain, nor  its  purport  comprehend,  to 
the  soul  surcharged  with  grief  there 
comes  relief  in  the  assurance  that  the 
great  Father  above  will  sanctify  all 
sorrow  to  His  children's  good,  and 
that  He  does  all  things  well." 

SMITH,  John,  Presiding  Patriarch 
of  the  Church  (continued  from  Vol. 
I,  page  183).  Patriarch  Smith  con- 
tinued his  labors  as  a  Patriarch  zeal- 
ously and  successfully  for  the  remain- 
der of  his  life.  In  December,  1905, 
he  accompanied  Pres.  Joseph  F.  Smith 
and  his  party  to  Vermont,  taking  part 
in  the  service  when  the  monument  in 
honor  of  the  Prophet  Joseph  Smith 
was  dedicated  Dec.  23,  1905.  Patri- 
arch Smith  died  at  his  residence  in 
Salt  Lake  City,  Nov.  6,  1911.  From 
an  article  published  in  the  "Deseret 
Evening  News"  at  the  time  of  his 
demise  we  re-publish  the  following: 
"Again  Israel  has  been  called  upon  to 
part  with  one  of  its  beloved  leaders, 
John  Smith,  presiding  Patriarch  to 
the  Church.  His  has  been  a  long  use- 
ful life.  He  has  become  a  familiar 
figure  throughout  the  Church.  Thou- 
sands of  Latter-day  Saints  value  as 
most  precious  mementoes  the  bless- 
ings pronounced  upon  them  by  the 
departed  servant  of  the  Lord,  for  they 
have  found,  in  their  fulfillment,  an 
unimpeachable  testimony  for  the  truth 
of  the  Great  Latter-day  Work.  Patri- 
arch John  Smith,  like  his  saintly, 
martyred  father,  Hyrum  Smith,  was 
faithful  to  the  gospel  and  to  his  call- 
ing, through  trials,  persecutions,  and 
hardships  of  every  kind.  He  never 
failed  to  respond  to  a  call  made  upon 
him,  and  he  performed  every  task 
with  due  regard  for  the  promptings 
of  conscience.  In  every  position,  pub- 
lic or  private,  military  or  civil,  religi- 
ous or  secular,  he  labored  with  zeal 
and  fidelity." 

SMITH,  John  Henry,  a  member  of 
the  Council  of  Twelve  Apostles  (con- 


BIOGRAPHICAL  ENCYCLOPEDIA. 


781 


tinned  from  Vol.  1:141).  John  Henry 
Smith  continued  his  labors  in  the  vari- 
ous Stakes  of  Zion,  assisting  in  the  or- 
ganization of  new  Stakes  and  Wards, 
ever  bringing  a  good  influence  to  bear 
upon  all  those  with  whom  he  associ- 
ated. In  1904  he  was  summoned  to 
Washington,  D.  C,  as  a  witness  be- 
fore the  Senate  Committee  on  Privi- 
leges and  Elections  in  the  case  of 
Senator  Reed  Smoot.  In  December, 
1905,  he  accompanied  Pres.  Joseph 
F.  Smith  and  others  to  Vermont,  tak- 
ing part  in  the  services  when  the 
monument  erected  in  honor  of  the 
Prophet  Joseph  Smith  was  dedicated. 
When  Pres.  Joseph  F.  Smith  (after 
the  death  of  Counselor  John  R.  Win- 
der), selected  a  new  counselor,  John 
Henry  Smith  was  chosen  and  set 
apart  as  second  counselor  in  April, 
1910.  The  duties  pertaining  to  this 
high  and  holy  office  were  faithfully 
discharged  by  Brother  Smith  until 
the  time  of  his  death,  which  occurred 
in  Salt  Lake  City  Oct.  13,  1911.  The 
"Deseret  Evening  News,"  at  the  time 
of  his  demise,  commented  as  follows, 
in  an  editorial:  "To  say  that  it  was 
a  great  shock  to  this  community  to 
hear  of  the  sudden  departure  from 
this  sphere  of  action  of  Pres.  John 
Henry  Smith  is  to  express  but  feebly 
the  general  sentiment.  For  the  sum- 
mons came  without  previous  warn- 
ing. He  seemed  so  robust  and  strong, 
so  active  and  full  of  vitality,  and  his 
presence  in  the  midst  of  his  loving 
family,  and  in  the  councils  of  the 
Church,  seemed  to  be  so  much  needed, 
that  one  naturally  hoped  and  expect- 
ed for  him  many  more  years  of  use- 
fulness in  this  life.  It  is  difficult  to 
reconcile  oneself  to  the  thought  that 
President  John  Henry  Smith,  the  ten- 
der husband  and  father,  the  wise 
counselor,  the  genial  friend,  the  de- 
lightful pulpit  and  platform  orator, 
the  strong  defender  of  the  truth,  the 
faithful  witness  and  messenger  of  the 
Master,  has  left  us.  But  such  Is  the 
decree  of  Him  whose  servant  he  was. 
He  has  gone  to  mingle  with  his  breth- 


ren behind  the  veil  and  to  continue 
his  work  in  another  sphere,  for  the 
redemption  of  the  world.  No  doubt, 
he  is  needed  there.  He  lives  though 
he  has  departed.  *  ♦  *  President 
John  Henry  Smith  has  done  a  good 
work  for  the  Master.  He  has  served 
faithfully  and  finished  his  mission. 
The  crown  of  victory  is  his." 

SMITH,  Joseph  Fielding,  sixth  presi- 
dent of  the  Church  of  Jesus  Christ  of 
Latter-day  Saints  (continued  from 
Vol.  I,  page  66).  At  the  general  con- 
ference of  the  Church  held  in  Salt 
Lake  City,  Oct.  7,  1901,  Joseph  F. 
Smith  was  sustained  as  first  counse- 
lor to  President  Lorenzo  Snow,  suc- 
ceeding George  Q.  Cannon,  who  had 
died  April  10,  1901;  but  three  days 
later,  Oct.  13,  1901,  President  Loren- 
zo Snow  died,  and  at  a  meeting  of  the 
First  Presidency  and  Twelve  Apostles, 
held  Oct.  17,  1901,  the  First  Presi- 
dency was  re-organized  with  Joseph 
F.  Smith  as  president,  John  R.  Win- 
der as  first  and  Anthon  H.  Lund  as 
second  counselor.  At  a  meeting  held 
Nov.  2,  1901,  President  Smith  was 
chosen  as  president  of  the  Church 
Board  of  Education.  As  soon  as  he 
became  president  of  the  Church,  Pres. 
Smith  commenced  a  career  of  great 
activity.  The  building  of  meeting 
houses  in  many  different  localities 
received  special  attention  and  it  is  a 
matter  of  record  that  during  his  ad- 
ministration a  greater  number  of 
meeting  houses,  chapels  and  taber- 
nacles were  built,  both  in  the  Stakes 
of  Zion  and  in  the  missionary  lieias, 
than  had  ever  been  done  before  since 
the  Church  was  organized.  In  Decem- 
ber, 1892,  President  Smith  stated  to 
the  Associated  Press  that  the  Church 
did  not  sanction,  authorize  or  per- 
form marriages  contrary  to  law.  This 
statement  was  made  necessary  be- 
cause of  certain  false  reports  wnicn 
had  been  circulated  to  the  effect  that 
the  Church  still  sanctioned  plural 
marriages  in  secret.  In  February, 
1904,  President  Smith,  together  with 


782 


LATTER-DAY   SAINT 


a  number  of  other  Church  leaders, 
were  summoned  to  Washington,  D.  C, 
to  appear  as  witnesses  in  the  Smoot 
investigation  case  before  the  Senate 
Committee  on  Privileges  and  Elec- 
tions, having  been  subpoenaed  by  the 
prosecution.  President  Smith  was 
kept  on  the  stand  for  nearly  a  whole 
week,  subjected  to  all  kinds  of  ques- 
tioning, and  he  astonished  the  mem- 
bers of  the  committee  and  others  by 
his  frank  and  direct  answers.  At 
the  74th  annual  conference  of  the 
Church  held  in  Salt  Lake  City  in  April, 
1904,  President  Smith  declared  in  a 
written  statement  that  no  plural  mar- 
riages had  been  solemnized  with  the 
sanction,  consent  or  knowledge  of  the 
Church  since  the  manifesto  was  issued 
by  President  Wilford  Woodruff,  Sept. 
24,  1890,  and  President  Smith  further 
announced  that  all  plural  marriages 
"are  prohibited"  and  that  anyone  who 
should  assume  to  "solemnize  or  enter 
into  such  marriages  "will  become  sub- 
ject to  excommunication  from  the 
Church.  In  December,  1905,  Presi- 
dent Smith,  accompanied  by  about 
thirty  others,  visited  Vermont  and 
dedicated  a  monument  erected  to  the 
honor  of  the  Prophet  Joseph  Smith 
Dec.  23,  1905,  it  being  the  100th 
anniversary  of  the  birth  of  the  Proph- 
et. The  President's  party  left  Salt 
Lake  City  Dec.  18,  1905,  and  returned 
Jan.  1,  1906.  In  May,  1906,  Presi- 
dent Smith  purchased  for  the  Church 
the  old  Washington  press  upon  which 
the  first  edition  of  the  Book  of  Mor- 
mon was  printed  in  1830.  In  July, 
1906,  President  Smith,  accompanied 
by  a  part  of  his  family  and  others, 
left  Salt  Lake  City  on  a  visit  to  Eu- 
rope. They  crossed  the  Atlantic 
ocean  on  the  ship  "Vaterland"  and 
during  their  stay  in  Europe  they  vis- 
ited Great  Britain,  Belgium,  Holland 
and  other  countries.  After  his  return 
President  Smith  visited  many  of  the 
Stakes  of  Zion,  attending  conferences, 
dedicating  meeting  houses  and  other- 
wise organizing  and  directing  the  af- 
fairs  of   the    Church.      In    February, 


1909,  with  part  of  his  family,  Bishop 
Charles  W.  Nibley  and  others,  Presi- 
dent Smith  left  Salt  Lake  City  on  a 
visit  to  the  Hawaiian  Islands.  He 
arrived  in  Honolulu  Feb.  27,  1909, 
and  after  a  pleasant  visit  on  the 
island  (where  he  had  filled  his  first 
mission  as  a  boy  and  made  a  number 
of  subsequent  visits),  he  returned 
home  April  1,  1909.  The  new  Bishop's 
Building,  erected  in  Salt  Lake  City, 
in  1909,  was  dedicated  by  President 
Smith  Jan.  20,  1910.  In  July,  1910, 
President  Smith  made  another  visit 
to  Europe,  accompanied  by  Charles 
W.  Nibley  and  others.  On  this  visit 
the  President  visited  Great  Britain, 
Holland,  Denmark,  Norway,  Sweden, 
Germany  and  Switzerland,  attending 
conferences  and  special  meetings  in 
the  different  missions.  The  Presi- 
dent's party,  returning  to  America, 
arrived  in  Salt  Lake  City,  Sept.  3, 
IdlO.  In  July,  1913,  President  Smith 
visited  Alberta,  Canada,  where  he 
dedicated  a  site  for  a  Temple  July  27, 
1913.  In  November,  1913,  he  visited 
Chicago  (Illinois),  where  he  dedi- 
cated the  Rosland  district  missionary 
home  and  a  chapel  and  mission  home 
on  the  Logan  Square.  On  their  re- 
turn trip  the  President  and  his  party 
visited  Far  West  and  Independence 
(Missouri).  Later  in  the  year  Presi- 
dent Smith  visited  some  of  the  Stakes 
in  Arizona  and  dedicated  a  new 
Church  Academy  at  Snowflake;  he 
also  dedicated  two  chapels  in  Mesa, 
visited  the  Roosevelt  dam,  etc.  In 
August.  1914,  he  made  another  visit 
to  Canada.  In  November,  1914,  he 
visited  some  of  the  Southern  States, 
attended  a  conference  at  Jacksonville, 
Florida,  and  returned  home  by  way  oi 
California.  During  the  war  period 
President  Smith  showed  great  sym- 
pathy for  the  allies  and  on  his  initia- 
tive the  Church  invested  half  a  mil- 
lion dollars  in  Liberty  bonds.  He 
also  authorized  the  spending  of  $1600 
to  buy  an  ambulance  automobile  for 
use  in  France.  Four  of  his  sons  en- 
listed   in    the    army,    one    of    whom 


BIOGRAPHICAL  ENCYCLOPEDIA. 


783 


(Calvin  S.)  distinguished  himself  as 
an  officer  in  the  "service  in  France. 
The  others  are  Andrew  K.,  who  served 
as  an  interpreter  for  the  German 
prisoners  at  Fort  Douglas;  Samuel, 
who  served  in  the  aviation  corps  at 
Berkeley,  Calif.,  and  Fielding,  who 
served  in  the  students'  training  camp 
at  the  Presidio,  near  San  Francisco, 
California.  In  June,  1915,  President 
Smith  made  another  visit  to  Hawaii, 
and  during  the  succeeding  three  years 
made  several  other  trips  to  that  land. 
On  one  of  these  visits  (in  February, 
1916)  President  Smith  and  Bishop 
Nibley  selected  the  site  for  the  erec- 
tion of  a  Temple,  the  saints  at  the 
previous  semi-annual  conference  held 
at  Salt  Lake  City  having  voted  unan- 
imously in  favor  of  erecting  a  Temple 
in  Hawaii.  Later  the  same  year  Presi- 
dent Smith  made  another  visit  to  the 
Hawaiian  Islands.  On  June  27,  1918, 
he  attended  the  dedication  of  a  monu- 
ment in  honor  of  his  father  Hyrum 
Smith  in  the  Salt  Lake  Cemetery,  it 
being  the  74th  anniversary  of  the 
martyrdom  of  Joseph  and  Hyrum 
Smith  in  Carthage,  Illinois.  President 
Smith  celebrated  the  80th  anniversary 
of  his  birth  Nov.  13,  1918,  although 
his  health  at  the  time  was  very  poor. 
After  that  he  continued  to  sink  grad- 
ually until  Nov.  19,  1918,  when  his 
spirit  took  its  flight  to  the  Great  Be- 
yond. He  had  presided  over  the 
Church  seventeen  years  and  gained 
the  love  and  confidence  of  the  entire 
community.  During  his  life  President 
Smith  married  six  wives.  His  first 
wife  was  Levira  A.  C.  Smith  (daugh- 
ter of  Samuel  Harrison  Smith  and 
Levira  Clark)  who  was  born  April 
29,  1842,  in  Nauvoo,  Illinois,  and  was 
married  to  Joseph  F.  Smith  April  4, 
1859.  In  1866  (May  5th)  President 
Smith  married  JulinaLambson  (daugh- 
ter of  Alfred  B.  Lambson  and  Melissa 
J.  Bigler),  who  was  born  June  18, 
1849,  in  SaltLakeCity, Utah.  She  bore 
her  husband  eleven  children,  namely, 
Mercy  Josephine,  Mary  Sophronia,Don- 
ette,  Jos    Fielding,  David  Asael,  Geo. 


Carlos,  Julina  Clarissa,  Elias  Wesley, 
Emily,  Rachel  and  Edith.  In  1868 
(March  1st)  President  Smith  married 
Sarah  Ellen  Richards  (daughter  of 
Willard  Richards  and  Sarah  Long- 
stroth),  who  was  born  Aug.  24,  1850, 
in  Salt  Lake  City,  Utah.  This  union 
was  blessed  with  eleven  children, 
namely,  Sarak  Ellen,  Leonora,  Joseph 
Richards,  Heber  John,  Rhoda,  Mi- 
nerva, Alice,  Willard  Richards,  Frank- 
lin Richards,  Jeanetta  and  Asenath. 
In  1871  (Jan.  1st)  President  Smith 
married  Edna  Lambson  (daughter  of 
Alfred  B.  Lambson  and  Melissa  J. 
Bigler),  who  was  born  March  3,  1851, 
in  Salt  Lake  City.  The  children  of 
this  marriage  were  Hyrum  Mack,  Al- 
vin  Fielding,  Alfred  Jason,  Edna  Me- 
lissa, Albert  Jesse,  Robert,  Emma, 
Zina,  Ruth  and  Martha.  In  1883 
(Dec.  6th)  President  Smith  married 
Alice  Kimball  (daughter  of  Heber  C. 
Kimball  and  Anna  Gheen),  who  was 
born  Sept.  6,  1858,  in  Salt  Lake  City, 
Utah.  The  issue  of  this  marriage 
were  the  following  children:  Lucy 
Mack,  Andrew  Kimball,  Jesse  Kimball 
and  Fielding  Kimball.  In  1884  (Jan. 
13th)  President  Smith  married  Mary 
Taylor  Schwartz  (daughter  of  Wil- 
liam Schwartz  and  Agnes  Taylor;, 
who  was  born  April  30,  1865,  in 
Holliday,  Salt  Lake  county,  Utah,  and 
who  became  the  mother  of  the  fol- 
lowing children:  John  S.,  Calvin  S., 
Samuel  S.,  James  S.,  Agnes,  Silas  S., 
and  Royal  S.  The  "Deseret  Evening 
News"  of  Nov.  19,  1918,  published 
the  following  editorial  in  eulogy  oi 
President  Joseph  F.  Smith:  "Modern 
day  Israel  mourns  today  the  loss  of 
the  beloved  leader  who  after  seven- 
teen years  of  splendid  presidency  and 
eighty  years  of  glorious  life  has  laid 
off  the  burdens  of  mortality  and  has 
gone  to  mingle  with  those  great  ones 
whose  labors  are  continued  on  the 
other  side.  The  people's  grief  will  be 
sincere  and  deep,  for  this  was  a  man 
whose  abounding  love  for  his  fellow- 
men  was  of  the  same  quality  with 
that  affection  which  he  lavished  upon 


784 


LATTER-DAY   SAINT 


his  own  family.     No  trait  of  his  re- 
splendent character  was  more  beauti- 
ful and  conspicuous  than  this  tender 
attachment  which  he  ever  manifested 
toward  all  those  who  had  claim  upon 
It.     No  man  ever  held  more  truly  the 
key  to  that  love  which  'is  the  secret 
sympathy,  the  silver  link,  the  silken 
tie,  which  heart  to  heart  and  mind  to 
mind  in  body  and  in  soul  can  bind.' 
In  this  parting  from  him,  therefore, 
there  is  not  only  the  sense  of  bereave- 
ment for  a  wise  and  righteous  leader 
taken  away,  there  is  also  among  tens 
of  thousands  the  feeling  of  personal 
sorrow  in  the  separation  from  a  gen- 
uine friend,  a  compassionate  father, 
a  kind  and  patient  brother.  These  re- 
lationships   President    Smith    desired 
to  sustain  to  his  people,  and  did  sus- 
tain, in  every  sense  of  the  word.   The 
first  among  the  six  presidents  of  the 
Church  to  have  been  born  within  its 
pale,  and  to  have  spent  every  day  of 
his  life  under  its  aegis  and  influence, 
he   was  permitted   to   hold   the   high 
calling  of  Prophet,  seer  and  revelator 
longer  than  any  of  his  predecessors 
save  one.  His  uncle,  the  Prophet  Joseph 
Smith,  was  slain  in  1844,  soon  after 
the  Church  had  passed  the  fourteenth 
anniversary  of  its  organization.  From 
that  year  until  1877,  President  Brig- 
ham  Young  held  the  keys  and  author- 
ity— a   period    of   thirty-three   years. 
President  John  Taylor  held  the  office 
ten  years.  President  Woodruff  eleven 
and   President   Lorenzo   Snow   three. 
These  were  great  spirits  all.  mighty 
men  of  God  every  one;  yet  President 
Smith  possessed   for  the  position  the 
unique  advantage  above  referred  to — 
he  did  not  have  to  'come  out  of  the 
world'  and  unlearn  any  of  its  trafli- 
tions  and   errors;    from   the   hour   of 
his  birth  he  was  privileged   to  bask 
in  the  rays  of  the  revealed   and  re- 
stored  gospel,    of  which   during   the 
ensuing  four  score  years  he  was  to 
be  so  valiant  a  champion,  so  excellent 
an  expounder.     And  the  results  have 
justified  in  every  way  the  hopes  that 
were   cherished   and   the   predictions 


that  were  made  concerning  his  presi- 
dency. The  Church  has  prospered 
amazingly,  both  in  spiritual  and  tem- 
poral things.  Missionary  work  abroad 
has  gone  forward  with  great  vigor, 
and  Zion  at  home  has  been  strength- 
ened. Evil  has  not  been  looked  upon 
with  the  least  degree  of  allowance, 
yet  charity  for  the  repentant  erring 
has  not  been  withheld.  The  spirit  of 
union  and  harmony  has  been  pro- 
moted, and  the  body  of  the  Church 
has  been  made  a  compact,  potent  force 
for  righteousness,  and  strong  to  re- 
sist the  onslaughts  of  the  adversary. 
Of  President  Smith's  personality  and 
attributes  it  is  needless  to  speak.  His 
life  has  been  an  open  book — his  course 
of  conduct  has  been  open  to  the  ob- 
servation of  all  men.  *  *  *  Of 
the  great  results  of  his  life  and  la- 
bors, volumes  might  be  written,  for 
he  has  left  his  impress  upon  the  his- 
tory of  this  and  future  generations. 
He  was  all  in  all  a  man,  sterling, 
staunch,  true,  a  benefactor  of  his  race. 
His  courage,  sincerity  and  faith  were 
magnificent,  yet  he  had  the  humility 
of  a  child,  and  was  not  ashamed  to 
shed  human  tears.  He  sought  to  live 
in  near  relation  with  those  holy  in- 
fluences which  gross  mortality  does 
not  sense;  and  we  are  permitted  to 
know  from  many  of  his  recent  utter- 
ances that  during  the  latter  part  of 
his  life  particularly  he  enjoyed  a 
blessed  communion  which  no  man 
can  contemplate  without  awe  but 
which  to  a  good,  pure  man  is  a  fore- 
taste of  heaven.  He  has  carried  off 
bravely  his  large  part  in  the  battle 
of  life,  and  has  earned  the  victor's 
crown.  His  memory  will  be  blessed 
forever!" 

S>IITH,  Joseph  Fielding,  junior,  a 

member  of  the  Council  of  Twelve 
Apostles,  was  born  July  19,  1876,  in 
Salt  Lake  City,  Utah,  the  son  of  Pres. 
Joseph  F.  Smith  and  Julina  Lambson 
Smith.  He  was  baptized  and  con- 
firmed by  his  father  July  19,  1884, 
and  four  years  later  was  ordained  a 


BIOGRAPHICAL  ENCYCLOPEDIA. 


785 


Deacon;  subsequently  he  was  ordained 
a  Teacher  and  set  apart  as  president 
of  the  Teachers'  Quorum  in  the  16th 
Ward,  and  from  his  early  youth  be- 
came an  active  Church  worker  in  the 
16th  Ward,  Salt  Lake  City.  He  was 
ordained  an  Elder  Sept.  8,  1897,  and 
a  Seventy  May  12,  1899,  by  Joseph 
F.  Smith.  The  following  day  (May 
13th)  he  left  for  Great  Britain  on  a 
mission.  On  his  arrival  in  Liverpool, 
England,  he  was  appointed  to  labor 
in  the  Nottingham  conference,  where 
he  became  known  as  a  successful  and 


energetic  Elder.  He  returned  home 
in  1901  and  in  1903  he  was  chosen  as 
a  president  of  the  24th  quorum  of 
Seventy  and  acted  as  instructor  of 
that  quorum  until  the  Salt  Lake  Stake 
of  Zion  was  organized  in  March,  1904, 
when  he  was  ordained  a  High  Priest 
by  Hyrum  M.  Smith,  and  set  apart  as 
one  of  the  High  Councilors  of  said 
Stake,  which  position  he  held  until 
the  time  he  was  called  to  be  an  Apos- 
tle. In  1898  (April  26th)  he  married 
Louie  E.  Shurtliff,  daughter  of  Lewis 
W.  Shurtliff,  of  Ogden.  She  died 
March  30,  1908,  leaving  two  small 
children  (Josephine  and  Julina).  In 
November,  1908,  Elder  Smith  married 
Ethel  G.  Reynolds  ( daughter  of  the 
late  Elder  George  Reynolds),  who  has 


borne  him  six  children,  namely,  Em- 
ily, Naomi,  Lois,  Joseph  F.,  Amelia, 
and  Lewis  Warren.  Early  in  life  El- 
der Smith  became  very  much  inter- 
ested in  the  genealogical  work  of  the 
Church  and  has  served  as  secretary, 
librarian  and  treasurer  of  the  Genea- 
logical Society  of  Utah.  He  estab- 
lished the  "Utah  Genealogical  and 
Historical  Magazine"  with  the  ap- 
proval and  under  the  direction  of  the 
board  of  directors,  editing  the  paper 
during  the  first  year  (1910),  but  had 
to  relinquish  the  editorial  chair  on 
account  of  other  duties  after  being 
called  into  the  Council  of  the  Twelve. 
In  the  summer  of  1902  he  visited 
Massachusetts,  gathering  the  genea- 
logy of  the  Smith  family.  On  this  trip 
he  secured  hundreds  of  names  and 
straightened  out  the  family  line  from 
Robert  Smith,  the  earliest  ancestor  in 
America.  He  was  also  actively  en- 
gaged while  quite  young  in  the  Mu- 
tual Improvement  work  of  the  Church, 
acting  as  instructor  in  the  16th  and 
later  in  the  17th  Ward.  In  1898- 
1899  he  acted  as  an  aid  in  the  Y.  M. 
M.  I.  A.  board  of  the  Salt  Lake  Stake, 
and  became  a  member  of  the  General 
Board  in  1903.  In  1909  he  was  also 
chosen  as  a  member  of  the  general 
board  of  Religion  Classes  and  is  at 
present  first  assistant  to  Rudger  Claw- 
son  in  the  general  superintendency  of 
the  Religion  Class  organizations  of 
the  Church.  Since  1906  he  has  been 
sustained  as  an  assistant  Church  His- 
torian. From  1901  to  1910  he  served 
as  a  home  missionary  in  the  Salt  Lake 
Stake  of  Zion.  In  1910,  when  John 
Henry  Smith  was  chosen  as  second 
counselor  in  the  First  Presidency,  Jo- 
seph Fielding  Smith  was  chosen  to 
fill  the  vacancy  in  the  Quorum  of  the 
Twelve,  caused  by  the  promotion  of 
Elder  John  Henry  Smith.  He  was  or- 
dained an  Apostle  April  7,  1910,  by 
Jos.  F.  Smith.  Since  that  time  Elder 
Smith  has  been  devoted  to  the  duties 
of  his  high  and  holy  calling,  traveling 
extensively  in  the  various  Stakes  of 
Zion,  preaching  the  gospel  and  assist- 


Vol.  Ill,  No.  50. 


June  26,  1920 


786 


LATTER-DAY   SAINT 


ing  in  ordaining  and  setting  apart  the 
many  new  officers  called  from  time  to 
time  to  fill  positions  in  the  Church. 
Since  April,  1912,  he  has  been  a  mem- 
ber of  the  board  of  trustees  of  the 
Brigham  Young  University.  In  1917 
he  was  chosen  as  a  member  of  the 
Church  Board  of  Education  and  is  at 
present  a  member  of  several  import- 
ant committees  connected  with  Church 
activities.  When  Pres.  Anthon  H. 
Lund  was  sustained  as  president  of 
the  Salt  Lake  Temple,  he  chose  Elder 
Smith  as  his  first  assistant,  which  po- 
sition he  now  holds.  Joseph  Fielding 
Smith  is  naturally  spiritually  minded, 
has  an  unbounded  faith  in  the  gospel 
of  Jesus  Christ  and  the  divine  mis- 
sion of  the  Prophet  Joseph  Smith;  he 
is  energetic  and  capable  in  all  his 
work,  is  sound  on  doctrine,  and  has 
written  a  number  of  doctrinal  and 
historical  essays  on  different  topics, 
all  of  which  show  a  thoroughness  in 
study  and  research. 

SNOW,  Lorenzo,  fifth  President  of 
the  Church.  (Continued  from  Vol. 
1:^  On  Monday,  January  8,  1900, 
President  Lorenzo  Snow  issued  a  proc- 
lamation declaring  that  the  Church 
had  positively  abandoned  polygamy, 
and  that  if  any  member  of  the  Church 
disobeyed  the  law,  either  as  to  polyg- 
amy or  unlawful  co-habitation,  he 
must  bear  his  own  burden  and  be  an- 
swerable to  the  tribunal  of  the  land 
for  his  own  action  pertaining  thereto. 
In  May,  1900,  President  Snow,  in  be- 
half of  the  Church,  donated  to  the 
Latter-day  Saints  College  a  land  grant 
north  of  the  old  Deseret  News  corner 
in  Salt  Lake  City.  This  is  now  the 
site  of  the  Latter-day  Saints  Univer- 
sity. At  a  meeting  of  the  Deseret  Sun- 
day School  Union,  held  May  9,  1901, 
President  Snow  was  chosen  general  su- 
perintendent of  all  the  Sunday  schools 
in  the  Church,  to  succeed  the  late 
George  Q.  Cannon.  For  some  time  in 
1901  President  Snow's  health  had 
been  failing  and  he  continued  to  grow 
worse  until  Oct.    10,   1901,  when  he 


died    at    the    Beehive   house,    in    Salt 
Lake    City.      The    "Deseret    Evening 
News"  of  Oct.   16,   1901,  commented 
upon  the  demise  of  President  Lorenzo 
Snow   as   follows:      "Once   more   the 
Church  of  Jesus  Christ  of  Latter-day 
Saints  is  in  deep  mourning.    Again  its 
chief  Apostle  and  President  has  been 
called  to  a  higher  sphere.     President 
Lorenzo  Snow  is  dead.     In  the  eighty- 
eighth  year  of  his  eventful  life  he  has 
finished  his  work  on  earth  and  closed 
his  mortal  career.     He  has  departed 
in  peace.     He  died  in  the  Lord;  he  is 
blessed  of  heaven;  he  rests  from  his 
labors,  and  his  works  do  follow  him 
as  evidences  of  his  worthiness  and  his 
title   to   a  never-fading  crown.      Our 
departed  leader  was  a  man  of  mark 
from  the  beginning  of  his  membership 
in  the  Church  of  the  latter  days.  There 
was  a  place  in  his  heart  for  the  gos- 
pel and  a  place  in  the  ministry  for  his 
talents.      Of  a  spiritual   nature,   yet 
eminently  practical,  he  was  ready  to 
receive  the  manifestations  of  the  spir- 
it and  the  revelations  of  heaven.     He 
received  a  divine  testimony  so  power- 
ful and  overwhelming  that,  to  use  his 
own  words,  it  filled  his  whole  being 
and  quickened  him  spiritually,  intel- 
lectually and  physically;  it  never  left 
him.     He  was  as  sensible  of  it  to  his 
last  hours  as  on  the  day  when  he  re- 
ceived it  directly  from  the  Lord.  This 
inspiration  guided  him  through  all  his 
labors    and    travels    and    ministry   at 
home  and  abroad.    His  whole  life  was 
devoted  to  the  cause  of  Christ  and  the 
salvation  of  man.    Whether  out  among 
the  nations  preaching  the  gospel,  or 
visiting  the  branches  and   Stakes  of 
Zion,  or  directing  the  enterprises  and 
temporal  works  necessary  to  the  de- 
velopment of  the  community  and  the 
advancement  of  the  State,  as  a  legis- 
lator, a  co-operative  leader,  an  Apos- 
tle of  the  Lord,  a  counselor  in  Israel, 
a  President  of  a  Temple  and  of  the 
Church,  and  a  Prophet  of  the  living 
God,   Lorenzo  Snow   was  equally  ac- 
tive and  able  as  a  great  spirit  devoted 
to  the  truth,  the  welfare  of  humanity 


BIOGRAPHICAL   ENCYCLOPEDIA. 


787 


and  the  glory  of  the  Eternal  Father. 
*  *  *  President  Snow,  at  his  first 
active  assumption  of  the  position  to 
which  he  had  been  called  at  the  head 
of  the  Church,  had  the  strong  desire 
to  lift  it  from  the  burden  of  debt 
which  was  upon  it,  in  consequence  of 
the  troubles  through  which  it  had 
passed.  He  was  inspired  to  revive 
among  the  Saints  obedience  to  the 
law  of  tithing,  and  his  travels  through 
the  Stakes  infused  a  new  spirit  among 
them  in  relation  to  it.  The  response 
was  remarkable.  It  enabled  him  to 
pay  off  many  obligations,  to  reduce 
the  rates  of  interest  that  were  being 
paid,  to  aid  financially  many  of  the 
interests  of  Zion,  and  to  see  before 
him  the  approaching  end  of  the  debts 
of  the  Church.  But  his  time  had 
come.  His  departure  is  a  great  loss 
to  the  people  over  whom  he  presided, 
and  they  will  feel  it  keenly,  but  what 
a  welcome  he  will  meet  on  the  other 
side  of  the  veil!  The  Prophets,  El- 
ders and  Saints  of  the  last  dispensa- 
tion, who  have  'gone  before,'  will 
greet  him  in  Paradise,  and  rejoice  at 
the  aid  he  will  render  in  the  great 
work  now  in  progress  in  the  spirit 
world.  *  *  *  Our  departed  Pres- 
ident will  be  ever  known  in  Israel  as 
one  of  the  chosen  and  anointed  sons 
of  God,  sent  on  earth  for  the  work  of 
the  last  dispensation,  who  magnified 
his  calling,  suffered  for  the  truth's 
sake,  and  make  a  great  impress  upon 
this  generation." 

TAIiMAGE,  James  Edward,  a  mem- 
ber of  the  Council  of  the  Twelve 
Apostles,  and  a  resident  of  Salt  Lake 
City,  Utah,  was  born  Sunday  Sept.  21, 
18  6  2,  at  Hungerford,  Berkshire,  Eng- 
land, the  son  of  James  Joyce  Tal- 
mage  and  his  wife,  Susannah  Preater. 
He  is  the  first  son  and  second  child  in 
a  family  of  eight.  He  was  baptized 
and  confirmed  a  member  of  the  Church 
of  Jesus  Christ  of  Latter-day  Saints 
at  the  place  of  his  birth,  June  15, 
1873,  and  on  the  18th  of  the  follow- 
ing August  was  ordained  a  Deacon  in 


the  Ramsbury  branch  of  the  London 
conference.  The  entire  family  left 
England  May  24,  1876,  landed  in  New 
York  June  5th,  and  arrived  in  Salt 
Lake  City  June  14th  following.  His 
career  in  the  Church  has  been  up- 
ward and  onward  from  the  time  of 
his  baptism.  In  Provo,  Utah,  where 
the  family  had  established  a  home, 
he  was  ordained  a  Teacher  Decem- 
ber 17,  1877,  and  an  Elder  June  28, 
1880.  On  September  29,  1884,  he 
was  ordained  a  High  Priest,  and  was 
set  apart  as  an  alternate  High  Coun- 


cilor in  the  Utah  Stake  of  Zion.  On 
December  7,  1911,  he  was  appointed 
and  sustained  to  be  one  of  the  Apos- 
tles, to  fill  the  vacancy  caused  by  the 
appointment  of  Elder  Charles  W.  Pen- 
rose as  second  counselor  in  the  First 
Presidency,  and  on  the  following  day 
(Dec.  8th)  was  ordained  an  Apostle 
of  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ  and  was  set 
apart  as  one  of  the  Council  of  the 
Twelve  Apostles  of  the  Church  of 
Jesus  Christ  of  Latter-day  Saints,  un- 
der the  hands  of  President  Joseph  F. 
Smith,  assisted  by  his  counselors  and 
members  of  the  Council  of  the  Twelve. 
In  1888  (June  14th)  he  married  Mary 
May  Booth  (daughter  of  Richard 
Thornton  Booth  and  his  wife,  Elsie 
Edge  Booth),  at  the  MantiTemple,  and 


788 


LATTER-DAY   SAINT 


from  this  union  there  are  the  follow- 
ing children:  Sterling  B.,  born  May 
21,  1889;  Paul  B.,  born  Dec.  21,  1891; 
Zella,  born  Aug.  3,  1894,  died  of  pneu- 
monia April  27,  1895;  Elsie,  born 
Aug.  16,  1896;  James  Karl,  born  Aug. 
29,  1898;  Lucile,  born  May  29,  1900; 
Helen  May,  born  Oct.  24,  1902,  and 
JohnRussell,  born  Feb.  1,  1911.  Bro. 
Talmage  obtained  his  early  schooling 
in  the  National  and  Board  schools  of 
his  home  district  in  England,  and  was 
an  Oxford  diocesan  prize  scholar  in 
1874.  He  entered  the  Brigham  Young 
Academy  (now  University)  at  Prove, 
Utah,  in  1876,  and  followed  to  com- 
pletion the  high  school  and  normal 
courses,  and  in  his  17th  year  was  a 
teacher  of  elementary  science  and 
English  in  the  institution  named.  His 
early  predilection  was  for  the  sci- 
ences, and  in  1882-83  he  took  a  se- 
lected course,  mainly  in  chemistry  and 
geology,  at  Lehigh  University,  Bethle- 
hem, Pa.  Though  a  special  student 
and  not  a  candidate  for  a  degree,  he 
passed  during  his  single  year  of  res- 
idence nearly  all  the  examinations  in 
the  four-year  course  and  was  later 
graduated;  and  in  188  3-84  he  was  en- 
gaged in  advanced  work  at  Johns  Hop- 
kins I'niversity,  Baltimore,  Md.  He 
returned  to  Utah  in  the  fall  of  1884, 
in  response  to  a  summons  from  the 
home  institution,  and  served  as  pro- 
fessor of  geology  and  chemistry,  with 
varied  activities  in  other  depart- 
ments, in  the  Brigham  Young  Acad- 
emy from  1884  to  1888.  While  still 
a  member  of  the  faculty,  he  was 
elected  a  member  of  the  board  of 
trustees  of  the  Brigham  Young  Acad- 
emy. During  his  residence  in  Provo, 
he  served  successively  as  city  council- 
man, alderman  and  justice  of  the 
peace.  In  1888  he  was  called  to  Salt 
Lake  City  to  take  the  presidency  of 
the  Latter-day  Saints  College,  which 
position  he  held  until  1893.  He  was 
president  of  and  professor  of  geology 
in  the  University  of  Utah,  1894-97. 
In  the  year  last  named  he  resigned 
the  presidency,  but  retained  the  chair 


of  geology,  which  had  been  specially 
endowed;  and  ten  years  later  (1907) 
he  resigned  the  professorship  to  fol- 
low the  practical  work  of  mining  ge- 
ology, for  which  his  services  were  in 
great  demand.  In  1891  he  received 
the  degree  of  Bachelor  of  Science,  and 
in  1912  the  honorary  degree  of  Doc- 
tor of  Science,  from  his  old  alma 
mater,  Lehigh  I'niversity.  In  1890 
he  was  given  the  honorary  degree  of 
Doctor  of  Science  and  Didactics  by 
the  Church  of  Jesus  Christ  of  Latter- 
day  Saints,  and  in  1896  was  awarded 
the  Doctor  of  Philosophy  degree  by 
Illinois  Wesleyan  University  for  non- 
resident work.  Dr.  Talmage  has  been 
elected  to  life  membership  in  several 
learned  societies,  and  for  many  years 
has  been  a  Fellow  of  the  Royal  Micro- 
scopical Society  (London),  Fellow  of 
the  Royal  Scottish  Geographical  So- 
ciety (Edinburgh),  Fellow  of  the  Geo- 
logical Society  (London),  Fellow  of 
the  Geological  Society  of  America. 
Fellow  of  the  Royal  Society  of  Edin- 
burgh, Associate  of  the  Philosophical 
Society  of  Great  Britain,  or  Victoria 
Institute,  and  Fellow  of  the  American 
Association  for  the  Advancement  of 
Science.  Dr.  Talmage  has  traveled 
extensively,  having  traversed  most  of 
this  country  and  of  Europe  many  times 
in  the  course  of  scientific  pursuits.  He 
was  a  delegate  from  the  Royal  Society 
of  Edinburgh  to  the  International  Ge- 
ological Congress  held  at  St.  Peters- 
burg (Petrograd))  in  1897,  and  was 
a  member  of  the  party  that  crossed 
the  Urals  into  Siberia.  Throughout 
the  period  of  his  professional  career 
as  teacher  and  professor,  Dr.  Talmage 
was  particularly  active  and  efficient 
in  encouraging  scientific  study  by 
popular  lectures  and  writings,  and  for 
this  labor  his  deep  love  for  science 
and  his  exceptional  command  of  lan- 
guage and  ability  as  a  public  speaker 
particularly  fitted  him.  Impelled  by 
the  same  spirit,  he  took  charge  of  the 
little  Deseret  Museum  in  1891,  and 
had  the  satisfaction  of  seeing  the  in- 
stitution   become    large    and    influen- 


BIOGRAPHICAL  ENCYCLOPEDIA. 


789 


tial.  He  retained  the  directorship  un- 
til 1919,  when  the  Deseret  Museum 
ceased  to  exist  as  a  unified  institu- 
tion, its  collections  being  segregated 
to  form  the  L.  D.  S.  University  Mu- 
seum, and  the  L.  D.  S.  Church  Mu- 
seum, respectively.  In  his  teaching 
work  Dr.  Talmage  was  the  first  to  es- 
tablish courses  in  domestic  science 
and  agricultural  chemistry  in  the  in- 
termountain  West.  When  called  to 
special  ministry  in  the  Church  he 
promptly  relintiuished  his  profession 
as  a  mining  geologist  and  engineer, 
the  practice  of  which  had  grown  to  be 
extensive  and  lucrative,  and  since 
that  time  he  has  devoted  himself  en- 
tirely to  ecclesiastical  service.  Dr. 
Talmage  is  the  author  of  many  scien- 
tific and  theological  works,  among 
which  are:  "First  Book  of  Nature" 
(1888);  "Domestic  Science"  (1891); 
"Tables  for  Blowpipe  Determination 
of  Minerals"  (1899);  "The  Great  Salt 
Lake,  Present  and  Past"  (1900  )  ;  "The 
Articles  of  Faith"  (1899),  a  compre- 
hensive exposition  of  the  doctrines  of 
the  Church;  "The  Great  Apostasy" 
(1909);  "The  House  of  the  Lord" 
(1912),  a  discussion  of  holy  sanctu- 
aries, ancient  and  modern;  "The 
Story  of  Mormonism"  ( 1907 )  ;  lectures 
delivered  at  Michigan,  Cornell  and 
other  universities;  "The  Philosophi- 
cal Basis  of  Mormonism"  (1915); 
"Jesus  the  Christ"  (1915);  "The  Vi- 
tality of  Mormonism"  (1919),  and 
numerous  pamphlets  and  contribu- 
tions to  periodicals.  Bishop  Orson  F. 
Whitney,  author  of  the  "History  of 
Utah,"  says  of  him:  "Professionally 
a  scientist  and  a  preceptor,  with  gifts 
and  powers  equalled  by  few.  Dr.  Tal- 
mage is  also  a  writer  and  speaker  of 
great  ability  and  skill.  He  is  an  ab- 
solute master  of  English,  both  by  pen 
and  tongue,  and  possesses  a  musical 
eloquence  of  marvelous  fluency  and 
precision.  His  style  of  oratory,  though 
not  stentorian,  is  wonderfully  impres- 
sive, and  his  well  stored  mind,  ca- 
pacious memory,  quick  recollection 
and   remarkable   readiness   of  speech 


render    him   a   beau-ideal   instructor, 
in  public  or  in  private." 

TAYLOR,  John  AVTiitaker.  ( Contin- 
ued from  Vol.  1:151.)  As  a  younger 
member  of  the  Council  of  Twelve 
Apostles  John  W.  Taylor  traveled  ex- 
tensively in  the  different  Stakes  of 
Zion  (after  presiding  for  several  years 
over  the  Colorado  Mission),  attending 
Stake  conferences  and  assisting  in  or- 
ganizing and  re-organizing  Stakes  and 
Wards.  But  as  a  difference  of  opinion 
arose  between  him  and  the  First  Pres- 
idency of  the  Church  and  the  mem- 
bers of  his  own  quorum  in  regard  to 
the  manifesto  issued  by  President 
Wilford  Woodruff  concerning  plural 
marriages,  Bro.  Taylor  resigned  from 
his  position  as  one  of  the  Twelve 
Apostles  in  April,  1906.  After  that 
he  retired  to  private  life  and  spent 
the  remainder  of  his  days  attending  to 
necessary  labors  in  providing  for  his 
large  family.  Bro.  Taylor  died  at  his 
home  in  Forest  Dale,  Salt  Lake  coun- 
ty, Utah,  Oct.  10,  1916.  In  an  obitu- 
ary published  in  the  "Deseret  Evening 
News"  on  the  day  of  his  demise  the 
following  occurs:  "Early  in  life  John 
W.  Taylor  developed  a  marked  spirit- 
uality and  was  the  recipient  of  many 
manifestations  of  the  power  of  God. 
His  testimonies  of  the  gospel  and  of 
the  missions  of  the  Savior  and  the 
Prophet  Joseph  Smith  were  deeply 
grounded  in  his  soul,  and  to  them  he 
remained  firm  and  unshaken  to  the 
end.  *  *  *  His  inspired  discours- 
es will  never  be  forgotten.  He  will  be 
remembered  as  one  filled  with  the 
inspiration  of  the  Holy  Ghost;  his 
teachings  and  testimonies  were  a 
source  of  renewed  diligence  and  en- 
couragement to  the  Latter-day  Saints. 
He  was  filled  with  the  spirit  of 
prophecy,  and  many  of  his  utterances 
have  realized  a  striking  fulfillment. 
In  a  temporal  capacity  he  took  great 
interest  in  the  colonization  of  the  un- 
settled parts  of  the  country,  and  he 
was  especially  interested  in  the  de- 
velopment of  the  settlements  in  Can- 


790 


LATTER-DAY   SAINT 


ada.  The  Saints  there  never  weary 
of  telling  how  much  support  he  gave 
them  by  word  and  deed  and  how  re- 
markably his  predictions  concerning 
the  future  of  that  country  have  been 
fulfilled.  The  Taylor  Stake  of  Zion 
in  southern  Alberta  was  named  in  his 
honor.  He  was  also  highly  respected 
by  the  non-Mormon  business  men  of 
Canada  and  in  this  country.  He  also 
presided  over  the  Colorado  Mission 
with  marked  ability,  and  by  those  who 
knew  him  in  the  mission  field  he  is  es- 
teemed as  one  of  the  best  of  mission- 
aries ever  known  in  the  Church.  His 
happy  disposition,  coupled  with  a  vein 
of  humor,  and  his  remarks  filled  with 
holy  inspiration  in  public  and  private, 
won  for  him  the  confidence  and  re- 
spect of  all  around  him.  He  got  out 
of  harmony  with  the  Church  and  as  a 
result  the  Council  of  the  Twelve  ex- 
communicated him  from  the  Church; 
but  he  never  became  bitter  toward  the 
Church.  Like  his  illustrious  father, 
he  was  a  man  of  deep  and  strong  con- 
victions, 'The  Kingdom  of  God  or 
nothing,'  was  his  motto.  He  loved 
righteousness  and  hated  iniquity.  His 
life  was  clean  and  pure,  his  lan- 
guage chaste  and  elevating.  His 
family  and  friends  who  stood  by  his 
bedside  during  his  last  illness  will 
never  forget  his  beautiful  teachings 
and  exhortations,  upholding  the  doc- 
trines of  the  gospel,  the  authority  of 
the  holy  priesthood,  exhorting  all  to 
keep  the  commandments  of  God.  He 
was  blessed  with  a  numerous  family, 
all  of  whom  survive  him  except  three 
of  his  children.  They  all  have  an 
honorable  standing  in  the  Church  with 
good  moral  characters.  They  are  true, 
loving  and  loyal  to  each  other  and 
filled  with  love,  confidence  and  re- 
spect for  their  honored  husband  and 
father." 

TEASDALE,  George,  a  member  of 
the  Council  of  Twelve  Apostles.  (Con- 
tinued from  Vol.  1:144.)  Apostle 
Teasdale,  continuing  his  apostolic  la- 
bors,   assisted    in    re-organizing    the 


Saints  in  Utah  county,  organizing  them 
into  three  Stakes  of  Zion,  namely, 
Utah,  Alpine  and  Nebo.  He  continued 
traveling  in  the  different  Stakes,  as- 
sisting in  the  organizing  of  Wards, 
etc.  Bro.  Teasdale  died  in  Salt  Lake 
City  June  9,  1907.  The  "Deseret 
Evening  News"  at  the  time  of  his  de- 
mise published  the  following  editor- 
ially: "Another  faithful  servant  of 
the  Most  High,  Elder  George  Teas- 
dale,  of  the  Apostles'  Quorum,  has 
been  released  from  his  earthly  mis- 
sion and  called  to  another  sphere  of 
action.  His  was  a  long  and  useful 
life.  For  a  quarter  of  a  century  he 
has  occupied  the  exalted  and  respon- 
sible position  of  an  Apostle  of  the  Lord 
in  the  Church  of  Jesus  Christ  of 
Latter-day  Saints,  and  he  has  been 
singularly  blessed  in  his  labors  in  the 
ministry,  at  home  and  abroad.  Elder 
Teasdale  was  a  conspicuous  type  of  a 
spirituality  that  our  religion  produces. 
This  was  in  fact  his  leading  trait  of 
character.  Amid  the  toil  and  priva- 
tions entailed  by  the  struggle  for  ma- 
terial existence  in  pioneer  Utah  and 
pioneer  Mexico,  he  still  retained  the 
sweetness  of  his  spirituality,  and  that 
was  indeed  of  a  high  order.  The  great 
theme  of  his  discourses  was  the  atone- 
ment of  our  Savior,  and  the  way  in 
which  his  precious  blood  cleanses  all 
men  who  will  succeed  Him,  from  their 
sins.  The  subtle  distinction  in  point 
of  doctrine,  the  careful  and  detailed 
explanation  of  some  idea  in  theology, 
the  defense  by  the  cannonade  of  ar- 
gument,of  an  assailed  position — these 
he  left  to  others.  He  concerned  him- 
self mainly  with  the  simple  and  ten- 
der story  of  the  cross.  The  main 
thing  with  him  was  the  work  of  the 
Redeemer  of  the  world,  and  how  it 
can  touch  the  conduct  of  men.  The 
Lord  gave  him  light  to  see  it.  His 
long  and  useful  life  was  an  example 
of  faithfulness  and  devotion  to  his 
religious  ideal,  a  zeal  for  the  truth 
tempered  by  calm  judgment  and  an 
unyielding  adherence  to  whatever  he 
regarded    as    the    call    of   duty,    con- 


I 


BIOGRAPHICAL  ENCYCLOPEDIA. 


791 


science,  and  God.  Elder  George  Teas- 
dale  has  gone  to  his  rest  and  his  re- 
ward. His  life's  work  is  done.  He 
has  fought  the  good  faith  and  won 
the  fight.  He  died  in  a  full  hope  of  a 
life  beyond  this  narrow  vale  and  of  a 
glorious  resurrection  from  the  dead. 
To  him  heaven  was  as  real  as  earth- 
life,  the  existence  of  God  as  certain 
as  his  own." 

THATCHER,  Moses,  a  member  of 
the  Council  of  Twelve  Apostles.  (Con- 
tinued from  Vol.  1:127.)  After  losing 
his  position  as  one  of  the  Twelve 
Apostles,  Brother  Thatcher  retired  to 
private  life,  but  continued  successful 
in  financial  affairs.  He  was  sum- 
moned to  Washington,  D.  C,  to  tes- 
tify before  the  Senate  Committee  on 
Privileges  and  Elections  in  the  Smoot 
investigation  case,  and  on  that  oc- 
casion, as  on  all  others,  he  remained 
true  to  his  former  friends  and  asso- 
ciates in  the  Church.  He  died  at  his 
home  in  Logan,  Cache  county,  Utah, 
Aug.  21,  1909.  The  following  was 
published  in  the  "Deseret  Evening 
News"  of  Aug.  23,  1909:  "With  the 
death  of  Moses  Thatcher,  one  of  the 
prominent  and  most  gifted  men  of 
this  intermountain  region  has  passed 
to  the  great  beyond.  Thousands  of 
his  friends  will  always  hold  him  in 
loving  remembrance  for  his  splendid 
work  in  the  missionary  field  and  at 
home  in  various  offices  of  responsi- 
bility and  trust.  From  the  tender  age 
of  fifteen  years  until  some  years  ago, 
he  gave  his  time  and  his  talents  to 
the  work  of  the  Lord,  for  the  propa- 
gation of  the  principles  he  loved  so 
well  and  to  which  he  remained  faithful 
to  the  last.  Moses  Thatcher's  first 
impressions  in  connection  with  the 
Church  date  back  to  the  expulsion  of 
the  Saints  from  Nauvoo.  He  was  then 
but  four  years  of  age,  but  never  for- 
got the  cloud  that  seemed  to  rest  over 
the  wandering  people — his  people.  He 
never  forgot  the  hardships  of  the  pio- 
neers. He  knew  what  it  was  to  suffer 
for  principles.      He   knew   life  in   its 


various  phases,  from  that  of  a  rough 
mining  camp  to  that  of  statesman  and 
rulers  of  nations.  And  in  every  posi- 
tion he  was  successful,  for  he  was 
earnest  and  sincere,  even  if,  like 
every  mortal,  he  at  times  was  mis- 
taken in  his  judgment.  One  of  the 
great  missions  performed  by  Moses 
Thatcher  was  that  to  Mexico,  and  the 
success  of  it  was  chiefly  due  to  his 
wise  and  well  directed  efforts.  He  be- 
came the  friend  of  statesmen  and 
gained  a  hearing  by  remarkable  lit- 
erary efforts  as  well  as  sermons  and 
conversations.  His  'Tribute  to  the 
Memory  of  Montezuma'  was  a  truly 
remarkable  article.  During  this  mis- 
sion Mexico  was  dedicated  to  the  end 
that  the  gospel  might  spread  among 
her  people.  In  the  dedication  the 
Lord  was  asked  to  rid  the  nation  of 
revolutionary  elements  and  the  dis- 
position to  shed  blood;  to  break  the 
shackles  from  the  bodies  and  minds 
of  the  poor  Lamanites,  that  they 
might  be  free  in  the  law  of  Christ. 
The  Lord  was  asked  that,  as  the  com- 
ing of  the  Spanish  conqueror  fore- 
shadowed their  bondage,  so  might  the 
gospel  foreshadow  their  deliverance; 
that,  as  the  first  overcame  them  with 
the  sword,  so  might  the  proclamation 
of  divine  truth  subdue  and  soften 
their  hearts.  The  Elders  besought 
the  Lord  to  bestow  His  blessings  up- 
on the  State  and  governmental  of- 
ficials and  the  people,  that  intrigues, 
plottings,  and  rebellions  might  cease, 
and  peace  and  prosperity  reign.  That 
the  Lord  has  heard  this  prayer,  in- 
spired by  His  own  Spirit,  is  evident  in 
the  prosperity  and  progress  of  the 
Diaz  regime.  Of  late  years  Moses 
Thatcher  has  not  enjoyed  good  health. 
He  has  been  a  patient  sufferer,  and 
his  death,  no  doubt,  came  as  a  wel- 
come release." 

WELLS,  John,  second  counselor  in 
the  Presiding  Bishopric  of  the  Church, 
was  born  Sept.  16,  1864,  in  Carlton, 
Nottinghamshire,  England,  the  son  of 
Thomas  Potter  Wells  and  Sarah  Cook. 


792 


LATTER-DAY    SAINT 


He  was  reared  in  Nottingham  and 
there  he  became  a  companion  and 
playmate  of  Elder  Arthur  W.  Winter, 
who  was  instrumental  in  his  conver- 
sion to  the  gospel.  In  August,  1882, 
he  was  baptized  at  Nottingham,  Eng- 
land, and  subsequently  ordained  to 
the  Lesser  Priesthood,  commencing 
his  active  duties  in  the  Church  with- 
in a  few  days  after  his  baptism.  In 
1885  he  was  appointed  president  of 
the  Nottingham  branch,  in  which  call- 
ing he  labored  diligently  until  his 
emigration  to  Zion.  He  left  England 
with  his  wife,  Almena  Thorpe  (whom 
he  married  in  1886),  and  a  babe,  ar- 
riving   in    Salt    Lake    City    July    11, 


1889.  Shortly  after  his  arrival  in 
Utah  he  obtained  work  in  the  Z.  C. 
M.  I.  shoe  factory,  and  later  in  the 
wrapping  desk  of  that  institution.  On 
Feb.  1st,  1890,  he  entered  the  office 
of  the  Presiding  Bishopric  as  a  gen- 
eral office  helper,  under  the  direction 
of  Robert  S.  Campbell,  then  the  chief 
clerk  of  that  office.  When  Elder 
Campbell  resigned  this  position,  in 
the  spring  of  1898,  John  Wells  was 
given  charge  as  chief  clerk.  Since 
that  time  many  changes  have  taken 
place  in  the  method  of  handling  and 
accounting  for  the  tithes.  The  old 
system  of  central  tithing  offices,  with 


a  Bishop's  agent  in  each  of  the  lead- 
ing Stakes  of  the  Church  was  dis- 
continued and  the  duty  of  receiving, 
handling  and  accounting  for  the  tithes 
was  transferred  to  the  Bishops  of  the 
Wards,  supervised  and  directed  by  the 
Presiding  Bishopric.  New  methods  of 
handling  the  tithes  were  inaugurated, 
and  the  tithing  system  practically 
placed  on  a  cash  basis.  New  systems 
of  Ward,  Stake  and  Mission  books 
and  records  were  put  into  operation. 
These  systematic  and  progressive 
measures  have  gradually  developed 
and  are  now  operated  in  the  Stakes, 
Ward  and  Missions.  In  all  this  re- 
arranging of  systems.  Elder  Wells 
was  the  leading  spirit.  For  several 
years  Elder  Wells  presided  over  the 
First  Quorum  of  Elders  in  the  Ensign 
Stake  of  Zion,  and  took  an  active  part 
in  the  work  of  the  18th  Ward.  For 
ten  years  he  was  connected  with  Dr. 
W.  H.  Groves'  Latter-day  Saints  Hos- 
pital, supervising  its  construction  from 
the  first  stone  which  was  laid  June  28, 
1903.  until  the  building  was  opened 
Jan.  5.  1905.  Thereafter  he  acted  as 
superintendent  of  the  hospital  until 
August,  1913,  when  his  many  other 
duties  became  too  heavy  to  continue 
the  supervision  of  the  hospital.  In 
1913  he  was  ordained  a  High  Priest. 
In  1914  he  became  a  member  of  the 
High  Council  of  the  Ensign  Stake  of 
Zion.  On  November  17,  1916,  he  was 
chosen  as  second  counselor  to  Presi- 
dent Richard  W.  Young  of  the  Ensign 
Stake  and  set  apart  to  that  office  un- 
der the  hands  of  President  Charles  W. 
Penrose,  in  which  position  he  acted 
until  July  18,  1918,  when  he  was  or- 
dained a  Bishop  by  President  Joseph 
F.  Smith  and  set  apart  as  second  coun- 
selor to  Presiding  Bishop  Charles  W. 
Nibley.  Bishop  Wells  has  been  a 
faithful  member  of  the  Church  since 
he  joined  it,  a  worker  of  almost  un- 
equalled energy  and  persistence,  re- 
liable, trustworthy  and  faithful  to  all 
the  responsibilities  his  brethren  have 
imposed  upon  him.  Bishop  Wells  is 
also  a  member  of  the  committee  on 


BIOGRAPHICAL   ENCYCLOPEDIA. 


793 


courses  of  study  for  the  Priesthood. 
He  is  the  father  of  seven  children  by 
his  wife,  Almena  Thorpe,  namely,  Ma- 
bel T.  (now  Mrs.  D.  W.  James,  Jr.), 
Bertha  T.  (later  Mrs.  A.  M.  Palmer, 
now  deceased),  Florence  T.  (now  Mrs. 
Hooper  Knowlton),  Arthur  Thorpe 
(deceased),  Clarice  Thorpe,  John 
Thorpe  and  Lewis  Thorpe. 

WHITNEY,   Orson     Ferguson,     a 

member  of  the  Council  of  Twelve 
Apostles.  (Continued  from  Vol.  I, 
page  658.)  Bishop  Orson  F.  Whitney 
had  presided  over  the  Eighteenth 
Ward  for  nearly  twenty-eight  years, 
and  for  seven  years  had  served  in  the 


capacity  of  an  assistant  to  the  Church 
Historian,  when,  at  the  General  Con- 
ference in  April,  1906,  he  was  called 
to  the  Apostleship,  and  became  a 
member  of  the  Council  of  the  Twelve. 
It  was  on  the  ninth  day  of  April  that 
he  was  ordained  an  Apostle  by  Presi- 
dent Joseph  F.  Smith,  the  ordination 
taking  place  in  the  Salt  Lake  Temple. 
While  deeply  sensible  of  the  high 
honor  conferred  upon  him,  he  never- 
theless felt  keenly  the  separation  from 
the  little,  flock  that  had  so  long  sus- 
tained him  as  their  shepherd,  and 
when  the  time  came  to  part,  tears  of 
affection  and  regret  were  shed  on  both 


sides.  At  the  farewell  testimonial 
where  he  and  his  counselors  (Elders 
Patrick  and  Barton)  laid  down  their 
Ward  offices,  he  entreated  his  old- 
time  friends  and  associates  to  con- 
tinue greeting  him  as  "Bishop."  He 
afterwards  said  in  the  hearing  of  this 
writer:  •'!  have  never  wanted  to  be 
called  'Apostle'  Whitney;  it  is  exceed- 
ingly distasteful  to  me;  that  sacred 
title  should  not  be  used  thus  com- 
monly. I  have  never  desired  it;  but  I 
have  expressed,  on  more  than  one  oc- 
casion, a  preference  for  my  old  title 
of  'Bishop,'  which  I  wore  so  long,  ana 
around  which  so  many  happy  memo- 
ries cluster.  I  recognize,  of  course, 
that  Elder'  is  now  my  proper  desig- 
nation, on  all  official  occasions;  but 
when  meeting  socially  with  old-time 
friends,  or  when  referred  to  in  a  lit- 
erary connection,  I  prefer  to  be  called 
'Bishop' — for  purposes  of  identifica- 
tion if  nothing  more.  There  are  many 
Elder  Whitneys  in  the  Church,  and  I 
produced  most  of  my  literary  works 
as  Bishop  Whitney."  Having  severed 
his  connection  with  the  Historian's 
Office,  he  entered  zealously  upon  me 
discharge  of  his  apostolic  duties.  Since 
becoming  one  of  the  Twelve,  he  has 
visited  repeatedly  all  or  nearly  all  of 
the  Stakes  of  Zion,  now  numbering 
about  four-score,  preaching  at  the 
quarterly  conferences,  ordaining  Stake 
and  Ward  officers,  and  otherwise 
ministering  to  the  people.  Where- 
ever  he  goes,  he  is  warmly  welcomed, 
and  his  labors  are  highly  appreciated. 
He  has  also  made  extended  trips  to 
different  parts  of  the  United  States 
and  Canada,  and  has  addressed  pub- 
lic gatherings  in  New  York,  Boston, 
Washington,  Chicago,  Portland,  San 
Francisco,  and  other  large  cities.  Dur- 
ing one  of  these  jaunts,  for  which  he 
was  specially  set  apart  by  the  then 
President  of  the  Twelve,  Francis  M. 
Lyman,  he  visited  scenes  memorable 
for  their  connection  with  early  Church 
history,  and  described  them  in  a  se- 
ries of  entertaining  letters,  addressed 
to   Pres.    Joseph   F.    Smith   and   pub- 


794 


LATTER-DAY   SAINT 


lished  in  the  "Deseret  News."  .This 
was  in  the  summer  of  1914,  the  year 
the  great  war  broke  out.  Elder  Whit- 
ney went  first  to  Independence,  Mis- 
souri, preaching  there  on  the  subject 
of  "Zion  and  Her  Redemption."  Then, 
in  company  with  others,  he  visited 
the  towns  of  Richmond  and  Liberty, 
and  the  sites  of  Far  West  and  Haun's 
Mill.  At  Liberty  he  and  his  party, 
which  included  Pres.  Samuel  O.  Ben- 
nlon  of  the  Central  States  Mission, 
were  permitted  to  enter  the  building 
that  was  formerly  Liberty  jail,  where 
the  Prophet  Joseph  Smith  and  other 
Church  leaders  were  imprisoned  dur- 
ing the  winter  of  1838-39,  the  period 
that  witnessed  the  expulsion  of  the 
Latter-day  Saints  from  Missouri.  The 
basement  of  the  building — the  former 
dungeon — remains  very  much  as  It 
was,  but  a  modern  residence  has  been 
erected  above  it.  Elder  Whitney  se- 
cured, by  purchase,  a  fragment  of  the 
old  jail  door,  also  two  iron  bars  of 
the  jail  window,  and  afterwards  pre- 
sented them  to  President  Joseph  F. 
Smith,  with  the  suggestion  that  they 
be  placed  in  the  Deseret  Museum;  a 
suggestion  acted  upon.  With  Elder 
Horace  H.  Cummings,  at  that  time 
general  superintendent  of  the  Church 
schools,  he  next  proceeded  to  Carth- 
age, Illinois,  where  they  inspected  the 
old  jail,  scene  of  the  martyrdom  of 
the  Prophet  and  Patriarch — a  piece 
of  property  now  owned  by  the  Church 
and  kept  up  for  the  accommodation  of 
tourists.  Crossing  the  Mississippi 
river  to  Keokuk,  Iowa,  they  steamed 
up  the  river  to  Nauvoo,  the  dead 
though  still  beautiful  city  that  was 
once  the  home  of  the  Saints.  Elder 
Whitney  went  on  to  Ohio,  where  he 
has  relatives,  and  paid  a  second  visit 
to  the  Kirtland  Temple,  first  seen  by 
him  in  the  year  1877.  In  the  State 
of  New  York  he  visited  for  the  first 
time  Palmyra,  where  the  original  edi- 
tion of  the  Book  of  Mormon  was 
printed;  the  Smith  Farm,  the  Sacred 
Grove  (scene  of  the  Prophet's  first 
vision),   the   Hill   Cumorah,   and   Ni- 


agara Falls.     By  way  of  Toronto  and 
Montreal   he  made  his  way   to  Lake 
Champlain,  and  spent  a  pleasant  week 
at  the  island  home  of  his  friend.  Dr. 
Guy  Carlton  Lee,  founder  of  the  Na- 
tional Society  for  Broader  Education, 
with  which  Elder  Whitney  is  connect- 
ed.    The  doctor  accompanied  him  to 
the  Joseph  Smith  Monument.     There 
Elder  Whitney  held  a  service  with  the 
Saints,  before  journeying  on  to  Bos- 
ton,   New    York,    Philadelphia,    and 
Washington.      In  Boston  he   met  his 
brother-in-law.  Elder  Junius  F.  Wells, 
and  together  they  took  in  the  sights 
of    the    "Hub"    and    its    historic    en- 
virons, scenes  with  which  Elder  Wells 
was  already  familiar.     Another  broth- 
er-in-law. Senator  Reed  Smoot,  gave 
him  a  hospitable  welcome  at  the  na- 
tion's capital.     He  visited  both  houses 
of  Congress,  and   was  introduced  by 
Senator  Smoot  and  Representative  Jo- 
seph Howell  to  various  men  of  prom- 
inence.    Returning  westward,  he,  ac- 
companied  by   President   German    E. 
Ellsworth,  of'the  Northern  States  Mis- 
sion, filled  appointments  at  St.  Paul, 
Minnesota,    and    Winnipeg,    Canada, 
dedicating    a    chapel    at    each    place. 
While    in    Chicago,    Bishop    Whitney 
superintended    the    publication    of    a 
new  edition  of  his  poem,  "Ellas — An 
Epic  of  the  Ages,"   probably   his 
greatest  literary  work.      It  was  first 
published    in    1904    by    the    Knicker- 
bocker Press  of  New  York  City,  as  an 
edition  de  luxe  subscribed  for  by  lead- 
ing men  and  women  of  Utah  and  else- 
where.    The  edition  of  1914  was  an- 
notated as  a  text  book  for  the  Church 
schools.      What   some   regard   as   his 
masterpiece,   "Love  and  the  Light — 
An  Idyl  of  the  Westland,"  was  issued 
from  the  press  of  the  "Deseret  News" 
in    1918.      While    working    on    this 
poem  he,  in  company  with  Pres.  Jo- 
seph  E.    Robinson   of   the   California 
Mission,  traveled  from  Denver  to  Los 
Angeles,    holding   meetings   at    many 
points,  and  glimpsing  en  route  those 
great  natural  wonders,  the  Petrified 
Forest  and  the  Grand  Canyon  of  Ari- 


BIOGRAPHICAL  ENCYCLOPEDIA. 


795 


zona.  Written  especially  for  the  young 
people  of  Zion,  to  combat  the  sinister 
influence  of  the  so-called  "Higher 
criticism,"  the  Idyl  immediately  be- 
came popular  and  was  placed  upon 
the  M.  I.  A.  reading  course  and  intro- 
duced into  the  Church  schools.  Two 
other  works  by  this  author,  namely, 
"The  Making  of  a  State"  and  "Whit- 
ney's Popular  History  of  Utah,"  each 
in  one  volume,  have  been  published, 
the  former  in  1908,  the  latter  in 
1916.  At  the  present  time  (1920) 
Bishop  Whitney  is  preparing  for  pub- 
lication in  book  form  his  "Saturday 
Night  Thoughts,"  a  series  of  histori- 
cal and  doctrinal  essays  which  ap- 
peared originally  in  the  Saturday  is- 
sues of  the  "Deseret  News  '  during 
the  suspension  of  public  religious 
gatherings,  owing  to  the  influenza 
epidemic  of  1918-19.  This  book  is 
especially  designed  for  Church  school 
students  and  young  missionaries.  Its 
author  has  been  for  many  years  a 
member  of  the  General  Church  Board 
of  Education,  and  is  connected  in  a 
similar  way  with  the  General  Board 
of  Religion  Classes.  Elder  Whitney 
counts  among  his  pleasant  memories 
the  privilege  of  listening  to  President 
Taft  and  President  Wilson  in  the 
Salt  Lake  Tabernacle,  and  afterwards 
meeting  those  dignitaries.  His  fer- 
vent prayer  for  President  Wilson,  at 
the  General  Conference  in  October, 
1919,  the  President  then  being  ser- 
iously ill,  will  be  long  remembered  by 
all  who  heard  it.  Besides  preaching, 
writing  and  setting  apart  and  in- 
structing missionaries.  Elder  Whit- 
ney serves  upon  important  committees 
and  sits  in  council  on  special  cases, 
whenever  such  labors  are  required  by 
the  First  Presidency.  By  their  ap- 
pointment be  became  chairman  of  the 
committee  that  prepared  the  Church 
exhibit  for  the  Alaska-Yukon  Expo- 
sition, held  at  Seattle  in  1909.  A 
unique  feature  of  this  exhibit  was  a 
pair  of  small-sized,  beautifully  fin- 
ished models,  one  of  the  Salt  Lake 
Temple,   the  other   of  the   Salt   Lake 


Tabernacle,  the  work  of  Reister 
Wright,  of  Salt  Lake  City.  These 
models  the  Church  subsequently  pre- 
sented to  the  Smithsonian  Institute, 
Washington,  D.  C.  Elder  Whitney 
attended  the  Panama-Pacific  Exposi- 
tion at  San  Francisco  in  1915,  and  in 
1917  was  again  in  California  visiting 
his  son,  Wendell,  of  the  145th  Field 
Artillery,  at  Camp  Kearney,  near  San 
Diego.  While  at  the  training  camp  he 
was  the  guest  of  Colonel  (afterwards 
General)  Richard  W.  Young.  Later 
in  the  season  he  took  his  wife  and 
daughter  to  San  Diego,  spending 
Christmas  and  New  Years  there.  His 
tongue  and  pen  are  kept  busy  teach- 
ing and  defending  the  Truth,  not  only 
from  pulpit  and  rostrum,  but  also  by 
correspondence  and  by  means  of  bio- 
graphical and  other  articles  emanat- 
ing from  his  branch  of  the  Publicity 
Department  of  the  Church,  and  ap- 
pearing in  histories,  encyclopedias 
and  magazines  all  over  the  country. 
"The  Mormons  in  the  History  of  Cal- 
ifornia," a  solicited  chapter  for  El- 
dredge's  History  of  California,  and 
the  article  on  Utah  in  the  Encyclo- 
pedia Americana,  are  sample  of  Bish- 
op Whitney's  contributions  to  current 
literature. 

WINDER,  John  Rex.  (Continued 
from  Vol.  1:244.)  After  the  death  of 
President  Lorenzo  Snow,  the  First 
Presidency  of  the  Church  was  re- 
organized Oct.  17,  1901,  with  Joseph 
F.  Smith  as  president  and  John  R. 
Winder  as  first  and  Anthon  H.  Lund 
as  second  counselor.  After  his  long 
experience  as  a  financial  and  military 
leader,  Bro.  Winder  at  once  became  a 
wise  and  able  counselor  to  the  presi- 
dent of  the  Church,  being  a  man  of 
good  judgment.  As  he  was  somewhat 
advanced  in  years,  he  did  not  travel 
very  extensively  in  the  Stakes  of  Zion, 
but  was  seen  nearly  every  day  at  his 
desk  in  the  office  of  the  First  Presi- 
dency and  in  the  Salt  Lake  Temple,  of 
which  he  was  president.  He  died  in 
Salt  Lake  City  March  27,  1910.     The 


796 


LATTER-DAY   SAINT 


"Deseret  Evening  News"  of  March  28, 
1910,  commented  as  follows  upon  the 
demise  of  President  John  R.  Winder: 
"The  retirement  of  President  John  R. 
Winder  from  this  field  of  earthly  ac- 
tion is  like  the  setting  of  the  sun 
after  a  glorious  day  of  victory  for  the 
right.  Few  men,  we  apprehend,  have 
done  better  what  they  have  set  them- 
selves to  accomplish  in  life  than  the 
venerable  leader  whose  departure  all 
Israel  mourns  today.  He  was  an 
exemplification  of  that  stirring  and 
sacred  injunction:  "Whatsoever  thy 
hand  findeth  to  do,  do  with  thy  might.' 
He  did  not  work  at  anything  a  little, 
but  with  his  whole  heart.  With  him, 
whatever  was  worth  doing,  was  worth 
doing  well.  And  his  life  is  a  proof  of 
the  excellence  of  the  principle  that 
seemed  to  be  his  guiding  star.  He 
was  an  optimist— a  cheerful,  sanguine, 
fearless  and  straight-forward  man. 
There  was  no  guile  in  his  words  or 
ways,  no  deception  or  subterfuge  in 
any  trait  of  his  strong,  hearty  and 
wholesome  character.  This  combina- 
tion of  simplicity  and  strength,  cheer- 
fulness and  firmness,  of  modesty  and 
power — these  are  the  marks  by  which 
all-around  greatness  in  man  is  always 
recognized.  He  was  singularly  well 
balanced,  never  erratic,  never  going 
to  extremes.  Pure  of  soul,  clean  of 
speech,  free  from  any  vice,  temperate 
to  abstemiousness,  a  sound,  whole- 
some body,  a  clear,  vigorous  mind,  a 
sweet,  generous  and  sympathetic  dis- 
position— this  mere  enumeration  of 
his  well  known  traits  indicates  the 
monument  which,  with  his  own  labor, 
he  has  built  for  himself  in  the  hearts 
of  the  people  who  knew  him.  *  *  * 
The  judgment  of  President  Joseph  F. 
Smith,  who  knew  Bro.  Winder  as  few 
others  could  know  him,  is  well  worth 
remembering.  They  were  soldiers  to- 
gether in  the  memorable  Echo  Can- 
yon war,  in  the  winter  of  1857-1858. 
They  were  fellow-members  of  the  city 
council.  While  President  Winder  was 
assessor  and  collector  for  Salt  Lake 
county,  while  he  was  a  member  of  the 


Presiding  Bishopric  of  the  Church, 
and  finally  as  a  member  of  the  First 
Presidency,  President  Smith  would 
have  learned  to  know  him  as  he  really 
was.  His  testimony,  therefore,  given 
at  President  Winder's  birthday  re- 
union, Dec.  11,  1893,  may  be  taken  as 
conclusive.  He  remarked  that  Presi- 
dent Winder  was  'a  superior  man,  a 
man  of  unquestioned  integrity,  a  man 
of  meekness  and  humility,  of  gentle- 
ness of  character,  mildness  of  work 
and  speech,  always  kind,  always  af- 
fable, always  considerate  of  others, 
and  in  every  way  fitted  for  every  po- 
sition in  which  President  Smith  had 
ever  seen  him  called  to  act.'  Of  sim- 
ilar import  was  the  testimony  of  Pres- 
ident Anthon  H.  Lund  to  the  effect 
that  in  his  work  in  the  quorum  of  the 
First  Presidency,  he  was  'indeed  like 
a  cheering  ray  of  sunshine  when  he 
came  into  the  office  after  quitting 
work  in  the  Temple.'  Similarly,  his 
statements  as  to  President  Winder's 
remarkable  strength  in  performing 
the  duties  of  his  high  calling,  while 
then  approaching  the  nineties  in  the 
year  of  his  life,  serve  also  to  show 
how  God  had  blessed  and  honored  a 
faithful  servant." 

WOOD  HUFF,  Abraham   Oweii,   a 

member  of  the  Council  of  the  Twelve 
Apostles.  (Continued  from  Vol.  1: 
172.)  Elder  Owen  Woodruff  (as  he 
was  familiarly  known)  continued  his 
labors  in  his  high  and  holy  calling, 
assisting  his  fellow  laborers  in  the 
quorum  in  visiting  the  settlements  of 
the  Saints,  leaving  among  the  people 
a  desire  to  improve,  and  above  all  to 
be  united  in  the  bond  of  brotherly 
love,  for  this  was  invariably  the  sub- 
ject of  his  exhortations,  and  endeared 
him  to  his  hearers  wherever  he  went. 
In  May,  1904.  in  company  with  his 
wife,  Helen  Winters  Woodruff,  and 
four  children,  he  went  to  visit  the 
settlements  of  the  Saints  in  Mexico, 
where  Sister  Woodruff  contracted  the 
dread  disease  smallpox,  to  which  she 
succumbed    June    7,    1904.      Brother 


BIOGRAPHICAL   ENCYCLOPEDIA. 


797 


Woodruff,  who  was  a  most  devoted 
husband,  contracted  smallpox  while 
waiting  upon  his  wife  and  followed 
her  into  the  "Great  Beyond"  two 
weeks  later,  June  20th.  The  "Deseret 
Evening  News"  commented  upon  the 
death  of  Apostle  Woodruff  editorially 
as  follows:  "The  sad  tiding  of  the 
death  of  Apostle  Abraham  Owen 
Woodruff  *  *  *  came  to  the  public 
as  a  calamity.  Following  so  quickly 
on  the  news  of  his  wife's  demise,  it  is 
as  a  heavy  blow  repeated  that  causes 
pain  and  regret  which  cannot  be  ex- 
pressed. When  it  was  learned  that 
the  bereaved  and  devoted  husband 
had  contracted  the  disease  (small- 
pox) which  carried  off  his  beloved 
companion,  there  were  forebodings  as 
to  the  result.  But  his  naturally  fine 
physique,  his  unusual  steadfast  faith, 
and  the  skill  and  attention  he  re- 
ceived, gave  hopes  of  his  speedy  re- 
covery. But  his  great  anxiety,  con- 
stant watching  and  lack  of  rest  in 
caring  for  his  dying  wife  depleted  his 
system  and  so  the  disease  took  him 
when  poorly  prepared  to  resist  its  en- 
croaches, and  it  was  heart  failure 
that  ended  his  earthly  career.  He  had 
been  removed  over  the  Mexican  line 
into  Texas,  and  in  the  hospital  at  El 
Paso  he  received  that  care  and  treat- 
ment that  was  necessary,  and  every- 
thing possible  was  done  for  his  relief 
and  recovery.  *  *  *  Bro.  Wood- 
ruff was  a  bright  and  valiant  soldier 
in  the  army  of  the  Lord,  ready  to  re- 
spond at  every  call;  devoted  to  the 
cause  in  which  he  was  enlisted  for 
life;  able  and  useful  in  temporal  as 
well  as  spiritual  things,  and  calm  and 
judicious  in  judgment  when  wise 
counsel  was  needed  in  the  settlement 
of  difficulties  in  newly  settled  places. 
He  was  beloved  by  the  Saints  and 
admired  for  his  purity  of  life  and  con- 
sistency of  conduct.  He  was  a  valued 
member  of  his  quorum,  and  there  will 
be  universal  sorrow  throughout  the 
Church  over  the  loss  that  is  sustained 
in  his  departure.  *  *  *  There  is 
mourning  in  Israel,  for  a  rising  star 


has  faded  out  of  Zion's  firmanent, 
and  it  is  in  grief  that  heads  are 
bowed,  while  we  gently  whisper,  'the 
will  of  the  Lord  be  done.'  " 

VOUXG,  Brigham,  junior,  president 
of  the  Council  of  Twelve  Apostles. 
(Continued  from  Vol.  1:121.)  Elder 
Young  continued  his  labors  as  an 
Apostle,  traveling  in  the  various 
Stakes  of  Zion  until  he  was  stricken 
with  his  last  illness.  He  died  in  the 
Sugar  House  Ward,  Salt  Lake  county, 
Utah,  April  11,  1903.  As  president  of 
the  quorum  of  Twelve  Apostles  he  was 
succeeded  by  Francis  M.  Lyman.  The 
following  is  copied  from  the  "Deseret 
Evening  News"  of  April  13,  1903: 
"The  announcement  that  Pres.  Brig- 
ham  Young,  of  the  Council  of  the 
Twelve  Apostles,  had  passed  away, 
caused  a  feeling  of  deep  sorrow  in  the 
hearts  of  many  thousands  of  people 
when  the  sad  news  was  circulated  on 
Sunday.  *  *  *  Our  departed 
friend  and  brother  was  well  known 
and  esteemed  throughout  these  moun- 
tain vales,  and  among  many  people  in 
different  parts  of  the  earth.  He  has 
traveled  extensively  and  ministered  in 
many  nations.  He  has  visited  every 
Stake  of  Zion  from  Canada  to  Mexico, 
and  also  the  different  States  of  the 
Union  and,  repeatedly,  the  British 
Isles  and  the  countries  of  continental 
Europe.  His  cheerful  disposition,  his 
kindly  counsels,  his  unfaltering  faith, 
his  fervent  spirit,  his  faithful  testi- 
mony and  his  unswerving  integrity 
and  devotion  to  the  work  in  which  he 
followed  his  illustrious  father,  who 
also  closely  followed  the  Prophet  Jo- 
seph Smith,  endeared  him  to  his  as- 
sociates in  the  ministry  and  to  the 
Latter-day  Saints  throughout  the 
world.  Of  intrepid  character,  he  knew 
no  fear.  Of  exceptionally  strong 
physique,  in  his  young  days,  he  felt 
no  fatigue.  Of  Inspirational  mind,  he 
reached  the  truth  more  by  intuition 
than  by  the  slow  process  of  logical 
deduction  and  he  grasped  the  nature 
of  a   question   or  a   situation   with   a 


798 


LATTER-DAY   SAINT 


quickness  and  a  tenacity  that  sprang 
from  divine  impressions  to  a  soul 
keyed  to  their  reception.  His  illness 
for  many  months  prepared  his  friends 
for  his  decease,  so  that  the  shock  did 
not  come  with  that  violence  that  a 
sudden  demise  causes  to  the  public 
mind." 

YOUNG,    Levi   Edgar,    one    of    the 

first  seven  presidents  of  Seventies, 
was  born  Feb.  2,  1874,  in  Salt  Lake 
City,  Utah,  the  son  of  Seymour  B. 
Young  and  Elizabeth  Riter.  He  was 
baptized  in  1882  by  Seymour  B.  Young 
and  soon  afterwards  ordained  to  the 
lesser  Priesthood.  For  several  years 
he  was  prominently  identified  with 
educational  work  in  the  district  and 
Church  schools  and  also  at  the  Uni- 
versity of  Utah.      He  was  graduated 


from  that  university  in  1895.  The 
following  two  years  he  was  engaged 
as  a  teacher  in  the  Lowell  school, 
Salt  Lake  City.  He  also  taught  two 
years  in  the  L.  D.  S.  College,  and  later 
went  to  the  University  of  Utah,  where 
he  became  instructor  in  history  for 
two  years.  After  being  ordained  a 
Seventy,  June  18,  1897.  by  Seymour 
B.  Young,  he  filled  a  mission  to  Eu- 
rope in  1901-1904.  He  presided  over 
the    Swiss    and    Austrian    Mission    in 


1902-1904.      Soon    after    his    return 
from  Germany,  in   1907,  he  married 
Valeria  Brinton   (daughter  of  Bishop 
David  B.  Brinton  of  Big  Cottonwood 
and   Susan   Huffaker   Brinton),    who 
was  born  Dec.   13,   1878.     This  mar- 
riage   has    been    blessed    with    three 
children,  namely,  Harriet  Wollerton, 
Jane  Seymour  and   Eleanor  Brinton. 
After  the  death  of  George  Reynolds 
Bro.  Young  was  chosen  and  sustained 
as  one  of  the  first  seven  presidents  of 
Seventies  at   the   general   conference 
held    in    Salt    Lake   City   in   October, 
190  9.     He  was  set  apart  to  that  po- 
sition Jan.  23,  1910,  by  Apostle  John 
Henry  Smith  in  New  York.     Brother 
Young    was    educated    in    the    public 
schools  in  Salt  Lake  City  and  in  1915 
received   his   B.   S.   degree   from   the 
University    of   Utah.      After   that   he 
spent   two   seasons   in    Harvard    Uni- 
versity   and    one    year    in    Columbia, 
New   York,   doing   graduate   work   in 
history.     He  holds  the  degree  of  M. 
A.   from  Columbia,  and  for  his  doc- 
tor's degree  in  philosophy  his  theses 
was    the    "Economic    and    social    de- 
velopment   of    Utah    under    Brigham 
Young's  leadership."     He  now  holds 
the  chair  of  American  History  at  the 
University  of  Utah  and  is  engaged  in 
doing  original  research  work  in  west- 
ern   American    history.      He    is    also 
spending  much  time  in  archeological 
work  within  the  confines  of  the  State. 
In  1916  he  took  charge  of  an  explor- 
ing  expedition   in   San   Juan   county, 
Utah,  returning  to  Salt  Lake  City  July 
26,1916.     Elder  Young  is  president  of 
the  Pacific  Coast  Branch  of  the  Amer- 
ican Historical  Association  ( 1919-20 ) , 
is  a  member  of  the  American  Acad- 
emy of  Political  and  Social  Science, 
the  American  Historical  Association, 
and    the    American    Anthropological 
Association. 

ADDITIONAL: 

ECCLES,  Stewart,  an  Elder  who 
died  while  filling  a  foreign  mission, 
was  born  Jan.  15,  1852,  in  Glasgow, 
Lanarkshire,    Scotland,    the    son    of 


BIOGRAPHICAL  ENCYCLOPEDIA. 


799 


William  Eccles  and  Sarah  Hutchin- 
son. He  emigrated  with  his  parents 
to  Utah  and  was  baptized  Dec.  3, 
1863.  In  1894-1896,  he  filled  a  mis- 
sion to  Great  Britain,  and  in  1903- 
1905  he  filled  a  second  mission  to 
the  same  country.  While  residing  in 
Eden,  Weber  county,  Utah,  he  was 
called  on  a  third  mission  to  Great 
Britain.  He  was  set  apart  for  that 
mission  April  15,  1913,  and  on  his 
arrival  in  Liverpool,  May  5,  1913, 
he  was  assigned  to  the  London  con- 
ference and  appointed  to  preside  over 
the  same.  He  labored  with  diligence 
and  success  until  he  took  sick  and 
died  at  Deseret,  High  Road,  South 
Tottenham,  London  N.,  Nov.  3,  1914. 
Elder  Eccles  had  been  ailing  for  some 
time,  but  neither  he  nor  his  friends 
anticipated  a  fatal  termination  of  the 
sickness.  His  remains  were  shipped 
to  his  home  in  Utah,  Nov.  11,  1914, 
in  charge  of  Elder  R.  Delbert  Ras- 
mussen  of  Ephraim,  Utah,  Sister 
Marintha  Eccles,  wife  of  the  de- 
ceased, who  had  been  a  faithful  com- 
panion and  helpmate  to  him  in  his 
missionary  labors,  returning  home  on 
the  same  ship.  Bro.  Eccles  was  a 
faithful  and  efficient  missionary  and 
a  wise  counselor  to  his  co-laborers. 
On  account  of  his  ability  as  a  pre- 
siding officer,  his  never  failing  tes- 
timony of  the  truth  and  his  implicit 
faith  in  God,  he  was  a  tower  of 
strength  in  the  midst  of  his  brethren. 
Altogether  he  spent  twelve  years  of 
his  life  in  the  missionary  field,  and 
at  home  he  was  also  an  active  and 
prominent  Church  worker.  Bro.  Ec- 
cles was  a  brother  of  the  late  David 
Eccles  of  Ogden,  and  a  High  Priest 
(64  years  old)  at  the  time  of  his 
demise. 

GREENWOOD,    Earl    Samuel,    the 

second  Bishop  of  the  American  Fork 
Fourth  Ward  (Alpine  Stake),  Utah 
county,  Utah,  was  born  July  13,  1880, 
in  American  Fork,  the  son  of  Samuel 
Greenwood  and  Ellen  Julian.  He  was 
baptized  May  25,  1889,  by  James  H. 


Clark  and  subsequently  ordained  to 
the  offices  of  Deacon,  Priest  and  El- 
der. Having  first  obtained  a  liberal 
common  school  educatioin  in  his  na- 
tive town,  he  took  a  three  years' 
normal  course  in  the  B.  Y.  A.  at 
Provo,  after  which  he  taught  school 
in  American  Fork,  where  he  also 
took  an  active  part  in  the  Ward 
auxiliary  organizations,  being  a  teach- 
er in  the  Sunday  school  and  secretary 
of  the  Y.  M.  M.  I.  A.  In  1902-1904 
he  filled  a  mission  to  the  Southern 
States,  laboring  in  Virginia  and  North 
Carolina,  part  of  the  time  as  presi- 
dent of  the  North  Carolina  confer- 
ence. After  his  return  home  from 
that  mission  in  1904  he  was  ordained 
a  Seventy  by  Robert  E.  Booth  and 
became  a  member  of  the  67th  quo- 
rum of  Seventy.  He  was  also  ap- 
pointed superintendent  of  the  Amer- 
ican Fork  Fourth  Ward  Sunday 
school,  which  position  he  held  until 
Oct.  24,  1915,  when  he  was  ordained 
a  High  Priest  and  Bishop  by  Apostle 
Rudger  Clawson  and  set  apart  to 
preside  over  the  American  Fork  Fourth 
Ward,  succeeding  W.  B.  Smith.  This 
position  he  still  holds.  Bishop  Green- 
wood has  also  served  one  term  (1914- 
1915)  as  mayor  of  American  Fork 
city.  During  his  administration  he 
took  a  most  active  part  in  increasing 
the  water  supply  of  the  city  and 
waged  a  successful  campaign  in  fa- 
vor of  prohibition.  He  is  otherwise  a 
miller  by  avocation,  and  since  1904 
has  been  manager  of  the  People's 
Mill  and  Elevator  Co.  (formerly 
owned  by  the  Chipman  Mercantile 
Co.).  In  the  year  1904  (June  29th) 
Bishop  Greenwood  married  Jane  L. 
Robinson  (daughter  of  Edward  Rob- 
inson and  Sarah  E.  Harrington),  who 
was  born  Sept.  28,  1882,  in  American 
Fork.  This  union  has  been  blessed 
with  four  children,  namely,  Elliott 
Rulon,  Quentin  E.,  Lois  and  Sher- 
man R. 

HARRINGTON,  Leonard  EUsworth, 

the   first   Bishop   of  American    Fork, 


800 


LATTER-DAY   SAINT 


Utah  county,  Utah,  was  born  Jan.  27, 
1816,  in  New  Lisbon,  Otsego  county. 
New  York,  the  son  of  James  Harring- 
ton and  Polly  Evans.  Becoming  a 
convert  to  "Mormonism,"'  he  was 
baptized  in  1840  and  moved  to  Nau- 
voo,  Illinois,  in  the  summer  of  1842. 
There  he  took  an  active  part  in  the 
building  up  of  that  community  and 
was  elected  justice  of  the  peace  in 
August,  1843,  receiving  his  commis- 
sion from  Governor  Thomas  Ford. 
He  resigned  the  office  in  1846  on  ac- 
count of  leaving  the  State,  migrating 
to  the  West.    He  arrived  in  the  Valley 


of  the  Great  Salt  Lake  in  the  fall  of 
1847,  crossing  the  plains  in  Edward 
Hunter's  company,  and  made  his  home 
in  Salt  Lake  City  until  the  fall  of 
1850,  when  he  moved  to  Utah  county 
and  became  one  of  the  first  settlers 
of  American  Fork,  where  he  resided 
the  remainder  of  his  days.  When  the 
American  Fork  W^ard  was  organized 
in  1851,  he  was  chosen  and  ordained 
the  first  Bishop  of  the  new  settle- 
ment and  acted  in  that  capacity  until 
his  death.  He  was  also  appointed 
postmaster  of  American  Fork  in  1851, 
which  office  he  held  until  1880.  In 
1851  he  was  chosen  orderly  sergeant 
in  the  Nauvoo  Legion  or  Utah  Militia. 
In  1852  he  was  elected  a  member  of 


the  House  of  Representatives  of  the 
Utah  legislature  and  remained  a  mem- 
ber of  that  body  until  188  2,  when  he 
was  disqualified  because  of  the  pro- 
visions of  the  Edmunds  law.  In  July, 
1853,  he  was  elected  mayor  of  Amer- 
ican Fork,  which  office  he  held  until 
188  2.  He  continued  for  many  years 
as  an  active  military  man,  being  ap- 
pointed battalion  adjutant  in  the 
Nauvoo  Legion  in  1853.  Honored 
and  respected  by  all,  Bishop  Harring- 
ton died  at  his  home  in  American 
Fork  June  21,  1883,  leaving  a  large 
family  to  mourn  his  loss.  As  a  mem- 
ber of  the  Utah  legislature  he  served 
Utah  county  and  the  whole  territory 
with  conspicuous  ability  for  no  less 
than  twenty-eight  years,  most  of  this 
time  acting  as  chairman  of  the  judi- 
ciary committee.  He  was  one  of  the 
■  soundest,  most  industrious  and  most 
progressive  of  early-day  lawmakers, 
and  was  a  stalwart,  sterling  citizen 
in  every  sense.  His  lively  interest  in 
education  is  attested  by  the  fact  that 
he  was  a  promoter  of  Utah's  first 
free  school  as  early  as  1866,  and  after 
the  establishment  of  the  B.  Y.  Acad- 
emy at  Provo  he  was  chosen  as  one 
of  its  trustees,  in  which  capacity  he 
served  until  his  death.  Bishop  Har- 
rington was  a  wise  leader  of  men, 
fatherly  and  influential,  and  his  judg- 
ment on  all  questions  that  arose  un- 
der pioneer  conditions  was  always  of 
the  best  and  won  for  him  great  re- 
spect from  the  other  large  figures 
among  whom  he  moved,  as  well  as 
from  the  entire  community.  Before 
coming  to  Utah,  Bishop  Harrington 
married  Lois  Russell,  who  bore  her 
husband  six  children,  namely,  Theo- 
dore S.,  Sarah  E.,  Leonard  E.,  Jane, 
Olive  and  Henry  D.  In  1855  he  mar- 
ried Mary  Jones;  her  children  were 
Daniel  and  Mary.  In  1858  he  mar- 
ried Harriet  Noon,  whose  children 
were  Heber  A.,  Leonard  S.,  Chancey 
Delos,  Harriet  and  Ida. 

HINDLEY,  John  Robinson,  the  first 
Bishop  of  the  American  Fork  Third 


BIOGRAPHICAL   ENCYCLOPEDIA. 


SOI 


Ward  (Alpine  Stake),  Utah  county, 
Utah,  was  born  Jan.  2,  1863,  at  Amer- 
ican Fork,  the  son  of  John  Hindley 
and  Jane  C.  Robinson.  He  was  bap- 
tized when  eight  years  old  and  raised 
in  American  Fork.  After  receiving  a 
common  school  education,  he  finished 
his  studies  in  the  B.  Y.  Academy  at 
Provo.  He  was  ordained  successively 
to  the  offices  of  Priest,  Elder  and 
Seventy,  the  latter  ordination  by 
Henry  Moyle,  and  he  subsequently 
acted  as  a  president  of  the  63rd  quo- 
rum of  Seventy.  In  1887-1889  he 
filled  a  good  mission  to  the  Southern 
States,  acting  part  of  the  time  as 
president  of  the  East  Tennessee  con- 
ference. Prior  to  going  on  this  mis- 
sion he  served  as  a  school  trustee  in 
American  Fork  and  after  his  return 
served  several  terms  in  the  same  ca- 
pacity. He  also  presided  over  the 
American  Fork  Ward  Y.  M.  M.  I.  A. 
and  was  a  teacher  in  the  Ward  Sun- 
day school.  He  also  helped  to  organ- 
ize a  missionary  class  which  proved 
very  beneficial  to  the  young  people  of 
both  sexes.  Soon  after  his  return 
from  his  mission  he  obtained  a  posi- 
tion as  secretary  and  bookkeeper  in 
the  American  Fork  Co-op.  In  1898- 
1900  he  filled  a  mission  to  Great 
Britain,  and  presided  over  the  Lon- 
don conference  for  eighteen  months. 
During  his  presidency  (when  he  had 
forty  Elders  and  four  lady  missionar- 
ies laboring  under  his  direction)  the 
conference  headquarters  were  moved 
from  3  6  Penton  street,  Islington,  to 
97  Farley  Road,  Stoke  Newington. 
On  his  return  from  this  second  mis- 
sion he  served  as  salesman  and  book- 
keeper in  the  Chipman  Mercantile 
Company.  When  the  Alpine  Stake 
was  organized  in  January,  1891,  he 
was  ordained  a  High  Priest  and  set 
apart  as  a  High  Counselor,  which  po- 
sition he  held  until  July,  1901,  when 
he  was  ordained  a  Bishop  by  George 
Teasdale  and  set  apart  to  preside  over 
the  American  Fork  Third  Ward,  which 
position  he  still  holds.  Soon  after 
this  ordination  he  took  the  initiative 


in  the  erection  of  a  $9000  brick  meet- 
ing house,  which  was  dedicated  March 
17,  1907,  by  Pres.  Joseph  F.  Smith, 
and  when  the  Alpine  Stake  tabernacle 
was  being  constructed,  he  acted  as 
treasurer  of  the  building  association. 
In  1883  (Dec.  13th)  Bro.  Hindley 
married  Annie  Chipman  (daughter  of 
William  Henry  Chipman  and  Sarah 
Binns),  who  was  born  April  2,  1864, 
at  American  Fork.  This  union  has 
been  blessed  with  five  daughters, 
namely,  Sarah  C,  Edith  Irene,  Anna, 
Eliza,  and  Jean  S.  Sister  Hindley  has 
for  a  number  of  years  acted  as  presi- 
dent of  the  Relief  Societies  of  the 
Alpine  Stake. 

MORTENSEN,  Lars,  an  active  and 
prominent  Elder  in  the  Church,  was 
born  July  25,  1842,  at  Haarbolle,  on 
the  island  of  Moen,  Prassto  amt,  Den- 
mark, the  son  of  Peter  Mortensen  and 
Helene  Sandersen.  Becoming  a  con- 
vert   to    "Mormonism,"    he    was    bap- 


tized Oct.  31,  1855.  Early  in  1856 
he  left  his  native  island  to  emigrate 
to  America.  He  crossed  the  Atlantic 
in  the  ship  "Thornton"  and  the  plains 
in  James  G.  Willie's  handcart  com- 
pany, which  arrived  in  Salt  Lake  City 
Nov.  9,  185  6.  Soon  after  his  arrival 
in  Utah,   he  proceeded  with  his  par- 


Vol.  IIT,  No.  51. 


July  3,  1920. 


802 


LATTER-DA/   SAINT 


ents  and  brothers  and  sisters  to  Par- 
owan,  Iron  county,  becoming  a  per- 
manent resident  of  that  place.  In 
February,  1859,  he  was  ordained  an 
Elder  by  Wm.  H.  Dame  and  in  18  65 
(Feb.  2  2nd)  he  was  ordained  a  Sev- 
enty by  Wm.  C.  McGregor  and  be- 
came a  member  of  the  69th  quorum 
of  Seventy.  In  1863  (Dec.  29th)  he 
married  Cornelia  Decker  (a  daughter 
of  Zachariah  B.  Decker  and  Nancy 
Bean),  who  was  born  Jan.  15,  1846. 
This  marriage  was  blessed  with 
twelve  children,  namely,  Cornelia  A., 
Nancy  E.,  Helena  L.,  Lars  H.,  Alice 
Gertrude,  Minnie  M.,  Arlington  P., 
Rulon  E.,  Martin  J.,  Golda  G.,  Wil- 
ford  W.  and  Pearl  C.  In  March,  1876, 
he  married  Sarah  V.  Decker,  a  sister 
of  his  first  wife,  who  bore  her  hus- 
band eight  children,  namely,  Harriet 
Ella,  Sarah,  Kate,  Alvarez  D.,  Laur- 
ence, Hazel,  Edwin  and  Myrtle.  In 
1866  Bro.  Mortensen,  responding  to 
call,  went  to  the  Missouri  river  as  a 
Church  teamster  in  Captain  Daniel 
Thompson's  ox  train.  Going  on  this 
mission  he  left  his  father  on  his 
death-bed,  whom  he  never  saw  again 
alive.  When  the  United  Order  was 
introduced  in  Parowan  in  1874,  Bro. 
Mortensen  was  chosen  as  foreman  of 
the  north  field  and  also  as  a  director 
of  the  United  Order  Manufacturing 
Institution.  In  1875  he  was  ordained 
a  High  Priest  by  Wilford  Woodruff 
and  set  apart  as  a  member  of  the 
High  Council  of  the  Parowan  Stake. 
From  1877  to  1886  he  acted  as  Sun- 
day school  superintendent  at  Par- 
owan. He  also  acted  for  several  terms 
as  a  member  of  the  Parowan  city 
council  and  in  1885  he  was  chosen  as 
second  counselor  to  Bishop  Charles 
Adams  of  Parowan.  During  the  anti- 
polygamy  persecution  in  188  6  he 
found  it  advisable  to  leave  his  Par- 
owan home  and  removed  to  Sanford, 
Conejos  county,  Colorado,  with  a 
part  of  his  family.  There  he  soon 
afterwards  organized  the  Sanford 
choir  and  was  chosen  as  Stake  chor- 
ister of  the  San  Luis  Stake.     In  1887 


(March  6th)  he  was  set  apart  as 
Sunday  school  superintendent  at  San- 
ford and  about  the  same  time  chosen 
as  a  High  Councilor  in  the  San  Luis 
Stake,  which  position  he  held  until 
his  death.  Ever  since  he  joined  the 
Church  in  his  native  land,  Bro.  Mor- 
tensen was  a  most  ardent  and  faith- 
ful Church  worker  and  was  universal- 
ly known  for  his  honesty  and  integ- 
rity and  his  love  for  the  young  and 
rising  generation.  He  was  always  a 
leading  spirit  in  social  and  musical 
matters,  composing  much  band  and 
dance  music.  He  arranged  and  copied 
many  of  the  hymns  which  were  used 
in  the  earlier  days  in  the  towns  where 
he  lived,  before  printed  music  could 
bvj  secured.  His  death  was  caused  by 
an  accident  which  occurred  in  a  hay- 
field  near  Sanford,  June  27,  1910.  He 
left  two  wives,  seventeen  children 
and  forty  grandchildren  to  mourn  the 
loss  of  a  devoted  husband  and  an 
affectionate  father. 

NICOLAYSEX,  Morten  Andreas 
Carl,  missionary-translator,  was  born 
April    22,    1876,    at    Skive,    Jutland, 


Denmark,  the  son  of  N.  Sophus  Nico- 
laysen  and  Johanne  R.  A.  Fischer. 
He  finished  his  five-year  apprentice- 
ship as  a  printer  in  September,  1895, 


BIOGRAPHICAL   ENCYCLOPEDIA. 


803 


at  F.  E.  Bording's  printing  establish- 
ment in  Copenhagen,  where  "Skandi- 
naviens  Stjerne"  had  been  printed 
since  its  first  issue  in  1851.  Here  he 
first  came  in  contact  with  "Mormon" 
literature  and  the  Elders  of  the 
Church  and  after  studying  the  Book 
of  Mormon  he  was  convinced  of  its 
truth  and,  applying  for  baptism,  he 
received  that  ordinance  in  the  waters 
of  0resund  Dec.  14,  1897.  From  the 
beginning  he  rejoiced  exceedingly  in 
the  gifts  of  the  everlasting  gospel  and 
he  soon  became  actively  engaged  in 
Church  work  in  the  Copenhagen 
branch,  where  he  labored  as  a  Sunday 
school  teacher,  counselor  and  presi- 
dent of  the  local  Y.  M.  M.  I.  A.,  dis- 
trict teacher,  assistant  and  superin- 
tendent of  a  large  Sunday  school,  etc. 
In  1900  (Oct.  21st)  he  was  ordained 
an  Elder  by  Elder  James  Thomsen. 
On  recommendation  of  Assistant 
Church  Historian  Andrew  Jenson 
(who  was  doing  special  missionary 
work  in  Scandinavia),  he  was  called 
by  Mission-president  Anthon  L.  Skan- 
chy  in  September,  1902,  to  write  and 
translate  for  "Skandinaviens  Stjerne" 
and  to  do  other  clerical  work  in  the 
mission  office.  After  nearly  three 
years  labor,  he  was  honorably  re- 
leased to  emigrate  to  Zion.  Just  be- 
fore leaving  his  native  land  he  mar- 
ried Thora  L.  M.  Pfeiffer,  who  had 
been  a  faithful  and  devout  member  of 
the  Church  since  her  baptism  April 
13,  1899.  About  two  years  after  his 
arrival  in  Utah  Elder  Nicolaysen  re- 
sumed his  missionary  labors  in  the 
interest  of  the  Scandinavian  people 
by  writing  and  translating  for  the 
Danish-Norwegian  weekly  ''Bikuben," 
which  occupation  he  followed  for 
seven  years.  His  writings  w'ere  usual- 
ly marked  with  directness,  always 
having  as  an  aim  to  bring  the  reader 
to  an  understanding  of  the  truth  of 
the  everlasting  gospel.  He  was  or- 
dained a  Seventy  Jan.  15,  1912,  by 
Charles  H.  Hart,  and  after  leaving 
the  "Bikuben"  office  in  July,  1914, 
he  worked  from  time  to  time  in  the 


Salt  Lake  Temple  for  over  half  a 
year,  but  gradually  he  went  back  to 
the  printing  profession — the  trade  of 
his  youth — after  following  other 
avocations  for  fourteen  years,  and  is 
at  present  employed  at  the  "Arrow 
Press,"  the  largest  job  printing  estab- 
lishment in  Salt  Lake  City.  In  the 
different  Wards  and  branches  of  the 
Church  where  he  has  resided,  Bro. 
Nicolaysen  has  always  been  active  in 
Church  duties.  By  faith  and  persever- 
ance, under  numerous  difficulties, 
and  by  complying  with  the  laws  of 
life  and  health,  he  has  retained  the 
vigor  of  youth  to  a  great  degree.  In 
a  happy  matrimony  he  has  been 
blessed  with  six  children,  namely, 
four  sons  (Mack,  Edward,  Carl  and 
John)  and  two  daughters  (Irmelin 
and  Lily).  Elder  Nicolaysen  became 
a  life  member  of  the  Genealogical 
Society  of  Utah  April  22,  1912.  He 
was  admitted  as  a  citizen  of  the  Uni- 
ted States  of  America  July  25,  1917. 

PARKIX,  John  Williain,  president 
of  the  High  Priests'  quorum  of  the 
South  Davis  Stake  and  a  resident  of 
South  Bountiful,  Davis  county,  Utah. 


was  born  March  19,  1839,  in  Loscoe, 
Derbyshire,  England,  the  son  of  John 
Parkin  and  Elizabeth  Wright.     Hav- 


804 


LATTER-DAY   SAINT 


ing  become  a  convert  to  "Mormon- 
ism"  he  emigrated  to  Utah  in  1863 
and  settled  in  South  Bountiful,  Davis 
county.  Here  he  was  ordained  succes- 
sively to  the  offices  of  Elder,  Seventy 
and  High  Priest.  He  led  the  Ward 
choir  for  a  long  time  and  acted  as 
Sunday  school  superintendent  for  forty 
years.  Besides  being  president  of  the 
High  Priests'  quorum  he  was  super- 
intendent of  religion  classes.  In  Au- 
gust, 1864,  he  married  Eliza  Foulds 
(daughter  of  James  Foulds  and  Sarah 
Saxton),  who  was  born  Dec.  7,  1839, 
in  Holbrook  Moor,  England.  The 
children  of  this  marriage  were  the 
following:  Sarah,  Harriet,  William  J., 
George,  James,  Stephen,  Eliza  Jane, 
Zipporah,  Grace  Hannah  and  Mary 
Olive.  In  1884  (April  24th)  he  mar- 
ried Elizabeth  S.  Thurgood  (daugh- 
ter of  Thomas  Thurgood  and  Sarah 
Ann  Banks),  who  was  born  April  29, 
1863,  in  Camberwell,  England.  She 
bore  her  husband  ten  children,  name- 
ly, Sarah  Laura,  Alice  Elizabeth, 
Thomas  E.,  Rilla  Ann,  Roland  T., 
Lincoln  D.,  Edith  L.,  Carrie  I.,  Clif- 
ford F.  and  Erma.  Bro.  Parker  died 
Feb.  16,  1919,  at  Bountiful  as  p^resi- 
dent  of  the  High  Priests'  quorum  of 
the  South  Davis  Stake. 

YOUXG,  Clara  Decker,  one  of  the 

three  original  pioneer  women  who  ar- 
rived in  Great  Salt  Lake  Valley  in 
July,  1847,  wac  born  July  22,  1828, 
at  Freedom,  Cattaraugus  county, 
New  York,  the  daughter  of  Isaac 
Decker  and  Harriet  Page  Wheeler. 
She  was  a  delicate  child,  being  af- 
flicted with  asthma.  Strange  as  it 
may  seem  in  the  light  of  the  hard- 
ships and  exposure  through  which 
she  passed  in  later  life,  her  parents 
hardly  dared  to  hope  that  she  would 
live  beyond  childhood.  When  she  was 
three  years  old  she  ran  under  her 
father's  ax,  while  he  was  chopping 
wood,  and  before  he  could  prevent  it 
the  blade  was  buried  in  her  skull. 
The  father,  wild  with  horrifying  emo- 
tions, bore  his  child  into  the  house; 


she  appeared  to  be  dead,  but  even- 
tually showed  some  signs  of  life,  and 
by  careful  nursing  she  was  able  to 
speak  after  a  lapse  of  one  year.  She 
literally  fluttered  between  life  and 
death  for  six  months.  Sister  Clara 
lived  with  her  father's  family  succes- 
sively in  Ohio,  Missouri  and  Illlinois. 
She  possessed  her  mother's  rare  cour- 
age and  presence  of  mind,  and  al- 
though a  child  of  only  ten  years  of 
age  she  passed  bravely  through  all  the 
terrifying  scenes  of  Missouri,  and 
when  fifteen  years  of  age  she  passed 
through  a  long  siege  of  sickness. 
When  but  sixteen  years  old  she  was 
married  to  President  Brigham  Young, 
May  8,  1843,  remained  by  the  side 
of  her  husband  in  the  exodus  from 
Nauvoo  and  at  Winter  Quarters,  and 
when  the  pioneer  band,  led  by  her 
great  and  wise  spouse,  set  out  on 
their  momentous  journey,  in  the 
spring  of  1847,  she  remained  bravely 
by  his  side  in  that  long  and  perilous 
pilgrimage,  her  brave  spirit  and  stout 
heart  rendering  her  a  valuable  adjunct 
to  that  immortal  company.  After  ar- 
riving in  the  valley  of  the  Great  Salt 
Lake  July  24,  1847,  she  at  once  be- 
gan to  do  what  she  could  to  make  a 
habitable  place  for  herself  and  hus- 
band, and  she  remained  in  the  Valley 
while  President  Young  returned  to 
the  Missouri  river  after  the  rest  of 
his  family  and  to  lead  the  bulk  of 
the  emigration  to  the  Valley.  The 
career  of  Sister  Clara  D.  Young  is 
marked  for  its  generosity,  nobility 
and  courage.  As  a  mother  she  evi- 
denced the  deepest  regard  for  the 
welfare  of  her  children,  and  she  also 
took  charge  of  other  children  with 
the  love  that  only  a  devoted  foster 
parent  could  manifest.  When  at  last 
her  noble  race  was  won,  hundreds  of 
heads  were  bowed  in  profound  sor- 
row. She  died  Jan.  5,  1889,  in  Salt 
Lake  City.  Mrs.  Jeanette  Young 
Easton  is  her  only  surviving  child. 
Sister  Clara  was  the  last  of  the  three 
original  pioneer  women  of  Utah  to 
pass  away  from  mortality. 


INDEX. 


•Denotes   that   sketch   is   accompanied   by   portrait. 


*Aagard,  Andrew  James,  Vol.  2:584. 
*Abbott,  William  E.,  Vol.  3:289. 

Abel,  Elijah,  Vol.  3:577. 

Adair,  Thomas  J.,  Vol.  3:577. 
*Adams,  Annie  L.  Penrod,  Vol.  3:579. 

Adams,  Barnabas  L.,  Vol.  3:577. 
*Adams,  Charles,  Vol.  1:534. 
*Adams,  Hugh  Leech,  Vol.  3:289. 
*Adams,  Hyrum,  Vol.  3:578. 
*Adams,  John  Quincy,  Vol.  3:1. 

Adams,  Nathan,  Vol.  2:131. 
*Adamson,  William  L.,  Vol.  3:579. 
*Ahlander,  Anders  F.,  Vol.  2:281. 

Ahlstrom,  John  Godfrey,  Vol.  3:2. 

Ainsworth,  Joseph,  Vol.  2:1. 

Alder,  Godfred,  Vol.  3:580. 

Aldrich,  Hazen,  Vol.  1:186." 

Alexander,  John,  Vol.  1:549. 

Alger,  Samuel  N.,  Vol.  1:798. 

Allen,  Alanson  David,  Vol.  2:338. 

Allen,  Albern,  Vol.  3:580. 

Allen,  Ammon,  Vol.  2:339. 
*Allen,  Andrew  A.,  Vol.  1:433. 

Allen,  Andrew  Stephen,  Vol.  2:584. 
*Allen,  Charles  Hopkins,  Vol.  2:140. 

Allen,  Elijah,  Vol.  2:143. 

Allen,  Elijah,  Vol.  3:581. 

Allen,  James,  Vol.  1:508. 
*Allen,  Jonathan  Alexander,  Vol.  3:2. 
*Allen,  John  Matthew  J.,  Vol.  2:195. 

Allen,  Joseph  S.,  Vol.  3:582. 

Allen,  Rufus,  Vol.  3:583. 

Allen,  Rufus  C,  Vol.  1:535. 

Allen,  Samuel  A.,  Vol.  2:584. 

Allen,  Warner  Hoopes,  Vol.  2:142. 

Allen,  Wiliam  C,  Vol.  1:571. 

Alley,  Charles  Henry,  Vol.  2:510. 
*Alley,  Emma  Turner,  Vol.  2:510. 

Alley,  George,  Vol.  2:508. 

Alley,  George  Hubbard,  Vol.  2:509. 
*Alley,  Mary  Symonds,  Vol.  2:509. 
*Alley,  Stephen  Webb,  Vol.  2:50  9. 
*Allphin,  Reuben  Lester,  Vol.  3:290. 

Allred,  Isaac,  Vol.  3:3. 

Allred,  James,  Vol.  3:583. 

Allred,  James  Riley,  Vol.  3:583. 

Allred,  Joseph  G.,  Vol.  1:560. 
*Allred,  J.  Urban,  Vol.  2:234,812. 

Allred,  Louis  Ephraim,  Vol.  2:92. 
*Allred,  Reddick  Newton,  Vol.  2:167. 

Allred,  Samuel,  Vol.  2:582. 
*Allred,  Wilford  Leroy,  Vol.  2:573. 
*Alston,  Thomas,  Vol.  1:789. 
Andersen,  Anders  Nielsen,  Vol.  2:10. 
Andersen,  Andrew  K.,  Vol.  3:584. 


*Andersen,  Andrew  S.,  Vol.  2:541. 
*Andersen,  Christian,  Vol.  2:745. 
*Andersen,  Christine  B.,  Vol.  1:507. 
*Andersen,  Frederick,  Vol.  2:211. 
*Andersen,  George  David,  Vol.  3:3. 
*Andersen,  Joachim  C,  Vol.  2:579. 
*Andersen,  Mons,  Vol.  1:506. 

Andersen,  Oluff  B.,  Vol.  3:584. 
*Andersen,  Soren,  Vol.  2:541. 
*Andersen,  Soren  P.,  Vol.  2:542. 
*Anderson,  Alice  Brooks,  Vol.  3:4. 
*Anderson,  Anders  Peter,  Vol.  3:290. 
*Anderson,  Andrew,  Vol.  3:292. 
*Anderson,  Andrew  Hugo,  Vol.  2:341. 
*Anderson,  Anton,  Vol.  1:815. 
*Anderson,  Anton  Edward,  Vol.  3:5. 
*Anderson,  August  Kull,  Vol.   2:237. 
*Anderson,  Charles  L.,  Vol.  1:544. 
♦Anderson,  Charles  P.,  Vol.  1:554. 
♦Anderson,  Christian,  Vol.   1:529. 
♦Anderson,  Christian,  Vol.  3:6. 
♦Anderson,  Christian,  Vol.  3:295. 
♦Anderson,  David  B.,  Vol.  3:292. 
♦Anderson,  Edward  H.,  Vol.  1:715. 

Anderson,  Gustave  T.,  Vol.  3:584. 
♦Anderson,  Hans,  Vol.  1:815. 
♦Anderson,  James  Albert,  Vol.  3:9. 
♦Anderson,  James  H.,  Vol.  1:778. 

Anderson,  James  Peter,  Vol.  3:294. 

Anderson,  James  Wm.,  Vol.  2:572. 
♦Anderson,  John,  Vol.  2:301. 
♦Anderson,  John  C,  Vol.  2:237. 

Anderson,  John  Forbis,  Vol.  2:585. 
♦Anderson,  John  H.,  Vol.  1:767. 
♦Anderson,  John  William,  Vol.  3:298. 
♦Anderson,  Lewis,  Vol.  2:222. 
♦Anderson,  Lewis  Robert,  Vol.  2:560. 

Anderson,  Marcus  C,  Vol.  3:585. 
♦Anderson,  Martha  Hansen,  Vol.  3:8. 
♦Anderson,  Nephi,  Vol.  3:296. 
♦Anderson,  Nephi  A.,  Vol.  2:145. 
♦Anderson,  Niels  O.,  Vol.  2:54  4. 
♦Anderson,  Ole,  Vol.  2:585. 
♦Anderson,  Pernilla  J.,  Vol.  3:6. 
♦Anderson,  Peter,  Vol.  3:7. 
♦Anderson,  Peter,  Vol.,  3:8. 

Anderson,  Walter  H.,  Vol.  3:585. 

Anderson,  William,  Vol.  2:585. 
♦Andreasen,  Jens  Peter,  Vol.  2:250. 
♦Andrus,  James,  Vol.  2:586. 

Andrus,  Milo,  Vol.  3:585. 

Andrus,  Silas  Terry,  Vol.  3:587. 

Angell,  Harvey  Leon,  Vol.  3:58  7. 

Arave,  David  Eli,  Vol.  3:299. 

Archibald,  Andrew  L.,  Vol.  3:588. 
♦Archibald,  David,  Vol.  2:588. 

Archibald,  Roy  G.,  Vol.  3:588. 


806 


INDEX. 


*Argyle,  Benjamin,  Vol.  2:588. 

Armstrong,  David,  Vol.  2:190. 
♦Armstrong,  Francis,  Vol.  2:482. 
♦Armstrong,  Isabella  S.,  Vol.  2:484. 
♦Armstrong,  William,  Vol.  3:588. 
♦Arnold,  Alicia  Read,  Vol.  2:493. 

Arnold,  Henry,  Vol.  3:589. 
♦Arnold,  Orson  Pratt,  Vol.  2:492. 
♦Arthur,  Christopher  J.,  Vol.  2:186. 

Ashby,  Nathaniel,  jun.,  Vol.  3:590. 
♦Ashton,  Edward  T.,  Vol.  1:685. 
♦Ashton,  Elias  Conway,  Vol.  3:299. 

Ashworth,  Wm.  Booth,  Vol.  2:39. 
♦Asper,  William,  Vol.  1:812. 
♦Atkin,  Edw.  Maughan,  Vol.  3:300. 
♦Atkin,  Thomas,  jun.,  Vol.1 :546,  822 

Atkinson,  Chartes  H.,  Vol.  3:591. 

Atkinson,  Thomas,  Vol.  3:591. 

Atwood,  Leslie  C,  Vol.  3:591. 

Atwood,  Millen,  Vol.  1:63. 
♦Atwood,  Millen  Dan,  Vol.  2:26. 
♦Atwood,  Samuel  Frink,  Vol.  3:300. 
♦Austin,  Edwin  N.,  Vol.  1:452. 
♦Austin,  Heber  Charles,  Vol.  3:301. 
♦Austin,  Mark,  Vol.  2:589,  744. 

Austin,  Philo  W.,  Vol.  1:446. 
♦Aveson,  Robert,  Vol.  1:679. 

B. 

Babbitt,  Almon  W.,  Vol.  1:284. 

Bachman,  Emuel,  Vol.  3:592. 
♦Backman,  Samuel  C,.  Vol.  2:374. 

Badger,  Rodney,  Vol.  3:592. 
♦Baerentsen,  Andrew  M.,  Vol.  2:577. 
♦Bagley,  Edward  A.,  Vol.  3:302. 
♦Bagnall,  Joseph,  Vol.  2:164. 
♦Bailey,  Thomas,  Vol.  3:303. 

Baldwin,  Caleb,  Vol.  2:589. 
♦Baldwin,  George,  Vol.  2:417. 

Baldwin.  Nathan  B.,  Vol.  3:593. 
♦Balfour,  John,  Vol.  2:442. 
♦Ball,  Elihu  K..  Vol.  1:550. 
♦Ball,  Samuel  Frederick,  Vol.  3:10. 
♦Ball,  Thomas,  Vol.  2:259. 
♦Ballantyne,  Richard,  Vol.  1:703. 

Ballard,  Henry,  Vol.  1:419. 
♦Ballard,  Henry  W.,  Vol.  1:426;  Vol. 

3:593. 
♦Ballard,  Melvin  Joseph.  Vol.  1:419; 

Vol.  3:744. 
♦Balle,  Christian  T.,  Vol.  3:303. 

Balle,  Emma  Eugenie  T.,  Vol.  3:304. 

Ballif,  Serge  Fredrick,  Vol.  3:306. 

Ballif,  Serge  Louis,  Vol.  3:305. 

Ballinger,  Pearson,  Vol.  2:123. 
♦Banks,  Cornelius  H.,  Vol.  2:465. 
♦Banks,  John,  Vol.  2:590. 
♦Banks,  John  Elmer,  Vol.  2:282. 

Barker,  Frederick,  Vol.  3:307. 
♦Barnes,  Arthur  F.,  Vol.  1:650. 
♦Barnes,  John  R.,  Vol.  1:464. 

Barnes,  Lorenzo  D.,  Vol.  3:307. 
♦Barnes,  William  J.,  Vol.  3:11. 
♦Barney,  Alma,  Vol.  3:11. 
♦Barney,  Danielson  B.,  Vol.  2:196. 

Barney,  Lewis,  Vol.  3:594. 


Barnum,  Charles  D.,  Vol.  3:594. 

Barron,  Alexander  F.,  Vol.  3:595. 

Barrow,  Freeman  Frank,  Vol.  3:308. 

Barrus,  Albert  Almon,  Vol.  3:309. 
♦Barrus,  Ellen  Martin,  Vol.  3:13. 
♦Barrus,  Ruel,  Vol.  3:12. 
♦Bartholomew,  John,  Vol.  3:309. 

Bartholomew,  Noah  W.,  Vol.  3:309. 
♦Barton,  Eliza,  Vol.  2:539. 
♦Barton,  Ellen  Bechall,  Vol.  2:513. 
♦Barton,  Florence  S.,  Vol.  2:455. 
♦Barton,  George  Ernest,  Vol.  2:591. 
♦Barton,  Isaac,  Vol.  1:676. 
♦Barton,  James,  Vol.  2:539. 
♦Barton,  Peter,  Vol.  1:463. 
♦Barton,  Walter  H.,  Vol.  3:310,  595. 
♦Barton,  William  Bell,  Vol.  1:667. 
♦Barton,  William  Henry,  Vol.  2:455. 
♦Bastian,  Gearsen  S.,  Vol.  1:344. 
♦Bateman,  Edward  A.,  Vol.  1:592. 
♦Bateman,  James  M..  Vol.  2:332. 

Bateman,  Samuel,  Vol.  1:590. 
♦Bateman,  Sophronia  A.  W.,  Vol.  2: 
592. 

Bateman,  Thomas,  Vol.  2:591. 
♦Bateman,  William  L.,  Vol.  2:591. 
♦Bates,  Ormus  Ariah,  Vol.  3:14. 

Bates,  Orson  Parley,  Vol.  3:13. 
♦Bawden,  Ann  Ireland,  Vol.  2:464. 
♦Bawden,  Henry,  Vol.  2:463. 
♦Bawden,  Henry  Lambert,  Vol.  2:455. 
♦Bawden,  Sarah  F.  H..  Vol.  2:464. 

Baxter,  John  M.,  Vol.  1:331. 
♦Baxter,  Lotta  Robine  P.,  Vol.  3:311. 
♦Baxter,  Samuel  Emerson,  Vol.  3:310. 
♦Bayles,  Evelyn  Lyman,  Vol.  3:16. 
♦Bayles,  Hanson,  Vol.  3:14. 
♦Bayles.  Mary  Ann  D.,  Vol.  3:15. 
♦Beal,  David  Nelson,  Vol.  2:745. 
♦Beal,  Henry,  Vol.  1:521;  Vol.  2:226. 
♦Beal,  John  Samuel,  Vol.  2:593. 
♦Bean,  James  William,  Vol.  2:6. 
♦Bean,  Virginius,  Vol.  2:209. 
♦Beatie,  Phoebe  L.  Y.,  Vol.  2:593. 
♦Beatie,  Walter  Josiah,  Vol.  1:649. 
♦Beazer,  Mark  Ephraim,  Vol.  2:19. 
♦Bebee,  Leroy  W.,  Vol.  1:537. 

Beck,  Herbert,  Vol.  3:312. 
♦Beck,  John,  Vol.  1:688. 
♦Beck,  John  Forsyth,  Vol.  2:594. 
♦Beck,  Joseph  Ellison,  Vol.  2:594. 
♦Beck,  Joseph  Peter,  Vol.  3:16. 
♦Beckstead,  Alexander,  Vol.  2:745. 
♦Beckstead,  Byram  H.,  Vol.  2:324. 
*Beckstead,  Gordon  S.,  Vol.  1:576. 
♦Beckstead,  Henry,  Vol.   2:746. 
♦Beckstead,     Henry    Byram,   Vol.    1: 

593;  Vol.  2:747. 
♦Beckstrand,  John  A.,  Vol.  3:312. 

Beecher,  William  J.,  Vol.  3:596. 
♦Beesley,  Alvin  A.,  Vol.  2:406. 
♦Beesley,  Ebenezer,  Vol.  1:739. 
♦Bell,  Herbert  Horace,  Vol.   2:595. 

Bell.  James  F.,  Vol.  3:596. 

Bell,  Thomas  H.,  Vol.  3:597. 
♦Belliston,  rvlbert  Henry,  Vol.  3:313. 


INDEX. 


807 


*Belnap,  Gilbert,  Vol.  2:747. 

*Belnap,  Hyrum,  Vol.  2:247. 

*Belnap,  Reuben,  Vol.  2:596. 

*Bendixen,  Knud,  Vol.   2:302. 

♦Bennett,  Ephraim,  Vol.  3:16. 

*Bennett,  George,  Vol.  3:17. 

*Bennett,  George  Riley,  Vol.  3:18. 

*Bennett,  Thomas,  Vol.  2:57. 

*Bennett,  William  B.,  Vol.  2:303. 

*Bennion,  Heber,  Vol.   1:569. 

*Bennion,  Hyrum,  jun.,  Vol.  2:473. 
Bennion,  Israel,  Vol.  1:547. 
Bennion,  John,  Vol.  3:597. 
Bennion,  Samuel,  Vol.  3:597. 

*Bennion,  Samuel  Otis,  Vol.  3:18. 
Bennion,  Samuel  R.,  Vol.  1:478. 

*Bennion,  Wilford,  Vol.  2:133. 
Benson,  Andrew  Peter,  Vol.  2:56. 

*Benson,  Ezra  T.,  Vol.  1:99. 

*Benson,  Jens  Peter,  Vol.  1:405. 
Benson,  Yeppa,  Vol.  3:313. 
Bent,  Samuel,  Vol.  1:367. 

♦Berg,  Henry  W.,  Vol.  1:796. 

♦Berg,  Ole  H.,  Vol.  1:795. 

♦Berlin,  Andrew  E.,  Vol.  2:342. 

Bernhisel,  John  M.,  Vol.  1:723. 

Berry,  John  Alphonzo,  Vol.  3:314. 

♦Berry,  John  William,  Vol.  3:314. 
♦Berry,  William  Shanks,  Vol.  3:314. 

Berthelsen,  Soren  C,  Vol.  2:206. 
♦Bertoch,  Ann  Cutcliffe,  Vol.   2:463. 
♦Bertoch,  James,  Vol.  2:462. 

Bevan,  James,  Vol.  3:598. 
♦Biesinger,  Thomas,  Vol.  3:316. 

Bigelow,  Moroni,  Vol.  3:598. 

Bigler,  Henry  William,  Vol.  3:599. 

Bigler,    Jacob    G.,   Vol.    1:515;    Vol. 
2:113. 

Billings,  George  Pierce,  Vol.  3:318. 

Billings,  Titus,  Vol.  1:242. 

Bills,  George  W.,  Vol.  1:570. 
♦Bills,  Gordon  S.,  Vol.  1:583. 
♦Binder,  William  L.  S.,  Vol.  1:640. 

Bingham,  Adam  A.,  Vol.  2:253. 
♦Bingham,  Albern  A.,  Vol.  3:318. 

Bingham,  Brigham  H.,  Vol.  3:600. 

Bingham,  Erastus,  Vol.  3:600. 
♦Bingham,  Erastus  P.,  Vol.  2:342. 
♦Bingham,  Francis,  Vol.  2:347. 
♦Bingham,  Sanford,  Vol.  2:252. 
♦Birch,  Erastus  Franklin,  Vol.  3:19. 
♦Bird,  Mormon  Delbert,  Vol.  3:319. 

Bischoff,  Joseph  Peter,  Vol.   3:219. 

Bjorklund,  Pehr  A.,  Vol.  3:602. 

Bjorkman,  Andrew,  Vol.  3:602. 
♦Bjorkman,  Oscar  Gotfred,  Vol.  3:20. 
♦Black,  George,  Vol.  3:20. 
♦Black,  Maria  Hansen,  Vol.  3:22. 
♦Black,  William  Morley,  Vol.  3:21. 
♦Blackburn,  Ellas  H.,  Vol.  1:491. 

Blackburn,  Manasseh  J.,  Vol.  2:93. 

Blackburn,  William,  Vol.  3:320. 
♦Blake,  James,  Vol.  3:321. 
♦Blake,  Thomas,  Vol.  1:584. 

Blake,  William,  Vol.  1:476. 

Bleak,  George  O.,  Vol.  3:603. 


♦Blight,  James,  Vol.  2:254. 
♦Blood,  Henry  Hooper,  Vol.  3:23. 
♦Blood,  William,  Vol.  1:465. 

Blood,  William,  Vol.  3:24. 
♦Blunck,  Hans  Henry  C,  Vol.  3:322. 
*Bluth,  John  Vitallis,  Vol.  2:244. 
♦Bockholt,  Dirk,  Vol.  3:24. 
♦Bodily,  Joseph  Henry,  Vol.  2:240. 
Bodily,  Robert,  Vol.  3:603. 
Boggs,  Francis,  Vol.  3:322. 
♦Bohn,  Jacob  J.  M.,  Vol.  3:604. 
♦Bond,  Jesse,  Vol.  3:25. 
♦Bond,  Sarah  Adams,  Vol.  3:26. 

Bond,  Wiliam  Samuel,  Vol.  3:323. 
♦Bone,  Francis,  Vol.  3:24. 
♦Booth,  John  E.,  Vol.  1:494. 
Booth,  Josephine  D.,  Vol.  1:503. 
Booth,  Richard  T.,  jun..  Vol.  3:604. 
Borrowman,  John,  Vol.  3:605. 
Borup,  Peter,  jun..  Vol.  3:605. 
Boud,  John  Wallace,  Vol.  2:372. 
♦Bourne,  John  Albert,  Vol.  3:26. 
Bowen,  David  John,  Vol.  2:13  4. 
♦Bowen,  Joseph  Leonard,  Vol.  3:27. 
♦Bowker,  John  Squires,  Vol.  3:27. 
♦Bowman,  Andrew  G.,  Vol.  2:402, 

808. 
♦Bowns,  James,  Vol.  3:28. 
♦Box,  Elijah  Arnold,  Vol.  2:59. 
♦Boyce,  John,  Vol.  2:748. 
Boynton,  John  F.,  Vol.  1:91. 
Brackenbury,  Joseph  B.,  Vol.  2:597. 
Bradford,  Robert  H.,  Vol.  2:411. 
♦Bradley,  Orlando,  Vol.  2:165. 
♦Brady,  Jordan,  Vol.   3:29. 

Brady,  Marion  H.,  Vol.  2:596. 
♦Bramwell,  Franklin  S.,  Vol.  1:771. 
Brand,  Alexander  A.,  Vol.  2:313. 
♦Brandley,  Theodore,  Vol.  1:387. 
Brannan,  Samuel,  Vol.  3:606. 
♦Breinholt,  Ane  S.  M.,  Vol.  2:551. 
♦Breinholt,  Jens  P.  L.,  Vol.  2:550. 
♦Bricker,  Sarah  Goff,  Vol.  2:452. 
♦Bricker,  William,  Vol.   2:451. 
♦Briggs,  George,  jun..  Vol.  3:29. 
♦Briggs,  Thomas,  Vol.  2:79. 
♦Bright,  John  Parley,  Vol.  3:323. 
Bright,  John  Wesley,  Vol.  2:41. 
♦Brighton,  Robert  A.,  Vol.  3:323. 
♦Brim,  William  Franklin,  Vol.  3:324. 
♦Brimhall,  George  Henry,  Vol.  1:714; 

Vol.  3:325. 
♦Brimhall,  Noah,  Vol.  2:597. 
♦Brimhall,  Norman  A.,  Vol.  3:29. 
♦Brimley,  Richard,  Vol.  1:606. 

Brinkerhoff,  James,  Vol.  3:327. 
♦Broadbent,  Reuben,  Vol.  2:129. 
♦Bromley,  William  M.,  Vol.  2:24. 
Bronson,  Henry  D.,  Vol.  3:607. 
♦Brooks,  George  Finly,  Vol.  2:99. 
♦Brough,  Samuel  R.,  Vol.  2:256. 
♦Brown,  Adin  Ebed,  Vol.  2:255,  811. 
♦Brown,  Albert  George,  Vol.  2:598. 
Brown,  Alexander,  Vol.  3:608. 
♦Brown,  Austin  Cravath,  Vol.   2:282. 
♦Brown,  Austin  Milton,  Vol.   2:438. 


808 


INDEX. 


Brown,  Ebenezer,  Vol.  3:608. 
Brown,  Elisha,  Vol.  3:328. 
*Brown,  Fannie  S.,  Vol.  2:439. 
*Brown,  George  W.,  Vol.  3:608. 
*Brown,  James,  Vol.  2:283. 

Brown,  James  M.,  Vol.  2:243. 
*Brown,  James  Stephens,  Vol.  3:30. 
Brown,  John,  Vol.  1:511. 
Brown,  Mahonri  E.,  Vol.  3:328. 
Brown,  Samuel,  Vol.  2:598. 
*Brown,  William,  Vol.  1:466. 

Browning,  George  A.,  Vol.  2:50. 
^Browning,  George  E.,  Vol.  3:329. 

Brugger,  Arnold,  Vol.  3:609. 
*Brunson,  Lewis,  Vol.  3:330. 
*Brunson,  Peter  Lorenzo,  Vol.  3:330. 
Brunson,  Seymour,  Vol.  3:331. 
Bryner,  Casper,  Vol.  1:535. 
*Buchanan,  Alexander,  Vol.  2:440. 
*Buck,  William  Foulds,  Vol.   2:285. 
♦Buckley,  Edmund,  Vol.  2:178. 
*Buckwalter,  Calvin  S.,  Vol.  1:603. 
*Buckwalter,  Henry  S.,  Vol.  1:604. 
*Budge,  William,  Vol.  1:451. 
Budge,  William  Arthur,  Vol.  3:332. 
Buehler,  John  Ulrich,  Vol.  2:14. 
Bulkier,  Newman,  Vol.  3:610. 
*Bull,  Joseph,  Vol.  1:653. 
*Bullock,  Lucy  Clayton,  Vol.   2:600. 
*Bullock,  Thomas,  Vol.   2:599. 
*Bunker,  Edward,  Vol.  3:31. 
♦Bunnell,  Stephen  L,  Vol.  2:600. 
♦Bunting,  James  Lovett,  Vol.  3:33. 
♦Burch,  James,  Vol.  2:242. 
♦Burdette.  Burdette  P.,  Vol.  3:610. 
*Burgon,  Willard  C,  Vol.  1:588. 
♦Burgoyne,  Edward  L.,  Vol.  2:35. 

Burnham,  James,  Vol.  3:611. 
*Burnham,  Wallace  K.,  Vol.  2:42. 
♦Burns.  William  Josiah,  Vol.  3:34. 
♦Burnside,  Alexander,  Vol.  3:332. 
♦Burraston,  John,  Vol.  2:347. 
♦Burrows,  James  Bascom,  Vol.  3:33  2. 
♦Burrows,  John  Holmes,  Vol.  2:522. 
Burt,  Albert  Cleon,  Vol.  3:611. 
♦Burt,  John  Davidson,  Vol.  2:61. 
♦Burton,  Arthur  Fielding,  Vol.  3:35. 
♦Burton,  Charles  S.,  Vol.  1:671. 
♦Burton,  Robert  T.,  Vol.  1:238;  Vol. 

3:746. 
♦Burton,  Thomas  F.,  Vol.  2:227. 
♦Burton,  William  G.,  Vol.  2:255. 
♦Burton,  William  Walton,  Vol.  1:349; 

Vol.  2:226. 
♦Bush,  Hannah  M.  Green,  Vol.   3:37. 

Bush,  Richard,  Vol.  3:35. 
♦Bush,  Richard  Nelson,  Vol.  3:36. 
♦Bushman,  Elias  Albert,   Vol.    2:284. 
Bushman,  Homer  Fred.,  Vol.  2:601. 
♦Bushman,  John,  Vol.  1:553. 
Bushman,  Lewis  Jacob,  Vol.  3:611. 
Bushman,  Martin  B.,  Vol.  1:507. 
Bushman.  Preston  A.,  Vol.  2:601. 
♦Butler,  Alva,  Vol.  1:578;  Vol.  2:312 
♦Butler,  Alva  John,  Vol.  2:312. 
Butler,  Henry,  Vol.  2:601. 


Butler,  Job,  Vol.  2:359. 

Butler,  John  Low,  Vol.  2:601. 
♦Butler,  Rufus  Edgar,  Vol.  3:38. 
♦Butler,  Sarah  Adeline,  Vol.  3:38. 

Butler,  Thomas,  Vol.  3:612. 

Butler,  Thomas  L.,  Vol.  2:359. 

Butler,  William  H.,  3:612. 
♦Butterfield.  Almon  T.,  Vol.  2:315. 

Butterfield,  Josiah,  Vol.  1:192. 
♦Butterfield,  Samuel,  Vol.  1:583. 
♦Butterfield,  Thomas,  Vol.  1:582. 
♦Butterfield,  Thomas,  jun., Vol.  1 :582 
♦Buttle,  Joseph  Acomb,  Vol.  2:749. 

Bybee,  Robert  Lee,  Vol.  2:601. 
♦Bywater,  George  G.,  Vol.  2:602. 
♦Bywater,  Henry  G.,  Vol.  2:604. 


♦Cain,  Elizabeth  W..  Vol.   2:751. 
♦Cain.  Joseph,  Vol.  2:750. 
♦Caine.  John  T..  Vol.  1:726. 
♦Calder,  David  O..  Vol.  1:773. 
♦Call,  Anson  C,  Vol.  2:258. 
♦Call,  Anson  Vasco,  Vol.  2:751. 

Call,  Anson  Vasco,  Vol.  3:612. 

Call.  Christian,  Vol.  3:333. 
♦Call.  Josiah.  Vol.  3:38. 
♦Callahan.  William  H..  Vol.  3:333. 

Callan.  Stephen  James,  Vol.  3:334. 

Canister,  Thomas,  Vol.  1:527. 
♦Callister,  Thomas  C,  Vol.  1:528. 
♦Cameron,  Benjamin.  Vol.  3:39. 
♦Cameron,  David.  Vol.  1:542.  821. 
♦Cameron,  Sarah  E.,  Vol.  3:40. 
♦Campbell,  Jonathan,  Vol.  1:398. 
♦Campbell,  Robert  Lang.  Vol.  3:613. 
♦Cannon,  Abraham  H..  Vol.  1:167. 
♦Cannon.  Angus  M..  Vol.  1:292. 

Cannon,  Annie  Wells,  Vol.  3:334. 
♦Cannon,  Carl  John,  Vol.  1:450. 

Cannon,  David  Hoagland,  Vol.  3:614. 
♦Cannon.  George  M.,  Vol.   1:566. 
♦Cannon,  George  Q.,  Vol.  1:42. 
♦Cannon,  John  M.,  Vol.  1:790. 

Cannon,  John  Quayle,  Vol.  1:243. 

Cannon,  Lester  Jenkins,  Vol.  3:615. 

Cannon,  Lewis  M..  Vol.  1:687. 
♦Cannon,  Martha  Telle,  Vol.  2:524. 
♦Cannon,  Sarah  J.  J.,  Vol.  2:605. 
♦Capener,  Arthur  Rigby,  Vol.  3:42. 

Capson,  Albert  A.,  Vol.  3:336. 
♦Capson.  Carl  Johan,  Vol.  3:336. 

Capson,  Nils,  Vol.  3:337. 
♦Carbine,  Wm.  Van  Orden,  Vol.  3:40. 
♦Card,  Charles  O.,  Vol.  1:296. 
♦Card.  Zina  Young,  Vol.  3:338. 
♦Cardon,  Joseph  E.,  Vol.  1:413. 
♦Cardon,  Joseph  S.,  Vol.  2:126. 
♦Cardon,  Louis  S.,  Vol.  1:420. 

Cardon,  Paul,  Vol.  2:76. 
♦Careless,  George  E.  P.,  Vol.  1:738. 

Carlisle,  John  Edward,  Vol.  2:752. 
♦Carlquist,  Carl  A.,  Vol.  2:422. 
♦Carlson,  Anders  Alfred,  Vol.  3:41. 
♦Carpenter,  Ann  E.  H.,  Vol.  3:43. 


INDEX. 


809 


Carpenter,  Erastus  S.,  Vol.  2:196. 
*Carpenter,  John  S.,  Vol.  3:42. 
♦Carpenter,  Joseph  H.,  Vol.  2:561. 
*Carrington,  Albert,  Vol.  1:126. 

Carter,  Gideon  Haden,  Vol.  3:615. 

Carter,  Hyrum,  Vol.  3:616. 

Cartwright,  Joseph  H.,  Vol.  3:616. 
*Carver,  John,  Vol.  2:284. 
*Casper,  Jedediah  Grant,  Vol.   2:752. 

Cazier,  Charles  Drake,  Vol.  3:340. 
*Cazier,  David,  Vol.  2:115. 
*Chamberlain,  Henry,  Vol.  3:44. 

Chamberlain,  Solomon,  Vol.  2:605. 
*Chamberlain,  Thomas,  Vol.  3:44. 
♦Chambers,  Mary  L.  S.,  Vol.  2:524. 
♦Chambers,  Nathaniel  G.,  Vol.  2:523. 

Chandler,  James  J.,  Vol.  2:261. 
♦Chapin,  Uriah  Calvin,  Vol.  3:341. 
♦Cheney,  Nathan  Beebe,  Vol.  2:62. 

Cherry,  Jesse  Yelton,  Vol.  3:616. 

Chipman,  Otto  Lyman,  Vol.  3:341. 

Chipman,  Stephen  L.,  Vol.  3:342. 

Chipman,  Washburn,  Vol.  1:505. 
♦Christensen,  Andrew,  Vol.  2:576. 

Christensen,  Anthon  C,  Vol.   2:146. 

Christensen,  Antone  C,  Vol.  3:343. 
♦Christensen,  Arnfred  J.,  Vol.  2:606. 
♦Christensen,  Carl  C.  A.,  Vol.   1:378. 
♦Christensen,  Christen,  Vol.   2:163. 
♦Christensen,  Christian,  Vol.  2:753. 
♦Christensen,  David  H.,  Vol.  1:788. 
♦Christensen,  F.  W.,  Vol.  2:544. 
♦Christensen,  George,  Vol.  1:370. 

Christensen,  Hannibal,  Vol.  3:617. 

Christensen,  Heber  C,  Vol.  2:753. 
♦Christensen,  James  A.,  Vol.   2:606. 
♦Christensen,  James  M.,  Vol.  1:686. 
♦Christensen,  J.  M.,  jun..  Vol.  2:166. 
♦Christensen,  James  P.,  Vol.  2:356. 
♦Christensen,  James  P.,  Vol.  2:68. 
♦Christensen,  John,  Vol.  2:607. 

Christensen,  Joseph,  Vol.  2:754. 
♦Christensen,  Lars  Peter,  Vol.  2:210. 
♦Christensen,  Mads,  Vol.  3:45. 
♦Christensen,  Niels,  Vol.  3:46. 
♦Christensen,  Niels  C,  Vol.  2:356. 

Christensen,  Niels  C,  Vol.  3:46. 
♦Christensen,  Simon,  Vol.  2:753. 
♦Christensen,  Thomas  C,  Vol.  2:164. 

Christensen,  Wilford  M.,  Vol.  2:56. 
♦Christenson,  Joseph,  Vol.  2:607. 
♦Christiansen,  C.  H.,  Vol.  2:543. 
♦Christiansen,  C.  J.,  Vol.  2:577. 
♦Christiansen,  F.  J.,  Vol.  2:569. 
♦Christiansen,  F.  J.,  jun..  Vol.  2:570. 
♦Christiansen,  Hans  C,  Vol.  1:396. 
♦Christiansen,  Hans  J.,  Vol.  2:201. 
♦Christiansen,  James,  Vol.  2:754. 
♦Christiansen,  Parley,  Vol.  1:817. 
♦Christiansen,  Soren,  Vol.  2:608. 

Christophersen,  Chris.  W.,  Vol.  3: 
617. 
♦  Christophersen,  Martin,  Vol.   3:617. 
♦Christophersen,  Rasmus,  Vol.  2:262. 

Chugg,  Moroni,  Vol.  3:47. 

Church,  Haden  Wells,  Vol.  3:618. 


Clapp,  Benjamin  L.,  Vol.  1:195. 
♦Claridge,  Samuel,  Vol.  3:47. 

Clark,  Amasa  Lyman,  Vol.   3:344. 
♦Clark,  Edward  Barrett,  Vol.  3:48. 
♦Clark,  Ezra  James,  Vol.  3:345. 
♦Clark,  Ezra  Thompson,  Vol.  3:343. 

Clark,  Geo.  Hammond,  Vol.  2:116. 
♦Clark,  George  Scheffer,  Vol.  2:25. 
♦Clark,  James  Cecil,  Vol.  2:755,  808. 
♦Clark,  John,  Vol.  1:775. 
♦Clark,  John  Alexander,  Vol.   3:346. 

Clark,  John  H.,  Vol.  1:444. 
♦Clark,  John  W.,  Vol.  1:548. 

Clark,  Joseph  Smith,  Vol.  3:347. 
♦Clark,  Joshua  Reuben,  Vol.  3:49. 

Clark,  Samuel  Thomas,  Vol.  3:619. 
♦Clark,  Thomas  H.,  Vol.  1:547. 
♦Clark,  Wilford  W.,  Vol.  2:35. 
♦Clark,  William  H.,  Vol.  2:756. 
♦Clarke,  James  Hill,  Vol.  2:755. 
♦Clawson,  Hiram  B.,  Vol.   1:629. 
♦Clawson,  Rudger,  Vol.  1:174. 
♦Clawson,  Thomas  A.,  Vol.  2:100. 

Clayson,  William  A.,  Vol.  3:619. 
♦Clayton,  Thomas,  Vol.  2:75  7. 
♦Clayton.  William,  Vol.  1:717. 

Clegg,  Thomas,  Vol.  1:476. 
♦Clements,  Albert  N.,  Vol.  1:448. 
♦Clifford,  Thomas  Holman,  Vol.  3:50. 
♦Cluff,  Benjamin,  Vol.  1:475. 
♦Cluff,  Harvey  H.,  Vol.  1:371. 
♦Cluff,  Henry,  Vol.  1:477. 
♦Cluff,  William  W.,  Vol.  1:340. 
♦Clyde,  Edward  D.,  Vol.  2:10. 

Coalter,  Fergus,  Vol.  3:347. 
♦Cockerill,  Alice  R.,  Vol.  2:447. 
♦Cockerill,  Anthony,  Vol.  2:446.  " 

Coffin,  Nathan  Samuel,  Vol.  3:348. 

Cole,  Thomas  J.,  Vol.  3:619. 
♦Colebrook,  Charles,  Vol.   2:292. 
♦Coleman,  George,  Vol.  1:526. 
♦Coleman,  Henry  T.,  Vol.  3:51. 

Collett,  Sylvester  D.,  Vol.  3:620. 

Coltrin,  Zebedee.  Vol.  1:190. 
♦Comer,  George,  Vol.  1:794. 

Condie,  John  William,  Vol.  3:349 
♦Condie,  Thomas  A.,  Vol.  3:53. 
♦Cook,  David,  Vol.  3:51. 
♦Cook,  Hyrum  H.,  Vol.  2:47. 
♦Cook,  Mary  E.  N.,  Vol.  2:758. 
♦Cook,  Phineas  Woolcott,  Vol.  3:52. 
♦Cook,  Samuel,  Vol.  3:348. 
♦Cook,  Thomas,  Vol.  2:757. 

Cook,  Washington  N.,  Vol.  3:620. 

Cook,  William,  Vol.  3:349. 
♦Cooley,  Andrew  Wood,  Vol.  3:350. 
♦Coombs,  Isaiah  M.,  Vol.  1:495. 
♦Coon,  James  D.,  Vol.  2:448. 
♦Coon,  John,  Vol.  2:758. 
♦Coon,  Mary  H.,  Vol.  2:449,  810. 
♦Coon,  Mary  T.  Y.,  Vol.  2:759. 

Coons,  George  W.,  Vol.  2:210. 
♦Cooper,  Eliza  Ward,  Vol.  2:610. 
♦Cooper,  John,  Vol.  2:144. 

Cooper,  John,  Vol.  3:351. 

Cooper,  Joseph  Parker,  Vol.  3:351. 


810 


INDEX. 


*Cooper,  Thomas,  Vol.  2:609. 
*Cope,  Francis,  Vol.  3:54. 
*Copley,  Thomas,  Vol.  2:260. 
*Corbridge,  Samuel  Ray,  Vol.  3:352. 

Cordon,  Omer  Samuel,  Vol.  3:352. 

Corrill,  John,  Vol.  1:241. 
*Corry,  William  Henry,  Vol.  3:352. 

Cottam,  Thomas  P.,  Vol.  3:353. 
*Cowdery,  Oliver,  Vol.  1:246. 
*Cowley,  Joseph  Curtis,  Vol.  3:354. 
*Cowley,  Matthias  F.,  Vol.  1:168. 

Cox,  Alvira  Coolidge,  Vol.  2:565. 
*Cox,  Edward  Isaiah, Vol.  3:55. 
*Cox,  Everard  Alvin,  Vol.  3:354. 
*Cox,  Frederick  W.,  jun..  Vol.  2:564. 
*Cox,  Thomas  Levis,  Vol.  2:190. 
*Cox,  William  A.,  Vol.  2:565. 
*Cox,  William  James,  Vol.  2:287. 
*Crane,  James,  Vol.  1:579. 
*Crane,  James  S.,  Vol.  1:580. 
*Crapo,  Charles  C,  Vol.  2:109. 
*Crawford,  John,  Vol.  1:391. 
*Crawford,  William  R.,  Vol.  3:55. 
*Crismon,  Charles,  jun..  Vol.  2:611. 
*Crismon,  Elizabeth  T.  C,  Vol.  2:612. 

Crockett,  Alvin,  Vol.  1:418. 
*Crockett,  Ozro  O.,  Vol.  2:173. 

Crook,  John  W.,  Vol.  2:13. 
*Crosby,  George  H.,  Vol.  2:44;  Vol. 

3:355. 
*Crosby,  George  H.,  jun..  Vol.  3:357. 
*Crosby,  Jesse  W.,  jun..  Vol,  1:541. 
*Crossgrove,  James  A.  B.,  Vol.  2:300. 
*Crow,  Charles  H.,  Vol.  1:621. 

Crowther,  James  F.,  Vol.  1:553. 

Crowther,  William  O.,  Vol.  3:358. 
*Crump,  William  C,  Vol.  1:580. 
*Crump,  William  C,  jun..  Vol.  1:569. 
*Cummard,  John,  Vol.  3:359. 

Cummings,  Benj.  F.,  Vol.  3:620. 
*Cummings,  Benj.  F.,  jun..  Vol.  3:622. 
*Cummings,  Horace  H.,  Vol.  1:713. 

Cummings,  James  D.,  Vol.  1:568. 
*Cunningham,  Andrew,  Vol.  2:370. 
*Cutler,  Allen  Riley,  Vol.  2:174. 
*Cutler,  Heber  S.,  Vol.  2:439. 
*Cutler,  John  C,  Vol.  3:360. 
*Cutler,  John  C,  jun..  Vol.  2:100. 

D. 

*Dahl,  Alexander,  Vol.  1:578. 
*Daines,  Robert,  Vol.  1:42  6. 

D^ines,  William  Moroni,  Vol.  2:178. 

Dalley,  John  Edward,  Vol.  3:362. 

Dalton,  George  M.,  Vol.  3:363. 
*Dalton,  John  C,  Vol.  1:552. 

Dame,  William  H.,  Vol.  1:532. 

Daniels,  James  E.,  Vol.  1:498. 

Dansie,  Alfred  J.,  Vol.  1:570. 
*Dastrup,  John,  Vol.  2:612. 
*Davidson,  Robert,  Vol.  3:56. 
*Davis,  Albert  W.,  Vol.  2:410. 
*Davis,  David  L.,  Vol.  2:395. 
*Davis.  Edward,  Vol.   2:759;   Vol.   3: 
57- 


*Davis,  Edward  W.,  Vol.  2:393. 

Davis,  Elizabeth  L.,  Vol.  2:613. 

Davis,  George,  Vol.  1:399. 

Davis,  George  A.,  Vol.  2:238. 

Davis,  George  W.,  Vol.  1:43  6. 
*Davis,  Jamima  N.,  Vol.  2:394. 
*Davis,  Nathan,  Vol.  1:647. 
*Davis,  Nofear,  Vol.  1:555. 
*Davis,  Sarah  E.  H.,  Vol.  2:393. 
*Davis,  William  C,  Vol.  2:197. 

Davis,  William  K.,  Vol.  2:760. 

Davis,  William  R.,  Vol.  2:613. 

Davis,  William  Ray,  Vol.  3:623. 
*Day,  Laronzo,  Vol.  2:461. 
*Day,  Wilford,  Vol.  3:363. 
♦Daybell,  Annie  Price,  Vol.  3:58. 
♦Daybell,  William,  Vol.  3:58. 
♦Daynes,  Joseph  J.,  Vol.  1:746. 
*Daynes,  Joseph  J.,  jun..  Vol.   2:477. 
*Dee,  Annie  Taylor,  Vol.  3:60. 
*Dee,  Thomas    Duncombe,    Vol.    3:59. 
*De  La  Mare,  Philip,  Vol.  2:285. 
*DeLange,  Joseph  F..  Vol.  3:364. 
*Denning,  James  H.,  Vol.  2:49. 

Derricott,  Joseph  T.,  Vol.  2:23. 
*Despain,  David  A.,  Vol.  2:310. 

Despain,  George  F.,  Vol.  2:312. 
*Despain,  Henry  W.,  Vol.  2:614. 
*Despain,  Hyrum  S..  Vol.  2:310. 
*Despain,  Lewis  Edgar,  Vol.   2:311. 
*Despain,  Ruth  A.  N.,  Vol.  2:308. 
♦Despain,  Solomon  J.,  Vol.  2:307. 
*Despain,  Susan  Dean,  Vol.  2:309. 
♦Despain,  William  J.,  Vol.  2:309 

De  St.  Jeor,  Francis,  Vol.  1:548. 
*Dewey,  George  Carlos,  Vol.  3:60. 
*Dewey,  James  Ernest,  Vol.  3:61. 
*Dibble,  Edwin  Cleveland,  Vol.   3:62. 

Dick,  John,  Vol.  3:364. 
*Dickson,  Albert  D.,  Vol.  3:62. 
*Dimond,  Robert  E.,  Vol.  1:592. 

Dimond,  Thomas  W.,  Vol.  2:614. 

Dimond,  William  S.,  Vol.  1:590. 
*Ditmer,  August  A.,  Vol.  2:435. 
*Done,  Arthur  J.,  Vol.  2:124. 
*Done,  Willard,  Vol.  1:716. 
♦Dorius,  Carl  C.  N.,  Vol.  2:760. 
*Dorius,  Charles  R.,  Vol.  2:615. 
*Dougall,  Maria  Y.,  Vol.  2:617. 
*Dougall,  William  B.,  Vol.  2:615. 
*Doxey,  Thomas,  Vol.  2:761. 
♦Drake,  Horace,  Vol.  2:80. 
♦Driggs,  Don  Carlos,  Vol.  2:235. 
♦Druce,  John,  Vol.  2:496. 
*Druce,  John  Alma,  Vol.  2:499. 
*Druce,  Julia  A.  J.,  Vol.  2:498. 
♦Duckworth,  James,  Vol.  3:63. 
♦Duffin,  James  G.,  Vol.   1:537. 
♦Dugmore,  Samuel,  Vol.  3:64. 
♦Duke,  John,  Vol.  3:64. 
♦Duke,  Robert,  Vol.  3:65. 

Duke,  Robert  Stone,  Vol.  3:65. 
♦Duncan,  Homer,  Vol.  1:622,  822. 
♦Dunn,  Charles  O.,  Vol.  1:429. 
Durrant,  Joseph,  Vol.  2:148. 
Durrant,  Lorenzo  H.,  Vol.  2:149. 


INDEX. 


811 


*Durrant,  Thomas  H.,  Vol.  2:180. 

Durrant,  William  R..  Vol.  3:365. 
*Dusenberry,  Ida  Smoot,  Vol.  2:619. 
*Dye,  Joseph  Henry,  Vol.  3:66. 
*Dye,  Richard,  Vol.  2:286,  811. 

Dye,  Samuel  G.,  Vol.  2:288. 
*Dye,  William  Maiden,  Vol.  3:67. 
*Dykes,  George  P.,  Vol.  2:762. 


B. 


*Eardley,  Bedson,  Vol.   2:276. 
*Eardley,  James.  Vol.  2:277. 
*Eardley,  Louisa  C,  Vol.  2:277. 

Earl,  James  Calvin,  Vol.  3:365. 

Earl,  Joseph  Ira,  Vol.  2:192. 
*Earl,  Sylvester  Henry,  Vol.  3:67. 

Earl,  Sylvester  Henry,  Vol.  3:366. 
*Earley,  Lehi  Nephi,  Vol.  3:69. 

Eccles.  Samuel,  Vol.  2:195. 

Eccles,  Stewart,  Vol.  3:798. 
*Eccles,  William,  Vol.  2:620. 
*Eckersley,  Joseph,   Vol.    1:346;    Vol. 

3:366. 
*Eddington,  William,  Vol.  2:620. 
*Edgley,  Joseph,  Vol.  3:69. 
*Ed\vards,  William,  Vol.  3:623. 
*Egan,  Richard  E.,  Vol.  1:816. 
*Egbert,  Joseph,  Vol.  3:70. 
*Eggertsen,  Simon  P.,.iun.,  Vol.  1:493. 
*Ek,  Carl  A.,  Vol.  1:686. 
*Elder,  Henry  Benson,  Vol.  3:624. 
*Eldredge,  Alma,  Vol.  1:341. 
*Eldredge,  Benjamin  R.,  Vol.  1:792. 
*Eldredge,  Frederick  B.,  Vol.  3:71. 
*Eldredge,  Horace  S.,  Vol.  1:196. 
*Eldredge,  James  Alonson,  Vol.  3:71. 

Eldredge,  Jane  Jennings,  Vol.  3:72. 
*Ellerbeck,  Thomas  W.,  Vol.  3:72. 
*Ellison,  Ephraim  Peter,  Vol.  3:73. 
*Ell\vood,  Robert,  Vol.  1:576. 
*Emery,  George  R.,  Vol.  1:644. 
*Emery,  Wilford  W.,  Vol.  2:409. 

Engberg,  Andreas,  Vol.  1:514. 
*Ensign,  Datus  H.,  Vol.  2:245. 
*Ensign,  Marius,  Vol.  3:367. 
*Ensign,  Rufus  B.,  Vol.  2:490. 

Enz,  Gottleib,  sen..  Vol.  2:207. 
*Erickson,  August,  Vol.  3:367. 
*Erickson,  Einar,  Vol.  1:525. 
*Erickson,  Jacob  Emil,  Vol.  2:466. 

Erickson,  John,  Vol.  1:588. 

Ernstsen,  Ernest  Mark,  Vol.  3:625. 
*Esplin,  Henry  Webster,  Vol.  3:74. 

Esplin,  William  Cox,  Vol.  3:625. 

Evans,  Abel,  Vol.  3:625. 
*Evans,  Abel  John,  Vol.  3:626. 

Evans,  David,  Vol.  3:627. 
*Evans,  Henry,  Vol.  2:28  9. 
*Evans,  John  A.,  Vol.  2:499. 
*Evans,  John  William,  Vol.  3:75. 
*Evans,  Priscilla  M.,  Vol.  2:360. 
*Evans,  Reginald,  Vol.  3:368. 
*Evans,  Taliesin  Thomas,  Vol.  3:369. 
*Evans,  Thomas  D.,  Vol.  2:359. 
*Evans,  William,  Vol.  3:75. 


*Ewell,  Francis  M.,  Vol.  1:525. 
*Eyre,  George  H.,  Vol.  3:369. 
*Eyring,  Henry,  Vol.  1:311. 


Fairbanks,  Henry,  Vol.  2:354. 
*Fairbanks,  John  B.,  Vol.  2:352. 

Fairbanks,  Joseph  W.,  Vol.  2:211. 
♦Fairbanks,  Nathaniel,  Vol.  2:355. 
*Fairbourn,  Richard  M.,  Vol.   2:296. 
*Fairbourn,  William,  Vol.  2:295. 
♦Farmer,  Erastus  G.,  Vol.  1:447. 
♦Farnsworth,  Franklin  D.,  Vol.  3  :  370. 
*Farnsworth,  Julia  P.  M.,  Vol.  2:621. 
*Farnsworth,  Moses  F.,  Vol.  1:522. 
*Farns\vorth,  Philo  T.,  Vol.  3:370. 
*Farr,  Lorin,  Vol.  1:749. 

Farr,  Lucian  C,  jun..  Vol.  3:76. 
*Farr,  Willard,  Vol.  1:555. 
*Farrell,  George  L.,  Vol.  1:765. 
*Farrell,  John,  Vol.  2:334. 
*Faucett,  William,  Vol.  2:622,  808. 
*Fa\vns,  David  Fowler,  Vol.  3:76.  ' 
*Felt,  David  P.,  Vol.  1:68  9. 
*Felt,  Nathaniel  H.,  Vol.  2:380. 
*Fenton,  Joseph  J.,  Vol.  2:436. 
*Fenton,  Thomas,  Vol.  2:437. 

Fernelius,  Charles  A.,  Vol.  2:254. 
*Fernstrom,  Frans  S.,  Vol.  1:684. 

Ferrin,  Charles  Ether,  Vol.  3:372. 
*Ferrin,  Josiah  Leaman,  Vol.  2:623. 
*Ferrin,  Josiah  Marsh,  Vol.  2:242. 
^Fielding,  Joseph,  Vol.  2:762. 

Fife,  John  Jacob,  Vol.  3:628. 
*Finlayson,  Thomas,  Vol.  2:623. 
*Finlinson,  Joseph  T.,  Vol.  3:77. 

Fish,  Joseph,  Vol.  2:215. 
*Fisher,  Franklin  Pierce,  Vol.  3:77. 

Fisher,  Joseph  H.,  Vol.  3:371. 
*Fisher,  William  F.,  Vol.  1:447. 
♦Fitzgerald,  J.  W.  W.,  Vol.  1:793. 
*Fitzgerald,  Perry,  Vol.  3:628. 
*Fjeld,  Andrew,  Vol.  3:629. 
*FjeHsted,  Andrew  C,  Vol.  1:817. 
*Fjeldsted,  Christian  D.,  Vol.   1:203; 
Vol.  3:746. 

Flake,  James  M.,  Vol.  2:218. 
*Flake,  Osmer  Dennis,  Vol.  3:78,  372. 

Flamm,  Henry  Joseph,  Vol.  3:372. 

Flanigan,  James  Henry,  Vol.  3:631. 

Fletcher,  Samuel,  Vol.  1:471. 
♦Florence,  Henry,  Vol.  3:79. 
♦Florence,  Samuel  S.,  Vol.  3:79. 

Fluckiger,  John,  Vol.  3:80. 
♦Flygare,  Nils  C,  Vol.  1:461. 
♦Folkersen,  Hans  Peter,  Vol.  2:623. 

Foote,  David,  Vol.  1:374. 
*Foote,  Warren,  Vol.  1:375. 
♦Forbush,  Loren  Ezra,  Vol.  2:326. 

Forbush,  Rufus,  Vol.  2:325. 
♦Ford,  Joseph  Nelson,  Vol.  3:80. 
♦Ford,  William,  Vol.  3:373. 
♦Forsberg,  Charles  E.,  Vol.  3:373. 
♦Forsgren,  Peter  A.,  Vol.  1:393. 

Forsyth,  George  J.  B.  H.,  Vol.  3:374. 


812 


INDEX. 


Forsyth,  James  Arzy,  Vol.  3:631. 
*Forsyth,  Jesse  Turner,  Vol.  3:374. 

Forsyth,  Thomas  R.,  Vol.  3:375. 

Foster,  James,  Vol.  1:191. 
*Foster,  Solon  J.,  Vol.  3:81. 
*Fotheringham,  William,  Vol.   2:190. 

Fox,  Isaac  W.,  Vol.  1:505. 
*Fox,  Jesse  W..  Vol.  1:774. 
*Frame,  Archibald,  Vol.  2:474. 
*Francis,  Alonzo,  Vol.  3:83. 
*Francis,  Esther  C.  E.  W.,  Vol.  3:85. 
*Francis,  Samuel,  Vol.  3:81. 
♦Francis,  Samuel,  Vol.  3:376. 

Frank,  Christopher,  Vol.  2:20. 

Frankland,  John  Dye,  Vol.  3:631. 
*Fraughton,  Franklin   A.,   Vol.    3:84. 
*Fraughton,  Juliet  Mott,  Vol.  3:85. 
*Frazier,  Marlon,  Vol.  1:469. 

Freckleton,  Wilford  O.,  Vol.   3:631. 

Fredrickson,  John,  Vol.  3:376. 
*Free,  Sarah  J.  H.,  Vol.  2:394. 
*Freeman,  Elijah  N.,  Vol.  1:329. 
*Fridal,  Knud  Hansen,  Vol.  3:86. 
*Fridal.  Knud  H..  jun.,  Vol.  3:377. 
*Fry,  Richard,  Vol.   1:474,   821. 

Fuchs,  Charles  F.,  Vol.  3:632. 
*Fuhrman,  Godfrey,  Vol.  3:86. 
♦Fuller,  Edmund  B.,  Vol.  2:334. 
♦Fuller,  George  A.,  Vol.  2:335. 
♦Fuller,  Henry  John,  Vol.  2:624. 

Fuller,  Perry  Boyd,  Vol.  3:377. 
♦Fullmer,  David,  Vol.  1:289. 

Funk,  James  William,  Vol.  2:42. 

Funk,  Willard  R.,  jun.,  Vol.  3:632. 


♦Gaelte,  Andreas  O.,  Vol.  1:587. 
♦Galley,  John  William,  Vol.  3:87. 

Gallop,  William,  Vol.  1:497. 
♦Gardner,  Ann  Knox,  Vol.  2:349. 
♦Gardner,  Archibald,  Vol.  2:329. 

Gardner,  Eliza  Rogers,  Vol.  2:349. 

Gardner,  Henry,  Vol.  1:797. 
♦Gardner,  Henry  A.,  Vol.   3:633. 
♦Gardner,  James,  Vol.  2:348. 

Gardner,  James  T.,  Vol.  3:378. 
♦Gardner,  Niel  L.,  Vol.  2:333. 
♦Gardner,  Robert,  jun.,  Vol.  2:625. 
♦Gardner,  William,  Vol.  3:379. 
♦Garfield,  Raphael,  Vol.  3:380. 

Garn,  James  E.,  Vol.  3:88. 
♦Garner,  Henry  James,  Vol.  2:251. 
♦Garrick,  Elizabeth  T.,  Vol.  2:558. 
♦Garrick,  Hamilton  M.,  Vol.  2:557. 
♦Gates,  Emma  Lucy,  Vol.  3:380. 
♦Gates  Jacob,  Vol.  1:197;  Vol.  2:80! 
♦Gates,  Jacob  F.,  Vol.  2:625. 
♦Gates,  Susa  Young,  Vol.  2:626. 

Gaylord,  John,  Vol.  1:193. 
♦Geddes,  Hugh  S.,  Vol.  1:442. 
♦Geddes,  Joseph  S.,  Vol.  1:439. 
♦Geddes,  William,  Vol.  1:462. 

Gee,  Salmon,  Vol.  1:192. 
♦Geertsen,  Peter  C,  Vol.  2:629. 
♦Georgeson,  Niels,  Vol.  1:445. 


♦Georgeson,  William,  Vol.  3:381. 
♦Gerrard,  George  E.,  Vol.  2:473. 
♦Gerrard,  Samuel,  Vol.  2:475. 
♦Gibb,  John  Lye,  Vol.  3:382. 
♦Gibbons,  Andrew  S.,  Vol.  2:194. 
♦Gibbons,  Andrew  V.,  Vol.  1:554. 
♦Gibbons,  Joseph,  Vol.   3:88. 
♦Gibbons,  William  H.,  Vol.  1:328. 

Gibbons,  William  Oliver,  Vol.  2:763. 
♦Gibbs,  Horace,  Vol.  2:763. 

Gibbs,  John  Henry,  Vol.  3:382. 
♦Gibbs,  William  H.,  Vol.  1:771. 

Gifford,  Freeborn  D.,  Vol.  1:539. 

Gifford.  Oliver  D.,  Vol.  1:538. 

Gifford,  Samuel  K..  Vol.  2:194. 
♦Giles,  Franklin  Moor,  Vol.  3:89. 

Giles,  Frederick  W.,  Vol.  2:630. 

Giles,  George  Elmo,  Vol.  3:633. 
♦Giles,  George  Thomas,  Vol.  3:89. 
♦Giles,  Henry  Evans,  Vol.  2:507. 

Giles,  Taylor,  Vol.   3:634. 
♦Giles,  Thomas  D.,  Vol.  2:507. 

Gill,  Joseph  S.  B.,  Vol.  3:634. 
♦Gillen,  Erick,  Vol.  2:458. 

Gillet,  Collins  Moore,  Vol.  3:634. 
♦Gillispie,  Alexander,  Vol.  2:5. 
♦Glade,  James  Richard,  Vol.  2:630. 

Glazier,  John  W.,  Vol.  1:541. 
♦Gleason,  John  S.,  Vol.  3:91. 
♦Gledhill,  John  Ivo,  Vol.  2:632. 
♦Gledhill.  Lilly  B.  L,  Vol.  2:631. 
♦Gledhill,  Thomas.  Vol.  2:631. 
♦Glen,  Alexander,  Vol.  2:418. 
♦Glines.  James  H..  Vol.   1:478. 
♦Glover,  Albert.  Vol.  2:108. 
♦Glover,  Betsy  C.  W.,  Vol.  2:531. 
♦Glover.  Joseph,  Vol.  2:332. 
♦Goaslind,  Charles  D.,  Vol.  2:171. 
♦Goddard,  George,  Vol.   1:706. 
♦Godfrey,  Caroline  T.,  Vol.  2:468. 
♦Godfrey,  Fannie  A.,  Vol.  2:469. 
♦Godfrey,  James,  Vol.  2:468. 
♦Goff,  Hyrum,  Vol.  1:308. 
♦Goff,  Jedediah,  Vol.  3:92. 
♦Gold,  Abraham  John,  Vol.  3:635. 
♦Goodliffe,  Arnold,  Vol.  1:391. 
♦Goodrich,  Albert  G.,  Vol.  2:241,  812 
♦Goodwin.  Isaac,  Vol.  3:636. 
♦Goodwin,  Samuel  Isaac,  Vol.    3:636 
♦Goold,  Robert  F.,  Vol.  2:632. 
♦Goold,  Samuel  W.,  Vol.  2:212. 
♦Gordon,  Robert  J.,  Vol.  2:234. 

Gould,  John,  Vol.   1:191. 

Gould,  Robert,  Vol.  2:336. 

Gould,  Samuel,  Vol.  3:383. 
♦Gould,  William,  Vol.    2:337. 
♦Gowans.  Hugh  S.,  Vol.  1:354. 

Grace,  Charles  H.,  Vol.  3:92. 
♦Grace,  Isaac  Henry,  Vol.  3:384. 
♦Graham,  George,  Vol.  2:434. 
♦Granger.  Walter,  Vol.   3:384. 
♦Grant,  Heber  J.,  Vol.  1:147;  Vol.  3: 

746. 
♦Grant,  Jedediah  M.,  Vol.  1:56. 
♦Grant,  Lewis  McKeachie,  Vol.   2:89. 
♦Grant,  Rachel  R.  Ivins,  Vol.  3:637. 


INDEX. 


813 


*Gray,  John  Cruickshank,  Vol.  3:385. 

Green,  Benjamin,  Vol.  2:300. 
*Green,  Erban,  Vol.  3:90. 
*Green,  George  William,  Vol.  3:90. 
*Green,  John  Hyrum,  Vol.   3:91. 

Green,  Niels  F.  H.  N.,  Vol.  2:262. 
*Green,  William,  Vol.   2:301. 

Greene,  John  Portineus,  Vol.  2:633. 

Greenhalgh,  Joseph  W.,  Vol.  3:638. 

Greenwood,  Earl  Samuel,  Vol.  3:  799. 
*Greenwood,  Hartley,  Vol.   2:636. 

Greenwood,  Joseph,  Vol.  3:638. 
*Griffin,  Ernest  Adelbert,  Vol.    3:96. 
*Griffin,  William  H..  Vol.  1:404. 
*Griggs,  James  F.,  Vol.  2:236. 
*Griggs,  Thomas  C,  Vol.  1:711. 
*Grimmett,  John  Henry,  Vol.  2:31. 
*Grimshaw,  Duckworth,  Vol.   2:37. 
*Groo,  Isaac,  Vol.  3:93. 

Grouard,  Benjamin  F.,  Vol.   3:639. 

Grover,  Joel,  Vol.  1:515. 
*Grow,  Henry,  Vol.  3:94. 
*Gudmundsen,  Isaac,  Vol.  2:50. 

Gudmundson,  Gudmund,  Vol.  3:639. 
*Guldbransen,  Ole,  jun..  Vol.  2:379. 
*Gundersen,  Thomas,  Vol.  2:478. 

Gundersen,  Thomas,  jun..  Vol.  2: 
479. 
*Gunn,  Frederick  Thos.,  Vol.  3:386. 
*Gunnell,  Charles  Edward,  Vol.  3:97. 

H. 

Haacke,  Rulon  C,  Vol.  3:641. 

Haag,  Adolph,  Vol.  3:642. 
*Hacking,  James,  Vol.  2:636. 
*Haigh,  William  H.,  Vol.  2:471. 
*Haight,  Catherine  W.,  Vol.  3:388. 
*Haight,  Hector  Caleb,  Vol.  3:387. 
*Haight,  Horton  D.,  Vol.  1:302. 
*Haight,  Julia  Van  O.,  Vol.  3:387. 
*Haight,  Louisa  L.,  Vol.  1:303. 
*Hair,  Thomas  C,  Vol.  3:388. 
*Hakes,  Collins  R.,  Vol.  1:559. 
*Hakes,  Mabel  A.  M.,  Vol.  1:811. 

Hale,  Alma  H.,  Vol.  1:402. 

Hale,  Aroet  Lucius,  Vol.  3:642. 
*Hale,  Heber  Quincy,  Vol.  3:97. 

Hale,  Solomon  E.,  jun..  Vol.  3:643. 
*Hale,  Solomon  H.,  Vol.  2:168. 
*Hall,  Calvin,  Vol.  3:388. 

Hall,  Charles  Scott,  Vol.  3:643. 
*Hall,  Elizabeth  T.,  Vol.  2:637. 

Hall,  Joseph,  Vol.  2:241. 

Hall,  Lester  LeRoy,  Vol.  3:64  4. 
*Hall,  Mary  Bates,  Vol.  2:637,  810. 
*Hall,  Timothy,  Vol.  2:637. 
*Halliday,  George,  Vol.  3:389. 
*Halliday,  Rosetta  Eve,  Vol.  3:393. 
*Halliday,  Vernee  L.,  Vol.  3:392 

Halliday,  Willard  Henry,  Vol.  3:644. 
*Halls,  George,  Vol.  3:98. 
*Halls,  Mary  Moiselle,  Vol.  3:99. 

Halls,  William,  Vol.  2:204. 
*Hamblin,  Jacob,  Vol.  3:100. 
♦Hamilton,  James  C,  Vol.  1:791. 


♦Hamilton,  Reuben  S.,  Vol.  2:315. 

Hammond,  Francis  A.,  Vol.  1:351. 

Hammond,  Francis  P.,  Vol.  2:1. 
♦Hammond,  James  T.,  Vol.  1:723. 

Hammond,  John  H.,  Vol.  3:393. 
♦Hammond,  Milton  D.,  Vol.  1:428. 

Hamson,  Hyrum  R.,  Vol.  3:644. 
♦Hancock,  Amy,  Vol.  2:351. 
♦Hancock,  George  W.,  Vol.  2:350. 
♦Hancock,  Levi  W.,  Vol.  1:188. 
♦Hanks,  Ephraim  K.,  Vol.  2:764. 
♦Hanks,  Walter  E.,  Vol.  2:263. 
♦Hansen,  Alfred,  Vol.  3:101. 
♦Hansen,  Carl  K.,  Vol.  2:575. 
♦Hansen,  Christian  V.,  Vol.  3:394. 
♦Hansen,  Hans  C,  Vol.  1:443. 

Hansen,  Hans  C,  Vol.  2:766. 

Hansen,  Hans  James,  Vol.  3:645. 
♦Hansen,  Hans  M.,  Vol.  1:343. 

Hansen,  Hans  Peter,  Vol.  2:573. 
♦Hansen,  Jens,  Vol.  2:361. 
♦Hansen.  Jens  N.,  Vol.  1:406. 

Hansen,  John,  Vol.  1:585. 

Hansen,  Joseph  C,  Vol.  2:217. 
♦Hansen,  Karen  R.,  Vol.  2:576. 
♦Hansen,  Lester  Laron,  Vol.  3:395. 
♦Hansen,  Niels,  Vol.  2:18. 
♦Hansen,  Oliver  A.,  Vol.   3:645. 
♦Hansen,  Peter  Marker,  Vol.  3:102. 
♦Hansen,  Peter  O.,  Vol.  2:766. 
♦Hansen,  Peter  O.,  jun..  Vol.  3:103. 
♦Hansen,  Victor  Lavan,  Vol.  3:104. 

Hanson,  Alma,  Vol.  3:396. 

Hardcastle,  Levi,  Vol.  2:323. 
♦Harder.  Willet  Shave,  Vol.  2:767. 
♦Harding,  Charles  Don.,  Vol.  2:387. 
♦Hardman,  Frances  A.  C,  Vol.  2:767 
♦Hardman,  Lehi  Nephi,  Vol.  2:767. 
♦Hardy,  Aaron,  Vol.  2:166. 

Hardy,  Charles  W.,  Vol.  2:101. 

Hardy,  George  W.,  Vol.  1:562. 
♦Hardv,  Leonard  G.,  Vol.  1:599. 
♦Hardy,  Leonard  W.,  Vol.  1:236. 
♦Harker,  Levi,  Vol.  3:104. 

Harmon,  Melvin  M.,  Vol.  1:535. 

Harper,  William  T.,  Vol.  1:549. 

Harriman,  Henry,  Vol.  1:193. 

Harrington, Leonard  E.,  Vol.  3:799, 
♦Harris,  Charles  Zera,  Vol.  3:105. 

Harris,  Hvrum  Smith,  Vol.  2:129. 
♦Harris,  John  R.,  Vol.  2:2. 

Harris,  Leander  S.,  Vol.  2:251. 
♦Harris,  Louisa  Sargent,  Vol.  3:107. 
♦Harris,  Martin,  Vol.  1:271. 
♦Harris,  Martin  H.,  Vol.  3:105. 

Harris,  Micah  F.,  Vol.  2:638. 
♦Harris,  Silas,  Vol.  2:130. 

Harris,  Thomas  Dodd,  Vol.  3:396. 
♦Harris,  William  McGhee,  Vol.  3:107. 

Harrison,  Bartholomew,  Vol.   3:397. 
♦Harrison,  Edwin  D.,  Vol.  1:768. 
♦Harrison,  James  Parry,  Vol.   2:133; 

Vol.  3:108. 
♦Hart,  Alfred  Augustus,  Vol.  3:397. 
♦Hart,  Arthur  W.,  Vol.  2:172. 
♦Hart,  Charles  H.,  Vol.  3:648. 


814 


INDEX. 


*Hart,  James  Henry,  Vol.  2:27. 

Hart,  John  William,  Vol.  3:398. 

Hart,  Samuel  Walter,  Vol.  3:398. 

Hartvigsen,  Jacob  L.,  Vol.  3:108. 

Harvey,  Ann  Coope,  Vol.  3:400. 
♦Harvey,  Hugh  William,   Vol.    3:399. 

Harvey,  John,  Vol.  3:399. 
*Harvey,  Richard  Coope,  Vol.  3:400. 

Hatch,  Abram,  Vol.  1:359. 
♦Hatch,  George  Andrew,  Vol.  3:400. 
♦Hatch,  Lorenzo  H.,  Vol.  1:323. 
♦Hatch,  Lorenzo  L.,  Vol.  2:179. 

Hatch,  Lucy  Alice,  Vol.  3:401. 
♦Hatch,  Meltiar,  Vol.  2:182. 
♦Hatch,  Stearns,  Vol.  3:109. 

Hatch,  Thomas  Asa,  Vol.  3:401. 

Hatch,  Wilder  True,  Vol.  2:45. 
♦Hawkes,  Nathan,  Vol.  3:109. 
♦Hawkins,  Riego,  Vol.  2:638. 

Hawkins,  Riego  Stay,  Vol.  2:312. 

Haws,  Caleb  W.,  Vol.  3:646. 

Haws,  Jesse,  Vol.   3:402. 
♦Hayes,  Alma,  Vol.  2:32. 
♦Hayes,  Henry  Nephi,  Vol.  2:209. 
♦Heaps,  William  Henry,  Vol.  3:402. 
♦Heaton,  Israel  H.,  Vol.  3:110. 
♦Heaton,  Jonathan  B.,  Vol.  3:403. 
♦Heiner,  Anthony,  Vol.  3:110. 

Heiner,  Daniel,  Vol.  1:475. 
♦Heiner,  George,  Vol.  3:111. 
♦Hemenway,  Lachoneus,  Vol.   2:457. 
♦Hemmert,  Hans  Jorgen,  Vol.   2:231. 
♦Henderson,  Elizabeth  S.  W.,  Vol.  3: 

113. 
♦Henderson,  James  N.,  Vol.  3:403. 
♦Henderson,  Sarah  A.  F.,  Vol.  3:113. 
♦Henderson,  Wm.  Jasper,  Vol.  3:404. 
♦Henderson,  Wm.  J.,  jun..  Vol.  3:112. 
♦Hendricks,  Brigham  A.,  Vol.  2:639. 

Hendricks,  James,  Vol.  2:403. 

Hendricks,  Ralph  H.,  Vol.  3:646. 

Hendricks,  Samuel  W.,  Vol.  3:405. 
♦Hendrickson,  John  A.,  Vol.  1:425. 
♦Henrichsen,  Erik  C,  Vol.  2:9. 
♦Henrie,  James,  Vol.  1:800. 
♦Henry,  Arthur  John,  Vol.  2:639. 
♦Hepworth,  Thornton,  Vol.  3:113. 
♦Herd,  James,  Vol.  3:114. 

Herrick,  Lester  J.,  Vol.  2:288. 

Heslop,  George  Ammon,  Vol.  3:406. 

Hess,  Arthur,  Vol.  3:646. 
♦Hess,  John  Ivan,  Vol.  3:406. 

Hess,  John  W.,  Vol.  1:463. 
♦Heywood,  James  Bell,  Vol.  3:114. 
♦Heywood,  Joseph  Edgar,  Vol.  3:115. 
♦Heywood,  Joseph  L.,  Vol.   1:646. 

Hicken,  Thomas,  Vol.  2:12. 
♦Hickenlooper,  C.  A.,  Vol.  2:287. 
♦Hickenlooper,  Wm.  H.,  Vol.  1:607. 
♦Hickman,  Deseret  N.,  Vol.  3:40  6. 

Hicks,  George  B.,  Vol.  2:163. 

Higbee,  Elias,  Vol.  1:253. 

Higbee,  Isaac,  Vol.  1:480. 
♦Higginbotham,  FrancisD.,  Vol.  3:407. 

Higgins,  James,  Vol.  2:303. 
♦Higgins,  Mahala  B.,  Vol.  2:304. 


Higgins,  Nelson,  Vol.  3:647. 
♦Hill,  Alexander  J.,  Vol.  2:456. 
♦Hill,  George  R.,  Vol.  2:9,  811. 

Hill,  John  Leonard,  Vol.  3:648. 
♦Hill,  William  H.,  Vol.  1:791. 
♦Hill,  William  J.,  Vol.  1:438. 

Hilton,  Joseph,  Vol.  2:185. 
♦Hinckley,  Bryant  S.,  Vol.  1:778. 

Hinckley,  Ira  N.,  Vol.  1:528. 

Hindley,  John  E.,  Vol.  3:800. 

Hirschi,  David,  Vol.  3:408. 

Hirschl,  Gottlieb,  Vol.  3:408. 
♦Hoagland,  Abraham,  Vol.  2:364. 
♦Hoagland,  John,  Vol.  2:365. 
♦Hoagland,  Lewis  G.,  Vol.  2:365. 
♦Hobbs,  Matilda  B.,  Vol.  2:305. 
♦Hobbs,  William,  Vol.  2:304. 
♦Hodson,  William,  Vol.  2:264. 

Hoff,  Henry  Herman,  Vol.  3:409. 
♦Hogan,  Erik  G.  M.,  Vol.  3:409. 
♦Hogan,  Hannah,  Vol.  2:640. 
♦Hogan,  Ingeborg  M.  J.,  Vol.  2:640. 

Hogan,  Joseph,  jun..  Vol.  3:648. 
♦Hogsted,  Hans  C.  S.,  Vol.  1:759. 
♦Hogsted,  Victor  C,  Vol.  1:769. 

Hokanson.  William  E.,  Vol.  3:649. 

Holbrook,  Jean  C,  Vol.  1:503. 

Holden,  Elijah  E.,  Vol.  3:650. 
♦Holladay,  Abraham,  Vol.  2:763. 
♦HoUaday,  Ann  H.  M.,  Vol.  2:397. 
♦Holladay,  Averetta  C.  J.,  Vol.  2:398. 
♦Holladay,  George  T.,  Vol.   2:397. 
♦Holladay,  James  E.,  Vol.  2:399. 

Holladay,  John  D..  Vol.  2:395. 
♦Holladay,  Thomas  M.  W.,  Vol.  2:396. 
♦Holland,  John,  Vol.  3:46. 
♦Hollands,  Thomas,  Vol.  2:641. 
♦Holman,  Ezekiel  J.,  Vol.  2:111. 
♦Holman,  John  Greenleaf,  Vol.  3:116. 
♦Holt,  Joseph  Mabey,  Vol.  2:641. 
♦Holt,  Robert  Mabey,  Vol.  2:407. 
♦Holt,  Samuel  Elijah,  Vol.   2:323. 

Hooks,  Elmer,  Vol.  3:650. 
♦Hooper,  Wm.  H.,  Vol.  1:724. 

Hopkin,  James  Samuel,  Vol.  3:117. 
♦Hopkin,  John,  Vol.  3:118. 

Home,  Henry  James,  Vol.  2:139. 

Home,  James  M.,  Vol.  2:142. 
♦Home,  Joseph,  Vol.  1:806. 
♦Home,  Joseph  Smith,  Vol.  2:206. 
♦Home,  Mary  I.,  Vol.  1:807. 
♦Horsfall,  Ira  Owen,  Vol.   3:410. 
♦Horsley,  Ernest  Samuel,  Vol.  3:118 
♦Hortin,  John,  Vol.  2:232. 

Hoskins,  Oliver  C,  Vol.  1:770. 
♦Houston,  James,  Vol.  1:800. 

Houston,  John  Cooper,  Vol.  2:48. 
♦Houtz,  Watson  C,  Vol.  2:642. 
♦Hovey,  Joseph  Grafton,  Vol.  3:119. 

Howard,  John  Shelton,  Vol.  3:411. 

Howard,  Samuel  Cyrus,  Vol.  3:411 
♦Howard,  Wilson  Allen,  Vol.  2:643 
♦Howe,  Amos,  Vol.  2:384. 
♦Howe,  Amy  Mellor,  Vol.  2:385. 
♦Howe,  Charles  Ross,  Vol.  2:386. 
♦Howe,  Julia  Cruse,  Vol.    2:385. 


INDEX. 


815 


Hoyt,  Timothy  Sabin,  Vol.  3:412. 

Hubbard,  Charles  W.,  Vol.  3:120. 

Hubbard,  John,  Vol.  3:651. 
♦Hubbard,  Joseph,  Vol.  3:120. 
*Huber,  Emll  Julius,  Vol.  3:651. 

Huber,  Johannes,  Vol.  2:14. 
*Huffaker,  Louis  Albert,  Vol.  2:54. 
*Huffaker,  Simpson  D.,  Vol.  3:412. 
♦Hughes,  David,  Vol.  3:414. 
*Huhl,  Charles  W.,  Vol.  2:404,  810. 
*Huish,  John  Edward,  Vol.  2:155. 
♦Hull,  Thomas,  Vol.  1:716. 

Hulme,  George  Ezra,  Vol.  3:414. 
♦Humphrey,  Thomas   G.,    Vol.    2:768. 
♦Humphries,  Samuel,  Vol.  2:31. 
♦Hunsaker,  Abraham,  Vol.  3:415. 

Hunsaker,  Enoch  C,  Vol.  3:652. 
♦Hunsaker,  John  L.,  Vol.  3:416. 
♦Hunt,  John,  Vol.  3:417. 
♦Hunt,  John  Alexander,  Vol.  3:121. 
♦Hunt,  John  Alex.,  jun..  Vol.  3:418. 
♦Hunter,  Edward,  Vol.  1:22  7. 

Hunter,  John  Davidson,  Vol.  3:418. 
♦Hunter,  Joseph  S.,  Vol.  1:534. 
♦Hunter,  Oscar  Fitzallen,  Vol.  2:643. 

Hunter,  William  P.,  Vol.  1:534. 
♦Hunting,  Elizabeth  A.  R.,  Vol.  3:122. 
♦Hunting,  Nathan,  Vol.   3:122. 
♦Huntington,  George  \V.,  Vol.  2:411. 
♦Huntington,  William,  Vol.  1:368. 

Huskinson,  John  Irving,  Vol.  3:652. 

Hutchings,  Stephen,  Vol.  3:419. 
♦Hyde,  Annie  T..  Vol.  1:702. 
♦Hyde,  George  Tilton,  Vol.  3:123. 

Hyde,  Heman,  Vol.  3:419. 
♦Hyde,  Janette  A.,  Vol.  2:644. 

Hyde,  Joseph  E.,  Vol.  3:653. 
♦Hyde,  Orson,  Vol.  1:80. 

Hyde,  Rosel,  Vol.  1:466. 
♦Hyde,  Wilford  A.,  Vol.  2:230. 
♦Hyde,  William,  Vol.  1:759. 
♦Hyde,  William,  jun..  Vol.  1:421. 
♦Hyde,  William  A.,  Vol.  1:313. 

Hyer,  Andrew  Lars,  Vol.  3:12  4. 

I. 

♦Iff,  Jacob,  Vol.  2:325. 
♦Inglestrom,  Anders  O.,  Vol.  1:455. 
♦Ipsen,  Alvin,  Vol.  1:398. 
♦Ipson,  Joseph,  Vol.  3:124. 
♦Irons,  John  Wilbert,  Vol.   2:266. 

Isaac,  John  P.,  Vol.  2:378. 

Isaac,  Rachel  Williams,  Vol.  2:378. 
♦Isaacson,  Martha  K.  C,  Vol.  2:552. 
♦Isaacson,  Peter,  Vol.  2:552. 

Israelson,  Andrew  M.,  Vol.  3:653. 
♦Iverson,  Gustave  Arnt,  Vol.  2:64  6. 
♦Iverson,  Niels  C,  Vol.  2:646. 

Ivie,  Calvert  Milton,  Vol.  3:419. 
♦Ivie,  John  L.,  Vol.  2:647. 
♦Ivins,  Anthony  W.,  Vol.  1:311;   Vol. 
3:750. 


♦Jack,  William  T.,  Vol.  1:304. 
♦Jackman,  Levi,  Vol    2:769. 


Jackson,  Aaron  Wm.,  Vol.  3:654. 
♦Jackson,  Alma  O.,  Vol.  1:43  6. 
♦Jackson,  Henry  C,  Vol.  1:766. 
♦Jackson,  Samuel,  Vol.  3:125,  420. 
♦Jacobs,  Daniel,  Vol.  2:445. 
♦Jacobs,  Henry  Chariton,  Vol.  3:421. 

Jacobs,  Henry  C,  jun.,  Vol.  2:768. 

Jacobs,  John  C,  Vol.  2:15. 
♦Jacobs,  Mary  Hains,  Vol.  2:445. 
♦Jacobs,  Zebulon,  Vol.  2:401. 

Jacobsen,  Jacob  Baltzer,  Vol.  3:423. 

Jacobson,  Christian,  Vol.  2:40. 

James,  Henry  Robert,  Vol.  3:654. 
♦Jaques,  John,  Vol.  1:254. 
♦Jardine,  James  B.,  Vol.  3:424. 

Jardine,  John,  Vol.  3:424. 
♦Jefferies,  Richard,  Vol.  3:125. 
♦Jeffs,  David  William,  Vol.  2:51. 
♦Jenkins,  Edward  E.,  Vol.  2:482. 

Jenkins,  John,  Vol.  1:405. 
♦Jenkins,  Thomas,  Vol.  1:604. 
♦Jennings,  Priscilla  P.,  Vol.  2:505. 
♦Jennings,  William,  Vol.  2:500. 

Jensen,  Alma  Larsen,  Vol.  3:425. 
♦Jensen,  Andrew,  Vol.  2:542. 
♦Jensen,  Andrew  C,  Vol.  2:56. 
♦Jensen,  Carl,  Vol.  2:435. 
♦Jensen,  Charles,  Vol.  2:648. 
♦Jensen,  Christen,    Vol.    1:550;    Voi. 
3:655. 

Jensen,  Christen  Israel,  Vol.  3:65  5. 
♦Jensen,  David,  Vol.  2:173. 
♦Jensen,  Denmark,  Vol.  1:301. 

Jensen,  Hans  (Hals),  Vol.  2:223. 
♦Jensen,  Hans  B.,  Vol.  2:318. 
♦Jensen,  Hans  Peter,  Vol.  2:362. 
♦Jensen,  Hyrum,  Vol.  1:39  9. 
♦Jensen,  James,  Vol.  1:310. 
♦Jensen,  James,  Vol.  1:565. 
♦Jensen,  James,  Vol.  2:229. 

Jensen,  James,  jun..  Vol.  2:229. 
♦Jensen,  James  C.,  Vol.  1:361. 

Jensen,  James  Peter,  Vol.  3:425. 
♦Jensen,  James  S.,  Vol.  2:770. 
♦JeuFen,  Jens  I.,  Vol.  1:818. 
♦Jensen,  Jens  Peter,  Vol.  1:570. 
♦Jensen,  Jens  Severin,  Vol.  2:512. 

Jensen,  Joseph  M.  E.,  Vol.  3:656. 
♦Jensen,  Joseph  Y.,  Vol.  2:648. 
♦Jensen,  Junius  C,  Vol.  2:176. 
♦Jensen,  Martin,  Vol.  2:649. 
♦Jensen,  Martin  Marinus,  Vol.  3:426. 
♦Jensen,  Niels,  Vol.  3:12  6. 

Jensen,  Ole  Christian,  Vol.  3:65  6. 
♦Jensen,  Peter,  Vol.  2:36. 
♦Jensen,  Soren,  Vol.  3:127. 
♦Jensen,  Soren,  Vol.  3:128. 
♦Jenson,  Andrew,  Vol.  1:261;  Vol.  3: 

752. 
♦Jenson,  James,  Vol.  3:129. 
♦Jenson,  Jens,  Vol.  2:649. 
♦Jenson,  Joseph  H.,  Vol.  2:650. 

Jenson,  Joseph  Henry,  Vol.  3:657. 
♦Jenson,  Peter,  Vol.  2:305. 
♦Jeppson,  Jeppe.  Vol.  1:395. 
Jepson,  James,  jun..  Vol.  3:426. 


816 


INDEX. 


*Jeremy,  Thomas  Evans,  Vol.  2:651. 
*Jerman,  Daniel  Smith,  Vol.  2:358. 
*Jex,  Eliza  Goodsen,  Vol.  3:130. 
*Jex,  William,  Vol.  3:12  9. 
*Johanson,  Olof  P.,  Vol.  2:653. 
*John,  David,  Vol.  1:488. 

John,  Levi,  Vol.   2:135. 
*Johnsen,  Erastus,  Vol.  3:427. 
♦Johnson,  Bengt,  jun..  Vol.  2:6. 

Johnson,  Benjamin  J.,  Vol.  2:120. 
♦Johnson,  Bodel  M.  J.,  Vol.  3:132. 
♦Johnson,  James,  Vol.  1:441. 
♦Johnson,  James  H.,  Vol.  2:654. 
♦Johnson,  John,  Vol.  2:159. 
♦Johnson,  John,  Vol.   1:495. 
♦Johnson,  John  Henry,  Vol.   3:130. 
♦Johnson,  John  P.  R.,  Vol.  2:655. 

Johnson,  Lorenzo,  Vol.  2:174. 

Johnson,  Luke  S.,  Vol.  1:85. 

Johnson,  Lyman  E.,  Vol.  1:91. 
♦Johnson,  Nephi,  Vol.   3:131. 

Johnson,  Otto  E,  Vol.  3:42  7. 

Johnson,  Peter,  Vol.  2:98. 

Johnson,  Richard  Ely,  Vol.  3:657. 
♦Johnson,  Seth,  Vol.  3:428. 
♦Johnson,  Swen  Frederik,  Vol.  3:13  2. 

Johnson,  Wallace  Lars,  Vol.   3:657. 
♦Johnson,  William  D.,  Vol.  1:366. 
♦Jolly,  Haskel  S.,  Vol.  2:47. 
♦Jones,  Albert  Stephen,  Vol.  2:655. 
♦Jones,  Alfred  Abraham,  Vol.  2:656. 
♦Jones,  Alfred  Thomas,  Vol.  2:656. 

Jones,  Dan,  Vol.  3:658. 
♦Jones,  Daniel  Brooks,  Vol.  2:105. 
♦Jones,  Daniel  Philemon,  Vol.  3:133. 
♦Jones,  David  P.,  Vol.  2:135. 
♦Jones.  George  L.  M.,  Vol.  2:657. 
♦Jones,  George  R.,  Vol.  1:684. 
♦Jones,  John  F.,  Vol.  5:52. 
♦Jones,  Kumen,  Vol.  3:134. 
♦Jones,  Lehi  Willard  T.,  Vol.  3:430. 
♦Jones,  Lewis  Daniel,  Vol.  3:430. 

Jones,  Miles  Levanter,  Vol.  3:431. 
♦Jones,  Nathaniel  Vary,  Vol.  2:368. 
♦Jones,  Nahaniel  V.,  jun..  Vol.  2:453. 

Jones,  RobertElijah,  Vol.  2:657. 

Jones,  Shadrach,  Vol.  3:660. 

Jones,  Thomas  J.,  Vol.  1:532. 
♦Jones,  Thomas  Wm.,  Vol.  3:431. 

Jones,  Uriah  T.,  Vol.  1:533. 
♦Jones,  Willard  Edwin,  Vol.  3:432. 
♦Joranson    (Yorgason),    James,    Vol. 

3:432. 
♦Jorgensen,  Enoch,  Vol.  1:502. 
♦Jorgensen,  Jens,  Vol.  2:581. 
♦Jorgensen,  Johan  G.,  Vol.  1:797. 
♦Jorgensen,  Kjersten  B.,  Vol.  2:582. 
♦Jorgensen,  Rasmus  G.,  Vol.  3:433. 
♦Jorgensen,  Sorine  K.,  Vol.  2:658. 
♦Judd,  Zadok  Knapp,  Vol.  3:134. 


K. 


♦Kay,  Hyrum,  Vol.  2:188. 
♦Kay,  John  Moburn,  Vol.  3:661. 
♦Kearns,  Austin,  Vol.  2:555. 


♦Kearns,  Hamilton  H.,  Vol.  2:555. 
♦Kearns,  Mary  J.,  Vol.  2:556. 

Keeler,  Charles  Obed,  Vol.  2:658. 
♦Keeler,  Joseph  B.,  Vol.  2:770. 

Keetch,  Elijah  C,  Vol.  1:451. 

Keilholz,  Adolph  W.   C.   L.,   Vol.   3: 
663. 
♦Keller,  Alvin,  Vol.  3:135. 
♦Keller,  James  Morgan,  Vol.  1:443. 
♦Keller,  James  Morgan,  Vol.  3:434. 
♦Kelley,  Charles,  Vol.  1:389. 
♦Kelly,  William,  Vol.  2:771. 
♦Kemp,  James,  Vol.  2:659. 
♦Kemp,  William,  Vol.  2:659. 
♦Kempton,  Alvin  B.,  Vol.  3:135. 
♦Kennedy,  John,  Vol.  3,  434. 
♦Kenner,  Scipio  A.,  Vol.  2:278. 
♦Kennington,  William  H.,  Vol.  2:228. 
♦Kesler,  Frederick,  Vol.  1:643. 
♦Keysor,  Guy  Messiah,  Vol.  3:435. 
♦Keysor,  Ruth  Wyllie,  Vol.  3:435. 
♦Keysor,  Sarah  Ann,  Vol.  3:437. 
♦Keysor,  Wm.  George,  Vol.  3:436. 
♦Kimball,  Andrew,  Vol.  1:364. 

Kimball,  Brigham  W.,  Vol.  3:663. 
♦Kimball,  Elias  S.,  sen.,  Vol.  2:55. 
♦Kimball,  Ellen  S.,  Vol.  2:772. 
♦Kimball,  Heber  Chase,  Vol.  1:34. 
♦Kimball,  Heber  Chase,  Vol.  3:437. 
♦Kimball,  Hiram  S.,  Vol.    2:372. 

Kimball,  Jeremiah  H.,  Vol.  3:664. 
♦Kimball,  Jonathan  G.,  Vol.  1:210. 
♦Kimball,  Lucy  W.,  Vol.  1:808. 
♦Kimball,  Quince  K.,  Vol.  3:438. 
♦Kimball,  Sarah  M.,  Vol.  2:372. 

King,  Culbert,  Vol.  2:185. 
♦King,  Thomas  F.,  Vol.  2:81. 
♦King,  Thomas   Owen,   Vol.    2:266. 
♦King,  William  H.,  Vol.  1:787. 
♦Kingsford,  Elizabeth   H.    J.,   Vol.    2: 
528. 

Kingston,  Charles,  Vol.  1:331. 
♦Kirkman,  John  E.,  Vol.  3:664. 
♦Kjaer,  John  Christian,  Vol.  2:566. 
♦Kjaer,  Louis  Christian.  Vol.  2:660. 

KJBer,  Margaret  Weibye,  Vol.  2:567. 

Kleinman,  Konrad,  Vol.  2:661. 
♦Knight,  Charlotte  M.,  Vol.  2:532. 

Knight,  Jesse,  Vol.  2:776. 
♦Knight,  Jesse  William,  Vol.  2:778. 

Knight,  John  Miner,  Vol.  2:778. 

Knight,  Joseph,  Vol.  2:772. 

Knight,  Lydia  G.,  Vol.  2:775. 

Knight,  Newel,  Vol.  2:773. 
♦Knudsen,  Andrew,   Vol.    1:492,   822. 
♦Knudsen,  Christian,  Vol.  1:508. 
♦Knudsen,  Mathias,  Vol.  1:508. 

Knudsen.  Wilford  J.,  Vol.  3:665. 

Knutti,  Godfred,  Vol.  3:665. 
♦Kristiansen,  E.  J.,  Vol.  2:443,  810. 
♦Kuhre,  William  D.,  Vol.   1:585. 

Kunzler,  Arnold  J.,  Vol.  3:665. 
♦Kutterer,  John  George.  Vol.  3:439 


INDEX. 


817 


*Labrum,  Ann  E.  W.,  Vol.  2:470. 
*Labrum,  John  George,  Vol.  2:470. 

Lake,  Barnabas,  Vol.  3:136. 

Lake,  James,  Vol.  2:387. 
*Lake,  Philomela,  Vol.  2:388. 

Lake,  William  Bailey,  Vol.  2:390. 
*Lambert,  Charles,  Vol.  2:779. 
*Lambert,  Charles  John,  Vol.  2:453. 

Lambert,  Ephraim,  Vol.  1:477. 
*Lambert,  George  C,  Vol.  1:612. 

Lambert,  James  N.,  Vol.  3:137. 
*Lambert,  John  Carlos,  Vol.  2:661. 
*Lambert,  Richard  G.  C,  Vol.  3:440. 

Lamoreaux,  Andrew  L.,  Vol.  3:666. 
*Lamph,  William  T.,  Vol.  3:137. 
*Langford,  Jeremiah  E.,  Vol.   2:537. 
*Langford,  Sarah  E.  O.,  Vol.  2:537. 

Langton,  William  S.,  Vol.  3:667. 
*Lant,  David,  Vol.  2:154. 
*Lapish,  Hannah  Settle,  Vol.  2:525. 
*Larkin,  George  W.,  Vol.  2:289 

Larsen,  Christen  G.,  Vol.  1:523. 

Larsen,  Christian,  Vol.  1:406. 
*Larsen,  Christian,  Vol.  2:75. 
*Larsen,  Christian  J.,  Vol.  1:423. 
♦Larsen,  Hans  C,  Vol.  1:449. 
*Larsen,  Henry,  Vol.  3:138. 
*Larsen,  James,  Vol.  2:580. 
*Larsen,  John,  Vol.  1:441. 

Larsen,  John  C,  Vol.  1:766. 

Larsen,  John  Parley,  Vol.  2:205. 
*Larsen,  Joseph  Young,  Vol.  2:460. 
*Larsen,  Lars,  Vol.  2:459. 

Larsen,  Lauritz  E.,  Vol.  1:458. 

Larsen,  Ludvig,  Vol.  1:575. 
♦Larsen,  Marinus,  Vol.  3:138. 
♦Larsen,  Niels,  Vol.   3:139. 
♦Larsen,  Peter  Christian,  Vol.  3:140. 
*Larson,  Alof,  Vol.  3:141. 

Larson,  John  A.,  Vol.  1:587. 
♦Larson,  Lehi,  Vol.  3:140. 

Larson,  Mons  Peter,  Vol.  3:667. 
*Lau,  Daniel  Frederick,  Vol.  3:142. 

Laurence,  William  R.,  Vol.  3:667. 
♦Lauritzen,  Jacob  M.,  Vol.  2:208. 

Law,  William,  Vol.  1:53. 
♦Lawson,  James,  Vol.  3:14  3. 
*Layton,  Charles  M.,  Vol.  1:367. 
♦Layton,  Christopher,  Vol.  1:363. 
♦Layton,  David  Edwin,  Vol.  3:141. 
♦Layton,  John  H.,  Vol.  3:668. 

Layton,  Oscar  T.,  Vol.  2:662. 
♦Layton,  Richard  G.,  Vol.  1:560. 
♦Leak,  William,  Vol.  2:330. 
♦Leak,  William  J..  Vol.  2:331. 
♦Leany,  Hyrum,  Vol.  2:193. 
♦Leatham,  James,  Vol.  2:180. 
♦Leatham,  Wm.,  Vol.  3:146. 
Leavitt,  Horton  B.,  Vol.  3:669. 
♦Lechtenberg,  Peter  Paul,  Vol.  3:147. 

Lee,  Samuel  Marion,  Vol.  3:441. 
♦Lee,  Severin  N.,  Vol.  3:669. 
Lee,  Thomas  Wolkitt,  Vol.  3:147. 
♦Leigh,  Henry,  Vol.  3:441. 

Vol.  Ill,  No.  52. 


Leithead,  James,  Vol.  1:540. 
♦Lemmon,  Hyrum,  Vol.  2:151. 
♦Lemon,  Alexander  A.,  Vol.  1:435. 
♦Lemon,  John  Knox,  Vol.  2:662,  780. 
♦Lesueur,  James  Warren,  Vol.  3:442. 
♦Lesueur,  John  T.,  Vol.  1:330. 
♦Lewis,  Ann  Llewellyn,  Vol.  2:350. 
♦Lewis,  Clair,  Vol.  3:148. 
Lewis,  Benjamin,  Vol.  3:670. 
♦Lewis,  Benjamin  M.,  Vol.  1:764. 
Lewis,  George  William,  Vol.  2:142. 
♦Lewis,  Henry,  Vol.  3:670. 
Lewis,  Jane  Amanda  S.,  Vol.  3:671. 
Lewis,  Phillip  Bessom  Vol.  3:672. 
♦Lewis,  Rufus,  Vol.  2:349. 
Lewis,  Samuel  E.,  Vol.  1:557. 
Lewis,  Tarlton,  Vol.  3:673. 
♦Lewis,  Theodore  Belden,  Vol.  3:148. 
♦Lewis,  William  H.,  Vol.  1:298. 
♦Liddell,  Lawrence  T.,  Vol.  3:150. 
♦Liljenquist,  Ola  N.,  Vol.  1:814. 
Lind.  Niels,  Vol.  1:310. 
Lindsay,  David  E.,  Vol.  2:45. 
Lindsay,  Edgar  Monroe,  Vol.  2:663. 
♦Lindsay,  Joseph,  Vol.  2:472. 
♦Lindsay,  Joseph  Shanks,  Vol.  3:150. 
♦Lindsay,  Philemon,  Vol.  2:267. 
♦Linford,  James  Henry,  Vol.  2:90. 
♦Linford,  James  H.,  jun..  Vol.  2:72. 
Linnell,  James  David,  Vol.  3:673. 
Lisonbee,  James  T.,  Vol.  2:140. 
♦Little,  Feramorz,  Vol.  2:485. 
♦Little,  Jesse  C,  Vol.  1:242;  Vol.  3: 

151. 
♦Little,  Rebecca  E.  M.,  Vol.  2:487. 
♦Lloyd,  Archie  E.,  Vol.  3:151. 
Lloyd,  John  Lea,  Vol.  3:443. 
♦Lofgren,  Niels,  Vol.  2:343. 

Loosle,  John  William,  Vol.  3:673. 
♦Lorentzen,  Godtfred,  Vol.  2:663. 
♦Loveland,  Carlos  Heber,  Vol.  3:444. 
♦Loveless,  Justin  A.,  Vol.  2:155. 
♦Lovell,  John,  Vol.  3:152. 
♦Low,  Osborne,  Vol.  2:228. 
♦Low,  Sylvester,  Vol.  2:17. 
♦Lowe,  Moroni  W.,  Vol.  3:445. 
♦Ludvigsen,  Frederik,   Vol.    2:558. 
♦Lund,  Anthon  H.,   Vol.    1:161;    Vol. 

3:753. 
Lund,  August  William,  Vol.  3:754. 
♦Lund,  Christian  N.,  Vol.  1:339. 
♦Lund,  Henry  C,  Vol.  2:780. 
♦Lund,  Louis  P.,  Vol.  1:512. 
♦Lundberg,  Frederick,  Vol.  3:445. 
♦Lundgren,  Waldemar  O.,  Vol.  3:446. 
♦Lunt,  Henry,  Vol.  3:446. 
♦Lunt,  Henry  Hunter,  Vol.  3:448. 
♦Lunt,  Henry  Whittaker,  Vol.  3:447. 
♦Lybbert,  Christian  F.  B.,  Vol.  1:479. 
♦Lyman,  Amasa  M.,  Vol.  1:96. 
♦Lyman,  Amy  Brown,  Vol.  2:664. 
♦Lyman.  Francis  M.,  Vol.  1:136;  Vol. 

3:755. 
♦Lyman,  Frederick  Rich,  Vol.  3:153. 
♦Lyman,  Platte  De  Alton,  Vol.  3:153. 
♦Lyman,  Richard  R.,  Vol.  3:756. 

July  10,  1920. 


SIB 


INDEX. 


*Lyman,  Walter  Clisbee,  Vol.  3:154. 
Lyon,  David  Ross,  Vol.  2:540. 
♦Lyons,  William  Orvil,  Vol.  3:155. 


M. 


Mace,  John,  Vol.  3:674. 
*Macfarlane,  Andrew  N.,  Vol.   1:681. 
♦Macfarlane,  Isaac  C,  Vol.  3:448. 

Mackay,  John  Calder.  Vol.  2:104. 
*Madsen,  Christian  A.,  Vol.  1:816. 
*Madsen,  Ellen  Nielsen,  Vol.  2:781. 
♦Madsen.  Lars  Peter,  Vol.  2:781. 
*Madsen,  Niels,  Vol.  2:665. 
*Madsen,  Peter,  Vol.  2:780. 
*Madsen,  Peter  F.,  Vol.  2:64. 
*Maeser,  Karl  G.,  Vol.  1:707. 
♦Magleby,  Jacob,  Vol.  2:665. 
*Magleby,  Orson,  Vol.  3:155. 
*Maiben,  John  B.,  Vol.  1:522. 

Major,  Wm.  Warner,  Vol.  3:67  4. 

Malin,  Elijah,  jun..  Vol.  3:674. 
*Malin,  John  McGuckin,   Vol.   2:666. 

Mann,  Charles  W.,  Vol.  1:467. 

Manning,  Arthur.  Vol.  3:675. 
♦Manning,  Margaret  R.  W.,  Vol.  3: 

449. 
♦Manning.  William  H.,  Vol.  3:450. 

Mansfield,  Matthew  W.,  Vol.   1:527. 
♦Marchant,  Franklin  W.,  Vol.  2:233. 
♦Marcroft,  Charlotte,  Vol.  2:421. 
♦Marcroft,  John,  Vol.  2:421. 
♦Margetts,  Charles  P..  Vol.  2:781. 

Markham,  Stephen,  Vol.  3:676. 

Marks,  William,  Vol.  1:283. 
♦Marsden,  Lucius  Nelson,  Vol.  3:450. 

Marsh,  Thomas  B.,  Vol.  1:74. 
♦Marshall,  George,  Vol.  2:40. 
♦Martin,  James,  Vol.  2:250. 

Martineau,  George  A.,  Vol.  2:126. 
♦Martineau,  James  H.,  Vol.  3:156. 
♦Martineau,  Lyman  R.,  Vol.  3:677. 
♦Martinsen,  Charles,  Vol.  3:678. 
♦Mason,  Ambrose  Todd,  Vol.  2:295. 
♦Mather,  Thomas,  Vol.  2:43. 
♦Matheson,  Alexander  G.,  Vol.  2:188. 
♦Matson,  Peter,  Vol.  1:370. 
♦Matthews,  Samuel,  Vol.  3:159. 
♦Maughan,  Charles  N.,  Vol.  3:451. 

Maughan,  Hyrum,  Vol.  3:679. 
♦Maughan,  John,  Vol.  1:445. 
♦Maughan,  Peter,  Vol.  1:758. 
♦Maughan,  William  H.,  Vol.  1:437. 

Mawson,  William  Oliver,  Vol.  2:465. 

Maxwell,  James,  Vol.  1:687. 
♦Maynes,  Emily  Keep,  Vol.  3:454. 
♦Maynes,  John  Alexander,  Vol.  3:452. 
♦Maynes,  Joseph  Watson,  Vol.  3:454. 
♦Maynes,  Selina  Jane,  Vol.  3:453. 
♦McAllister,  Duncan  M.,  Vol.  1:651. 
♦McAllister,  John  D.  T.,  Vol.  1:334. 
♦McArthur,  Daniel  D.,  Vol.  1:336. 

McBride,  George,  Vol.  3:679. 
♦McBride,  Loren  Dyphus,  Vol.  3:159. 

McBride,  Thomas,  Vol.  3:680. 


♦McClellan,  John  J.,  Vol.  1:747. 
♦McCuUough,  William  A.,  Vol.  1:496. 
♦McCune,  Elizabeth  A.  C,  Vol.  2:667. 

McCune,  Henry  Fred.,  Vol.  3:160. 

McCune,  Matthew,  Vol.  3:161. 
♦McDonald,  Alexander  F.,  Vol.  1:557. 

McDonald,  John,  Vol.  2:11. 
♦McEwan,  Daniel  Dean,  Vol.  2:667. 
♦McGhie,  Robert  L.,  Vol.  2:669. 
♦McGregor,  Joseph  F.,  Vol.  3:680. 
♦McGregor,  William  C,  Vol.  3:161. 
♦McGregor,  William  C,  Vol.  3:681. 
♦McGuire,  Patrick  Henry,  Vol.  2:670. 

Mcintosh,  Abraham  E.,  Vol.  2:581. 
♦McKay,  Angus,  Vol.  2:339. 
♦McKay,  David  Oman,  Vol.  3:760. 
♦McKay.  Thomas  Evans.  Vol.  3:682. 
♦McKean.  Mary  Page  G.,  Vol.   2:377. 
♦McKean,  Theodore,  Vol.  2:374. 
♦McKean,  Theodore,  jun..  Vol.  2:409. 
♦McKee.  Joseph  Allen.  Vol.  2:671. 
♦McKenzie.  David.  Vol.  2:670. 
♦McKinnon,  Archibald.  Vol.  1:332. 
♦McKinnon.  Peter.  Vol.   1:470. 
♦McLachlan.  William.  Vol.   1:611. 
♦McLelland,  Edward  M.,  Vol.  3:162. 
♦McLelland.  Thomas.  Vol.  2:431. 

McLellin.  William  E..  Vol.  1:82. 
♦McMaster,  John  B.,  Vol.  2:64. 
♦McMillen,  William,  Vol.  2:201. 

McMullen,  Bryant  Ross.  Vol.  2:234. 

McMullin.  Albert  O..  Vol.  2:782. 
♦McMullin,  Brlgham  Y.,  Vol.  3:455. 
♦McMullin.  Henry  Luflin,  Vol.  3:162. 

McMullin,  Ira  Spaulding.  Vol.  3:455. 
♦McMurrln.  Joseph  W..  Vol.   1:216. 
♦McNeil.  John.  Vol.  1:504. 

McQuarrie,  Robert,  Vol.  2:16. 
♦McRae,  Alexander,  Vol.  1:620. 
♦McRae,  Daniel,  Vol.  1:567. 
♦Mecham,  Joseph  Lyman.  Vol.  2:149. 

Mecham,  Leonidas  A.,  Vol.  3:163. 
♦Mecham,  Leonidas  S.,  Vol.  2:267. 

Mecham,  Moses  M.,  Vol.  2:24  0. 
♦Meeks.  Heber  Jesse.  Vol.  2:132;  Vol. 

3:163. 
♦Meeks.  William.  Vol.  3:456. 

Mellor,  Archie  Myron.  Vol.  3:456. 
♦Mellor.  James,  jun.,  Vol.  2:782. 

Memmott,  Thomas.  Vol.  1:531. 

Mendenhall,  William  H..  Vol.  1:769; 
Vol.  3:163. 
♦Merrill,  Albert,  Vol.  2:390. 
♦Merrill,  Alberto  John,  Vol.  3:164. 
♦Merrill,  Alma,  Vol.  1:400. 
♦Merrill.  Amos  Newlove,  Vol.   2:783 

Merrill,  Bathsheba  M.,  Vol.  2:392. 
♦Merrill,  Clarence.  Vol.  2:391. 

Merrill,  Heber  Kimball,  Vol.  2:74. 
♦Merrill,  Joseph  F.,  Vol.  1:784. 

Merrill,  Katie  E.  Hale,  Vol.  3:683. 
♦Merrill,  Marriner  W.,  Vol.  1:156; 

Vol.  3:764. 
♦Merrill,  Thomas  H.,  Vol.  1:404. 
♦Merz,  Adolph,  Vol.  2:571. 
♦Meservy,  Joseph  R..  Vol.  2:102,  809. 


INDEX. 


819 


♦Meservy,  Margaret  O.,  Vol.  2:809. 
*Meservy,  Oliver  K.,  Vol.  2:103,  809; 

Vol.  3:164. 
*Meservy,  Mrs.  O.  K.,  Vol.  2:809. 

Middleton,  Charles  F.,  Vol.  1:460. 
*Middleton,  George  W.,  Vol.  2:481. 
*Midgley,  Jemlna  R.  H.,  Vol.  2:491. 
*Midgley,  Joshua,  Vol.  2:490. 

Miles,  Daniel  S.,  Vol.  1:192. 
*Miles,  Samuel,  Vol.  1:536. 
*Miller,  Arnold  D.,  jun..  Vol.   3:457. 
*Miller,  Charles  E.,  Vol.  2:314. 

Miller,  Daniel  G.,  Vol.  2:101. 
*Miller,  Eleazer,  Vol.  2:672. 

Miller,  Henry  William,  Vol.   3:165. 
*Miller,  Jacob,  Vol.  2:87. 

Miller,  James  R.,  Vol.  1:563. 

Miller,  Lewis  Edgar,  Vol.  3:683. 
*Miller,  Margaret  N.,  Vol.  2:673. 
*Miller,  Orrin  P.,  Vol.  1:307;  Vol.  3: 

764. 
*Miller,  Reuben,  Vol.  3:166. 
*Miller,  Reuben  G.,  Vol.  1:524,  821. 
*Miller,  Uriah  G.,  Vol.  1:568. 
*Miller,  William,  Vol.  1:481. 
*Miller,  William,  Vol.  2:460. 
*Miller,  William,  Vol.  2:672. 
*Miller,  William  Henry,  Vol.  3:166. 
*Minson,  Thomas,  Vol.  2:30. 
*Miskin,  James  Richard,  Vol.  2:53. 
*Mitchell,  Benjamin  T.,  Vol.    2:369. 

Mitchell,  Frederick  E.,  Vol.  3:457. 
*Mitchell,  Walter  Collins,  Vol.  3:459. 
*Mitchell,  William  Cook,  Vol.  3:458. 
*Mitton,  Samuel  Bailey,  Vol.  3:167. 
*Moench,  Louis  F.,  Vol.  2:244. 

Moffett,  William  A.,  Vol.  2:673. 
*Molen,  Simpson  M.,  Vol.  1:408. 
*Money,  Albert  Thurber,  Vol.   2:161. 
*Monson,  Hiram,  Vol.  3:168. 
*Monson.  Peter,  Vol.  3:459. 
*Monson,  Walter  Peter,  Vol.  2:175. 

Monteirth,  Alvin  M.,  Vol.  2:198. 

Moody.  Ella  Adelia,  Vol.  3:684. 
*Moody,  Francis  Winfred,  Vol.  2:268. 

Moody,  William  A.,  Vol.   2:195. 

Moore,  John,  Vol.  1:797. 
*Moore,  John,  Vol.  2:162. 
*Moore,  Joseph  Weber,  Vol.  3:460. 
*Morgan,  John,  Vol.  1:204. 

Morgan,  Joseph  R.,  Vol.  1:639.     • 

Morgan,  Thomas,  Vol.  1:763. 
*Morgan,  William  R.,  Vol.  3:168. 
*Morley,  Isaac,    Vol.    1:235;    Vol.    2: 

784. 
*Morrell,  Joseph,  Vol.   1:407. 
*Morrell,  William  H.,  Vol.  3:461. 
*Morrill,  John,  Vol.  3:169. 
*Morris,  Elias,  Vol.  1:636. 

Morris,  George  Edwin,  Vol.  3:684. 
*Morris,  George  Quayle,  Vol.  2:367. 
*Morris,  Hiram  Bowles,  Vol.   3:462. 
*Morris,  Joseph  Smith,  Vol.  3:683. 
*Morris,  Nephi  L.,  Vol.  1:639. 
*Morris,  Richard  V.,  Vol.   1:675. 

Morris,  Robert,  Vol.  1:621. 


Morrison,  John  Alfred,  Vol.  3:464. 
*Mortensen,  Christian,  Vol.  2:324. 
*Mortensen,  Hans  Jorgen,  Vol.  3:464. 
*Mortensen,  Johan  P.,  Vol.  2:673. 
*Mortensen,  Lars,  Vol.  3:801. 
*Mortensen,  Morten  C,  Vol.  1:397. 

Mortensen,  Niels  C,  Vol.  2:340. 
*Moss,  Daniel,  Vol.  3:171. 
*Moss,  Emma  A.,  Vol.  3:170. 
*Moss,  John,  Vol.  3:169. 
*Moss,  Melvina  Rushton,  Vol.  3:171. 
*Moss,  Rebecca  Wood,  Vol.  3:170. 

Mouritzen,  Mouritz,  Vol.  1:424. 

Mousley,  Lewis  H.,  Vol.  2:107. 

Moyle,  Henry,  Vol.  2:674. 
*Moyle,  James,  Vol.  1:776. 
*Moyle,  James  H.,  Vol.  1:783. 

Muir,  Dan,  Vol.  2:"88. 

Muir,  David  M.,  Vol.  3:684. 

Muir,  James  A.,  Vol.  1:579. 
*Muir,  William  S.,  Vol.  2:256. 
*Muller,  Jacob,  Vol.  3:172. 
*Mumford,  Elizabeth  M.,  Vol.  2:400. 

Mumford,  George,  Vol.  2:37. 

Mumford,  Thomas,  Vol.  2:399. 
*Munns,  Charles,  Vol.  3:465. 
*Murdock,  Brigham,  Vol.  3:172. 
*Murdock,  David  L.,  Vol.  2:522. 

Murdock,  Gideon  A.,  Vol.  2:39. 
*Murdock,  Gideon  M.,  Vol.  2:400. 
*Murdock,  John,  Vol.  2:362. 
♦Murdock,  John  M.,  Vol.  2:38. 

Murdock,  John  M.,  Vol.  2:12. 
*Murdock,  John  R.,  Vol.  1:304. 

Murdock,  Joseph,  Vol.  3:173. 
*Murdock,  Joseph  R.,  Vol.  1:361;  Vol. 

3:174. 
*Murdock,  Joseph  Stacey,  Vol.  3:173. 
*Murdock,  Nymphas  C,  Vol.  3:174. 
*Murdock,  Sally  Stacey,  Vol.  3:173. 
"Musser.  Amos   M.,   Vol.    1:381;    Vol. 

3:765. 
*Myers,  Carl  Peter,  Vol.  2:459. 
*Myers,  Jacob,  Vol.  2:319. 
*Myrup,  Lars  C.  N.,  Vol.  2:224. 


N. 


*Naegle,  George  C,  Vol.  1:562,  822. 
*Naisbitt,  Henry  W.,  Vol.  3:175. 
*Nalder,  Francis  Henry,  Vol.    3:466. 

Nalder,  William  N.,  Vol.  2:91. 
*Nash,  Isaac  B.,  Vol.   2:178;   Vol.   3: 

466. 
*Neal,  Mary  Malissa,  Vol.  2:784. 
*Nebeker,  Ammon,  Vol.  2:152. 
*Nebeker,  Ashton,  Vol.  3:180. 
*Nebeker,  Delia  Lane,  Vol.  2:34. 

Nebeker,  George,  Vol.  1:682. 
*Nebeker,  Ira,  Vol.  2:33. 
*Nebeker,  John,  Vol.  3:176,  468. 
*Nebeker,  John  L.,  Vol.   1:683;    Vol. 

2:785. 
*Nebeker,  Lurena  F.,  Vol.  3:178. 
*Nebeker,  Mary  W.,  Vol.  3:179. 


820 


INDEX. 


*Nebeker,  Phebe  S.  T.,  Vol.  3:182. 
♦Nebeker,  Sarah  I.  McK.,  Vol.  3:181. 
*Nebeker,  William  Perry.  Vol.  3:180. 

Needham,  Alice  W.,  Vol.  2:419. 
*Needham,  James,  Vol.   2:419. 
*Needham,  John,  Vol.  1:414. 

Needham,  Martha  B.,  Vol.  2:420. 
*Neff,  Amos  Herr,  Vol.  2:103. 
*Neff,  Ann  Eliza  B.,  Vol.  3:468. 
*Neff,  John,  Vol.  2:785. 

Neff,  John,  jun..  Vol.  2:787. 
*Neff,  Mary  B.,  Vol.  2:786. 
*Nelson,  Carl  Magnus,  Vol.  3:183. 
*Nelson,  Daniel  Morgan,  Vol.   3:183. 
♦Nelson,  Christian  T.,  Vol.  3:469. 

Nelson,  John  E.,  Vol.  3:685. 
*Nelson,  Joseph,  Vol.  1:784. 
*Nelson,  Joseph  G.,  Vol.  2:172. 
♦Nelson,  Nels  August,  Vol.  1:571. 

Nelson,  Rasmus  Peter,  Vol.  3:469. 

Nelson,  Thomas  B.,  Vol.  2:675. 
♦Nelson,  Waldemar  T.,  Vol.  3:184. 
♦Neslen.  Charles  Clarence,  Vol.  2:  520. 
♦Neslen,  Robert  F.,  Vol.  2:518. 

Neslen,  Samuel  Francis,  Vol.  3:685. 
♦Neville,  George  A.,  Vol.  3:185. 
♦Newman,  William  J.,  Vol.  2:377. 
♦Nibley,  Charles  Wilson,  Vol.  3:766. 
♦Nibley,  Preston,  Vol.  3:686. 
♦Nibley,  Rebecca  Neibaur,  Vol.  2:675. 
♦Nicolaysen,  Morten  A.  C,  Vol.  3:802. 
♦Nielsen,  Adolph  Martin,  Vol.  3:470. 
♦Nielsen,  Anders,  Vol.  3:185. 
♦Nielsen,  Charles  M.,  Vol.  2:678. 
♦Nielsen,  Christen  (Miller  I,  Vol. 

2:268. 
♦Nielsen,  Christian  R.,  Vol.  2:568. 
♦Nielsen,  Hans  W.,  Vol.  2:540. 
♦Nielsen,  Jens,  Vol.  2:203. 
♦Nielsen,  Jens,  Vol.  2:344. 

Nielsen,  Lars,  Vol.  2:165. 
♦Nielsen,  Niels,  Vol.  2:679. 

Nielsen,  Peter,  Vol.  3:471. 
♦Nielsen,  Peter  A.,  Vol.  1:573. 
♦Nielsen,  Rasmus,  Vol.  2:680. 
♦Nielson,  Edgar  Odland,  Vol.  3:471. 

Nielson,  Frihoff  G.,  Vol.  3:472. 
♦Nielson,  Frihoff  Peter,  Vol.  3:473. 
♦Nielson,  James  L.,  Vol.  2:787. 
♦Nielson,  Oloff,  Vol.  2:322. 
♦Nilson,  Cecilia  Larson,  Vol.  2:306. 
♦Nilson,  James  Anderson,  Vol.  2:306. 
♦Nilson,  Nils  Mats,  Vol.  2:680. 
♦Nixon,  James  W.,  Vol.  2:94. 
♦Nixon,  Mary  Ann  Hall,  Vol.  2:681. 
♦Nixon,  Thomas  Alonzo,  Vol.  2:48. 
♦Nixon,  William,  Vol.  2:681. 

Nowers,  Wilson  Gates,  Vol.  2:39. 
♦Nuttall,  Leonard  John,  Vol.  1:355. 
♦Nye,  John,  Vol.  1:397. 


O. 


♦Oborn,  John,  Vol.  2:326. 
♦Okelberry,  Peter,  Vol.  2:160. 


Okelberry,  Peter,  Vol.  3:686. 
♦Okelberry,  William  Paul,  Vol.  3:473 
♦Okerlund,  George  W.,  Vol.  3:474. 

Okerlund,  Ivan  George,  Vol.  3:686. 

Okerlund,  Ole,  Vol.  3:474. 

Oldham,  Royal  Price,  Vol.  3:687. 

Oldham,  Samuel,  Vol.  1:434. 
♦Oldroyd,  Andrew,  Vol.  3:475. 

Oldroyd,  Archibald,  Vol.  3:475. 
♦Oldroyd.  Archibald  T.,  Vol.  2:682 
♦Oliver,  Samuel,  Vol.  3:186. 
♦Olpin,  Edwin  Dee,  Vol.  2:683. 

Olsen,  Christian,  Vol.  3:187. 

Olsen.  Christine,  Vol.  3:187. 

Olsen,  Edward  A.,  Vol.  2:787. 
♦Olsen,  Frederick  A.,  Vol.  2:299. 

Olsen,  Joseph  Henry,  Vol.  3:188. 

Olsen,  Louis  Christian,  Vol.  3:476. 

Olson,  Erick  Lehi,  Vol.  3:188. 

Olson,  John  Nils,  Vol.  3:476. 
♦Olson,  Lars  Larson,  Vol.  2:357. 

Olson,  Nephi  Robert,  Vol.  3:687. 
♦Olson,  Randine  G.,  Vol.  2:356. 
♦Openshaw,  Jonathan  E.,  Vol.  3:476. 
♦Ord,  John  William,  Vol.  2:112. 
♦Orgill,  Edward,  Vol.  2:317. 
♦Orme.  Charles  Alvin,  Vol.  1:546; 
Vol.  3:188. 

Orr,  Josiah,  Vol.  2:23. 
♦Orton,  Joseph,  Vol.  2:192. 
♦Osguthorpe,  John,  Vol.  3:189. 
♦Osguthorpe,  Lydia  R.,  Vol.  3:189. 

Osmond,  George,  Vol.  1:348. 
♦Ossmen,  August  W.,  Vol.  2:53. 

Ottley,  Sidney  James,  Vol.  3:477. 
♦Ottosen,  Jens,  Vol.  2:567. 
♦Ottosen,  Johanna  E.  N.,  Vol.  2:568. 
♦Overson,  Christian,  Vol.  2:146. 
♦Overson,  David  P.,  Vol.  2:683,  812. 

Overson,  Ove  Ephraim,  Vol.   2:684. 
♦Oveson,  Lars  Peter,  Vol.  2:92. 
♦Oviatt,  Geo.  Herman,  Vol.  3:190. 

Oviatt.  Henry  Herman,  Vol.  3:190. 
♦Owen,  James,  Vol.  2:290. 
♦Owens,  Clarence  E.,  Vol.  2:219. 

Owens,  James  Clark,  Vol.  2:217. 

Owens,  James  Clark,  Vol.  3:191. 


Pace,  Harvey  A.,  Vol.  2:684. 
♦Pace,  Henry  Alexander,  Vol.  3:477. 
♦Pack,  Silas  Mosher,  Vol.  2:231. 

Packard,  Noah,  Vol.  2:68  4. 
♦Packer,  Ossin  Leonidas,  Vol.  3:478. 
♦Page,  Esther  L.,  Vol.  2:421. 

Page,  Hiram,  Vol.  1:277. 
♦Page,  John,  Vol.  2:420. 

Page,  John  E.,  Vol.  1:92. 
♦Page,  Jonathan  S.,  Vol.  2:153. 
♦Page,  Jonathan  S.,  jun.,  Vol.  2:150. 

Page,  Thomas  P.,  Vol.  2:318. 

Palmer,  James  Isaac,  Vol.   3:479. 
♦Park,  Andrew  Findley,  Vol.  3:480. 
♦Park.  Hamilton  G.,  Vol.  1:668. 


INDEX. 


821 


*Park,  James  Pollock,  Vol.  3:479. 
*Park,  John  R.,  Vol.  1:785. 
*Park,  Joseph  Gordon,  Vol.  2:466. 
*Parker,  Gilbert,  Vol.  3:191. 
*Parker,  James  Slack,  Vol.  2:21. 
*Parker,  Joseph  F.,  Vol.  3:192. 
*Parker,  Joseph  Wm.,  Vol.  3:480. 

Parkin,  John  William,  Vol.  3:803. 
♦Parkinson,  George  C,  Vol.  1:438. 
♦Parkinson,  Samuel  C,  Vol.  2:178. 
♦Parkinson,  Samuel  Rose,  Vol.  2:177. 
♦Parkinson,  Timothy  H.,  Vol.  3:193. 
♦Parkinson,  William  C,  Vol.  1:305. 
♦Parrish,  Joseph  Alonzo,  Vol.   3:688. 

Parry,  Caleb,  Vol.  3:688. 
♦Parry,  Edwin  F.,  Vol.  1:645. 
♦Parry,  Joseph,  Vol.  2:685. 

Partridge,  Edward,  Vol.  1:218. 
♦Partridge,  Edward,  jun..  Vol.  1:488. 
♦Partridge,  Ernest  D.  A.,  Vol.  2:685. 
♦Partridge,  Frank  H.,  Vol.  3:481. 

Passey,  Fredrick  Wm.,  Vol.  3:482. 

Patrick,  Robert,  Vol.  1:665. 

Patten,  David  W.,  Vol.  1:76. 

Patten,  George,  Vol.  2:157. 
'♦Patten,  William  Neuman,  Vol.  3:193. 
♦Paul,  Joshua  H..  Vol.  1:619. 
♦Paxman,  James  W.,  Vol.  1:517. 
♦Paxman,  William,  Vol.  1:515. 

Paxton,  Robert  Anthony,  Vol.  3:689. 

Pearson,  Hans,  Vol.  2:333. 

Pearson,  Henry,  Vol.  1:575. 
♦Pearson,  Henry  M.,  Vol.  1:588. 

Peck,  Bryan  Ward,  Vol.  3:689. 
♦Pectol,  Ephraim  P.,  Vol.  3:482. 
♦Pectol,  George  Peter,  Vol.  3:483. 
♦Peery,  David  H.,  Vol.  1:756. 
♦Pehrson,  Erik  J.,  Vol.  1:816. 
♦Pehrson,  John  P.,  Vol.  1:575. 
♦Peirce,  Eli  Harvey,  Vol.  2:686. 
♦Peirce,  James  M.,  Vol.  2:688. 
♦Peirce,  Mary  Ann  B.,  Vol.  2:688. 
♦Peirce,  William  A.,  Vol.  2:687. 

Pendleton,  Daniel  S.,  Vol.  2:689. 
♦Penrose,  Charles  W.,  Vol.  1:256; 

Vol.  3:769. 
♦Perkins,  Abraham  J.,  Vol.  2:198. 
♦Perkins,  Alice  Mellen,  Vol.  2:448. 

Perkins,  David  M.,  Vol.  2:689. 
♦Perkins,  George  W.,  Vol.  2:447. 

Perkins,  Nephi  M.,  Vol.  3:689. 

Perkins,  William  G.,  Vol.  2:429. 

Perkins,  William  Louis,  Vol.  3:484. 
♦Perry,  Henry  Morgan,  Vol.  3:484. 

Perry,  John,  Vol.  3:690. 
♦Peters,  John  David,  Vol.  2:63. 
♦Petersen,  Adam  Lind,  Vol.  3:485. 

Petersen,  Andrew,  Vol.  3:485. 
♦Petersen,  Hans  F.,  Vol.  2:554. 

Petersen,  Hans  Therkild,  Vol.  3:194. 
♦Petersen, Jens,  Vol.  2:345. 

Petersen,  Jesper,  Vol.  3:690. 
♦Petersen,  Lars,  Vol.  2:345. 
♦Petersen,  Lars  C,  Vol.  1:427. 
♦Petersen,  Mette  C.  C,  Vol.  2:691. 
♦Petersen,  Niels  M.,  Vol.  2:690. 


♦Petersen,  Niels  R.,  Vol.  2:225. 
♦Petersen,  Oluff,  Vol.  2:66. 
♦Petersen,  Peter,  Vol.  1:798. 

Petersen,  Peter  A.,  Vol.  2:161. 
♦Petersen,  Rozilla  K.,  Vol.  2:67. 

Peterson,  Andreas,  Vol.  3:690. 
♦Peterson,  Andrew  C,  Vol.  3:486. 
♦Peterson,  Brigham  Y.,  Vol.  2:193 
♦Peterson,  Canute,  Vol.  1:362. 

Peterson,  Christian,  Vol.  3:244. 
♦Peterson,  James  C,  Vol.  2:788. 
♦Peterson,  James  E.,  Vol.  2:184. 

Peterson,  James  Morten,  Vol.  2:691. 
♦Peterson,  Lawrence,  Vol.  3:194. 
♦Peterson,  Linnius  C,  Vol.  3:487. 
♦Peterson,  Mary  Jensen,  Vol.  2:553. 
♦Peterson,  Niels,  Vol.  2:553. 
♦Peterson,  Peter  B.,  Vol.  2:788. 
♦Pett,  James.  Vol.  1:390. 
♦Pettegrew,  David,  Vol.  1:618. 
♦Pettit,  Emma  S.  B.,  Vol.  2:406. 
♦Pettit,  Ethan,  Vol.  2:414. 
♦Pettit,  Lorenzo,  Vol.  2:405. 
♦Pettit,  Lucy  A.  M.,  Vol.  2:405. 
♦Pettit,  Margaret  E.,  Vol.  2:414. 

Pettv,  Lewis  James,  Vol.  3:195. 

Phelps,  Henry  Smith,  Vol.  2:138. 
♦Phelps,  Morris,  Vol.  1:373. 
♦Phelps,  William  Wines,  Vol.  3:692. 
♦Phillips,  Edward,  Vol.  3:195,  697. 
♦Phillips,  Ishmael,  Vol.  1:692. 

Phillips,  Walter  F.,  Vol.  3:698. 
♦Pierce,  Isaac  Riley,  Vol.  2:358. 
♦Piggott,  George  W.,  Vol.  2:692. 
♦Pilling,  Richard,  Vol.  1:386. 
♦Pitkin,  George  O.,  Vol.  1:433. 
♦Pixton,  Joseph  Cooper,  Vol.  3:196. 

Pixton,  Seth  Silcock,  Vol.  2:316. 
♦Plowman,  John  Jacobsen,  Vol.  3 :  196. 

♦  Pollard,  Joseph,  Vol.  1:635. 
♦Pomeroy,  Francis  M.,  Vol.  3:488. 
♦Pomeroy,  Franklin  T.,  Vol.  2:137. 

Pond,  Brigham,  Vol.  2:41. 
♦Pond,  Joseph  L.,  Vol.  3:198. 
♦Pond,  Joseph  Thorn,  Vol.  2:26. 
♦Pond,  Lewis  S.,  Vol.  1:301. 
♦Pond,  Lysander  C,  Vol.  1:315. 
♦Pond,  Noah  S.,  Vol.  1:314. 
♦Pond,  Zera  Whittle,  Vol.  3:198. 
♦Pope,  George  H.,  Vol.  2:694. 
♦Porter,  Aaron  Benjamin,  Vol.  3:199. 
♦Porter,  Joseph  Rich,  Vol.  2:148. 
♦Porter,  Lyman  Wight,  Vol.  3:491. 
♦Porter,  Margaret  L.  B.,  Vol.  2:790. 
♦Porter,  Nahum,  Vol.  2:174. 
♦Porter,  Nathan  T.,  Vol.  2:789. 
♦Porter,  William  F..  Vol.  2:789. 
♦Poulsen,  Andrew,  Vol.  2:693. 
♦Poulsen,  Paul,  Vol.  2:694. 

♦  Poulson,  John  Christian,  Vol.  3:491. 
*Poulton,  James,  Vol.  2:790. 

Pratt,  Addison,  Vol.  3:698. 
♦Pratt,  Moroni  W.,  Vol.  1:817. 
♦Pratt,  Orson,  Vol.  1:87. 
♦Pratt,  Parley  P.,  Vol.  1:83. 


822 


INDEX. 


*Preston,  William  B.,  Vol.  1:232; 

Vol  3:771. 
*Price,  Brigham  Francis,  Vol.  3:197. 
♦Price,  Edmond,  Vol.  2:695. 
♦Price,  Robert,  Vol.  2:36. 

Priest,  John,  Vol.  1:450. 

Probst,  Jacob,  Vol.  2:13. 

Pugh,  Edward  K.,  Vol.  2:132. 
*Pugmire,  Henry  Nelson,  Vol.  3:199. 

Pugmire,  Jonathan,  jun..  Vol.  2:430. 
*Pugmire,  Vincent  McK.,  Vol.  3:200. 

Pulsipher,  Zera,  Vol.  1:194. 
*Purdie,  William,  Vol.  2:102. 

Putnam,  Savannah  C,  Vol.  1:471. 
*Pye,  Caleb  Enoch,  Vol.  3:492. 
*Pyper,  Alexander  C,  Vol.  1:627. 
*Pyper,  George  D.,  Vol.  1:669. 


Q. 


*Quayle,  John,  Vol.  3:200. 

Quibell,  Joseph  A.,  Vol.  1:472. 
♦Quinney,  Joseph,  jun..  Vol.  3:201. 
*Quist,  Albert,  Vol.  2:695. 
♦Quist,  John  Anderson,  Vol.  2:696. 


R. 


*Raleigh,  Alonzo  H.,  Vol.  1:672. 
♦Ralphs,  Ephraim,  Vol.  2:189. 
♦Rampton,  Ephraim,  Vol.  2:189. 
♦Rampton.  Henry,  Vol.  3:493. 
♦Randall,  Melvin  Harley,  Vol.   3:202. 

Randall,  Orrin  Harley,  Vol.  2:147. 
♦Ransom,  James  Austin,  Vol.  3:494. 
♦Rappleye,  Tunis,  Vol.  2:791. 
♦Rasband,  Frederick,  Vol.  2:697. 

Rasband,  Joseph  A.,  Vol.  1:478. 

Rasmussen,  Daniel,  Vol.  2:572. 
♦Rasmussen,  Hans,  Vol.  2:697. 
♦Rasmussen,  Niels,   Vol.    1:596;    Vol. 
3:202. 

Rasmussen,  Niels  Peter,  Vol.  3:494 

♦Rasmussen,  Peter  Christian,  Vol.  2: 
108;  Vol.  3:699. 

♦Rasmussen,  Rasmus,  jun..  Vol.  1: 
443. 

♦Rasmussen,  Soren,  Vol.  1:574;   Vol 
3:495. 

♦Ratcliffe,  Emma  J.  E.,  Vol.  3:203. 

♦Ratcliffe,  James,  Vol.  3:202. 

♦Ravsten,  Bengt  M.,  Vol.  3:699. 

♦Ravsten,  John,  Vol.  3:204. 
Rawlins,  Franklin  A.,  Vol.  2:41. 
Read.  Charles,  Vol.  3:700. 

♦Read,  Walter  P.,  Vol.  2:494. 

♦Redd,  Lemuel  H.,  Vol.  2:116. 

♦Redd,  Lemuel  H.,  jun.,  Vol.  3:204. 

♦Redd,  Wayne  H.,  Vol.  1:353. 

♦Redd,  William  A.,  Vol.  1:539. 

♦Reece,  Joseph,  Vol.  2:152. 

♦Reed,  Ira,  Vol.  2:413. 

♦Reed,  Levi  Ward,  Vol.  2:412. 

♦Reed,  Margaret  P.,  Vol.  2:413. 

♦Rees,  John  Evans,  Vol.  2:583. 
Reese,  Howard,  Vol.  3:495. 


Reeve,  William  A.,  Vol.  2:145. 
♦Reid,  Alfred  C,  Vol.  2:698. 
♦Reid,  George  A.,  Vol.  2:446. 
♦Reid.  William  T.,  Vol.  2:791. 
Reidhead,  John,  Vol.  2:221. 
♦Reiser,  Albert  S.,  Vol.  1:780. 
♦Reiser.  Anna  C.  A.,  Vol.  2:427. 
♦Reiser,  Henry,  Vol.  2:424. 

Reiser,  Magdalena  S.,  Vol.  2:426. 
♦Reiser,  Margaret  V.  B.,  Vol.  2:428. 
♦Reiser.  Susanna  Rupp.  Vol.  2:425. 
♦Remington.  Lydia  R.  B.,  Vol.  2:239. 
♦Renstrom,  Andrew  P.,  Vol.  2:698. 
Reynolds.  Francis  M..  Vol.  3:496. 
♦Reynolds,  George,   Vol.    1:206;    Vol. 

3:771. 
♦Reynolds,  Henry,  Vol.  2:233. 

Rhees,  Reuben  Thos.,  Vol.  3:496. 
♦Rhodes.  Jane  Williams,  Vol.  2:699. 
♦Rhodes.  William  Henry,  Vol.  2:699. 
♦Rich.  Benjamin  Erastus,  Vol.  3:206. 
♦Rich,  Charles  C.  Vol.  1:102. 
♦Rich.  Edward  Charles,  Vol.  3:207. 
♦Rich,  Harriet  Sargent,  Vol.  3:211. 

Rich,  Leonard,  Vol.  1:189. 
♦Rich.  Mary  Ann,  Vol.  3:497. 
♦Rich,  Sarah  De  A.  P.,  Vol.  3:207. 

Rich,  Thomas,  Vol.  3:212. 
♦Rich,  Thomas,  jun..  Vol.  3:213. 
♦Rich,  William  L.,  Vol.  2:28. 
Richards,  Alma  Pascal,  Vol.   3:701. 
♦Richards,  Claude,  Vol.  2:700. 
♦Richards.  Emanuel  H.,  Vol.  2:331. 
♦Richards.  Emily  Sophia.  Vol.  2:700. 

Richards.  Evan  Alvin.  Vol.  2:150. 
♦Richards.  Franklin  D..  Vol.  1:115. 
♦Richards.  George   Franklin,    Vol.    1: 

544;   Vol.  3:772. 
♦Richards.  Henry  P..  Vol.  1:813. 
♦Richards,  Jesse  Snyder,  Vol.  3:213. 

Richards,  John  A.,  Vol.  3:702. 
♦Richards,  Joseph  Hill,  Vol.  2:213. 
♦Richards,  Levi  Willard,  Vol.  3:703. 
♦Richards,  Mary  Ann  P.,  Vol.  3:214. 
♦Richards,  Morgan,  jun..  Vol.  3:499. 
♦Richards.  Myron  John,  Vol.  2:134. 
♦Richards,  Preston  D.,  Vol.  2:704. 
♦Richards,  Samuel  W.,  Vol.  1:718. 
♦Richards,  Silas,  Vol.  2:327. 
♦Richards,  Stephen  L.,  Vol.  3:773. 
♦Richards,  Willard,  Vol.  1:53. 

Richards,  Willard  B.,  Vol.  2:471. 
♦Richardson,  John.  Vol.   2:457. 
♦Richardson,  Joseph  J.,  Vol.  3:214. 
♦Richardson.  Myron  B.,  Vol.  3:215. 
Richardson,  Shadrach,  Vol.  2:160. 
♦Richins.  Mary  Ann  H.,  Vol.  2:398 
Ricks,  Joel,  Vol.  2:70. 
Ricks,  Joel,  jun..  Vol.  2:69. 
♦Ricks,  Thomas  E.,  Vol.  1:455. 
Riding,  Alfred  Hall,  Vol.  2:183. 
Rigbv,  Fanny  J..  Vol.  2:792. 
Rigby,  James.  Vol.  2:792. 
♦Rigby,  Martin  Clark,  Vol.  3:500. 
♦Rigdon.  Sidney,  Vol.  1:31. 
♦Ririe,  David,  Vol.   3:216. 


INDEX. 


823 


Ritchie,  John  McAffee,  Vol.  2:10; 
Vol.  3:216. 
*Robbins,  Charles  B.,  Vol.  2:74. 
*Robbins,  Hulbert  Bross,  Vol.  3:217. 
♦Roberts,  Brigham  H.,  Vol.  1:205. 
♦Roberts,  Walton  A.,  Vol.  2:20. 
♦Roberts,  William  D.,  Vol.  1:498. 
♦Robinson,  Benjamin  H.,  Vol.   1:529. 
♦Robinson,  George  Henry,  Vol.  3:218. 
♦Robinson,  George  Huber,  Vol.  3:222. 

Robinson,  George  W.,  Vol.  1:252. 
♦Robinson,  James  H.,  Vol.  3:218. 
♦Robinson,  Joseph  E.,  Vol.  3:219. 
♦Robinson,  Joseph  Lee,  Vol.  3:220. 
♦Robinson,  Richard  S.,  Vol.  3:221. 

Robinson,  William  D.,  Vol.  3:501. 

Robison,  Charles  E.,  Vol.  3:706. 
♦Robison,  Daniel,  Vol.  3:217. 
♦Robison,  Daniel  A.,  Vol.  2:147. 
♦Robison,  Franklin  A.,  Vol.  2:144. 
♦Robison,  Willis  E.,  Vol.  1:342. 
♦Robson,  Charles  I.,  Vol.  1:558. 
♦Rockwood,  Albert  P.,  Vol.  1:194. 

Rockwood,  Charles  W.,  Vol.  1:454. 
♦Rogers,  Aurelia  S.,  Vol.  3:224. 

Rogers,  Henry  P.,  Vol.  3:706. 
♦Rogers,  Henry  Tooles,  Vol.  2:174. 
♦Rogers,  Thomas,  Vol.  3:223. 

Rohwer,  Charles  J.,  Vol.  2:69. 
♦Rolapp,  Henry  H.,  Vol.  3:501. 
♦Romney,  George,  Vol.  1:678. 
♦Romney,  Margaret  A.  T.,  Vol.  2:538. 

Romrell,  George  H.,  Vol.  3:502. 
♦Rose,  Erastus  Francisco,  Vol.  3:222. 
♦Rose,  Josephine  E.  R.,  Vol.  3:223. 
♦Rose,  Leon  Alley,  Vol.  3:503. 
♦Rosengren,  Gustave  L.,  Vol.  2:110. 
♦Roskelley,  James,  Vol.  3:225. 
♦Roskelley,  Samuel,  Vol.  1:400. 
♦Rouche,  John  E.,  Vol.  1:434. 
♦Rouche,  Thomas  F.,  Vol.  1:464. 
♦Roundy,  Elizabeth  J.  D.,  Vol.  1:809. 
♦Roundy,  Shadrach,  Vol.  1:642. 
♦Rowberry,  John,  Vol.  1:545. 

Ruckert,  Christopher  L.,  Vol.  3:706. 
♦Rudy,  Anna  Maria  B.,  Vol.  2:415. 
♦Rudy,  Franklin  H.,  Vol.  2:416. 
♦Rudy,  Henry,  Vol.  2:414. 
♦Rudy,  Margaret  Ann  R.,  Vol.  2:416. 

Rundquist,  Peter  T.,  Vol.  1:592. 
♦Russell,  Allen,  Vol.  3:226. 
♦Russell,  John  Hastie,  Vol.  2:520. 

Russell,  Jonathan,  Vol.  3:22  6. 


S. 


♦Sagers,  Adam  S.,  Vol.  3:226. 

Salisbury,  David,  Vol.  2:115. 
♦Salisbury,  Joseph  H.,  Vol.  2:2. 
♦Salter,  Ellen  Cleverly,  Vol.  3:227. 
♦Salter,  William,  Vol.  3:227. 
♦Samuelsen,  Frederik  F.,  Vol.  3:707. 
♦Samuelson,  Charles,  Vol.  3:503. 
♦Sandberg,  Peter  J.,  Vol.  1:446. 
♦Sanderson,  Owen  M.,  Vol.  2:249. 

Sargent,  Abel  Morgan,  Vol.  3:228 


♦Satterfield.  Ammon  Y.,  Vol.  3:503. 
♦Saunders,  Demas  A.,  Vol.  2:705. 
♦Saunders,  Hannah  B.,  Vol.  2:706. 
♦Savage,  Charles  Roscoe,  Vol.  3:708. 
♦Saxton,  Matilda  D.,  Vol.  2:707. 
♦Saxton,  Solomon,  Vol.  2:706. 
♦Schade,  Adam  W.,  Vol.  2:338. 
♦Schade,  Christian  F.,  Vol.  2:337. 
♦Schaerrer,  John  J.,  Vol.  1:514. 
♦Schaub,  Karl  Conrad,  Vol.  3:228. 

Schenk,  John,  Vol.  2:107. 
♦Schmid,  Robert,  Vol.  3:504. 
♦Schmutz,  Gottlieb,  Vol.  3:505. 
♦Schneider,  Ephraim  C,  Vol.  3:505. 
♦Schofield,  Nephi  Y.,  Vol.  2:481. 
♦Scholes,  Francis.  Vol.  3:229. 
♦Scholes,  Frederick,  Vol.  3:230. 
♦Schow,  Andrew  P.,  Vol.  1:543. 
♦Schow,  August  S.,  Vol.  1:767. 
♦Schramm,  Carl  C,  Vol.  2:158. 
♦Schulthess,  Arnold  H.,  Vol.  1:598. 
*Schwendiman,  Fred.,  Vol.  3:506. 
♦Scott,  Andrew  H.,  Vol.  2:7. 
♦Scott,  Walter,  Vol.  2:8. 

Scott,  William  R.,  Vol.  2:111. 
♦Scowcroft,  John,  Vol.  3:230. 
♦Scowcroft,  Mary  F.,  Vol.  3:231. 
♦Seal,  Franklin  E.,  Vol.  2:316. 
♦Seaman,  George  Alex.,  Vol.  3:232. 
♦Secrist.  Charles  Albert,  Vol.  3:232. 

Secrist,  Jacob  F.,  Vol.  3:711. 
♦Secrist,  Jacob  Moroni,  Vol.  3:233. 
♦Seddon,  Samuel  M.  T.,  Vol.  1:607. 
♦Seegmiller,  William  A.,  Vol.  2:707. 

Seegmiller,  William  H.,  Vol.  1:521. 

Seeley,  Joseph  Franklin,  Vol.  3:711. 
♦Seeley,  William  Stewart,  Vol.  3:507. 
♦Selander,  Julius,  Vol.  2:379. 

Selck,  William  W..  jun.,  Vol.  3:507. 
♦Sessions,  Byron,  Vol.   1:300. 
♦Sessions,  David,  Vol.  2:79. 

Sessions,  Fabyan,  jun..  Vol.  3:712. 

Sevey,  George  W.,  Vol.  1:800. 
♦Shaffer.  James  M.,  Vol.  2:238. 
♦Sharp,  John,  Vol.  1:677. 
♦Sharp,  John  C,  Vol.  2:479. 
♦Sharp,  John  George,  Vol.  2:327. 
♦Sharp,  John  William,  Vol.  2:320. 

Sharp,  Joseph,  Vol.  2:479. 
♦Sharp,  Sarah  B.  P.,  Vol.  2:480. 
♦Shawcroft,  David  Earl,  Vol.  3:234. 
♦Sheets,  Edwin  S.,  Vol.  2:708. 
♦Sheets,  Elijah  F.,  Vol.  1:614. 
♦Sheffield,  Heber  John,  Vol.  3:234. 

Shepard,  Justin,  Vol.  3:235. 
♦Shepherd,  Joseph  R.,  Vol.  3:235. 
♦Shepherd,  Marcus  L.,  Vol.  3:508. 

Sherman,  Lyman,  Vol.  1:190. 

Sherner,  Lawrence  W.,  Vol.  3:510. 
♦Sherwood,  Robert,  Vol.  2:441. 
♦Shields,  John  Gillespie,  Vol.  3:236. 
♦Shields,  Louise  Hansen,  Vol.  3:237. 

Shirley,  Charles  Coulson,  Vol.  3:510. 
♦Shomaker,  Abigail  T.,  Vol.  2:560. 
♦Shomaker,  Ezra,  Vol.  2:559. 

Shreeve,  Thomas  Arthur,  Vol.  2:708. 


824 


INDEX. 


Shumway,  Wilson  A.,  Vol.  2:221. 
♦Shupe,  James  Wright,  Vol.  2:289. 
-Shurtliff,  Lewis  W.,  Vol.  1:459. 
•^Siggard,  Peter  Petersen,  Vol.  2:67. 
♦Simmons,  Mary  Ann  F.,  Vol.  3:511. 
♦Simmons,  William  H.,  Vol.  3:512. 

Simons,  Martha  Dixon,  Vol.  2:710. 

Simons,  Orrawell,  Vol.  2:709. 
*Sims,  George,  Vol.  3:712. 

Sirrine,  Mephibosheth,  Vol.  3:713. 
*Sjodahl,  Janne  Mattson,  Vol.  3:714. 
*Skanchy,  Anthon  L.,  Vol.  1:422. 
*Skidmore,  Charles  H.,  Vol.  3:237. 
*Skidmore,  William  A.,  Vol.  2:176. 
♦Skidmore,  William  L.,  Vol.  1:403. 
*Skinner,  George,  Vol.  3:238. 

Skinner,  Nephi  Aaron,  Vol.  3:513. 

Skinner,  William  H.,  Vol.  3:513. 

Slack,  Walter  Herbert,  Vol.  3:513. 
*Slaugh,  George  Alfred.  Vol.  2:239. 

Sloan,  James,  Vol.  1:254. 

Sly,  James  Calvin,  Vol.  3:514. 
♦Smart,  Abel,  Vol.  2:32. 
♦Smart,  Thomas  H.,  Vol.  1:589. 
♦Smart,  Thomas  S.,  Vol.  3:514. 
♦Smart.  William  H..  Vol.  1:360. 
♦Smith,  Albert,  Vol.  2:306. 

Smith,  Alvin  Nathaniel.  Vol.  3:715 

Smith,  Amanda,  Vol.   2:792. 
♦Smith,  Andrew,  Vol    1:599. 
♦Smith,  Andrew,  jun.,  Vol.  1:602. 

Smith,  Asahel,  Vol.  1:182. 

Smith,  Azariah,  Vol.  2:224. 
♦Smith,  Bathsheba  W.,  Vol.  1:699. 
♦Smith.  Benjamin  F..  Vol.  1:497. 
♦Smith.  Charles  H..  Vol.  3:516. 
♦Smith,  David  Asael,  Vol.  3:775. 
♦Smith,  Elias.  Vol.  1:719. 

Smith,  Elias  A..  Vol.  1:776. 
♦Smith,  Emma.  Vol.  1:692. 
♦Smith,  George  A.,  Vol.  1:37. 
♦Smith,  George  A.,  jun..  Vol.  2:392. 

Smith,  George  Albert.  Vol.  3:776. 
♦Smith,  George  Michael.  Vol.  3:239. 

Smith.  Harriet  S.,  Vol.  2:298. 

Smith,  Herald  Eugene,  Vol.  3:715. 
♦Smith,  Hyrum.  Vol.  1:52. 
♦Smith,  Hyrum,  Vol.  3:240, 
♦Smith.  Hyrum  Gibbs,  Vol.  3:778. 
♦Smith.  Hyrum   M.,   Vol.    1:772;    Vol. 

3:779. 
♦Smith,  Isaac,  Vol.  1:410. 
♦Smith,  Jesse  N.,  Vol.  1:316. 

Smith,  John,  Vol.  1:182. 
♦Smith,  John,  Vol.  1:183;  Vol.  3:780. 

Smith,  John  C.  L.,  Vol.  1:532. 
♦Smith,  John  Eddins,  Vol.  2:297. 
♦Smith,  John  Fewson,  Vol.  1:688. 
♦Smith,  John  Henry,  Vol.  1:141;  Vol. 

3:780. 
♦Smith,  John  Jex,  Vol.  3:242. 

Smith,  John  Sivel,  Vol.  3:241. 
♦Smith,  Joseph,  jun.,  Vol.  1:1. 

Smith,  Joseph,  sen.,  Vol.  1:181. 
♦Smith,  Joseph  Daniel,  Vol.  2:143. 


♦Smith,  Joseph  Fielding,  Vol.  1:66; 

Vol.  3:781. 
♦Smith,  Joseph  Fielding,  jun..  Vol.  3: 

784. 
♦Smith,  Joseph  Harmon,  Vol.  2:383. 
♦Smith,  Joseph  West.,  Vol.  2:220. 
♦Smith,  Josephine  A.  R.,  Vol.  2:307. 
♦Smith,  Lauritz,  Vol.  1:573. 
♦Smith,  Lot,  Vol.  1:803. 
♦Smith,  Lucy,  Vol.  1:690. 
♦Smith,  Mary  Ellen  W.,  Vol.  3:240. 

Smith,  Mary  Fielding,  Vol.  2:710. 
♦Smith.  Orson,  Vol.  1:407. 
♦Smith.  Ralph,  Vol.  2:73. 
♦Smith.  Samuel  F.,  Vol.  2:214. 

Smith,  Samuel  H.,  Vol.  1:278. 
♦Smith,  Samuel  H.  B.,  Vol.  3:242. 
♦Smith,  Silas  S.,   Vol.    1:801. 

Smith.  Sylvester,  Vol.  1:191. 
♦Smith,  Thomas  Alfred,  Vol.  3:516. 
♦Smith,  Thomas  X.,  Vol.  2:77. 

Smith.  Warren  Barnes.  Vol.  3:715. 

Smith,  Willard  Gilbert,  Vol.  3:517. 

Smith.  William,  Vol.  1:86. 
♦Smith.  William  B..  Vol.  3:244. 

Smith.  William  Cooke,  Vol.  3:517. 

Smith,  William  G.,  Vol.  1:473. 
♦Smith.  William  Henry.  Vol.  2:297. 

Smith.  William  J..  Vol.  1:472. 

Smith,  William  R..  Vol.  1:802. 
♦Smoot.  Abraham  O..  Vol.  1:485. 
♦Smoot.  Reed,  Vol.  1:178. 
♦Smoot,  William  C.  A..  Vol.  2:711. 
♦Smuin,  George.  Vol.  2:290. 

Snell,  Rufus  P..  Vol.  2:45. 
♦Snow.  Edward  H.,  Vol.  1:798. 
♦Snow.  Eliza  R..  Vol.  1:693. 
♦Snow,  Elizabeth  R.  A..  Vol.  2:512. 
♦Snow.  Erastus.  Vol.  1:103. 
♦Snow,  Frank  Mousley,  Vol.  3:518. 
♦Snow,  Franklin  R..  Vol.  3:518. 
♦Snow,  James  C.  Vol.  1:794. 

Snow,  Jeter,  Vol.  1:539. 
♦Snow.  Joseph  Homer.  Vol.  2:183. 
♦Snow.  LeRoi  Clarence,  Vol.  3:716. 
♦Snow.  Lorenzo.  Vol.    1:26;   Vol.   3: 

786. 
♦Snow,  Lucius  A.,  Vol.   2:60. 

Snow,  Mason  Levi,  Vol.  2:93. 
♦Snow,  Oliver  G.,  Vol.  1:389;  Vol.  2: 

58. 
♦Snow,  Orrin  Henry,  Vol.  3:244. 
♦Snow,  Seymour  B..  Vol.  2:797. 
♦Snow.  Willard  L.,  Vol.  1:574. 
♦Snow,  William,  Vol.  3:519. 
♦Snowball,  John,  Vol.  2:257. 
♦Solomon,  Alfred,  Vol.  1:681. 

Sorensen,  Alden  Conrad,  Vol.  3:717. 

Sorensen,  Andrew  P.,  Vol.  2:205. 
♦Sorensen,  Christine  W..  Vol.    2:712. 
♦Sorensen.  Hans  C,  Vol.  3:717. 
♦Sorensen,  John  P..  Vol.  1:819. 
♦Sorensen.  Morton,  Vol.  2:712 

Sorensen,  Niels,  Vol.  2:269. 
♦Sorensen,  Ole,  Vol.  1:523. 

Sorensen,  Peter,  Vol.   3:520 


INDEX. 


825 


Sorensen,  Peter  C,  Vol.  2:713. 

Southwick,  John  Alfred,  Vol.  3:718. 
*Speirs,  Adam,  Vol.  1:618. 
*Spencer,  Daniel,  Vol.  1:286. 

Spencer,  Franklin,  Vol.  1:519. 
*Spencer,  Hiram  Theron,  Vol.  2:443. 
*Spencer,  Mary  Barr  Y.,  Vol.   2:444. 
♦Spencer,  Orson,  Vol.   1:337. 
*Sperry,  Harrison,  Vol.  1:605. 
*Spilsbury,  Fanny  S.,  Vol.  3:246. 
*Spilsbury,  George,  Vol.  3:245. 
*Staines,  Lillias  T.  L.,  Vol.  2:518. 
♦Staines,  William  C,  Vol.  2:513. 
*Staker,  C.  M.  P.,  Vol.  2:293. 
*Staker,  Joseph  Smith,  Vol.  2:715. 

Staker,  Nathan  Henry,  Vol.  2:294. 
*Staker,  William  Henry,  Vol.  2:292. 

Staley,  John  Wesley,  Vol.  3:521. 
*Stallings,  Virgil  B.,  Vol.  2:335. 

Standing,  James,  Vol.  2:713. 
♦Standing,  James  V.,  Vol.  2:714. 

Standing,  Joseph,   Vol.    3:719. 

Stanger,  George  O.,  Vol.  3:721. 
♦Stanley,  Frank,  Vol.  2:451. 
♦Staples,  Joseph  Levi,  Vol.  2:714. 
♦Stapley,  Orley  S.,  Vol.  3:521. 
♦Steed,  Laura  L.  Reed,  Vol.  3:247. 
♦Steed,  Susannah  Davis,  Vol.  3:249. 
♦Steed,  Thomas,  Vol.   2:88;    Vol.   3: 

247. 
♦Steed,  Thomas  Joseph,  Vol.  3:248. 
♦Steed,  Walter  William,  Vol.    3:250. 
♦Steedman,  Andrew,  Vol.   3:522. 
♦Steele,  James  E.,  Vol.  1:453. 
♦Steele,  Mahonri  M.,  Vol.  1:543,  821. 
♦Stephens,  Evan,  Vol.  1:740. 
♦Stephens,  William  Orial,  Vol.  3:523. 
♦Stephenson,  Anthony,  Vol.   1:530. 

Sterrett,  William  W.,  Vol.  3:523. 
♦Stevens,  David  Riley,  Vol.  3:251. 

Stevens,  George  W.,  Vol.  3:721. 
♦Stevens,  Joseph  F.,  Vol.  3:525. 

Stevens,  Margery,  Vol.  3:721. 

Stevens,  Ransom  M.,  Vol.  3:722. 
♦Stevens,  Thomas  J.,  Vol.  2:248. 

Stevens,  Walter,  Vol.  2:715. 
♦Stevensen,  Willard  E.,  Vol.  2:716. 
♦Stevenson,  E.  J.  D.  F.,  Vol.  2:716. 
♦Stevenson,  Edward,  Vol.  1:214. 
♦Stevenson,  Eliza  M.  S.,  Vol.  3:252 
♦Stevenson,  Ezra  T.,  Vol.   2:500. 
♦Stevenson,  George  V.,  Vol.  3:251 
♦Stewart,  Benjamin  F.,  Vol.  2:717. 

Stewart,  Daniel  Jones,  Vol.  3:722. 

Stewart,  David  B.,  Vol.  1:541. 
♦Stewart,  Elizabeth  H.,  Vol.  2:575. 
♦Stewart,  Isaac  M.,  Vol.  1:793. 
'^Stewart,  James,  Vol.  2:574. 

Stewart,  James  W.,  Vol.  2:579. 
♦Stewart,  James  Z.,  Vol.  1:416. 

Stewart,  John  Riley,  Vol.  3:525. 

Stewart,  Joseph  Alvin,  Vol.  3:526. 
♦Stewart,  Neil  Murdock,  Vol.  3:722 
♦Stewart,  Samuel  W.,  Vol.  1:786. 
♦Stewart,  Urban  Van,  Vol.  3:526. 
♦Stewart,  Vincent  I.,  Vol.  2:21. 


♦Stewart,  William  A.,  Vol.  2:184. 
♦Stewart,  William  M.,  Vol.  1:786. 
♦Stimpson,  William,  Vol.    2:253. 
♦Stocking,  Ensign  I.,  Vol.  2:718. 

Stoddard,  Joseph  D.,  Vol.  3:527. 
♦Stohl,  Lorenzo  N.,  Vol.  2:65. 
♦Stohl,  Ole  N.,  Vol.  1:394. 
♦Stohl,  Oleen  Nilson,  Vol.  3:528. 
♦Stoker,  David,  Vol.  3:253. 
♦Stoker,  David,  jun..  Vol.  3:254. 

Stoker,  John,  Vol.  3:252. 
♦Stoker,  John,  Vol.  3:723. 
♦Stoker,  Regena  H.,  Vol.  3:253. 

Stokes,  Thos.,  Vol.  2:299. 

Storrs,  Joseph  Henry,  Vol.  3:52  9. 

Stott,  Edwin,  Vol.  3:530. 
♦Stout,  Hosea,  Vol.  3:530. 
♦Stratford,  Edwin,  Vol.  2:291. 

Street,  Edwin  W.,  Vol.  3:723. 
♦Strong,  Alice  F.  B.  W.,  Vol.  3:255 
-*Stucki,  John  Ulrich,  Vol.  2:29. 
♦Sudbury,  Samuel  John,  Vol.  2:280. 
♦Sullivan,  James  Henry,  Vol.  2:718. 
♦Sundwall,  Peter,  Vol.  3:724. 
♦Sutton,  Harry  Edward,  Vol.  3:254. 
♦Swalberg,  Ernest  L.,  Vol.  3:534. 
♦Swapp,  Joseph  Henry,  Vol.  3:255. 
♦Swenson,  Canute,  Vol.  2:719. 
♦Swenson,  Oscar  E.,  Vol.  2:467. 
♦Swenson,  Swen  L.,  Vol.  3:52  7. 
♦Swift,  Sarah  Walsh.,  Vol.  3:256. 
♦Swindle,  Heber,  Vol.  2:798. 

Symons,  Arzelia  W.,  Vol.  3:535. 


♦Taft,  Seth,  Vol.  2:798. 
♦Talmage,  James  Edward,  Vol.  3:787. 
♦Tanner  Benjamin  F.,  Vol.  2:58. 
♦Tanner,  George  W.,  Vol.  2:720. 
♦Tanner,  Henry  S.,  Vol.  1:717. 

Tanner,  John,  Vol.  2:799. 
♦Tanner,  John  Alma,  Vol.  3:535. 
♦Tanner,  John  J.,  Vol.  2:156,  811. 
♦Tanner,  Joseph  M.,  Vol.  1:709. 
♦Tanner,  Joseph  Smith,  Vol.  2:153. 
♦Tanner,  Nathan,  jun.,  Vol.  3:536. 
♦Tanner,  Nathan  A.,  Vol.  2:246. 

Tanner,  William  S.,  Vol.  2:151. 
♦Taylor,  Alonzo  L.,  Vol.  2:122. 

Taylor,  Edmund  Z.,  Vol.  3:724. 
♦Taylor,  Eliza  J.  W.,  Vol.  2:449. 
♦Taylor,  Elmer,  Vol.  3:537. 

Taylor,  Frank  Y.,  Vol.  1:563. 

Taylor,  George  B.,  Vol.  3:725. 
♦Taylor,  George  H.,  Vol.  1:634. 

Taylor,  James  Elmer,  Vol.   3:537. 

Taylor,  James  Green,  Vol.  3:53  8. 
♦Taylor,  John,  Vol.  1:14. 
♦Taylor,  John,  Vol.  2:720. 

Taylor,  John  Possels,  Vol.  3:258. 
♦Taylor,  John  Whitaker,  Vol.  1:151; 

Vol.  3:789. 
♦Taylor,  Joseph  E.,  Vol.  1:295. 

Taylor,  Joseph  Harris,  Vol.  3:725. 

Taylor,  Joseph  Lake,  Vol.  3:538. 


826 


INDEX. 


Taylor,  Lee,  Vol.  2:579. 

Taylor,  Leo  Sanford,  Vol.  3:539. 
♦Taylor,  Levi  James,  Vol.  2:270. 
♦Taylor,  Martin  V.  B.,  Vol.  2:578. 
♦Taylor,  Samuel  B..  Vol.  2:449. 
♦Taylor,  Thomas,  Vol.  2:366. 
♦Taylor,  Thomas  E.,  Vol.  2:720. 
♦Taylor,  Thomas  H.,  Vol.  1:493. 
♦Taylor,  Thomas  Nicholls.  Vol.  3:725. 
♦Taylor,  William,  Vol.  1:564. 
♦Taylor,  William  A.,  Vol.  3:259. 

Taylor,  William  W.,   Vol.    1:199. 
♦Teasdale,  George.  Vol.   1:144;   Vol. 
3:790. 

Te  Awe  Awe,  Tamihana,  Vol.  3:726. 
♦Teeples.  William  R..  Vol.  3:259. 
♦Terry,  James  Parshall,  Vol.  3:260. 

Terry,  Joseph,  Vol.  1:572. 
♦Terry,  Joshua,  Vol.  1:572. 
♦Terry,  Otis  L.,  Vol.  2:802. 
♦Terry,  Otis  L.,  jun..  Vol.  2:804. 
♦Terry.  Thomas  Searles,  Vol.  3:261. 

Teuscher,  Henry,  jun..  Vol.  3:539. 

Tew,  William.  Vol.  1:495. 
♦Thackeray.  George  R..  Vol.  3:263. 
♦Thatcher.  Henry  K.,  Vol.  3:264. 
♦Thatcher,  John  B.,  Vol.  3:263. 
♦Thatcher,  Moses.  Vol.  1:127;  Vol. 
3:791. 

Theddell,  Emil  Conrad.  Vol.   3:726. 
♦Thomas,  Charles  J..  Vol.  2:488. 
♦Thomas,  Charles  W.,  Vol.  2:724. 
♦Thomas.  Edward.  Vol.  2:721. 
♦Thomas.  Elbert  Duncan.  Vol.  2:722 
♦Thomas.  Richard   K..  Vol.   1:780. 
♦Thomas.  Robert  Henry.  Vol.  2:723. 
♦Thomas.  Robert  T.,  Vol.   2:723. 
♦Thomas.  William  Henry,  Vol.  3:265. 

Thomassen,  Charles  R.,  Vol.  3:539. 
♦Thomassen.  Peter  Olaff,  Vol.  2:724. 
♦Thompson,  Joseph,  Vol.  3:266. 
♦Thompson,  Mercy  R.  F.,  Vol.  2:725. 
♦Thompson,  Niels.  Vol.  2:321. 
♦Thompson.  Orvil  L.  Vol.  3:540. 

Thompson,  Robert  B.,  Vol.  1:253. 
♦Thomson.  Andrew.  Vol.   2:549. 
♦Thomson,  Andrew,  jun..  Vol.   2:726. 
♦Thomson,  Andrew  W.,  Vol.  2:314. 
♦Thomson.  Christiana  J.,  Vol.  2:549. 
♦Thomson,  George.  Vol.  3:265. 
♦Thoresen,  Ingwald  C,  Vol.   1:430. 
♦Thorn,  William,  Vol.   1:610. 
♦Thorne,  Joseph  E.,  Vol.  1:512. 
♦Thornley,  John,  Vol.    3:267. 
♦Thornley,  Martha  Seed.  Vol.   3:268. 
♦Thorpe,  Christian  L.,  Vol.  3:540. 
♦Thorup.  John  T.,  Vol.  1:595. 

Thurber,  Albert  K.,  Vol.  1:519. 
♦Thurman,  Ray  Stewart,  Vol.   3:268, 
541. 

Thurston.  Thomas  J.,  Vol.  3:269. 
♦Tietjen,  Alma,  Vol.  3:541. 
♦Tietjen,  Joseph  E.,  Vol.  3:542. 
♦Tillotson.  Ephraim.  Vol.  2:15. 
♦Tingey,  Franklin  S..  Vol.  1:650. 
♦Tingey,  John,  Vol.   1:648 


Tingey,  Thomas,  jun.,  Vol.  1:333. 
♦Tingey,  Wesley  Earl,  Vol.  3:727. 
♦Tippets,  John  Harvey,  Vol.  3:269. 
♦Tobiason.  Theodore.  Vol.  1:617. 

Tolley,  George  W.,  Vol.  2:22,  727. 
♦Tolman,  Benjamin  H.,  Vol.  3:543. 
♦Tolman,  Judson,  Vol.  2:78. 
♦Tolman.  Judson  A.,  Vol.  1:388. 
*Tolton.  Edward.  Vol.  3:543. 
♦Tolton,  John  Franklin,  Vol.  3:544. 

Tomlinson,  Judson  Bliss.  Vol.  3:728. 
♦Torgerson.  Gilbert,  Vol.  2:247. 
♦Toyn,  David  Harry,  Vol.   3:270. 
♦Tracy,  Eli  A.,  Vol.  2:346. 
♦Trane,  Thomas  F..  Vol.  1:506. 
♦Transtrom,  Ola,  Vol.  3:270. 

Tripp,  John  Leroy,  Vol.  3:728. 
♦Tucker,  Charles.  Vol.  3:545. 
♦Tucker,  Edward  C.  Vol.  2:293.  812. 

Tufts.  Josiah,  Vol.  2:269. 

Turner,  Charles.  Vol.  3:271. 
♦Turner,  James,  Vol.  1:589. 
♦Turner,  James  F.,  Vol.  1:577. 
♦Turner,  William  A..  Vol.  2:230. 
♦Turpin,  Jesse,  Vol.  3:728. 
♦Tuttle,  Luther  Terry,  Vol.  3:729. 
♦Twitchell,  Willis,  Vol.  1:471. 

Tyler.  Frank  Newton.  Vol.  3:546. 

Tyler.  Robert  M.,  Vol.  1:560. 


U. 


♦Udall,  David  A.,  Vol.  2:112. 
♦Udall,  David  K..  Vol.  1:325. 
♦Udy.  Charles  Albert.  Vol.  3:272. 


♦Valentine.  Hyrum  W..  Vol.  3:731. 
♦Vance,  James  Wesley,  Vol.  3:273. 
♦Van  Cott,  John,  Vol.  1:198;  Vol. 

2:727. 
♦Vaughan,  John  Harris,  Vol.  2:728. 
♦Vernon.  James.  Vol.  2:232. 
♦Vetterli.  John.  Vol.  3:730. 


W. 


♦Waddoups.  Eliza  J.  S..  Vol.  3:275. 
♦Waddoups.  Martha  Page,  Vol.  3:274. 
♦Waddoups.  William.  Vol.   3:274. 

Wade,  Edward  D..  Vol.   3:546. 

Wade.  Moses.  Vol.  3:547. 

Wahlquist.  Anders  J..  Vol.  2:140. 
♦Wahlquist.  Charles  J.,  Vol.  3:275. 

Waite.  John  A.,  jun..  Vol.  3:276. 

Walker.  Daniel  Cox.  Vol.  2:336. 
♦Walker.  Don  Carlos,  Vol.  1:453. 

Walker,  Ezra  Brown,  Vol.  3:547. 
♦Walker,  Henry,  Vol.  2:729. 
♦Walker,  Henson,  Vol.  1:508. 
♦Walker,  James  John,  Vol.  3:547. 
♦Walker.  James  Thomas,  Vol.   3:548. 
♦Walker.  John  H..  Vol.  2:109. 
♦Walker,  Solomon,  Vol.  3:549. 
♦Walker.  Stephen,  Vol.  2:729. 


INDEX. 


827 


Walker,  Thaddeus,  Vol.  3:732. 
*Walker,  William  H.,  Vol.  1:565. 
♦Wallace,  George  B.,  Vol.  1:291. 
♦Wallace,  George  E.,  Vol.  2:402. 
♦Wallace,  Henry,  Vol.  1:613. 

Wallantine,  Robert  W.,  Vol.  2:730. 

Walser,  George  Jasper,  Vol.  3:549. 
♦Walsh,  John,  Vol.  2:81,  744. 
♦Walters,  Henry  B.,  Vol.  3:550. 
♦Walton,  Thomas,  Vol.  2:730. 

Walz,  Conrad,  Vol.  3:551. 

Wandell,  Charles  W.,  Vol.  3:551. 
♦Warburton,  Joseph,  Vol.   1:593. 

Ward,  David  Henry,  Vol.  2:270. 

Ward,  Elijah  Barney,  Vol.  3:552. 
♦Ward,  George  Moroni.  Vol.  3:554. 
♦Ward,  Moroni,  Vol.  1:459. 

Ward,  Richard  Alvin,  Vol.  3:554. 

Ward,  William  Ivan,  Vol.  3:732. 

Wardle,  Junius  F.,  Vol.  3:555. 
♦Ware,  James  Russell,  Vol.  3:555. 

Warner,  Alvin,  Vol.  3:556. 
^Warner,  William  H.,  Vol.   3:556. 
*Warnick.  Charles  P.,  Vol.  1:513. 

Warren,  Louis  Albert,  Vol.  3:73  3. 

Wasden,  James  Brooks,  Vol.  3:276. 

Watkins,  George  W.,  Vol.  3:557. 
♦Watkins,  William    (Lampard),    Vol. 

2:62. 
♦Watson,  Andrew  A.,  Vol.  2:3. 
*Watson,  Ellen  Rily,  Vol.  2:423. 
♦Watson,  Hugh,  Vol.  2:428. 
*  Watson,  James  Cowen,  Vol.  2:423. 
♦Watson,  Joseph  M.,  Vol.  3:277. 
♦Watson,  Sarah  J.  W.,  Vol.  2:429 
♦Watt,  Golightly,  Vol.  3:278. 

Watts,  Baldwin  H.,  Vol.  3:657. 

Webber,  Thomas  G.,  Vol.  1:670 

Weber,  Robert,  Vol.  3:558. 
♦Webster,  Francis,  Vol.  2:533. 
♦Webster,  George  Wm.,  Vol.  3:558. 
♦Webster,  John,  Vol.  2:475. 
♦Webster,  John  J.  G.,  Vol.  3:559. 

Webster,  John  W.,  Vol.  2:477. 
♦Webster,  Mary  A.  W.,  Vol.  2:476. 
♦Webster,  William,  Vol.  3:559. 
♦Weggeland,  Dan  A.,  Vol.  2:271. 
♦Weibye,  Jens  C.  A.,  Vol.  1:818. 
♦Weiler,  Elijah  M.,  Vol.   1:603. 
♦Weiler,  Jacob,  Vol.  1:601. 
♦Welker,  Adam,  Vol.  2:199. 

Welker,  Hugh  Melvin,  Vol.  3:733. 
♦Welker,  James  R.,  Vol.  2:200. 

Welling,  Milton  H.,  Vol.  1:770. 
♦Wellington,  John,  Vol.  2:298. 
♦Wells,  Daniel  H.,  Vol.  1:62. 
♦Wells,  Emmeline  B.  W.,  Vol.  2:731. 
♦Wells,  Heber  M.,  Vol.  1:722. 
♦Wells,  John,  Vol.   3:791. 
♦Wells,  Joseph  Smith,  Vol.  2:479. 

Wells,  Junius  F.,  Vol.  1:714. 
♦Wells,  Louis  R.,  Vol.  2:521. 

Wells,  Lydia  Ann,  Vol.  2:511. 
♦Wells,  Rulion  S.,  Vol.  1:212. 
♦Wells,  Samuel  H.,  Vol.  3:278. 

Wells,  Susan  H.  A".,  Vol.  2:511. 


Welsch,  Charles  A.,  Vol.  2:43. 

Wentz,  Peter  M.,  Vol.  2:734. 
♦West,  Chauncey  W.,  Vol.  1:749. 
♦West,  Jabez  W.,  Vol.  1:616. 
♦West,  John  Anderson,  Vol.  3:279. 
♦West,  Joseph  A.,  Vol.  1:754. 
♦West,  William,  Vol.   2:735. 
♦Wheatley,  Thomas,  jun..  Vol.  2:735. 

Wheeler,  Joseph  Edw.,  Vol.  2:204. 

Wheelwright,  Thos.  B.,  Vol.  3:560. 

Whipple,  Edson,  Vol.  3:560. 
♦Whipple,  Robert  John,  Vol.  3:733. 

Whipple,  Willard,   Vol.    2:218. 
♦Whitaker,  John  M.,  Vol.   1:790. 

White,  Catherine  Foutz,  Vol.  2:736. 
♦White,  Charles  D.,  Vol.  1:531. 
♦White,  Edward,  Vol.   3:562. 
♦White,  Kershaw  N.,  Vol.  2:436. 
♦Whiting,  Edward  L.,  Vol.  2:273. 

Whiting,  Francis  M.,  Vol.  3:563. 

Whitmer,  Christian,  Vol.  1:276. 
♦Whitmer,  David,  Vol.  1:263. 

Whitmer,  Jacob,  Vol.  1:276. 

Whitmer,  John,  Vol.  1:251. 

Whitmer,  Mary  M.,  Vol.  1:283. 

Whitmer,  Peter,    Vol.  1:282. 

Whitmer,  Peter,  jun..  Vol.  1:277. 

Whitney,  Elizabeth  A.,  Vol.  3:563. 

Whitney,  Ira  B.,  Vol.  2:206. 
♦Whitney,  Newel  K.,  Vol.   1:222. 
♦Whitney,  Orson  F.,  Vol.  1:658;  Vol. 
3:793. 

Whittier,  Eli  Frank,  Vol.  3:562. 
♦Whitworth,  Michael  W.,  Vol.  3:280. 

Wickman,  Hans  C,  Vol.   2:94. 
♦Widerborg,  Carl,  Vol.  1:814. 
♦Widtsoe,  Anna  Karine  Gaarden,  Vol. 

3:734. 
♦Widtsoe,  John  A.,  Vol.   1:768;   Vol. 

3:735. 
♦Widtsoe,  Osborne  J.  P.,  Vol.   2:403. 

Wight,  Lyman,  Vol.   1:93. 
♦Wilcox,  Elizabeth  J.  S.,  Vol.  2:737. 
♦Wilding,  Thomas  E.,  Vol.   2:434. 
♦Wilhelmsen,  Benjamin  Everett,  Vol. 

3:565. 
♦Wilhelmsen,  Niels,  Vol.  3:564. 
♦Wilkes,  Albert  Lester,   Vol.   3:566. 
♦Wilkins,  George  W.,  Vol.  2:161. 
♦Wilkins,  Oscar,  Vol.   2:738. 
♦Willardsen,  Anna  K.  S.,  Vol.  2:547. 
♦Willardsen,  Christian,  Vol.   2:545. 
♦Willardsen,  Chr.,  jun..  Vol.  2:547. 
♦Willardsen,  Karen  S.,  Vol.   2:546. 
♦Willardsen,  Mary  L.,  Vol.  2:546. 

Willes,  William   Sidney   Smith,   Vol. 
3:566. 

Willey,  David  O.,  jun..  Vol.  2:738. 

William,  David  J.,  Vol.  1:493. 
♦Williams,  Ada  Evans,  Vol.  3:281. 
♦Williams,  Clarissa  S.,  Vol.   2:738. 
♦Williams,  David,  Vol.  2:532. 
♦Williams,  David  J.,  Vol.  2:536. 
♦Williams,  David  James,  Vol.  3:568. 
♦Williams,  Ebenezer  A.,  Vol.  3:280. 
♦Williams,  Eda  Pearson,  Vol.  2:741. 


828 


INDEX. 


Williams,  Frederick  G.,  Vol.  1:51. 
♦Williams,  Geo.  W.,  jun..  Vol.  2:740. 

Williams,  Griffith  E.,  Vol.  3:736. 
*Williams,  Ira  T..  Vol.  2:106. 
♦Williams,  James  V.  N.,  Vol.  2:740. 
♦Williams,  Sarah  T.,  Vol.  2:534. 
♦Williams,  William  N.,  Vol.  1:657. 

Willie,  James  G.,  Vol.   2:430. 
♦Willis,  John  H.,  Vol.  2:219. 
♦Willis,  Lemuel  J.,  Vol.  2:46. 
♦Willis,  William  W.,  Vol.  2:218. 
♦Wilson,  George  D.,  Vol.  3:282. 
♦Wilson,  Guy  Carlton,  Vol.  3:736. 

Wilson,  Joseph  E.,  Vol.  1:412. 
♦Wilson,  Moroni,  Vol.  3:282. 

Wilson,  Robert  L.,  Vol.   2:741. 
♦Wilson,  William  W..  Vol.  1:586. 
♦Wiltbank,  Ellis  W.,  Vol.  1:555. 
♦Winder,  John  R.,  Vol.  1:244;  Vol. 

3:795. 
♦Winegar.  William  W.,  Vol.  3:283. 
♦Winn,  William  Lucelus,  Vol.  3:568. 

Winsor,  Andrew  Nielsen,  Vol.  3:570. 
♦Winsor,  Anson  Perry,  Vol.  3:569. 
♦Winter,  Thomas  W.,   Vol.   1:606. 

Wolcott,  Robert  W.,  Vol.  3:737. 
♦Wolstenholme,  Levi,  Vol.  2:450. 
♦Wolstenholme. Martha  H.,Vol.  2:450. 
♦Wood,  Charles,  Vol.  2:340. 
♦Wood,  Charles  S.,  Vol.  2:340. 

Wood,  George  William,  Vol.  3:738. 
♦Wood.  James  Grace,  Vol.  2:91,  805. 

Wood,  John,  jun.,  Vol.  2:192. 
♦Wood,  Jonathan  David.  Vol.  2:87. 

Wood,  Martin,  Vol.  3:738. 
♦Wood,  Samuel,  Vol.  2:741. 
♦Wood.  William,  jun..  Vol.  2:408. 

Woodard,  Jabez,  Vol.  3:571. 
♦Woodbury,  Frank  B.,  Vol.  2:433. 

Woodbury,  John  Taylor.  Vol.  2:742. 
♦Woodbury,  Orin  Nelson.  Vol.  2:432. 
♦Woodland,  Henry  S.,  Vol.  1:315. 

Woodland,  James.  Vol.  2:742. 

Woodmansee,  Chas.  R.,  Vol.  3:738. 
♦Woodruff,  Abraham  O.,  Vol.   1:172; 

Vol.  3:796. 
♦Woodruff,  Asahel  Hart,  Vol.  3:284. 

Woodruff,  David  P.,  Vol.  2:742. 
♦Woodruff,  Elias  Smith,  Vol.  2:367. 

Woodruff,  Emma  S.,  Vol.  2:805. 
♦Woodruff,  Newton,  Vol.  1:402. 
♦Woodruff,  Wilford,  Vol.  1:20. 
♦Woodruff,  Wilford.  jun..  Vol.  1:616. 

Woolf,  John  Anthony,  Vol.  2:17. 
♦Woolley,  Albaroni  H.,  Vol.  2:281. 
♦Woolley,  Edward  D.,  Vol.  1:358. 
♦Woolley,  Edwin  D.,  Vol.   1:799. 
♦Woolley,  Edwin  G.,  Vol.  1:799. 
♦Woolley,  Henry,  Vol.  3:284. 


♦Woolley,  Hugh  Roberts,  Vol.  3:739. 
♦Woolley,  John  Ensign,  Vol.  3:286. 

Woolley,  John  M.,  Vol.  1:782. 
♦Woolley,  John  W.,  Vol.  3:285. 
♦Woolley,  Marcellus  S.,  Vol.  1:679. 
♦Woolley,  Mary   Stretton   Blood,  Vo. . 

3:285. 
♦Woolley,  Samuel  A.,  Vol.  1:781. 

Woolley,  Thomas,  Vol.  2:743. 
♦Woolstenhulme   J.,  sen..  Vol.  1:469. 

Wootton,  Attewall,  Vol.  2:14. 
♦Wootton,  Charles  R..  Vol.  2:294. 

Workman,  Andrew  J.,  Vol.  1:538. 
♦Worthen,  Charles  H.,  Vol.  2:417. 
♦Wotherspoon,  James,  Vol.   3:740. 

Wright,  Alexander,  Vol.  3:571. 
♦Wright,  Brigham,  Vol.  2:66. 

Wright,  Ernest  James,  Vol.  3:741. 
♦Wright,  James  A.,  Vol.  2:291. 
♦Wright,  John  F.,  Vol.  1:431. 

Wright,  Jonathan  C,  Vol.  3:287. 

Wright.  Joseph,  Vol.  1:467. 
♦Wright,  William  H.,  Vol.  2:467. 


♦Yates,  James  Maxwell,  Vol.  3:573. 
♦Yates,  Thomas,  Vol.   3:574. 
♦Yeates,  Richard,  Vol.   1:421. 
♦Youd,  John  Pickles,  Vol.   3:575. 
♦Young,  Andrew,  Vol.   2:92. 
♦Young,  Brigham,  Vol.  1:8. 
♦Young,  Brigham,  jun.,  Vol.  1:121. 

Young,  Brigham  W.,  Vol.  3:741. 

Young.  Clara  Decker.  Vol.  3:804. 
♦Young,  Ebenezer  R.,  Vol.   2:743. 

Young,  Feramorz  Little,  Vol.  3:742. 
♦Young.  Franklin  W.,  Vol.  2:95. 

Young,  Harriet   Page   Wheeler,   Vol. 
3:743. 
♦Young.  John  Ray,  Vol.  2:274. 

Young,  John  W.,  Vol.  1:42. 

Young.  Joseph,  Vol.  1:187. 
♦Young,  Joseph  A.,  Vol.  1:518. 
♦Young.  Levi  Edgar,  Vol.  3:798. 

Young,  Lorenzo  S.,  Vol.  3:575. 
♦Young,  Richard  W.,  Vol.   1:671. 
♦Young,  Robert  D.,  Vol.   2:743. 
♦Young,  Seymour  B.,  Vol.  1:200. 
♦Young,  Willard,  Vol.   3:575. 
♦Young,  Zina  D.  H.,  Vol.  1:697. 
♦Youngberg,  Carl  G.,  Vol.   2:258. 


Z. 


♦Zundell,  Abraham,  Vol.  3:288. 
♦Zundell,  Isaac  E.  D.,  Vol.  1:561. 


3  1197  21951  2412 


Date  Due 

All  library  items  are  subject  to  recall  at  any  time. 


MAR  1 3  2004 


JUN  i  I 


JAN  1 4  W\ 


APR  16 


Brigham  Young  University 


AJ 


Ji4-^l 


t? 


